  Hiroshi Nakaso: Asian economy – past, present and future 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Securities Analysts Association of Japan International Seminar, Tokyo, 24 April 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 is 
titled  “Asset  Management 
Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to speak here at the International Seminar hosted by the Securities 
Analysts Association of Japan. 
Today’s  seminar 
in  Asia:  Opportunities  and  Future 
Development.”  The  participants  here  today  are  all  engaged  in  financial  markets  business, 
whether  directly  or  indirectly,  and  your  involvement  has contributed  to  the  development of 
financial  markets  in  Japan  and  other  Asian  economies.  Your  continued  involvement  in 
financial  markets,  whether  directly  or  indirectly,  has  helped  build  the  foundations  for  the 
success of the financial markets. As I will elaborate later, we, the Bank of Japan, have also 
been  actively  making  efforts  to  develop  Asian  financial  markets,  through  bilateral  and 
multilateral cooperative initiatives with other Asian economies. 
Today, under the title “Asian Economy: Past, Present, and Future,” I will first look back at the 
growth  of  the  Asian  economy  and  its  driving  forces,  and  then  share  my  views  on  the 
challenges ahead for the sustainable growth of the Asian economy. 
I. 
Growth of the Asian economy: Past, present, and future 
Asian economic growth in historical context 
Let us turn back the clock and reflect on the history of Asian economic growth. 
It may come as some surprise to learn that, based on studies by the renowned economic 
historian, Professor Angus Maddison, the Asian economy accounted for nearly 60 percent of 
the  global  GDP  before  the  Industrial  Revolution  which  began  in  the  late  18th  century 
(Chart 1).  However,  as  the  Western  economies  have  enjoyed  much  higher  growth  since 
then,  the  share  of  the  Asian  economies  has  followed  a  downward  path  from  that  high  of 
60 percent, to as low as just over 10 percent by the early 1950s. 
The  Asian  economy  did  not  sink  without  trace,  though.  A  period  of  strong  economic 
expansion known as the “Asian Miracle” ensued, characterized by a “flying geese” pattern of 
development. This began in the 1960s, with high growth in Japan followed by take-off of the 
“Four Tigers,” Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan. In the early 1980s, Malaysia and 
Thailand  joined  these  five  to  enjoy  the  high  growth  path.  China  gained  momentum  in  the 
1980s, and started to record double-digit growth after joining the World Trade Organization in 
the early 2000s, which made China a driving force of the Asian economy. 
Of course, during the history of Asian growth over half a century, the road to success was not 
always  smooth.  Many  of  you  will  recall  the  1997  Asian  Currency  Crisis,  which  followed  a 
period of high growth in the mid-1990s. Despite the unprecedented impact of the crisis, the 
regional economy proved its strength and resilience, with its foundations firmly rooted in a 
strong manufacturing base, as many Asian economies soon regained the prosperous export-
led recovery trail. Another more recent illustration of this resilience is the Lehman Shock and 
the subsequent global financial crisis. After the crisis, the Asian economy continued to follow 
a relatively high growth path. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The resilience and robustness of the Asian economy and its markets was also evident in the 
aftermath  of  the  so-called  taper  tantrum  in  May  2013.  The  stability  of  financial  markets  in 
emerging economies in general was eroded, but Asian stock and foreign exchange markets 
remained  relatively  immune  (Chart  2).  Returning  to  the  share  in  global  GDP,  the  Asian 
economy  today  has  recovered  its  share  to  over  30  percent,  and  is  expected  to  continue 
contributing to the sustainable growth of the global economy. 
Mechanism of economic growth in Asia 
What then makes the Asian economy so strong and resilient? To this end, I want to elaborate 
on two mechanisms or the dual engines which have driven the Asian economy. 
The  first  mechanism  is  Asia’s  position  as  “the  factory  of  the  world,”  a  position  achieved 
through  continued  expansion  of  exports  driven  by  direct  investment  from  abroad.  Global 
trade volumes increased dramatically with trade liberalization and direct investment growth. 
Firms in advanced economies proactively engaged in strategic global allocation of production 
sites in order to ensure the most efficient means of production. In this way, these firms could 
not only cushion the effects of higher wages and saturated demand for goods in advanced 
economies, but also reap the benefits of growing demand in emerging economies. Significant 
advances  in  information  technologies  and  inventory  management  have  also  contributed to 
these movements. 
It is only natural that Asia became identified as an attractive candidate in this process, given 
its  abundant  low-cost  and  highly-skilled  labor  force  and  large  potential  for  future  growth. 
Global firms increasingly moved their production sites to Asia, and traded components and 
finished  goods  with  their  home  or  third  countries,  thus  making  their  supply  chains  more 
global. Asia, as a hub of such trade networks, enjoyed employment opportunities created by 
the entry of foreign firms and exports increased significantly. At the same time, adoption of 
advances  in  production  technology  and  resource  management  enhanced  competitiveness, 
along with the accumulation of human resources. 
The  second  mechanism  that  I  want  to  highlight  is  the  autonomous  growth  in  domestic 
demand spurred by the development of export industries. As export industries grew, a large 
proportion of the labor force moved from the rural agricultural sector to take up employment 
in urban factory sites. As income level rose with economic expansion, the number of middle-
income  households  gradually 
in 
consumption.  As  a  result,  the  ground  was  laid  for  an  autonomous  expansion  of  domestic 
demand, which, along with exports, underlined Asian economic growth. As evidenced in the 
recent increase in direct investment in the non-manufacturing sector, Asia is now recognized 
not only as “the factory of the world,” but is also gaining prominence as the world’s biggest 
“consumer base.” 
increased,  which  underpinned 
the  strong  growth 
Middle-income trap 
The question here is whether Asia can maintain its position as the world growth center in the 
future.  According  to  long-term  forecasts  by  international  organizations  and  private-sector 
economists, Asia is expected to continue to enjoy relatively high growth and thus its share in 
the global GDP will increase steadily. 
These forecasts depend largely on the implicit assumption that Asia will maintain its growth 
momentum  without  falling  into  the  “middle  income  trap.”  The  so-called  follower  group 
economies can move from low-income to middle-income status by continuing on the road to 
high growth, leveraging their abundant resources and importing technology. This catch-up-
style growth will be short-lived though, unless it is underpinned by the gradual sophistication 
of  the  industrial  structure.  History  shows  that  many  economies  have  faced  difficulties  in 
advancing  beyond  the  status  of  a  middle-income  economy.  This  is known  as  the  “middle-
income trap.” A low-income economy can strengthen export competitiveness in the process 
of reaching middle-income status by using the abundant inflow of human resources from the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
rural agricultural sector, which puts downward pressure on wages. However, wages tend to 
rise after passing what is called “the Lewisian Turning Point” in development economics. This 
in turn reduces corporate profits and weakens export competitiveness, which together lead to 
sluggish economic growth. 
Several  Asian  economies  have  taken  the  world  by  surprise  by  achieving  the  “miracle”  of 
actually  escaping  the  shackles  of  the  middle-income  trap  (Chart  3).  Japan  reached  the 
Lewisian Turning Point in the 1960s, but then marked the “Izanagi” boom years from the mid-
1960s to the early 1970s, growing by more than 10 percent year-on-year. The “Four Tigers” 
have also continued on a growth path after escaping from the middle-income trap. In these 
economies,  there  were  many  factors  at  play.  On  the  supply-side,  abundant  investment  in 
plant and equipment led to higher productivity in manufacturing and other sectors together 
with  higher  capital  equipment  ratios.  On  the  demand-side,  the  investment  in  plant  and 
equipment translated into an increase in demand, and higher competitiveness through higher 
productivity  led  to  a  sustained  expansion  of  exports.  The  population  shift  from  rural 
agricultural areas to urban areas created a sizable middle-income tier, heralding an increase 
in consumption. 
Challenges for the Asian economy: Expanding productivity 
II. 
So, how can Asia as a whole continue to enjoy prosperity while ensuring that those Asian 
economies  still  in  the  early  stages  of  growth  continue  to  progress  without  falling  into  the 
middle-income  trap?  I  will  focus  on  three  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  or  the 
“challenges” facing Asian economies. 
The first challenge is to ensure a continuous increase in productivity. In particular, there are a 
number of issues to be addressed if we are to strengthen the traditional Asian growth model 
based on a combination of both exports and domestic demand. 
Staying competitive in the changing global environment 
In order to remain competitive and further develop export industries, Asian economies need 
to keep on adapting to changes in the global competition environment. 
The global trade volume has been rather depressed of late compared with global economic 
growth.  The  concept  of  “slow  trade”  is  now  being  actively  debated  among  economists 
(Chart 4). This “slow trade” phenomenon can be explained in part by the cyclical factor that 
investment in plant and equipment, which has a greater tendency to induce imports, is lower 
than  in  the  past.  At  the  same  time,  a  more  structural  factor  can  also  be  identified.  The 
expansion of global supply chains, which has underpinned Asian growth for some time, has 
reached its maturity stage, thus contributing to the “slow trade” phenomenon. 
One prominent example of these structural changes can be observed in China, which has 
been playing a major role as the assembly and export center in global supply chains within 
Asia. The growth in exports to China from other Asian economies has been depressed as 
China,  by  increasingly  using  domestically  produced  parts,  has  become less  dependent  on 
imports. Additionally, this year will almost certainly become an epoch-making year for China 
when outward direct investment exceeds inward direct investment for the first time. Further 
expansion of production base by Chinese firms to neighboring economies is stimulating the 
reconstruction  of  supply  chain  networks.  These  developments  represent  a  significant 
environmental change for Asian firms. 
In addition, there has been progress toward greater integration within the region in the form 
of  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC).  Such  integration  will  stimulate  intraregional 
trade  as  barriers  to  the  free  movement  of  goods  and  services  are  removed.  It  will  also 
change the flow of goods and capital, and lead to increased competition. 
What  is  required  to  overcome  the  challenges  posed  by  such  changes  in  the  economic 
environment?  From  the  experiences  of  those  economies  and  regions  that  have  already 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
overcome the middle-income trap, it is crucial not to cling to past success, but to concentrate 
on adapting to the changing environment with an eye to the future direction of changes, and 
to keep on pushing into new frontiers. The value of investing in areas such as research and 
development should not be underestimated; the strategic development and advancement of 
the industrial structure depends upon such investment (Chart 5). If an industrial sector with 
competitive advantage is developed, this will translate into increased strength in the export 
business. 
Nurturing the service sector and urbanization 
Turning  our  attention  toward  the  issue  of  domestic  demand,  it  is  clear  that  the  key  to 
offsetting the saturation of demand for manufactured goods is to nurture the service sector 
and raise its productivity. The service sector is often labor-intensive, and as a consequence, 
tends  to  yield  lower  productivity  compared  to  manufacturing  industry.  For  this  reason,  the 
Asian  economies  should  be  mindful  to  maintain  a  high  level  of  productivity  in  the  overall 
economy when they shift toward a service economy, by providing high value-added products 
with the active implementation of innovations such as in information technology. 
Urbanization  will  play  an  important  role  in  this  regard.  China  and  other  Asian  economies 
have been promoting urbanization as one of their policy targets (Chart 6). Concentration of 
the population to cities, with a larger middle-income population, will lead to greater demand 
for high value-added products and services. 
Increasing investment in infrastructure 
Increased  investment  in  infrastructure  is  likewise  vital  to  stimulating  both  exports  and 
domestic  demand.  However,  there  are  still  some  Asian  economies  where  insufficient 
infrastructure is bottlenecking industrial advancement (Chart 7). For example, a stable supply 
of  electricity  is  a  prerequisite  to  persuading  manufacturing  firms  to  move  their  production 
sites.  Shipping  ports  and  roads  are  indispensable  in  order  to  expand  exports.  Supplying 
sufficient residential infrastructure such as housing, schools, and proper water and sewage 
systems is crucial to promoting urbanization. 
According to a report by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Asian economy is expected 
to invest the phenomenal sum of nearly 8 trillion US dollars in the 11 years from 2010, in 
infrastructure  such  as  power  supply  and  roads.  Infrastructure  investment  is  a  stimulus  not 
only for domestic demand, but would also attract investment by foreign firms that can provide 
sophisticated technological expertise, which would in turn contribute to boosting productivity. 
III. 
Challenges for the Asian economy: Adapting to changes in demographics 
The second challenge facing the Asian economy is to embrace changes in demographics. 
Asia  is  composed  of a diversity  of  economies, and  the  patterns  in  demographics  are  also 
diverse  (Chart  8).  For  instance,  while  India  has  some  time  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the 
demographic  bonus,  the  “Four  Tigers,”  China  and  Thailand  are  already  facing  an  aging 
population  and  declining  birth  rate.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  China  and  Thailand  will  be 
going from demographic bonus to demographic onus while they are still in the middle-income 
tier.  Finding  the  appropriate  response  to  these  changes  in  demographics  and  sustaining 
growth poses a major challenge to the Asian economy. 
We  could  draw  lessons  from  the  experience  of  Japan.  One  of  those  lessons  is  that 
demographic onus depresses economic growth through both the supply-side and demand-
side factors. On the supply-side, it is widely recognized that labor constraints put downward 
pressure on the potential growth rate. There is empirical evidence to support this observation 
in the case of Japan where, since the 2000s, the labor force has been shrinking, household 
savings have declined, and the pace of growth in capital accumulation has slowed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
On  the  other  hand,  the  demand-side  factors  are  not  so  obvious,  and  they  tend  to  be 
overlooked.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  the  aging  population  and  declining  birth  rate  have,  for 
example, induced higher demand for goods and services targeting the elderly, but not all of 
this potential demand has been exploited because firms have not necessarily succeeded in 
identifying  and  responding  to  such  changes.  As  to  social  security  systems,  severe  fiscal 
conditions  in  pension  and  medical  insurance  systems  has  been  interpreted  as  heralding 
potential future increases in payments, which would lead to suppressed consumption. 
So,  with  an  eye  to  these  potentially  serious  negative  effects  of  the  demographic  onus,  it 
would  be  wise  to  recognize  and  assess  these  effects  without  delay,  and  to  take  action  to 
alleviate them in a forward looking manner. 
On the supply-side, labor participation of women and the elderly will need to be increased in 
order to address the decline in the working population. In general, the participation rate of 
women and the elderly tends to be lower in Asia than in advanced western economies. There 
is an urgent need to establish a working environment that is receptive to women and elderly 
workers, so as to make the most of their potential contribution. On the demand-side, firms 
need to step up efforts to identify and exploit the potential demand of the elderly, adjusting 
their product lines to cater to targeted needs in areas such as travel, nursing care, and user-
friendly electronic appliances. 
IV. 
The challenges for the Asian economy: Enhancement of resilience 
Capital flows and the Asian economy 
The third challenge is how to make the Asian economy more resilient to global shocks. 
Asia  has  successfully  maintained  its  high  economic  performance  so  far  by  attracting  and 
effectively utilizing the capital flowing into the region. The capital inflow first came primarily in 
the form of direct investment, which helped establish Asia’s position as  “the factory of the 
world.”  Later,  portfolio  investments  joined  the  capital  inflows,  resulting  in  more  volatility  in 
capital flow in and out of Asia, which then developed into the Asian Currency Crisis of the 
late 1990s. 
This experience prompted Asian economies to review their policy frameworks flexibly so as 
to become more resilient to global shocks. For instance, in terms of foreign exchange policy, 
the de facto fixed exchange system pegged to the US dollar was replaced by a more flexible 
system.  Foreign  reserves  were  accumulated  at  a  rapid  pace.  To  make  financial  systems 
more resilient, Asian economies adopted macroprudential policies well in advance of other 
regions. On the financial market front, policy initiatives have been introduced to encourage 
the  development  of  local  currency  bond  markets.  These  efforts  combined  have  led  to  a 
strengthening  of  Asian  markets,  as  proven  by  the  fact  that  Asian  markets  were  not  as 
seriously  affected  by  the  negative  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis  that  followed  the 
Lehman Shock. 
However, we should also recognize the fact that capital flows to and from Asia will inevitably 
become  more  volatile  as  the  Asian  financial  markets  become  more  integrated  into  global 
financial  markets  with  the  irreversible  progress of  globalization. With  this  in  mind,  a  major 
challenge  facing  the  Asian  economy  is  to  further  strengthen  its  resiliency  against  global 
shocks, and I want to share three ways through which this might be achieved. 
Making use of the region’s abundant savings 
The  first  way  is  to  further  promote  financial  intermediation  mechanisms  which  enable 
effective  use  of  the  abundant  savings  in  Asia.  Traditionally,  Asian  economies  have  relied 
mainly on the banking sector for financial intermediary services, and this may have been at 
the expense of development of the capital markets. Against this background, the abundant 
savings in Asia have not been utilized within the region, but have flowed out to the advanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
economies, only to return to Asia as capital flows from advanced economies. In this process 
of global capital recycling, even small changes in the risk appetite of global investors have 
caused the rewinding of capital inflows, and that has had a disproportionately large impact on 
relatively small emerging markets. 
In  order  to  resolve  this  issue,  it  is  essential  to  work  simultaneously  on  strengthening  the 
banking intermediary channel and nurturing alternative financial intermediation channels. In 
particular, each economy should continue to focus on promoting the development of its local 
currency  bond  market,  so  as  to  ensure  a  more  diverse  range  of  investment  choices  into 
which Asian domestic savings can flow. 
In this regard, bond markets in Asia have grown significantly since the mid-2000s (Chart 9). 
This is largely thanks to the invaluable efforts of market participants like the audience today 
to  make  the  market  environment  more  conducive,  including  making  improvements  in  soft 
infrastructure such as enhanced disclosure by Asian firms and standardization of accounting 
systems. Looking at data by currency, the share of foreign currency-denominated bonds has 
declined overall. A look at the most recent data, however, paints a somewhat contradictory 
picture of this trend, with a small increase in foreign currency-denominated bonds as funding 
costs have declined against the background of unconventional easing policies in advanced 
economies. Due attention should be paid to the influence that the imminent normalization of 
the monetary policies in the United States might have on the debt servicing capacity of Asian 
firms. 
Regional integration and pickup in cross-border trade 
The  second  way  to  boost  resilience  to  global  shocks  is  to  accelerate  regional  financial 
integration, which has been lagging behind the integration of trade and other real economic 
activity. Together, these efforts are expected to encourage more activity in the flow of funds, 
with  a  pick-up  in  cross-border  transactions,  both  inter-regional  and  intra-regional.  Over-
dependence on capital from outside the region would expose Asia to sudden withdrawal of 
credit provision and sharp unwinding of capital triggered by shocks not directly related to the 
region. Expansion of intra-regional cross-border transactions would broaden and deepen the 
investor base, contributing to higher resilience of Asian markets. 
The financial markets in Asian economies are in various stages of development. This poses 
a serious impediment to regional integration, unlike in Europe, which stands as a forerunner 
case in regional integration. Even so, it is not farfetched to expect a surge of activity in terms 
of  cross-border  transactions,  once  market  practices  and  the  relevant  laws  and  regulations 
are further harmonized. 
In this connection, one topic which needs to be duly considered alongside the promotion of 
cross-border trades is payment and settlement systems. Central banks, including the Bank of 
Japan, are making joint efforts to ensure and enhance smooth cross-border settlements. As 
part  of  these  efforts,  there  is  ongoing  discussion  among  the  ASEAN  economies,  Japan, 
China,  and  Korea  to  establish  cross-border  linkage  between  the  securities  settlement 
systems and central banks’ payment systems. This would most likely stimulate an increase in 
capital  transactions  within  the  region,  as  intra-regional  cross-border  payments  and 
settlements  will  become  safer  and  more  efficient.  Once  this  initiative  is  established,  for 
instance, Japanese banks would be able to smoothly and effectively obtain funds in Asian 
currencies  on  a  Delivery  Versus  Payment  (DVP)  basis  against  Japanese  Government 
Securities (JGSs) collateral (Chart 10). 
Strengthening the regional safety nets 
The third way to ensure resilience is to strengthen the regional safety nets. It is especially 
important  to  prevent  spillover  and  contagion  triggered  by  a  temporary  liquidity  shortage  in 
terms of the balance of payments or funding by financial institutions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Bilateral  swap  agreements  have  already  been  established  among  the  economies  in  the 
region  to  deal  with  any  liquidity  crisis  related  to  balance  of  payments.  Furthermore,  the 
economies  of  ASEAN,  Japan,  China,  and  Korea  have  agreed  on  the  expansion  and 
strengthening of the Chiang-Mai Initiatives, which help finance short-term US dollar liquidity 
among participating economies (Chart 11). 
Preventing  liquidity  crises  among  financial  institutions  is  another  important  task  for  central 
banks.  The  Lehman  Shock  and  the  ensuing  global  financial  crisis  reminded  central  banks 
around  the  world  of  the  importance  of  fostering  a  sound  financial  system  with  a  resilient 
funding environment for financial institutions and deep and liquid interbank markets. We have 
also  observed  that  banks  have  been  increasingly  expanding  their  presence  in  other 
economies  in  the  region.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  Asian  central  banks  are 
progressively  making  efforts  to  enhance  environments  for  the  funding  of  local  currencies. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  already  agreed  to  establish  cross-border  collateral  arrangements 
with many Asian central banks (Chart 12). These are arrangements in which, for instance, 
Asian central banks provide local currency liquidity to Japanese financial institutions against 
yen-denominated assets as collateral, in a situation where the Japanese financial institutions 
encounter  funding  difficulties  in  the  Asian  currencies.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  agreed  to 
establish such arrangements as a backstop with central banks in Thailand, Indonesia, and 
Singapore.  In  February  2015,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP) 
agreed to establish a cross-border liquidity arrangement where Philippine pesos are provided 
against yen cash. 
In establishing and managing regional safety nets, authorities in the region should recognize 
and acknowledge the policy issues that each country faces, and be prepared to cooperate in 
addressing  any  sudden  and  serious  changes  in  international  financial  markets.  From  this 
perspective, the Bank of Japan, in cooperation with other central banks in Asia, has been 
contributing  proactively  to  the  Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks 
(EMEAP). 
Concluding remarks 
I have talked briefly today about the history of Asian economic growth, and I have highlighted 
three challenges ahead. These challenges will test whether the Asian economy will be able 
to realize a sustainable growth path. I believe that Asia has high potential to overcome these 
challenges, and, we should be able to celebrate the 21st century as the “Asian Century.” 
Another important question is how Japan can contribute to sustainable growth in the region, 
as well as enjoying the benefits of this growth. I would like to add a few words on this issue. 
As  Asia  becomes  more  than  just  “the  factory  of  the  world,”  but  also  a  globally  important 
market, many changes are being observed in the demand structure in the Asian economy, 
such as rising demand for goods in local markets and the shift towards a service economy. If 
Japan is to enjoy the full benefits of the region’s growth, it needs to adapt appropriately to 
such  changes.  Japanese  firms  have  nurtured  strong  product  lines  and  business  expertise 
within  a  competitive  domestic  business  environment.  In  order  to  cultivate  local  demand,  I 
think it would be very effective to take advantage of such high-quality products and expertise 
with  due  consideration  to  the  local  cultures  and  customs  of  each  economy.  For Japanese 
financial  institutions,  it  is  essential  to  focus  not  only  on  efforts  to  support  Japanese  firms 
operating  in  Asian  countries,  but  also  to  contribute  to  local  economic  development  by 
supporting local business firms. These efforts are already underway. 
Japan has already experienced many of the challenges that other Asian economies will be 
facing in the near future, such as environmental and energy issues. We could say Japan is 
“in the vanguard of addressing global issues.” Japan can use this front-runner advantage as 
a business opportunity in providing skills and expertise in these areas, and through this, can 
contribute to underpinning sustainable growth in the region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
The  Bank  of  Japan,  for  its  part,  has  been  pursuing  aggressive  monetary  easing,  or 
quantitative and qualitative easing (QQE), with the aim of achieving a price stability target of 
2  percent.  Leading  Japan’s  economy  out  of  persistent  deflation  and  putting  it  on  a  solid 
recovery  path  should  also  contribute  to  upholding  the  sustainable  economic  growth  of  the 
Asian economy. I would like to conclude my remarks by adding that the Bank of Japan is 
determined  to  play  an  active  role  in  enhancing  the financial  infrastructure  in  Asia,  through 
such means as refining payment and settlement systems and strengthening safety nets. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
