  Raghuram Rajan: Reserve Bank of India celebrates its 80th anniversary 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Financial Inclusion Conference, Mumbai, 2 April 2015. 
 The Reserve Bank was set up in 1935 when India was under British rule. But the RBI was 
certainly  not  a  British  institution,  and  has  been  working  right  from  the  outset  for  Indian 
economic interests. 
It has also nurtured Indian talent. In 1943, Chintaman Dwarkanath Deshmukh, one of India’s 
finest  financial  minds,  was  appointed  as  the  first  Indian  governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank. 
Amongst  the  problems  he  had  to  confront  was  how to  deal  respectfully  but  firmly  with  the 
debts the colonial power had accumulated to India during World War II. 
Over the years, the Reserve Bank has been blessed with a number of such great leaders, a 
reflection also of the importance the government places in having a strong central bank. The 
list of past governors and deputy governors reads like a who’s who of the Indian economic 
establishment,  with  governors  like  Benegal  Rama  Rau,  M.  Narasimham,  Dr.  I.G.  Patel, 
Dr. Manmohan Singh, Dr. Rangarajan, Dr. Bimal Jalan, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, and Dr. Subba Rao, 
ably  assisted  by  deputy  governors  such  as  SS  Tarapore,  Vepa  Kamesan,  Dr.  Rakesh 
Mohan, K. Udeshi, Shyamala Gopinath, and Usha Thorat. The RBI’s board has also been 
superb, with people like Sir Purshottamdas Thakurdas and Yezdi Malegam guiding it. 
Interestingly,  many  of  the  governors  were  from  the  administrative  services,  with  only  one, 
M. Narasimham,  from  the  RBI  itself.  Nevertheless,  all  understood  that  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
role  is  to  safeguard  the  monetary  and  financial  stability  of  the  country  even  while  working 
towards its financial development. There has always been a constructive dialogue between 
the  Government  and  the  Bank,  informed  by  their  respective  time  horizons  and  attitudes 
towards risk. And history records that successive governments have invariably appreciated 
the wisdom of the Reserve Bank’s counsel. 
Over the years, the Reserve Bank has addressed many concerns. Inflation control has been 
foremost –  and the Reserve Bank  has done an admirable job over time, despite the price 
pressures created by food shortages, oil prices and wars. 
Financial sector development has been another concern. The RBI’s role has included setting 
up new institutions, encouraging the use of technology, developing markets, and expanding 
financial inclusion. 
In  the  coming  year,  we  will  have  many  new  players  in  the  banking  eco-system,  such  as 
payments  banks,  small  finance  banks  and  possibly  a  postal  bank  competing  with  existing 
universal banks, regional rural banks, cooperative banks, and a variety of non-bank finance 
companies. 
The  use  of  technology  has  also  expanded  from  the  days  when  accounts  were  maintained 
manually in ledgers and unions called for strikes at the very mention of the word computers. 
Today, some banks allow customers to do all their banking transactions on a mobile phone, 
without entering a branch or touching a pen. 
The Reserve Bank’s intent is to create an ownership neutral, institution neutral, technology 
agnostic 
touch-and-go 
payments  will  find  use  even  as  banks  focus  on  acquiring  and  analysing  information  and 
reducing  transactions  costs  as  they  compete  to  extend  financial  services  to  all.  The  RBI’s 
state-of-the-art  payments  system  will  support  technology,  even  as  the  RBI  strengthens  its 
cyber-supervision and cyber-security. 
We also need deep markets to absorb risks that stay too often in banks or in corporations. 
Here too our track record has been strong. Though many developing country governments 
level  competitive  arena.  For  example, 
technologies  enabling 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
are forced to borrow only in foreign currency, the Reserve Bank has fostered a liquid rupee 
government  bond  market,  where  the  government  today  is  able  to  contemplate  issuing 
40 year bonds. The rupee is truly becoming international as foreign institutions queue up to 
issue rupee denominated bonds. New products supported by the RBI, such as the recently 
introduced interest rate futures contract, are doing a roaring business on exchanges. 
Our tasks are far from over. The nation has enormous financing needs in infrastructure, and 
far  too  many  of  our  banks  already  have  too  much  exposure.  Big  corporate  infrastructure 
players have also taken too much debt. The required national push to finance infrastructure 
should  not  override  financial  stability,  which  is  key  to  national  security.  Going  forward,  we 
need to develop new sources of risk capital so that our infrastructure needs can be financed 
with moderate amount of debt, even as we help the system deleverage. 
Perhaps  the  country’s  most  important  financial  challenge,  which  is  the  theme  of  the 
Conference  today,  is  to  bring  financial  services  to  every  doorstep  and  to  every  small 
enterprise.  The  poor  are  still  too  far  away  from,  or  too  uncomfortable  stepping  into,  bank 
branches. 
With government initiatives like Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana and the MUDRA Bank, as 
well  as  new  technologies,  new  institutions,  and  new  processes  such  as  direct  benefits 
transfers,  I  am  confident  that  our  country  can  empower  the  poor  and  the  small  with  both 
choice  and  opportunities.  The  Reserve  Bank  in  turn  has  to  ensure  greater  consumer 
protection and consumer literacy. 
Finally,  if  the  Reserve  Bank  is  respected  today,  it  is  because  of  the many  thousands  who 
have worked over the years for the Bank, with capability and dedication. Let me recognize 
two. Rani Durve, a DGM in the Bhopal office, has created numerous films, books, and street 
plays on themes such as fictitious emails and excessive interest rates so as to educate and 
inform the public. Nirmal Pattnayak, an AGM in the Department of Information Technology, 
enabled the pan-India electronic transfer of funds for government departments through the 
national  electronic  payment  systems,  thus  overnight  making  the  government  one  of  the 
largest users of electronic payments. Both have gone beyond the ordinary call of duty, but 
they are only representative of many others in the Bank. 
The RBI is also respected for its integrity. It is a matter of great pride for me today that when 
someone enters our building to persuade us to change a regulation, they come armed not 
with money but with arguments about what is right. 
Let  me  conclude.  Strong  national  institutions  are  hard  to  build.  Therefore  existing  ones 
should be nurtured from the outside, and constantly rejuvenated from the inside, for there are 
precious few of them. In the 81st year of this great institution let us rededicate it to helping 
the nation secure prosperity and economic opportunity for all. Thank you for joining us in this 
celebration. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
