  Eddie Yue: Developing Asia’s infrastructure to sustain economic growth 
Statement by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
and Head of Delegation, Hong Kong, for the 48th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, 
Baku, Azerbaijan,4-5 May 2015. 
 I would like to thank the Government of Azerbaijan for hosting the 48th Annual Meeting of the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  and  the  Management  and  staff  of  ADB  for  the  excellent 
arrangements  of  the  event.  I  would  also  like  to  express  my  deepest  condolences  to  the 
people of Nepal affected by the recent earthquake. 
Global economic growth has been modest and uneven since the last Annual Meeting. While 
developing economies including those in Asia remain an important source of global growth, 
there are signs that activities are slowing and potential outputs are falling. Despite substantial 
progress,  developing  Asia  still  faces  significant  development  challenges.  In  particular,  a 
number  of  developing  economies  have  been  held  back  by  infrastructure  bottlenecks.  To 
sustain  economic  growth  and  fully  realise  their  growth  potential,  substantial  infrastructure 
investment is needed. 
Developing  Asia’s  infrastructure  development  needs  dwarf  existing  official  development 
assistance,  government  and  private  investments  combined.  To  fill  this  huge  infrastructure 
financing  gap,  we  need  bold,  new  efforts.  In  this  regard,  we  welcome  the  combination  of 
Asian  Development  Fund  (ADF)  resources  with  the  ADB’s  ordinary  capital  resources.  The 
merger will allow ADB to make more efficient use of its existing resources and substantially 
expand its financial capacity by up to 50% according to ADB’s estimates. This, in turn, will 
mobilise  more  public  and  private  sector  investments  through  co-financing  and  greatly 
enhance the support available to developing members. 
We are also glad to see that governments are working together and making significant steps 
in promoting infrastructure development. They include, for instance, the establishment of the 
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the G20 Global Infrastructure Initiative and Global 
Infrastructure Hub. These initiatives underscore the commitment by governments from within 
and  outside  the  region  to  give  infrastructure  investment  a  fresh  impetus.  By  bringing  new 
funds and new ways for development assistance, they will serve to complement the existing 
efforts by ADB in meeting the region’s vast development needs. 
As  highlighted  in  the  theme  for  this  year’s  Annual  Meeting,  fostering  cooperation  among 
development partners – existing and new, private and public, national and multilateral – is 
crucial for reaping synergy and maximising development impact. ADB has a hailed tradition 
of cooperating with other partners in delivering results. By working together, we believe that 
ADB  and  its  partners  in  the region  will  go  a  long  way  in  mobilising funds  and  building the 
capacity of developing members in delivering high-quality infrastructure projects. 
As  an  international  financial  and  business  centre  in  the  region,  Hong  Kong,  China  has  an 
active role to play in supporting and promoting infrastructure investment in Asia. Corporates, 
as well as national and multilateral development agencies including ADB and IFC, have been 
making  extensive  use  of  Hong  Kong,  China’s  deep  financial  markets  in  raising  funds  for 
infrastructure projects. Joint ventures and funds have been set up in Hong Kong, China for 
identifying  opportunities  and  managing  investments  in  infrastructure  projects  in  the  region. 
We  have  also  been  seeing  increasing  offshore  issuance  of  Renminbi  (RMB)  bonds  in  our 
market  to  finance  infrastructure  projects.  With  the  increasing  use  of  RMB  in  trade  and 
investment  in the  region,  it  is  expected  that the use  of  RMB  in  infrastructure financing  will 
continue to rise. Hong Kong, China, as the largest offshore RMB centre with a wide range of 
RMB  financial  services,  is  well  placed  to  support  these  infrastructure  financing  activities 
denominated  in  RMB.  Besides  financial  services,  Hong  Kong,  China  also  has  a  pool  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  talents  in  professional  services  like  construction  and  planning,  surveying,  engineering, 
project management, accounting, legal and arbitration, logistics, etc. Firms and consultants 
of Hong Kong, China are well placed to take part and support infrastructure developments in 
the region. 
Substantial  investment  is  needed  in  many  developing  Asian  economies  to  break  the 
infrastructure  bottlenecks  and  move  forward  to  the  next  stage  of  development.  Increasing 
cross-border connectivity will also promote greater trade and economic integration, unlocking 
the region’s growth potential. We are pleased to see that ADB and national governments are 
making this a priority and taking meaningful steps to promote infrastructure investment in the 
region.  As  a  member  of  the  region,  Hong  Kong,  China  stands  ready  to  contribute  to  this 
work. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
