Vítor Constâncio: Financial regulation and the global recovery 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
24th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference “Is financial reregulation holding back finance for 
the global recovery?”, Washington DC, 16 April 2015. 
This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form in Washington on 16 April. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking the Levy Institute and specially its President, Dimitri Papadimitriou, 
for  inviting  me  to  speak  again  at  the  Annual  Conference  honouring  Hyman  Minsky.  This 
year’s theme is quite topical and opens the door to a lively debate about the role of finance 
and  regulation,  both  in  the  crisis  period  and  in  the  moderate  recovery  underway.  The 
recovery is however still to achieve the closing of negative output gaps on both sides of the 
Atlantic. It could then be expected that different views emerge about the regulatory reform 
efforts that are not yet concluded. Let me mention four. 
According  to  one  view,  the  crisis  and  its  recessionary  effects  result  from  the  excesses  of 
finance and insufficient regulation. This implies that the main effort should be to tame finance 
in order to avoid future crises of the same type. In this vein, it could be expected that deep 
reforms of the international financial regulation would follow the acknowledged failure of the 
legal  framework  in  place  before  the  crisis.  Two  well-known  specialists  in  the  field,  Barry 
Eichengreen and Eric Helleiner have  very recently published two books1 explaining  why a 
transformative  reform  of  the  international  system  has  indeed  not  occurred.  Eichengreen 
explains  it  the following  way:  “…depression  and financial  collapse  were  avoided,  if  barely. 
This fostered the belief that the flaws of the prevailing system were less. It weakened the 
argument for radical action […]. Success thus became the mother of failure.” 
This sounds perhaps too harsh because good work has been done in adopting measures in 
the domains of capital, liquidity and resolution of banks in order to increase the resilience of 
the banking sector, within the financial system. Much less has been achieved beyond banks, 
notably in what regards OTC derivatives or non-bank entities, including activities of the so-
called shadow banking. 
However,  as  remarked  by  Helleiner,  financial  reform  saw  the  emergence  of  a  promising 
innovation in the form of macro-prudential policy: a policy that uses regulatory measures to 
deal  with  system-wide  financial  risk  and  the  smoothing  of  the  financial  cycle,  i.e.  the 
fluctuations  of  credit  financing,  leverage  and  asset  prices.  This  goal  is  essential. 
Nevertheless,  some  economists  and  policy  makers  continue  to  view  this  with  scepticism. 
Monetary policy cannot simultaneously cope with two different objectives and the need for 
macro-prudential  policy  has  become  more  acute  with  the  realisation  that  advanced 
economies are very likely to face a prolonged period of low real and nominal growth. In such 
an environment, monetary policy has to remain accommodative, with low interest rates which 
foster search for yield and froth in asset markets, making the use of macro-prudential policy 
– to strengthen institutions, to smooth the financial cycle and to pre-empt asset bubbles –
more necessary. Without an effective macro-prudential policy, advanced economies will not 
be able to avoid financial instability. This means that regulatory reform has to continue until 
appropriate instruments are put in place to deal with the non-bank financial sector, which is 
increasingly  taking  the  role  of  credit  intermediation  previously  performed  by  banks.  The 
1   Eichengreen,  B.  (2015),  “Hall  of  mirrors:  The  great  depression,  the  great  recession  and  the  misuses  of 
history”, Oxford University Press USA; Helleiner, E. (2014), “The status quo crisis: Global financial governance 
after the 2008 meltdown” Oxford University Press USA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  
 
concentration of reform measures on the banking sector has led to an expansion of shadow 
banking or the market-based financing sector. The investment fund industry doubled in size 
in the last five years in Europe. The financial system is expanding in new dimensions and 
new risks are emerging in terms of maturity transformation and leverage, especially synthetic 
leverage. 
Another  view  on  the  regulatory  reform  is  rooted  on  a  sceptical  perspective  about  the 
possibility of taming finance, accepting that booms and busts are simply unavoidable. After 
adopting some measures to increase the resilience of financial institutions in terms of capital 
and  liquidity,  the  policy  concern  is  about  how  macroeconomic  policy  should  be  used  to 
mitigate  the  effects  on  the  real  economy  stemming  from  endogenous  financial  crises. 
Monetary policy would “mop-up the mess” via liquidity provision after the bust and would help 
the recovery. For the more Keynesian-inclined minds, this should extend to the use of fiscal 
policy, especially in an environment of low interest rates near the zero lower bound. 
It  is  true  that  monetary  policy  is  nowadays  considered  the  most  powerful  of  the  macro 
policies to stabilise the economy, but it is important to be aware of its limitations, especially 
near the zero lower bound. It is sometimes said that the world avoided the worst in 2008 only 
because central banks made bold use of their tools, notably by cutting rates and providing 
abundant liquidity. But the truth is that without the significant use of fiscal policy in 2008 and 
2009,  stimulating  our  economies  and  supporting  the  banking  sector,  the  meltdown  of  the 
financial system would perhaps not have been avoided. At the meeting in Toronto in 2010, 
the  G20  decided  to  reverse  this  policy  and  embarked  in  fiscal  consolidation,  to  different 
degrees,  leaving  monetary  policy  alone  to  deal  with  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  In  this 
context, the double dip suffered by the euro area economy after 2011 is easier to explain by 
fiscal  policy  short-term  effects,  than  by  the  behaviour  of  monetary  policy.  In  a  European 
Commission  (EC)  working  paper2  using  the  EC  Quest  model,  Jan  Veld  finds  that  the 
cumulative  impact  from  simultaneous  fiscal  consolidation  in  2011  to  2013  (taking  into 
account spillover effects among seven euro area countries), ranged from 8.1 % in Germany 
or 9.7% in Spain to 18% in Greece, in terms of GDP losses in relation to baseline. In the 
same vein, Rannenberg, Schoderand and Strasky (2014)3 find a cumulative negative effect 
of consolidation for the euro area in 2011–2013 of 14%, using a variant of the Quest model, 
and of 15% using a variant of the ECB’s New Area-Wide Model (NAWM). Despite the fact 
that  several  European  countries  had  to  implement  deficit  reductions,  these  model-based 
calculations,  with  all  their  caveats,  illustrate  the  importance  of  macroeconomic  policy  in 
determining the outcome of financial crises for the real economy. 
Coming back to the conference theme, a third view about the regulatory reform, supports a 
positive answer to the question: “Is financial reregulation holding back finance for the global 
recovery?”.  It  concludes  that  regulatory  reform  has  gone  too  far  and  that  by  constraining 
finance  it  is  hampering  the  recovery.  However,  it  would  first  have  to  be  proven  that 
investment  and  growth  are  being  significantly  affected  by  financing  supply  constraints  in 
order to validate this view. 
This does not seem to be the case. Evidence points more in the direction of a general lack of 
demand and weak growth prospects to explain low investment and the modest recovery. The 
desperate search for growth and jobs by governments and policy makers, following seven 
years of gradual reforms, could give some credence to this view amidst feelings of reform 
fatigue. However, I argue that it would be wrong to listen to these opinions. The pace of the 
                                                
2   Veld, J. (2013), “Fiscal consolidations and spillovers in the euro area periphery and core”, European Economy 
Economic Papers 506, October. 
3   Rannenberg, A., C. Shoder and J. Strasky (2014), “The macroeconomic effects of the European Monetary’s 
Union fiscal consolidation from 2011 to 2013: a quantitative assessment”, mimeo. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
recovery is not being affected by lack of finance. Finance would be abundant if there were 
investment projects with prospects of good return. 
A fourth possible answer to the conference’s question relates to a “liquidationist” view that 
amazingly surfaced again, in spite of the lessons from the 1930’s. Its defenders claim that 
macroeconomic policies, aimed at mitigating the recessionary consequences of the crisis, do 
more harm than good in the medium-term. However, some accept that reforms to strengthen 
capital and liquidity buffers in credit institutions were necessary. According to this view, the 
crisis stemmed from excessive credit, debt and bad investments and thus, deleveraging and 
liquidation of bad capital must happen. Applying a very accommodative monetary policy to 
fight recession would risk inflation or, in the more modern guise of the doctrine, would lead to 
asset price bubbles and future crises. Consequently, monetary policy, in view of the alleged 
ineffectiveness  of  macro-prudential  policy,  should  have  become  restrictive  since  2011  or 
2012. According to this reasoning, precedence should be given to the financial cycle over the 
stabilisation of the business cycle or, in more telling terms, precedence should be given to 
the risk of asset price bubbles over the risks of deflation and unemployment. 
Acknowledging that my description of these four different opinions has hardly been neutral, in 
my view, a combination of the first and second approaches is the appropriate response to the 
question setting the conference theme. Nevertheless, I want to clearly state that the financial 
regulatory reform has to be completed and extended through further efforts to contain risks in 
the so called shadow banking sector and to strengthen macro-prudential policies. Believing 
that  advanced  economies 
that  requires 
accommodative  monetary  policy,  I  see  no  alternative  to  regulatory  macro-prudential 
instruments  to  mitigate  financial  instability  and  crises  by  smoothening  the  financial  cycle. 
Naturally, we should be aware that taming finance is a challenging, if ever achievable task. 
As Minsky put it in the last sentence of his book “Stabilizing an unstable economy”: “There is 
no possibility that we can ever set things right once and for all; instability, put to rest by a set 
of  reforms  will,  after  time,  emerge  in  a  new  guise”.  Nevertheless,  our  countries  have 
experienced long tranquil periods, without financial crises in the past, and we should now aim 
to return to that. 
I  already  stated  that  re-regulating  finance  is,  in  my  view,  not  an  obstacle  to  the  ongoing 
recovery. In last year’s conference, I argued that “fixing finance” was not enough to ensure 
higher  economic  growth.4  This  does  not  mean  that  I  do  not  consider  finance  vital  for  a 
healthy  economy.  A  well-functioning  financial  system  is  essential  to  foster  long-term 
economic  growth.  In  this  respect,  last  autumn  was  characterised  by  two  milestones  in 
Europe: the completion of the asset quality review and stress tests and the start of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, which went live on 4 November. Repairing banks’ balance-sheets, 
together  with  the  advancements  in  the  design  of  the  new  resolution  framework,  the 
regulatory reforms improving capital and liquidity standards, as well as those concerning the 
shadow banking system (like securitisation and OTC reforms), constitute clear evidence of 
the  commitment  of  the  ECB  and  other  EU  policy  makers  to  restore  a  well-functioning 
financial sector and create the conditions for an adequate flow of credit to the real economy. 
These successes took place against the background of slow growth and subdued inflation. 
Despite recent encouraging signs, the recovery in Europe remains gradual and moderate. In 
the  European  context,  the  subject  of  this  conference  is  therefore  very  pertinent.  I  already 
gave my general answer in favour of completing the regulatory reform. In what follows, I will 
further substantiate my arguments in favour of that position and will express my concern with 
the insufficient attention paid so far to the growing risks in the shadow banking sector. 
face  a  protracted  period  of 
low  growth 
                                                
4   Constâncio  V.  (2014),  “Growing  out  of  the  crisis:  Is  fixing  finance  enough?“  Speech  at  the  Annual 
Hyman P. Minsky Conference on the State of the US and World Economies Washington D.C., 10 April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 A defence of regulatory reform 
 The beneficial impact of regulation on growth 
Financial  institutions  support  and  foster  economic  growth  by  intermediating  savings  and 
allocating them to productive activities.5 These functions are also their inherent sources of 
financial fragility. Regulation plays a key role in reducing the scope of financial fragility and 
limiting  the  costs  of  financial  instability.  Hence,  a  well-designed  regulatory  framework  can 
actually lead to faster average economic growth over time. 
There  is  vast  academic  literature  that  tries  to  empirically  identify  the  impact  of  financial 
deepening (measured by the ratio of credit to GDP) on long-term economic growth.6 The pre-
crisis  evidence  largely  pointed  to  a  positive  relationship  between  financial  deepening  and 
long-term  economic  growth.  However,  recent  evidence  has  cast  doubt  on  such  a  simple 
monotone  relationship.  Several  studies  have  shown  that  at  high  level  of  financial 
development, the effect of finance on growth becomes negative or insignificant.7 Cecchetti 
and Kharroubi (2012)8 put the peak of the effect of credit on GDP growth per worker at a 
100%  ratio  of  private  credit  to  GDP.  In  other  words,  letting  the  financial  system  grow  too 
much may harm the economy’s growth prospects. Correspondingly, regulating finance may 
stimulate rather than retard economic development. 
Regulation, like any form of public intervention, is justified by the existence of market failures. 
Financial regulation is not an exception to this, even though it is somewhat “unique” given the 
special role that banks perform in the economy and the high (social) costs associated to the 
failure of a financial institution. 
Financial regulation is meant to correct financial institutions’ incentives toward risk, to induce 
them to internalise the costs and the externalities associated to their failures, thus reducing 
both the occurrence of crises and the associated costs. 
Limiting the occurrence of crises has a positive effect on growth for several reasons. Crises 
affect growth asymmetrically: activity falls much more sharply during a crisis than it increases 
during  credit  booms.9  Their  negative  effect  on  growth  is  very  long-lasting.10  An  empirical 
investigation  focusing  on  a  large  cross  section  of  countries  shows  that  output  losses 
6  
                                                
5   Diamond  D.,  and  Dybvig,  P.  H.  (1983),  “Bank  runs,  deposit  insurance  and  liquidity”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy,  91,  pp. 401–419; Holmstrom,  B.,  and  Tirole,  J.  (1997),  “Financial  Intermediation, loanable  funds 
and the real sector”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 112(3), pp. 663–691; Diamond D., (1984), “Financial 
intermediation and delegated monitoring”, Review of Economic Studies, 51(3), pp. 393–414. 
It started with Gurley, J. G and Shaw, E.S. (1955) “Financial aspects of economic development”  American 
Economic  Review,  45,  pp.  515–538;  Goldsmith,  R  W  (1969)  Financial  Structure  and  development”  Yale 
University  Press;  Shaw,  E.  (1973):  “Financial  deepening  and  economic  development”,  Oxford  University 
Press,  New  York,  and  McKinnon,  R.I.  (1973)  “Money  and  capital  in  economic  development”,  Brookings 
Institute. More recently, see King R., and R. Levine, (1993), “Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, pp. 717–737; Rajan, R. and L., Zingales, (1998), “Financial Dependence 
and  growth”,  American  Economic  Review,  88,  pp.  559–586;  Fisman,  R.,  and  I.,  Love,  (2007),  “Financial 
Dependence and growth revisited”, Journal of European Economic Association, 5, pp. 470–479. 
7   Cecchetti S. G., and E. Kharroubi, (2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance on growth”, BIS Working Paper 
381 and Arcand J. L., Berkes E. and Panizza U., (2012) “Too Much Finance?”, IMF Working Paper 12/161. 
8   Cecchetti  S.  G.,  and  E.  Kharroubi,  (2012),  “Reassessing  the  impact  of  finance  on  growth”,  BIS  Working 
Paper 381. 
9   Popov  A.,  (2013),  “Credit  constraints,  equity  market  liberalization  and  growth  rate  asymmetry”,  Journal  of 
Development Economics, 107, pp. 202–214; Beckaert G., and Popov A., (2015), “On the kink between the 
volatility and the skewness of growth”, mimeo. 
10   Reinhart C.M., and Rogoff K. S, (2009), “This time is different. Eight centuries of financial follies”, Princeton 
University Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
associated with financial crises are highly persistent and may range from 4% to 16%.11 When 
the financial sector is in distress, entrepreneurs’ access to credit is impaired with negative 
effects on the investment of existing firms as well on new business creation.12 Recoveries 
from financial crises tend to be slow, ‘creditless’ and ‘jobless’.13 Even if regulation reduces 
economic growth in normal times, its impact on average economic growth can still be positive 
over time. 
But there is a further argument as to why regulation may have a positive effect on growth: 
without  regulation,  the  financial  sector  may  become  excessively  large  and  displace  other, 
more productive activities. 
Recent growth in the financial system has not necessarily led to more credit availability for 
innovative  businesses.  In  the  last  two  decades,  banks  in  developed  economies  have 
channelled an increasing amount of funds to households rather than firms. More and more 
savings  have  flowed  into  low  productivity  growth  sectors  like  real  estate  rather  than  into 
growth  enhancing  activities  such  as  technology.14  In  addition,  the  growth  of  the  financial 
sector and the high remuneration it offers may have  drawn talented individuals away from 
other productive sectors in the economy since financial and non-financial sectors compete 
for the same scarce supply of human capital.15 
The need to limit its excessive growth applies not only to the financial system as a whole but 
also  to  individual  institutions.  I  am  referring  here  to  the  well-known  too-big-to-fail  problem. 
The recent crisis highlighted the risk of letting individual institutions grow excessively. Some 
of the recent regulatory changes (Total Loss Absorption Capacity, extra capital charges) can 
play a crucial role in solving such a problem, as I will discuss in detail below. 
In short, the long-term relationship between finance and growth is complex and non-linear. 
But the theory and evidence suggests that effective regulation is likely to be beneficial in the 
long run. 
What  about  the  short-term  impact  of  regulation?  There  are  good  theoretical  reasons  to 
believe  that  capital  ratios’  effect  on  growth  should  not  be  overly  large.  The  famous 
Modigliani-Miller (MM) ‘irrelevance’ result16 states that firms’ (and banks) business decisions 
are independent of their capital structure. Of course, the MM insight is developed in a highly 
idealised  setting.  For  example,  the  tax  advantages  of  debt  and  the  liquidity  services 
performed by short-term bank liabilities do drive a wedge between the cost of debt and equity 
                                                
11   Cerra V., and Saxena S. C.,(2008), “Growth dynamics: the myth of economic recovery”, American Economic 
Review, 98(1), pp. 439–457. 
12   Queralto A., (2015), “A model of slow recoveries from financial crises”, mimeo. 
13   Abiad, A., Dell’Ariccia, G., and B., Li, (2011), “Creditless recoveries”, IMF working paper 11/58; Bijsterbosch, 
M. and T. Dahlhaus, (2011), “Determinants of credit-less recoveries”, ECB working paper 1358; Calvo, G., 
Coricelli, F. and P. Ottonello, (2013), “Jobless recoveries during financial crises: Is inflation on the way out?”, 
NBER Working Paper 19683. 
14   Benigno G., and Fornaro L., (2014), “The financial resource curse”, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 
116 (1), pp. 58–86; Benigno G., Converse N., and Fornaro L., (2015), “Large capital flows, sectoral allocation 
and economic performance”, Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming; Jorda, O., Schularick 
M., and Taylor A. M., (2015),“The great mortgaging, crises and business cycle”, NBER Working Paper 20501. 
15   Philippon, T., (2010), “Financiers versus Engineers: Should the Financial Sector be Taxed or Subsidized?”, 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), pp. 158–182. 
16   Modigliani, F. and Miller, M. (1958), The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment”. 
American Economic Review 48 (3) pp. 261–297. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
for  banks.  But  the  empirical  papers  that  have  estimated  this  wedge  have  found  it  to  be 
small.17 
Regulators have gone to considerable length to assess the impact of the various regulatory 
initiatives. The regular quantitative impact assessments undertaken by the Basel Committee 
show that most reporting banks have made significant progress to meet the new regulatory 
requirements  for  capital  and  liquidity.18  The  European  Commission  has  published  a 
comprehensive  study  that  aims  to  estimate  the  joint  economic  impact  of  many  regulatory 
initiatives.19 This study comes to the conclusion that the expected costs of the reforms will be 
compensated by the wider economic and societal benefits. Moreover, specific assessments 
have  been  made  with  regard  to  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  stronger  capital,  liquidity 
requirements and OTC derivative reforms. In the European context, the European Banking 
Authority and the Commission have assessed the macroeconomic impact of the regulatory 
reform for insurance companies and broadened the assessment with regard to the Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  and  currently  with  regard  to  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio.20  Overall,  the 
evidence  available  from  these  studies  demonstrates  a  positive  or  neutral  impact  on  GDP 
growth. 
Slow growth in Europe has many structural causes 
So what is the cause of slow economic growth if not regulation? GDP growth comes from 
three  main  sources:  greater  productive  efficiency  (otherwise  known  as  Total  Factor 
Productivity  or  TFP),  labour  force  increases  and  capital  deepening  (the  increase  in  the 
amount of capital per worker). The contribution of all three factors has been declining over 
time and across countries as part of what has been termed ‘secular stagnation’. 
The main reason why labour force growth has declined is population ageing. As the number 
of older retired people grows, the labour force is expected to decline at a rate of around 0.6% 
per annum by 2030.21 
TFP  growth  has  remained  subdued  at  a rate  of  expansion  of  around  1%  per  annum. The 
determinants of TFP growth are not fully understood but among others, Robert Gordon22 has 
argued  that  TFP  growth  occurs  in  waves,  driven  by  major  innovations.  So  far,  despite  its 
great promise, the ICT revolution of the 1990s has not led to a pronounced and sustained 
pick-up in productivity growth in any of the major industrialised countries. 
Finally, the rate of capital deepening (the increase in the amount of capital per worker) has 
been weak in recent years reflecting low aggregate demand, financing constraints and weak 
business  confidence.  The  contribution  of  this  growth  driver  is  expected  to  return  to  more 
normal levels as the economic recovery proceeds. 
Compared  to  these  structural  reasons  for  the  slowdown  in  growth,  the  impact  of  financial 
regulation has been modest, at best. 
                                                
17   Hanson, S. Kashyap, A. and Stein, J. (2011), ‘A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation’, Journal of 
Economic  Perspectives  25(1),  pp.  5–28,  Miles,  D.  Marcheggiano,  G.  and  Yang,  J.  (2013),  ‘Optimal  Bank 
Capital’, Economic Journal, vol. 123(567), pp. 1–37. 
18   See BIS/FSB (2010) Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity 
requirements; BIS (2013), Macroeconomic impact assessment of OTC derivatives regulatory reforms. 
19   European Commission, Economic review of the financial regulation agenda, May 2014. 
20   See DG ECFIN (2007) Impact Assessment: Possible macroeconomic and financial effects of Solvency II and 
EBA (2014) Second report on impact assessment for liquidity measures under Article 509 (1) of the CRR. 
21   “The  Global  Economy  in  2030:  Trends  and  Strategies  for  Europe”,  European  Strategy  and  Policy  Analysis 
System and Centre for Policy Studies, April 2014. 
22   Gordon, R. (2012), “Is US economic growth over? Faltering innovation confronts the six headwinds”, NBER 
Working Paper 18315. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Another related consequence of secular stagnation may be that the natural real interest rate 
(the  real  interest  rate  consistent  with  full  employment  and  stable  inflation)  has  fallen. 
Population ageing has shifted the balance between older households who are likely to save 
and  younger  households  who  are  likely  to  borrow.  As  a  result,  real  interest  rates  have 
declined substantially in the last two decades.23 Nominal interest rates have also fallen in line 
with the real, leaving the ‘normal’ central bank policy rate much closer to the zero bound, 
thus increasing the likelihood of hitting it during deep recessions. 
Without  getting  into  a  discussion  about  the  merits  and  risks  of  unconventional  monetary 
policy,  it  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates 
complicates the task of monetary policy in trying to stabilise large shocks. Financial crises 
are some of the largest peace-time negative shocks to hit market economies and our ability 
to use monetary policy in order to deal with them ‘ex-post’ would be impaired in a secular 
stagnation world. 
This makes the role of regulation in avoiding financial crises more important than ever. When 
it comes to dealing with financial crises, prevention is always better than cure but especially 
so when ‘mopping-up after the crash’ is complicated by the inability to cut short-term interest 
rates sufficiently far below zero.24 
What has been achieved and what is in the pipeline? 
We have seen that, far from damaging growth, a strong regulatory framework is essential in 
ensuring  strong  long-term  economic  performance.  Let  me  now  briefly  touch  upon  the  key 
achievements of the efforts to reform the financial system. 
We have increased capital requirements well above the levels in force before the financial 
crisis.  This  will  make  banks  more  resilient  to  shocks  and  reduce  their  incentives  to  take 
excessive risks. We have identified the most systemically important institutions and require 
them  to  have  additional  capital  buffers  reflecting  the  significant  externalities  their  failure 
would impose on the financial system and the economy as a whole. The introduction of the 
two  liquidity  ratios  will  make  banks  more  resilient  against  sudden  liquidity  and  funding 
shocks. 
These reforms were changes necessary to the regulatory framework but are, in my view, not 
yet sufficient for a stable financial system. In view of the current rhetoric of reform fatigue, it 
is important stress that we still need to finalise several important initiatives that are currently 
under way. They are all needed in order to effectively correct market failures and with the 
minimum of cost to the real economy. TLAC, the leverage ratio and the review of risk weights 
would help underpin the effectiveness of capital regulation in avoiding excessive risk-taking 
and  protecting  the  real  economy  from  the  consequences  of  bank  failure.  The  attempts  to 
broaden non-bank funding sources in Europe via improved and safer securitisation practices, 
as  well  as  capital  markets  union,  should  reduce  the  negative  consequences  of  bank 
deleveraging now as well as in the future. 
Total  Loss  Absorption  Capacity  Let  me  begin  with  the  TLAC  initiative  targeting  the  most 
systemically important banks. Too-big-to-fail is a very important source of market failures and 
                                                
23   Krugman, 
September 
P., 
Secular 
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/25/bubbles-regulation-and-secular-stagnation, 
Summers, L., Speech at the IMF Economic Forum on 8 November 2013. 
Regulation 
“Bubbles, 
2013, 
and 
Stagnation” 
followed 
in 
by 
24   A  number  of  central  banks  in  Europe  have  managed  to  cut  certain  interest  rates  below  zero.  The  ECB’s 
deposit facility rate is at –0.2% and the Swiss National Bank has cut its main policy rate to an unprecedented 
–0.75%. Nevertheless, there exists a limit on how low interest rates can go because at sufficiently negative 
yields, storing physical cash will become attractive to banks and households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
I consider TLAC as an important element in effectively tackling this distortion. Allow me to 
highlight three elements of the proposal. 
First  of  all,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  right  in  proposing  a  global  Pillar 1 
requirement  with  the  possibility  to  apply  additional  Pillar  2  requirements.  A  pillar 1 
requirement  delivers  a  robust  international  standard  for  globally  systemic  important  banks 
and ensures, at the same time, a global level playing field. 
Second,  I  agree  with  a  Total  Loss  Absorbency  approach  with  the  capital  buffers  on  top. 
Having the buffers sit on top of TLAC ensures that they can function as intended, regardless 
of  the  TLAC  calibration.  Additionally,  it  allows  for  a  very  strict  intervention  mechanism  for 
TLAC  non-compliance  as  for  the  duration  of  the  breach  of  the  buffer  requirement,  the 
automatic distribution restrictions specified in Basel III would apply. 
Third,  I  agree  with  benchmarking  TLAC  eligible  liabilities  against  a  non-risked  weighted 
measure  (the  leverage  ratio  exposure)  in  addition  to  risk-weighted  assets.  Under  the 
assumption that TLAC is appropriately calibrated, this ensures that for a failing bank, when 
risks  have  materialised  and  risk-weights  do  not  matter  anymore,  the  actual  loss  can  be 
compensated and the bank successfully recapitalised. 
Nevertheless, I acknowledge that industry has raised several important issues to the TLAC 
proposal, in particular relating to the size of the required TLAC market, the impact on bank 
funding costs, the calibration and the link with the leverage ratio. Let me assure you that we 
take  these  issues  seriously.  This  is  why  the  FSB  is  performing  a  thorough  impact 
assessment in close collaboration with the ECB and other members of the Basel Committee 
(BCBS). This assessment includes a shortfall analysis, a market survey to obtain estimates 
on  investor  base  and  pricing/spread  of  eligible  liabilities,  a  micro-  and  macro-economic 
impact  analysis  and  a  verification  of  historical  losses  and recapitalisation  –  to  analyse  the 
proposed calibration. 
Having said this, all regulatory reform, and TLAC in particular, have an impact on the cost of 
doing business for banks. And insofar as the increase in funding costs is the result of the 
effective removal of the implicit state guarantee this is, in principle, welcome. The benefits of 
the removal of the implicit guarantee outweigh the individual increase in costs for society as 
a whole. Tax payers and their elected representatives have no appetite for another bail-out. 
TLAC  will  significantly  reduce  the  externalities  of  a  failure  of  systemically  important 
institutions that are imposed on the real economy and will therefore have an overall positive 
effect on growth. 
The Leverage Ratio 
The finalisation of the Leverage Ratio (LR) framework should also be a key priority on the 
global regulatory reform agenda. Leverage was undoubtedly one of the root causes of the 
financial crisis. The 20 largest banks in Europe had built-up significant leverage before the 
financial crisis, as their ratios of Book Equity to Total Assets (a reasonable proxy for the new 
definition of the Basel Leverage Ratio) had fallen from 6% in the late 1990s to around 3% in 
2008.25 
Hence,  a  comprehensive  and  well-calibrated  leverage  ratio  is  an  important  tool  for 
addressing  such  risks  that  might  be  circumvented  or  not  captured  by  the  risk-based 
framework. I therefore strongly support the migration of the LR to a Pillar 1 requirement, as 
foreseen  by  the  Basel  Committee.  I  also  see  a  need  to  complement  the  micro-prudential 
minimum  LR  requirement  by  a  macro-prudential  LR  framework.  In  particular,  further  work 
should  be  undertaken  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  adding  a  buffer  for  systemically  important 
                                                
25   See ESRB ASC Report: https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/asc/Reports_ASC_4_1406.pdf. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
banks to  the  LR framework.  Large  banks  contribute  most  to  excessive  leverage  with  their 
greater costs of failure and their greater reliance on internal models. 
Further work looking at the relationship between the LR and the risk-based framework should 
be  undertaken.  For  example,  policy  makers  could  consider  adding  a  time-varying  buffer. 
Such a buffer could help maintain the relative role of the LR in the capital framework once 
the countercyclical buffer is activated in the risk-based framework. 
There are some concerns about a negative impact of a binding LR requirement on lending to 
the  real  economy.  Critics  of  the  LR  often  argue  that  it  would  trigger  significant  additional 
capital requirements and, as a consequence, may make it more costly for banks to finance 
the real economy. However, I believe that these concerns are overstated for three reasons. 
First, as already mentioned, there are many reasons to believe that the impact of the higher 
capital requirements on growth in normal times should not be overly large. In any case, the 
latest Basel QIS study shows that the large majority of banks already satisfy the currently 
envisaged 3% minimum requirement. Any additional impact would be modest. Second, even 
if the LR leads to some contraction in lending, it may still be good for long-run growth if it 
helps  to  avoid  costly  crises.  Finally,  there  is  a  more  subtle  effect  by  which  the  LR  may 
actually help improve lending to the real economy. Recent evidence on risk-weights for SME 
lending  in  Europe26  shows  that  the  average  capital  cost  for  this  activity  in  the  risk-based 
framework is higher than under the LR. This would imply that in a situation where the LR 
becomes the binding measure for a subset of banks, banks may potentially increase SME 
lending  at  the  expense  of  other  activities,  which  have  a  preferential  treatment  in  the  risk-
based framework relative to the LR framework. I would encourage further work on this matter 
that would present evidence on the significance of this effect. 
Risk weights 
Let me now turn to another key lesson we learnt in the aftermath of the financial crisis. The 
BCBS  has  shown  that  significant  differences  exist  in  the  way  banks  estimate  PDs  and 
LGDs27 resulting in the reported capital ratios varying by as much as 2 percentage points for 
banks with similar exposures. We must address this variability of risks-weights, and bank’s 
overreliance on internal models that produce them. 
Variability of risk-weights may arise because of data scarcity and complexity of models, but 
may also be a consequence of banks gaming the risk-weights. Behn et al (2014)28 provide an 
example of recent empirical work that clearly reveals this gaming behaviour within banks’ use 
of internal models. By exploiting the staggered introduction of the model-based approach in 
Germany, Behn et al. show that (1) internal risk estimates employed for regulatory purposes 
systematically  underpredict  actual  default  rates  by  0.5  to  1  percentage  points;  (2)  both 
default rates and loss rates are higher for loans that were originated under the model-based 
approach, while corresponding risk-weights are significantly lower; and (3) interest rates are 
higher  for  loans  originated  under  the  model-based  approach,  suggesting  that  banks  were 
aware  of  the  higher  risk  associated  with  these  loans  and  priced  them  accordingly. 
Fortunately, the BCBS has stepped up its efforts in this area. First, it has recently published a 
consultation  paper  on  its  new  capital  floor  framework  based  on  standardised  approaches. 
These  floors  will  limit  the  extent  to  which  internal  models  can  lower  capital  requirements 
relative to the standardised approach and therefore ensure that the level of capital across the 
banking  system  does  not  fall  below  a  certain  level.  Second,  the  BCBS  has  recently 
                                                
26   See EBA, Third interim report on the consistency of risk-weighted assets, 2013. 
27   See Basel Committee, Regulatory consistency of risk-weighted assets in the banking book, July 2013. 
28   Behn, M., Haselmann, R. and V. Vig, (2014), “The limits of model-based regulation”, SAFE Working Paper 
Series, No. 75. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
established  the  high-level  Task  Force  on  Simplicity  and  Comparability  mandated  to 
undertake a strategic review of the capital framework in order to reduce reliance on models 
for some risks and portfolios. 
I expect both strands of work not only to improve the resilience of financial institutions but 
also  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  lending  to  the  real  economy.  Empirical  evidence  on  the 
behaviour of German banks during the crisis suggests that loans subject to internal model 
capital charges were reduced significantly more than loans under the standardised approach 
to capital regulation, supporting the view that internal models are relatively more pro-cyclical 
than  the  standardised  approach.29  The  cited  paper  shows  that,  for  the  German  banking 
system,  loans  subject  to  model-based,  time-varying  capital  charges  were  reduced  by 
3.5 percent more than loans under the traditional approach to capital regulation, during the 
financial  crisis.  Hence,  increasing  the  relative  importance  of  the  standardised  approach 
should help to smooth the credit cycle, in particular by making deleveraging episodes less 
severe. 
Securitisation 
Another important strand of work, strongly pushed by the ECB in collaboration with the Bank 
of  England,  is  the  revitalisation  of  the  securitisation  market.  When  performed  with  proper 
regard  to  loan  underwriting  standards,  securitisation  can  play  a  very  important  role  in 
diversifying  bank  funding  sources,  freeing  bank  capital  and  allocating  risk  more  efficiently 
within  the  EU  financial  system.  This  is  particularly  important  in  the  current  stage  of  bank 
balance  sheet  deleveraging  when  other  funding  sources  must  replace  shrinking  traditional 
banks. 
For securitisation to work in stimulating lending to the real economy, we need it to be simple 
and  transparent.  This  would  reduce  the  post-crisis  stigma  associated  with  securitised 
products  and  would  improve  non-bank  investors’  confidence  in  securitisations  leading  to 
higher demand. In turn this would free-up bank capital and allow banks to expand their own 
lending to the real economy. 
Capital Markets Union 
Finally, let me briefly touch upon a very recent initiative in Europe also aimed at improving 
financing of the real economy by broadening access to non-bank funding sources. 
This initiative follows the fashionable title of Capital Markets Union or CMU. Its objectives are 
very broad and the benefits may only materialise over the long-term. However, in a recently 
published  Green  Paper,  the  European  Commission  has  highlighted  a  number  of  reforms 
which can improve enterprises’ funding access also in the short-term.30 
For  example,  lowering  barriers  to  capital  market  access  as  well  as  the  development  of  a 
European private placement market can make a difference in providing finance to the real 
economy. The shift in financing of the real economy from the banking system to markets and 
non-bank  entities  is  already  taking  place.  The  role  of  CMU  is  to  foster  the  effective  and 
efficient  allocation  of  financial  resources  at  the  European  level  while  avoiding  the 
vulnerabilities experienced during the recent episodes. 
As  I  said  before,  it  is  important  to  finalise  these  initiatives  to  address  all  the  lessons  we 
learned from the financial crisis. The current – indeed difficult – environment is the result of 
the crisis and the pre-crisis regulation. In order to leave this transitory environment and move 
into a new and more resilient steady state for the good of the financial sector, we need to 
                                                
29   Behn, M., Haselmann, R, and P. Wachtel, “Pro-cyclical capital regulation and lending”, Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper 32/2014. 
30   European Commission Green Paper, Building Capital Markets Union, 2015. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
complete  the  regulatory  reform.  Ultimately,  this  will  have  a  positive  effect  on  the  real 
economy and lead to more sustainable growth. 
Missing elements: what about the rest of the system 
We  had  to  make  the  banking  system  safer  and  I  believe  that,  subject  to  the  successful 
implementation of the measures discussed in the previous section, we are close to achieving 
this  goal.  But  does  this  make  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  less  crisis-prone  and  more 
conducive  to  sustainable  economic  growth?  Have  we  eliminated  the  market  failures  that 
make financial crises so costly for the real economy? 
So  far,  the  regulatory  reform  has  largely  focused  on  the  banking  sector  with  the  effect  of 
pushing  activities  to  less  regulated  and  supervised  parts  of  the  financial  system.  Going 
forward, we need more information, and need to develop a monitoring framework and macro-
prudential tools for the rest of the financial system. Non-banks can also exert costs on the 
wider financial  system  and  can, just  as  easily  as  normal  banks,  become  excessively  risky 
and too-big-to-fail (just think AIG for example). 
Our regulatory framework must evolve in two key aspects. First, we need to have in place 
permanent  tools  for  the  more  systemic  players.  Second,  we  need  a  toolbox  for  the  less 
significant financial firms who could jointly destabilise the financial system. This essentially 
mirrors the macro-prudential approach that we have followed for the banking sector. 
Identifying systemic non-bank non-insurers 
In this respect, the current work of the FSB on a methodology for identifying Systemic Non-
Bank Non-Insurers, in my view, addresses the first aspect of the remaining challenges. In 
this regard, let me highlight the importance of developing a framework that captures a wide-
set of entities with this methodology. This is necessary for two reasons. 
First, it sends a signal to the industry that authorities stand ready to apply macro-prudential 
tools when systemic risks are identified. Second, we need to have a broad set of policy tools 
ready to address the risks stemming from financial firms at large. Focusing on a limited set of 
entities will not allow us to fully understand what instruments are needed in our toolbox. 
Going  beyond  systemic  financial  firms,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  appropriate  macro-
prudential tools to address the systemic risk of the remaining non-bank financial system. This 
is in the spirit of what has been done for the banking sector, where a range of policy tools is 
now available to address risks to banks from developments in specific markets and activities. 
The FSB’s work on asset management goes in this direction and shows the road ahead. The 
build-up of leverage and the growing exposure to illiquid assets in the asset management 
sector are clearly relevant developments for macro-prudential supervisors. These need to be 
carefully  monitored  and  assessed.  However,  macro-prudential  policy  cannot  stop  at  this 
point.  It  is  well-known  that  the  liabilities  of  asset  managers  are  subject  to  short-term 
redemption.  Moreover,  some  asset  managers  hold  a  significant  share  of  their  assets  in 
illiquid  securities  and  use  derivatives  and  short-term  financing  transactions  to  increase 
leverage and returns. The combination of these factors makes asset managers more prone 
to runs and asset fire-sales, which may spill-over to other parts of the financial system. 
A  comprehensive  toolkit  to  target  these  risks  is  therefore  needed.  More  specifically, 
additional liquidity requirements and minimum redemption and load fees31 are potential tools 
that should be part of the macro-prudential toolbox. 
                                                
31   Fecht, F. and M. Wedow (2014), “ The dark and the bright side of liquidity risks: Evidence from the open-
ended real estate funds in Germany” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 23, pp. 376–399. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Haircuts for Secured Financial Transactions (SFT) and margin requirements for OTC 
derivatives 
Haircuts  for  securities  financing  transactions  are  a  further  tool  that  could  prove  to  be 
effective.  With  countercyclical  haircuts,  as  opposed  to  a  regime  with  flat  minimum 
requirements, the effects on volatility and leverage in financial markets may turn out to be 
stronger.32 Authorities should therefore consider using haircuts as a macro-prudential tool, 
e.g. by raising the numerical haircut floors and varying them over time in a countercyclical 
manner.  Macro-prudential  haircuts  for  SFTs  could  be  complemented  by  similar  tools  that 
allow authorities to set countercyclical add-ons to margin requirements applied by CCPs, as 
well  as  for  OTC  derivatives.  I  would  encourage  further  work  to  understand  the  effects  of 
these tools and how to apply them in practice. 
Concluding remarks 
To kick-start growth in Europe is one of the most important challenges at present. I believe 
that the enhanced regulatory framework in place since the crisis can play a positive role in 
achieving  this  goal.  We  want  a  healthy  and  competitive  financial  system  that  supports 
sustainable long-term economic development rather than a return to deregulation and boom-
bust cycles. 
As I have discussed, we still have to finish various initiatives, some of which are well under 
way.  I  expect  these  initiatives  to  help  foster  an  environment  of  stable  and  healthy  real 
economy. 
Challenges remain, of course. In view of the global problem posed by ageing populations, 
growth  may  not  necessarily  pick-up  without  further  structural  reforms.  Low  interest  rates 
brought about by secular stagnation further complicate the tasks of both monetary policy and 
financial stability. A strong regulatory framework is essential in dealing with these challenges 
and  avoiding  future  financial  crises.  However,  an  effective  regulatory  framework  requires 
continued  vigilance.  We  are  currently  experiencing  a  significant  shift  away  from  bank 
intermediated finance and this process will continue in the future. This requires a broadened 
toolkit, the ability to take decisive and intrusive macro-prudential policy actions as well as a 
framework  that  is  capable  of  expanding,  in  order  to  encompass  all  relevant  systemic 
institutions and activities. This becomes even more critical when monetary policy needs to be 
accommodative, as I expect will be the case for the foreseeable future in the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                
32   Brumm,  J.,  M.  Grill,  F.  Kubler  and  K.  Schmedders,  (2015)  “Margin  Regulation  and  Volatility”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
