  Agus D W Martowardojo: Enhancing financial inclusion through Islamic 
finance 
Keynote address by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the IFSB 
International  Seminar  “Enhancing  Financial  Inclusion  through  Islamic  Finance”,  Jakarta, 
31 March 2015. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahiim, 
• 
His Excellency: Mr Jaseem Ahmed, Secretary General – Islamic Financial Services 
Board; 
His Excellency: Dr. Muliaman D Hadad, Chairman of OJK, Board of Commissioners; 
Prominent speakers, 
Distinguished Delegates and all participants, 
• 
• 
• 
Assalamualaikum Warahmatullah Wabarakatuh, 
A very good morning to all of you. 
Greeting 
1. 
It  is  a  great  honor  for  me  to  deliver  a  keynote  address  in  this  IFSB  international 
seminar  that  is  emphasizing  on  the  need  to  enhance  financial  inclusion  through 
Islamic  finance.  Having  observed  that  providing  greater  financial  access  is  very 
crucial  in  delivering  equitable  opportunities  to  all  segments  in  the  society  and 
preserving  more  sustained  economic  development,  I  am  pleased  to  observe  that 
Islamic  finance  has  a  great  concern  over  having  a  better  outreach  in  delivering 
financial services. The international seminar that we have today may serve as one 
of  the  efforts  to  deliberate  ideas  on  how  Islamic  finance  could  formulate  its  roles 
through better financial products and regulations. 
Recent development of Islamic financial industry 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
2. 
We  have  already  witnessed  that  Islamic  financial  industry  has  been  rapidly 
developing in terms of economic sectors, asset size, physical outreach, and financial 
products  offered.  Islamic  financial  products  have  been  used  in  commercial  retail 
products, corporates, and government. The products of Islamic banks, takaful, and 
capital  market  have  been  widely  used  in  various  economic  sectors  including 
agriculture, manufacturing, trade finance, transportation, infrastructure development, 
and others. Branches of Islamic financial institutions have also been established to 
reinforce physical presence in the market; besides technological advancement that 
allows  the  customers  to  enjoy  sophisticated  Islamic  financial  products  such  as 
mobile banking and e-finance. The global Islamic financial industry is expected to 
reach the total assets of USD 2 Trillion this year. The industry is growing at about 
17.3 percent compounded average growth rate. It is almost twice as much as the 
conventional industry has achieved. 
The  development  of  Islamic  financial  services  industry  is  still  dominated  by  the 
2 major  industries,  namely  the  Islamic  banking  sector  and  Islamic  capital  market 
with the share of 80 percent and 15 percent respectively. The interest of non-Muslim 
populated countries like the United Kingdom, South Africa and Luxembourg to issue 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 4. 
5. 
International 
 
 
global  Sukuk  has  been  monumental.  The  total  of  Sukuk  issuance  in  2014  has 
reached the amount of USD 114.7 Billion. At the regulatory and infrastructure side, 
we  could  also  see  some  significant  progress  taking  place.  The  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board has consistently produced regulatory references that are beneficial 
to enhance governance of the industry. Those cover prudential measures for Islamic 
banking, takaful (or Islamic insurance), and Islamic capital market. 
The  latest  efforts  coming  into  plates  are  the  Guidance  Note  on  Liquidity  Risk 
Management  and  the  core  principles  of  Islamic  banking  supervision.  Those 
regulatory references are expected to further streamline Islamic finance operations 
globally  and  serve  as  a  basis  for  assessing  the  strength  and  effectiveness  of 
regulation  and  supervision.  The 
Islamic  Liquidity  Management 
Corporation has also shown its presence by increasing its sukuk issuance that can 
be used for liquidity management of the internationally operating Islamic banks more 
efficiently.  Despite  some  exogenous  disturbing  factors  like  geopolitical  crises  and 
shocks to oil prices, we could expect that the industry could sustain its development 
until  it  reaches  its  significant  role  as  one  of  key  drivers  of  the  global  economic 
development. 
Cross  sector  activities  between  Islamic  banking  and  capital  market  in  terms  of 
Basel III  compliant  sukuk,  “green”  sukuk  issuance,  and  social  based  sukuk  have 
also indicated progressive innovation in the industry. The central banks have also 
equipped  themselves  with  some  innovation  allowing  them  to  perform  monetary 
operations using sharia compliance financial instruments and enriching the industry 
with  more  compatible  products  such  as  sharia  compliance  repurchase  agreement 
(repo).  At  the  industry  level,  we  could  also  see  the  involvement  of  Islamic 
Development  Bank  as  one  of  the  Multilateral  Development  Banks  deserves 
appreciation.  It  was  through  its  initiatives  that  the  establishment  of  supporting 
institutions  like  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  International  Islamic 
Financial  Market  (IIFM),  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic 
Financial Institutions (AAOIFI), and the International Islamic Liquidity Management 
(IILM)  was  successfully  arranged.  The  latest Ten-Year  Framework  and Strategies 
tries to consolidate all the efforts into a well-developed program. 
Current global Islamic financial industry development 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
6. 
The  global  economy  is  still  trying  to  regain  its  momentum  for  the  economic 
development  in  the  last  5  years.  The  economic  recovery  is  surrounded  by 
uncertainty  which  could  easily  affected  by  economic  policies  of  advanced 
economies and other disturbances. The tapering of the US quantitative easing and 
the  shock  of  international  oil  price  caused  a  destabilizing  force  to  the  emerging 
economies that are fundamentally sustained by domestic demands well-formulated 
monetary policy. The growth in the capital market has also been challenged by the 
oil price decline and low interest policy in the advanced market. 
Despite  the  uncertainty  faced  by  the  industry,  I  am  confident  that  the  Islamic 
financial industry could maintain its pace of growth in years to come. There are at 
least five driving forces to sustain the industrial development including the growth of 
emerging  economies,  cross-border 
Islamic 
financial  products,  regulatory  advancement  driven  by  more  advanced  and 
comprehensive regulatory standards, and continuous growth of Muslim population. 
transactions, 
innovative 
financial 
7. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Achieving greater sustainability in the economic development and financial outreach 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
The development of Islamic finance is expected to provide benefits to wide range of 
customers.  Those  include  the  low  income  society  that  currently  does  not  have 
access to the financial system to make their life better. According to some studies, it 
is  found  that  there  are  quite  many  people  in  OIC  member  countries  that  still  live 
under poverty line. Most of them is unable to upgrade their quality of life and turn 
themselves  into  productive  society  due  to  the  lack  of  assets  in  hand  and  the 
absence of financial products and services with low cost of funds. 
Moreover,  due  to  lacks  of  other  resources,  they  are  also  remote  from  supportive 
education  program  and  health  facilities  that  are  potential  to  strengthen  the  basic 
necessities  to  gain  quality  in  human  capital.  Without  properly  designed  poverty 
alleviation program that particular group of people may be trapped in the poverty for 
ages. In some occasion, low income society has been perceived as involving high 
risk and too expensive to manage since it requires an extensive effort to manage 
highly  dispersed  customers.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  proper  mechanism  and 
procedures supported by well-developed regulation, microfinance industry can also 
be highly lucrative. 
Islamic finance with a wider application of equity-based financing and micro-finance 
products can facilitate greater outreach to medium, small and micro enterprises to 
promote  entrepreneurship  and  value-creating  activities.  Conceptually,  greater 
access to financial services can be provided by commercial based Islamic financial 
institutions such as Islamic banks providing microfinance products or micro takaful 
provided by takaful institutions. Other steps can be formulated such as integrating 
commercial sector with Islamic social sector to come up with financial services that 
are reachable by the micro entrepreneurs and low income society in general. The 
program  is  aimed  at  improving  social  welfare  arrangement  through  variety  of 
vehicles  such  as  optimization  of  awqaf  funds,  innovative  zakat  disbursement 
program  that  is  contributive  to  the  job  creation  initiatives  and  poverty  alleviation 
program. 
Conceptually, the practice of Islamic finance signifies its favor to financial stability 
and quality economic development which is characterized by the use of risk-sharing 
concept,  discouragement  to  excessive  debt,  the  emphasis  on  ethical  investment 
activities,  and  other  sharia  specific  preferences.  The  emphasis  on  equity  based 
investment underlines the importance of reinforcing the basic relationship between 
financial sector and real economy. 
The development of Islamic financial sector could reduce over-reliance to the debt 
funding and excessive speculation. Having observed from the past economic crises, 
it  has  been  evidence  that  excessive  debt  funding  and  speculation  significantly 
contributed  to  the  financial  system  fragility.  In  relation  to  the  formulation  of  public 
preference, the principle to the prohibition of excessive debt taking could serve as a 
medium of public education that could create positive effect on the moderation of the 
aggregate demand; and thus more stable macroeconomic condition. 
The application of risk-sharing principle could give more gravity to partnership in the 
society  rather  than  creating  lender-debtor  relationship.  Despite  the  requirement  to 
have a favorable environment that promotes more symmetric market, the application 
of  sharing  concept could  offer the  potential  to  reinforce  the  link  between  financial 
sector and the real economy which base the financial contracts on value creation 
and viability of the enterprises. Once the transparency and governance are in place 
to allow better partnership, over-creation of financial engineering can be minimized 
since the financial activities will be focused on the intrinsic value added offered in 
the financial contracts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 14. 
15. 
 
 
From  the  governance  perspective,  the  risk  sharing  concept  strengthens  the 
incentive  to  the  financial  institutions  to  exercise  appropriate  due  diligence  to  the 
financial  transactions  assuring  that  the  expected  profits  commensurate  their  risk 
taking.  Supported  by  sound  information  and  reporting  system,  the  risk-sharing 
contract  opens  up  opportunities  for  the  entrepreneur  and  the  financier  to  monitor 
and calculate the intrinsic values of the financial transaction that is reflected by its 
expected  profit,  cash-flow,  risks  involved  and  other  influencing  factors  to  the 
projects.  This  concept  promotes  greater  discipline  and  responsibility  to  all 
contracting  parties  to  assure  its  success.  The  combination  of  good  governance, 
greater transparency and well-designed risk management would shape trust-based 
relationship that is essential to make the intermediation process efficient. 
The attention of the IFSB towards enhancing the role of microfinance in the Islamic 
finance industry deserves appreciation. The Islamic financial institutions should be 
able to play significant roles in the economic development covering all segments in 
the society. The availability of standards on the microfinance activities is important 
to ensure operational prudence practiced by the Islamic financial institutions when 
extending their facilities to the low income society. Some regulatory incentive needs 
to be created in terms of relatively lower risk weighted asset to provide lower cost of 
capital when entertaining the micro-entrepreneurs. Although, further research need 
to  take  place  to  find  the  optimal  number  and  prerequisites  when  applying  the 
incentives. 
Closing 
16. 
Finally, please allow me to wish you all a productive discussion and deliberation in 
this  important  seminar.  I  am  confident  that  supported  by  internationally  reputable 
academics and players, we can achieve significant outcomes that are beneficial to 
promote  development  in  the  area  of  microfinance  for  Islamic  finance.  I  wish  this 
program a great success. Thank you very much. 
Wassalamu’alaykum warahmatullah wabarakatuh. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
