  Karnit Flug: The Israeli economy – a macroeconomic perspective 
Main points of a lecture by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Supreme 
Court, Jerusalem, 6 August 2015. 
 The Israeli economy is an open economy that is greatly affected by developments abroad. 
This is reflected in the growth rates in the economy, which are very much in line with those 
abroad.  The  effect  of  activity  abroad  is  mainly  reflected  through  international  trade,  which 
affects demand for Israeli exports, both goods and services. Goods exports are in a virtual 
standstill,  against  the  background  of  the  virtual  standstill  in  global  trade,  which  declined 
slightly  in  2013  and  recovered  slightly  during  2014.  In  contrast,  services  exports  have 
performed better than global trade. 
The labor market is in good condition. The unemployment rate is very low and this, alongside 
the  continuing  trend  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate,  with  new  participants  finding 
employment, reflects an increasing trend in the employment rate. The development of real 
wages per employee post indicates a moderate increase in recent years, and acceleration in 
the past year. 
Monetary policy 
The Bank of Israel’s policy acts to achieve the Bank of Israel’s targets as set out in the law. 
The main target is achieving price stability, meaning meeting the inflation target, and subject 
to that, support for the other economic targets, chiefly growth and employment, and support 
for financial stability. In recent months, the inflation rate has been below the target, and in the 
past  12  months,  prices  have  declined  by  0.4  percent,  mainly  due  to  a  decline  in  fuel  and 
commodities  prices.  In  contrast,  one-year  forward  inflation  expectations  are  at  the  lower 
bound  of  the  target  range  –  1.0  percent.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  shekel  has 
appreciated,  which  has  contributed  to  lower  prices,  following  a  number  of  months  of 
depreciation in the last few months of 2014. The appreciation also makes it difficult for Israeli 
exporters  to  compete  in  the  global  market,  and  our  estimation  is  that  the  shekel  is 
appreciated relative to equilibrium levels. Against the background of these developments – 
which are also affected by developments in the global economy – the Bank of Israel lowered 
the interest rate to the historically low level of 0.1 percent, and purchased foreign exchange. 
The budget and the fiscal aggregates 
The  government  has  recently  been  dealing  with  the  finishing  touches  of  the  budget.  The 
proposed budget for 2015 and 2016, which was approved by the government, includes deficit 
targets of 2.9 percent of GDP each year, which are higher than those that are appropriate for 
the  economy  in  its  current  state,  with  a  level  of  activity  close  to  full  potential,  high 
employment  rates,  and  low  unemployment  rates  by  historical  perspective.  The  proposed 
deficit  targets  do  not  support  the  continued  reduction  of  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio.  An 
international comparison of the tax burden shows that the tax burden in Israel is lower than 
the OECD average, and the share of public expenditure in Israel is smaller than the OECD 
average.  Since  our  defense  expenditures  are  much  higher  than  those  of  other  advanced 
economies,  and  the  interest  expenditures  on  the  debt  are  relatively  high,  the  civilian 
expenditure  (excluding  defense  and  interest)  obtained  is  very  low.  Israel  is  in  next-to-last 
place in an international comparison of civilian  expenditures. (Civilian expenditures include 
public  services  such  as  education,  healthcare,  welfare,  and  public  security,  as  well  as 
expenditures on growth engines such as investments in infrastructure that are meant, among 
other things, to encourage future growth.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  An issue that has an effect on both the longer-term fiscal area and on the cost of living, is the 
outline  of  agreements  being  formulated  between  the  interministerial  team  dealing  with  the 
issue of natural gas development and the gas companies. The Bank of Israel’s position is 
that under the circumstances created, the new outline provides a reasonable response to the 
needs  of  the  economy,  particularly  for  the  purpose  of  speeding  up  the  connection  of  an 
additional natural gas pipeline and the promotion of development of the Leviathan and Karish 
and Tanin reservoirs. By the nature of negotiations, the outline does not achieve the ideal 
result,  but  it  does contain  many  advantages for the  economy.  As  such, the  Bank  of Israel 
supports the main points of the outline and progress toward its implementation. 
The outline arranges a variety of issues related to the natural gas economy that were subject 
to  uncertainty,  thereby  enabling  more  stable  regulation  of the  natural  gas  economy,  which 
will make it easier to advance the financing and development of the reservoirs, and will in the 
end  enable  redundancy  of  supply  and  a  market  structure  that  is  more  competitive  than  is 
currently the case. The outline also supports the achievement of the government’s target to 
enable  the  realization  of  export  contracts  with  Egypt  and  Jordan  for  both  economic  and 
diplomatic considerations. 
Before final approval of the outline, it is important that milestones be set for advancement in 
the development of the Leviathan reservoir and connecting it to the Israeli gas economy, and 
that  decisions  be  made  regarding  the  measures  that  will  be  taken  should  the  pace  of 
development not be according to agreements. In particular, it is important that if a delay in 
development prevents the creation of a more competitive structure than is currently the case 
in the natural gas market, alternative steps be defined that will advance the connection of the 
gas  reservoirs  to  the  Israeli  economy  in  the  most  rapidly  possible  manner,  alongside  a 
mechanism that will protect Israeli consumers from monopolistic pricing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
