  François Groepe: Recent developments in the African region 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  François  Groepe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank,  at  the  Tenth  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision–Financial  Stability  Institute 
High-level  Meeting  for  Africa  on  “Strengthening  Financial  Sector  Supervision  and  Current 
Regulatory Priorities”, Cape Town, 29–30 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you for inviting me to the Tenth BCBS-FSI High-level Meeting for Africa and to share 
my views on the recent developments in the African region. 
I  will  provide  you  with  a  brief  overview  of  possible  risks  for  the  African  region  that  are 
associated  with  a  new  round  of  quantitative  easing  in  developed  economies.  I  will  also 
discuss the impact of low oil prices on sovereign and corporate debt issuance, and global 
growth and the implications of these developments for the region. I shall conclude by giving 
an update on regulatory developments. 
Despite  a  strong  performance  by  the  US  and  UK  economies,  the  global  economic  growth 
outlook  remains  mixed,  with  the  growth  prospects  having  deteriorated  in  a  number  of  the 
other advanced economies, with Japan in a technical recession and the Eurozone remaining 
weak amid the possibility of deflation. 
The  lower  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  have  had  a  significant  and  divergent  impact  on 
recent  macroeconomic  developments,  with  deteriorating  prospects  in  some  emerging 
markets  contributing  to  the  lowering  of  the  IMF’s  2015  global  growth  forecast  by 
0,3 percentage points to 3,5 per cent with notable downward revisions made to Brazil, China, 
Nigeria, and Russia. Growth in China is expected to moderate to 6,8 per cent in 2015 and 
although  Africa  remains  one  of  the  high-growth  regions,  weaker  commodity  prices  pose 
downside risk to the outlook. 
Currency devaluations and the potential impact on the African region 
The global increase in liquidity, resulting predominantly from capital injections by the Bank of 
Japan  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  could  have  negative  spill  over  effects  to 
sub-Saharan Africa and emerging market economies (EMEs) in general. 
Concerns  over  losses  in  the  export  market  as  a  result  of  a  strengthening  of  domestic 
currencies  could  give  rise  to  attempts  at  currency  devaluations  in  some  developed 
economies  and  encourage  monetary  policy  easing  in  the  context  of  a  subdued  inflation 
outlook  environment,  specifically  in  industrialised  nations.  The  announcement  of  further 
large-scale asset purchases by the ECB and the Bank of Japan precipitated the weakening 
of the euro and the yen, respectively, amidst expectations of monetary policy normalisation in 
the US. 
Already, Denmark and Canada have cut interest rates, while the proponents of interest rate 
increases  in  the  UK  are  retreating.  Subsequent  to  the  ECB’s  announcement  to  fend  off 
deflation  threats  through  an  asset-purchase  programme,  the  Swiss  Franc  appreciated 
strongly, increasing the risk of falling exports and a possible contraction. 
In Asia, the advent of Abenomics raised concerns that China could respond in an effort to 
protect  its  exports  market  share  and  with  its  growth  easing  to  7,4 per  cent  for  the  fourth 
quarter in 2014, the lowest in 24 years, devaluation of the Chinese yuan may be considered 
a possible policy option. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In summary, the further quantitative easing may in the short term increase global liquidity and 
lead  to  capital  inflows  to  emerging  market  economies,  but  this  may  be  accompanied  by 
increased  currency  volatility  on  the  back  of  dollar  strength  and  in  some  countries  weaker 
growth. Currency devaluations flowing from quantitative easing in external markets may also 
have a negative impact on countries that export to those countries. 
Currency risk, sovereign and corporate downgrades 
For the sub-Saharan African region, the past five years of highly accommodative monetary 
policies  in  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan  have  stoked  the  currency  risk  associated  with  the 
increase  in  sovereign  debt  issuance.  The  persistent  search  for  high-yielding  securities 
presents an additional dimension of risk for African countries. 
Backed in recent years by comparatively stronger regional growth, African nations are now 
able to issue billions of dollars in sovereign bonds, prompting the IMF to issue a warning that 
too  much  debt  in  the  region  could  derail  the  best  economic  period  observed  in  this 
generation. 
The uptick in borrowing in the region lifted public debt to a ten-year high of 35 per cent of 
GDP  in  2014.  Although  such  debt  levels  are  much  lower  than  in  Europe  and  some  Asian 
countries,  the  associated  currency  risk  is  significant.  The  cost  of  servicing  a  US 
dollar-denominated  Eurobond,  issued  by  an  African  state  may  look cheaper  than that  of  a 
debt issue in local markets, but if the relevant country’s currency declines, the cost of foreign 
borrowing  could  increase,  thereby  exerting  unwelcome  pressure  on  national  budgets.  This 
risk  is  more  pronounced  in  oil-exporting  countries  that  draw  a  significant  portion  of 
government revenue from their energy sectors. 
As an illustration, Russia’s credit rating has been downgraded to below investment rate for 
the first time in a decade. A number of oil producing countries on the African continent, too 
will  need  to  adjust  to  the  falling  oil  prices  and  declining  fiscal  revenue  by  cutting  fiscal 
expenditure and possibly raising taxes. 
The risk of sovereign downgrades, on the back of deteriorating fiscal and external balances 
could also extend to the corporate sector and may spill over to vulnerable non-oil producing 
countries. Yields on corporate bonds, issued by the energy sector, have risen sharply since 
June 2014. The prospect of defaults due to over-lending to the energy sector is a possibility 
that cannot be ignored. 
Unless oil prices rebound significantly to enable borrowers to refinance their debt on more 
favourable terms, the cross-sectional risks of multiple exposures of different industries to the 
energy sector would be propagated through the financial system. Consequently, share prices 
of oil-listed companies, along with those that provide services to the energy sector, could be 
negatively impacted. 
The impact of low oil prices on the interconnectedness of financial institutions – a risk 
for global growth 
The obvious similarities between the transmission mechanism of the 2006 fall in US house 
prices and the fall in the price of oil since June 2014 have prompted some analyst to predict 
that the correction in the oil price could lead to a plunge in stock markets, with subsequent 
negative spill over effects to the global economy. 
The global financial crisis had its roots strongly embedded in the procyclical risks that were 
amplified and propagated over time by the highly leveraged US housing market. Accordingly, 
a  sharp  fall  in  US  house  prices  led  to  bankruptcies  of  major  financial  institutions  that  had 
significant exposures to the real-estate market. As companies filed for bankruptcies and the 
risk  of  default  increased  in  the  financial  markets,  refinancing  of  existing  debt  became 
increasingly difficult. The shutdown of the US commercial paper market made it difficult for 
corporates  to  borrow  money  over  the  short-end  of  the  yield  curve,  resulting  in  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  unprecedented financial meltdown and significant job losses as economic activity came to a 
halt. 
Through  different  financial  institutions’  interconnectedness,  a  well-contained  and  relatively 
limited  exposure  to  the  US  real-estate  market  soon  spilled  over  to  the  global  financial 
system,  with  negative  consequences for  regional  growth  in  Africa. While  the  origins  of the 
crisis might have been procyclical, it is essentially the distribution of risks during the 2007–08 
crisis that amplified the losses incurred. 
In less than a decade, since the crisis, we now have another highly leveraged sector – the 
US shale oil industry – that capitalised on the rise in the price of oil that started almost ten 
years ago. Banks’ lending to the energy sector of billions of dollars could pose a systemic 
risk to the global financial system as the exposure was seen as low-risk and the pricing of 
risk by lenders might have been less robust during the upward swing in oil prices. 
Resultantly,  the  plunge  in  oil  prices  has  stoked  concerns  over  growth  of  particularly  oil 
producing  countries,  fuelling  fears  about  deflation  and  intensifying  scrutiny  of  capital 
spending  across  the  energy  sector,  with  companies  set  to  slash  their  exploration  and 
development  budgets.  Some  estimates  put  the  figure  of  possible  losses  related  to  halting 
exploration projects at US$1 trillion. 
Moreover, low oil prices are a major threat to high cost oil producers. For as long as prices 
remain below US$50 per barrel, a number of those oil producers will struggle to break even. 
This could trigger a new wave of bankruptcies and defaults with concomitant negative spill 
over effects to the financial sector. 
It is evident that although low oil prices could boost consumption its impact on growth could 
be mixed, with oil exporting countries particularly negatively impacted by these developments 
in  the  form  of  deteriorating  fiscal  and  external  balances.  This  will  furthermore  result  in  a 
sharp  decline  in  the  flows  into  sovereign  wealth  funds  and  given  the  fiscal  deficits  could 
result in significant sell off by these funds. 
The lower oil prices may also accelerate the build-up of deflationary pressures and possibly 
result in stagflation becoming more entrenched in certain economies. 
The impact of low oil prices on revenue projection in the African region 
Some sub-Saharan African countries are particularly at risk from the fall in oil prices, with oil 
exports  accounting for  40–50 per  cent  of GDP for  Gabon,  Angola  and  the  Republic  of  the 
Congo  and  80 per  cent  for  Equatorial  Guinea.  In  Angola,  the  Republic  of  Congo  and 
Equatorial Guinea, the oil industry accounts for 75 per cent of government revenue, while in 
Nigeria  oil  still  accounts  for  more  than  70 per cent  of  the  national  budget,  leaving  public 
institutions exposed to the ebb and flow of global energy prices. 
Cheaper oil is complicating Ghana’s efforts to reduce its significant trade and budget deficits. 
In August 2014, it requested a US$500 million bailout from the IMF. In order to meet bailout 
terms,  Ghana  is  taxing  oil  at  the  pump;  however,  the  fall  in  oil  prices  may  exacerbate  its 
difficulties in meeting its debt obligations. 
Most oil exporters need oil prices to be considerably above US$57, the projected price for 
2015,  to  cover  government  spending,  which  has  increased  in  recent  years  in  response  to 
rising  social  pressures  and  infrastructure  development  goals.  Furthermore,  vulnerability  to 
currency  risk  increases  if  the  borrower  is  dependent  on  the  exports  of  one  or  two 
commodities for revenue. 
East Africa is set to emerge as a global supplier of oil and gas within the next decade due to 
the  recent  major  oil  and  gas  discoveries  in  Mozambique,  Tanzania,  Kenya  and  Uganda. 
Kenya and Uganda alone are estimated to hold 4 billion barrels of crude oil, while Tanzania 
and Mozambique claim reserves of 200 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. With the promise of 
unprecedented petro-revenues possible, host governments are working on bold, detailed and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  comprehensive local content policies as they eye the next phase. All these plans could be 
jeopardised if oil prices do not rebound in the medium term. 
Lastly,  the  fall  in  oil  prices  has  negatively  affected  revenue  projections  of  oil-exporting 
countries and their currencies’ exchange rates. While emerging market currencies generally 
track inflation differentials over the long run, large moves in the crude oil price have directly 
affected exporters’ currencies in the short-term, because of a perceived diminished value in 
export flow revenue. 
the 
implementation  of 
Regulatory, supervisory and financial stability matters 
Turning  to  regulatory  and  financial  stability  matters,  the  global  financial  crisis  has 
necessitated, among other things, a serious regulatory reform agenda in order to address the 
excesses of the period leading up to it; anchor future economic growth and ensure a sound 
regulatory and financial stability framework. 
The current overhaul of the global regulatory system is broad and covers a range of relevant 
financial  issues.  Some  of  the  key  themes  thereof  include  addressing  the  too-big-to-fail 
(TBTF)  problem  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs),  building  resilient 
financial institutions, reducing the opacity of the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets, 
mitigating the impact of shadow banking on financial stability, enhancing financial benchmark 
transparency and promoting the convergence of accounting standards. 
Within  each  of  these  themes  there  are  a  number  of  regulatory  initiatives,  such  as  the 
regulation and resolution of SIFIs under the TBTF problem and Basel III and proposals for a 
basic capital requirement for insurers to strengthen the theme of building resilient financial 
institutions. This list, although not exhaustive, suggests the significant scope and amount of 
the  work  still  ahead.  Compounding  the  problem  further  are  the  implementation  and 
monitoring  processes,  such  as  FSAPs  and  related  peer  reviews  to  assess  progress made 
with 
internationally  agreed  regulatory  standards  by  member 
jurisdictions. 
Given the extensive range of regulatory reforms currently under way, South Africa has since 
last  year  been  calling  for  a  consolidation  phase  where  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the 
adoption  and  implementation  of  agreed  international  regulatory  standards  and  greater 
understanding of the impact of new regulatory reforms on emerging market and developing 
economies (EMDEs). This call was firstly made to avoid unacceptable, uneven, and differing 
implementation of these new standards, thereby creating regulatory arbitrage opportunities 
globally,  and  secondly  out  of  concern  for  the  impact  of  the  cost  of  new  regulatory 
developments on EMDEs. Also, given the nature of “Tenth BCBS-FSI High-level Meeting for 
Africa” meeting, we need to alert global regulatory authorities and standard setters that there 
is a possibility of a widening gap between regulatory standards in advanced economies and 
those in sub-Sahara Africa, where a number of countries are only now implementing Basel II. 
South Africa, as a member of the G-20 and the FSB, is able to participate and, hopefully, 
influence formulation of policy, but unfortunately a number of our peers on the continent are 
not  as  fortunate  as  us  and  hence  are  denied  this  opportunity.  South  Africa,  therefore, 
welcomes  the  recent  decision  by  the  FSB  to  allow  opportunities  for  non-FSB  members  to 
contribute  to  this  process  and  it  supports  the  monitoring  processes  that  have  been  put  in 
place. We furthermore welcome the decision not only for the reasons highlighted above, but 
also so that we can obtain an independent assessment of the progress that South Africa has 
made in this regard. 
Recent domestic developments 
On 1 January 2013 South Africa implemented the Basel III framework. The implementation 
period  for  several  of  the  Basel III  requirements  that  were  incorporated  into  the  domestic 
banking regulations commenced on 1 January 2013 and includes transitional arrangements, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which will be phased in until 1 January 2019. The purpose of the transitional arrangements is 
to afford banks sufficient time to meet the higher standards while still supporting lending to 
the real economy. 
South Africa underwent an FSB peer and thematic review in 2013 and recently participated 
in  an  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP),  which  was  finalised 
towards  the  end  of  2014.  The  purpose  of  FSAPs  is  to  assess  the  stability  of  member 
jurisdictions’ financial systems as a whole, and not that of individual institutions. FSAPs are 
intended  to  help  countries  identify  key  sources  of  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  sector  and 
implement  policies  to  enhance  its  resilience  to  shocks  and  contagion.  Overall,  the 
assessment of South Africa’s financial sector and the supervision and regulation thereof was 
positive, with the report noting a high level of compliance and strong supervision, but found 
that  the  financial  sector  operated  in  a  challenging  economic  environment  and  some  gaps 
were identified. 
Regarding  the  implementation  of  a  twin  peaks  model  of  financial  regulation,  South  Africa 
decided  in  2011  to  change  its  regulatory  architecture  into  a  twin  peaks  regulatory  system. 
The original 2011 policy document on the twin peaks model set-out key proposals aimed at 
enhancing  financial  stability,  consumer  protection,  and  financial  inclusion.1  In  terms  of  the 
twin  peaks  model,  the  approach  will  change  from  regulation  by  institution  to  regulation  by 
objective. In this new approach, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) will be responsible 
for the prudential oversight of banks, insurers, financial conglomerates, and financial market 
infrastructures  and  it  will  also  become  the  Resolution  Authority.  The  current  Financial 
Services Board will be re-named the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) and will be 
responsible for the market conduct of all financial services institutions, including banks. 
Under  the  planned  twin  peaks  approach,  there  will  be  opportunity  to  streamline  the 
supervision  of  the  financial  system  between  the  SARB  and  the  yet-to-be-formed  FSCA. 
There will be a phased approach to the implementation of a twin peaks model, starting with 
the enactment of relevant legislation to establish the relevant regulators. In December 2014, 
the National Treasury (NT) released, for public comment, the cabinet-approved second draft 
of the Financial Sector Regulation Bill to give effect to the establishment of the necessary 
regulators, their powers and responsibilities. It is noteworthy that chapter 6 of this proposed 
Bill deals with coordination, cooperation, collaboration, consultation and consistency between 
regulations, a matter raised in the 2014 FSAP report. South Africa, as it seeks to strengthen 
its  financial  system  and  regulatory  framework,  is  willing  to  learn  from  all  relevant 
stakeholders, whether here or abroad, and adopt these lessons to domestic circumstances. 
Conclusion 
It  is  clear  that  the  slump  in  oil  prices  poses  risks  to  financial  system  through  its  possible 
impact  on  stock  market  developments.  The  highly  indebted  US  shale  oil  producers  are 
possible trigger points and should be monitored. There is a risk that losses may intensify in 
the derivatives market. 
These  negative  developments  can  affect  global  growth,  which  could  remain  weak  in  a 
deflationary  environment,  forcing  central  banks  to  inject  more  liquidity  into  their  respective 
economies in an attempt to revive economic activity. Finally, while low oil prices are generally 
positive for consumers and business confidence, an extended period of low oil prices could 
pose a number of risks for global financial stability. 
I have also highlighted the scale of the global regulatory reform process under way and some 
of the challenges in this regard. Given the growing complexity and interconnectedness of the 
                                                
1  See the policy document titled, A Safer Financial Sector to Serve South Africa Better (commonly referred to as 
the Red Book), released by National Treasury in February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  global financial system, it is imperative for regulators in individual jurisdictions to cooperate 
and coordinate their efforts in the interest of a more robust global financial system. It is in this 
spirit that I wish you well as you share your experiences, ideas and insights at this meeting. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
