  Halim Alamsyah: Bank Indonesia – improved efficiency through data 
collection 
Speech  by  Dr  Halim  Alamsyah,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  in  the  Signing  of 
Cooperation  Agreement  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  of  the 
Republic of Indonesia, Jakarta, 23 February 2015. 
 The honorable, 
• 
Directorate General of Population Affairs and Civil Registration Services of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Mr. H. Irman, 
Heads/Officials in the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Heads/Officials in the state ministries and institutions, 
Heads  of  Working  Units  in  Bank  Indonesia  and  Financial  Services  Authority 
(OJK), 
Heads  of  financial  institutions,  association  of  financial  institutions,  and 
Indonesia Consumers Organization (YLKI), 
Distinguished guests, 
Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb, 
Good morning and may God bless us all, 
1. 
On  this  great  occasion,  let  us  praise  God  the  Almighty  for  the  blessings 
bestowed  upon  us  so  that  we  can  attend  the  “Signing  of  Cooperation 
Agreement  on  Utilization of National Identity Numbers, Population Data, and 
Electronic  Resident’s  Identity  Cards  within  the  Scope  of  Duties  of  Bank 
Indonesia”. 
This  cooperation  agreement  signing  is  the  follow-up  to  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  on  Utilization  of  National  Identity  Numbers,  Population  Data,  and 
Electronic Resident’s Identity  Cards within  the  Scope of Duties of  Bank Indonesia 
signed  by  the  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia  and  Minister  of  Home  Affairs  on 
6  May  2013.  This  follow-up  takes  a  relatively  long  time  because  in-depth 
reviews  of  many  aspects  are  necessary,  including  infrastructure  preparation  and 
primarily  the  impacts  of such utilization policy on Bank Indonesia and the financial 
industry broadly. 
The  duties  of  Bank  Indonesia  in  the  fields  of  monetary,  macroprudential,  and 
payment  system  require  data  and 
in 
formulating  appropriate  policies  and  decisions 
financial  system 
stability  and  ensure  a  reliable  and  smooth  payment  system.  Such  data  and 
information  are  gathered  by  Bank  Indonesia  from various sources through reports 
and/or  surveys  of,  among  others,  bank  and  non-bank 
institutions, 
government  institutions,  the  capital  market,  exporters,  companies  with  external 
debt exposure, and even households. 
In  relation  thereto,  Bank  Indonesia  strongly  supports  the  application  of  National 
Identity  Numbers  and  electronic  Resident’s  Identity  Cards  by  the  Ministry  of 
Home  Affairs  because 
in 
Indonesia  is  data  singularity.  The  program  conducted  by  the  Ministry  of  Home 
Affairs  to  digitize  population  data  by  biometric  verification  technology  in  the 
issue  of  population  registration 
important  elements 
information  as 
fundamental 
to  maintain 
financial 
the 
   2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 5. 
 
 
forms  of  fingerprint  recording  and retina scanning  to  ensure one’s  singularity is  a 
very progressive step  to address the issue. 
In  its  development,  the  population data  gathered and  managed by  the Ministry 
of  Home  Affairs  may  have  wider  benefits,  including  the  implementation  of  duties 
of  Bank  Indonesia  and  even  other  relevant  institutions.  Some  examples  of  the 
population  data  benefits  in  the  implementation  of  duties  of  BI  and  financial 
institutions,  particularly  banks, are as follows: 
a. 
First,  to  increase  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  services  provided  to 
customers  and  the  community  in  credit  extension.  As  we  all  know, 
Bank 
Indonesia  is  currently  managing  Debtor  Information  System  (DIS) 
which  has  gathered  around  82  million  debtors’  data  from  bank  and  non-
bank  financial  institutions  with  more  than  180  million  credit  facilities.  The 
DIS  data  is utilized  by  bank  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  as one  of 
the  main  considerations 
in  credit  extension  process  to  verify  debtors’ 
identities,  credit  facilities  extended  by  other  financial  institutions,  payment 
history,  collateral,  etc.  Therefore,  accuracy  and singularity of  debtors’ data 
are very important factors. 
Second,  to  increase  effectiveness  of  Bank  Indonesia  in  conducting 
assessments and designing more efficacious credit policies. 
Third,  to  support  banks  to  better  understand  and  recognize  customer 
candidates  as  well  as  financial  behavior  in  a  more  prompt  and 
accurate  manner.  Accordingly,  banks  are  also  expected  to  design  cheap 
credit extension  patterns  without  any  collateral  for  individuals  or  households 
with sound  financial  behavior. We often call this financial inclusion program. 
b. 
c. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
6. 
In  many  occasions,  I  often  say  that  the  Global  Financial  Inclusion  Index  data  in 
2011  recorded  only  around  20%1  of  adult  population  in  Indonesia  who  have 
accounts  with formal  financial  institutions;  in  other  words,  there  are  more  than 
135  million  people  with  limited  or  no  access  to  formal  financial  institutions 
(commonly  called  unbanked  people).  Poor  access  by  the  community  to  formal 
financial institutions becomes a  national  strategic  issue  considering  the  strong 
correlation  between  expanded 
financial  access  and  economic  growth. 
Therefore,  financial  inclusion  has  become  the  government’s  priority  agenda  as 
specified  in  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy. 
One  of  the  causes  of  poor  access  of  unbanked  people  to  formal  financial 
institutions  is  asymmetric  information.  Generally,  data  of  unbanked  people  is 
difficult  to  obtain  as  preliminary  data  for  customer  potential  analysis.  For  that 
reason,  information  provision 
facilities  are  necessary,  which  allow  adequate 
mapping  of  unbanked  people  potential,  so  that  formal  financial  institutions  may 
provide  the  required  financial  products  and  services. Starting from this identified 
information  requirement,  one  of  the  financial 
inclusion  programs  promoted  by 
Bank  Indonesia  is  the  Financial  Identity  Number  (FIN). 
FIN  is  a  unique,  inherent,  lifetime,  simple,  transparent,  and  interoperable  number 
provided  to  the  community,  including  unbanked  people.  The  aim  is  to  reduce 
asymmetric  information  &  risk  premium,  facilitate  and  increase  financial 
access  of  the  community,  and  facilitate  financial  institutions  to  obtain 
7. 
8. 
                                                
1   World Bank report “Global Financial Inclusion Index“. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9. 
 
 
information  on  customer  candidates/customers.  For  Bank  Indonesia,  FIN  is 
very  useful  to  produce  more  structured  database  and  information  on  people 
receiving  services  from  formal  financial  institutions.  However,  more  importantly, 
FIN  will  become  one  of  the  main  data  sources  to  make  profiles  (rating)  of 
accurate  individual  or  household  finance  to  facilitate  banks  in  extending  cheap 
but quality credit package without any collateral. 
BI  has  been  developing  FIN  since  2012  by  collecting  information  through  a 
baseline  survey  using  secondary  data  and  comprehensive  survey  by  direct 
interviews  with  respondents.  BI  is  consistently  improving  FIN  business  model, 
among  others  through  information  system  development  and  database  expansion 
by  formulating  digital  questionnaire  concept,  which,  at  the  initial  phase,  will  be 
tried  through  Digital  Financial  Services  agents.  In  this  relation,  the  NIN 
(e-Resident’s Identity Card)  database  will  be  used  to  establish  FIN  data  to  allow 
acceleration  of  data  capturing  process  and  avoid  FIN  data  duplication, 
thereby  ensuring  FIN  data  singularity  of each person. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
10. 
We  are  pleased  that  Bank  Indonesia’s  policies  and  work  programs  to  increase 
public  welfare,  among  others  through  electronification  and  financial inclusion, may 
synergize  with  the  Program  for  Population  Data,  National  Identity  Numbers,  and 
Electronic  Resident’s  Identity  Cards  by  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs,  to  give 
greater  benefits  for  the  financial  system  in  particular  and  Indonesian  people  in 
general. 
We  believe  this  Cooperation  Agreement  signing  is  the  first  step  for  both 
institutions,  and  further  technical  steps  are  definitely  necessary  to  realize  the 
expected benefits. 
To  conclude,  we  would  like  to  extend  our  highest  appreciation  and  gratitude  to 
the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  and  all  parties  supporting  the  realization  of  this 
Cooperation  Agreement.  May  God  the  Almighty  bless  our  sincere  intention  and 
steps  and  bestow us with smooth implementation thereof. 
11. 
12. 
Thank you. Wassalamualaikum wr. wb. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
