  R Gandhi: Financial consumer (depositor) protection – reflections on 
some lingering questions 
Text  of  the  M  R  Pai  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India, at the Indian Merchant’s Chamber (IMC), Mumbai, 8 September 2015. 
Assistance provided by Ms Reena Banerjee is gratefully acknowledged. 
 1. 
At  the  outset,  let  me  express  my  pleasure  at  being  here  today  with  you  on  the 
occasion  of  the  M  R  Pai  Memorial  Lecture;  it  is  my  proud  honour  to  have  presented  the 
Eleventh  M R Pai  Memorial  award  to  Madam  Smt K J Udeshi,  former  Deputy  Governor, 
Reserve  Bank  and  former  Chairperson,  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India 
(BCSBI). It is normal for teachers to be presenting awards and prizes to their students and 
wards; but it is a strange thing for a student to present an award to his teacher. The M R Pai 
Foundation has just caused that. As young boys and girls, I am sure, many of you, like me, 
would have day dreamed to present awards and prizes to our teachers. Today, thanks to the 
M R Pai Foundation,  my  such  daydream  has  become  a  reality.  Smt  Udeshi  has  been  a 
mentor  to  me  and  many  more  in  the  Reserve  Bank.  With  her  charming  disposition  and 
dedication, her staunch adherence to principles and high values and varied knowledge and 
expertise, she had been a well-respected coach and mentor; and also a strict disciplinarian. 
Having been a sports person, she knew the value of playing by rules and importance of fair 
play. That definitely helped her in being a strict disciplinarian when she was in the Reserve 
Bank and also during her tenure as the first Chair-person of the BCSBI. I am very grateful to 
you, Madam, for giving me this privilege to honour you with the M R Pai Memorial Award. 
2. 
As  is  well  known,  Shri  M  R  Pai  was  a  multi-faceted  personality,  but  his  greatest 
contribution lay in starting the consumer movement in India. He was active in all areas, and 
confronted  monopolistic  giants  like  the  telephone  services,  the  Indian  Airlines,  and  more 
particularly the banks, earning the title of Champion of the Consumer. Consumer protection 
and consumer activism has come a long way since those times. The best example of this is 
in  what  the  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission  (FSLRC)  has  said  in  their 
Report in 2013. 
“Consumer protection: A prime motivation of all financial regulation is to protect 
consumers. The relationship between financial firms and their customers is one 
where, many times, the outcomes may harm customers. These problems are not 
sporadic or accidental; but are often rooted in basic problems of information and 
incentives  and  will  not  be  alleviated  through  financial  literacy  campaigns.  The 
central purpose of financial regulation is to intervene in the relationship between 
financial firms and their customers, and address market failures. This requires a 
comprehensive consumer protection framework that covers both the problem of 
prevention  (interventions  that  induce  financial  firms  towards  fair  play)  and  cure 
(addressing consumer grievances)”. 
3. 
I am sure this is music for the great soul of Shri Pai. I will be discussing the essential 
elements of, and the need for consumer protection, as well as initiatives taken both globally 
and in India with specific reference to the financial sector. 
Consumer protection – role of the Reserve Bank 
4. 
Protection of the interests of the depositors has been one of the mandates of the 
Reserve  Bank.  The  Banking  Regulations  Act  1949  is  replete  with  the  phrases  like  “in  the 
interests of depositors” wherever it entrusts powers to the Reserve Bank; be it granting of a 
banking  license  or  cancellation  thereof,  giving  directions  on  advances  or  on  any  banking 
matter,  applying  for  suspension,  winding  up,  or  amalgamation  of  banks,  approving 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  appointment of CEOs or additional directors, removal of CEOs, all these are to be exercised 
keeping, among other things, the depositors interests in view. But the services provided by 
the banking sector today are much more than only deposit services. This rapid increase in 
the  nature  of  financial  services  has  highlighted  the  need  for  robust  regulation  as  well  as 
consumer  education  to  protect  and  empower  consumers.  The  need  to  extend  provision  of 
banking  services  to  underserved  sections  of the  population  whose  financial  literacy  is  low, 
combined with the growing complexity of financial products and the use of technology can 
increase  the  risk  of  mis-selling.  Financial  consumer  protection  should  be  reinforced  and 
integrated with other financial inclusion and financial education policies. If such protection is 
absent,  the  benefits  to  economic  growth  of  expanded  financial  inclusion  may  be  severely 
undermined.  Financial  consumer  protection  also  contributes  to  strengthening  financial 
stability. Taking these factors into account, Reserve Bank has recently articulated its Core 
Purpose, Values and Vision as its commitment to the Nation to include regulating markets 
and institutions under its ambit to ensure financial system stability and consumer protection. 
5. 
Apart  from  the  Reserve  Bank,  the  Government  of  India  has  also  been  concerned 
with  financial  consumer  protection.  The  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission 
(FSLRC), about which I had referred to earlier, was constituted by the Ministry of Finance in 
March  2011,  and  was  asked  to  comprehensively  review  and  redraw  the  legislations 
governing India’s financial system. In its report submitted to the Ministry of Finance in March 
2013,  containing  a  draft  Indian  Financial  Code  to  replace  the  bulk  of  the  existing financial 
laws, consumer protection was also highlighted. 
6. 
The work of the Commission in the field of consumer protection marks a watershed 
compared  with  traditional  approaches  in  Indian  financial  law.  It  marks  a  break  with  the 
tradition  of  caveat  emptor,  the  “buyers  beware”  concept,  and  moves  towards  a  position 
where a significant burden of consumer protection is placed upon financial firms. The draft 
Code first establishes certain basic rights for all financial consumers. In addition, the Code 
defines what is a unsophisticated consumer, and an additional set of protections are defined 
for these consumers. The proposed basic protections are: 
Financial service providers must act with professional diligence; 
a) 
Protection against unfair contract terms; 
b) 
Protection against unfair conduct; 
c) 
Protection of personal information; 
d) 
Requirement of fair disclosure; 
e) 
Redress of complaints by financial service providers. 
f) 
In addition, unsophisticated consumers will have three additional protections: 
7. 
The right to receive suitable advice; 
a) 
Protection from conflicts of interest of advisors; 
b) 
Access to the redress agency for redress of grievances. 
c) 
8. 
The  regulator  will  be  given  an  enumerated  set  of  powers  through  which  it  must 
implement these protections. Alongside these objectives and powers, the regulator will also 
be given a set of principles that guide the use of the powers. 
9. 
The draft IFC is currently under examination. 
The Reserve Bank has welcomed this suggested approach to consumer protection. 
Consumer protection – what does it imply and how will it help? 
10. 
Financial  consumer  protection  sets  clear  rules  of  conduct  for  financial  firms 
regarding their retail customers. It aims to ensure that consumers: (1) receive information to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  allow them to make informed decisions, (2) are not subject to unfair or deceptive practices, 
and (3) have access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes. Complementary financial 
literacy initiatives are aimed at giving consumers the knowledge and skills to understand the 
risks  and  rewards  of  using  financial  products  and  services  –  and  their  legal  rights  and 
obligations  in  using  them.  Clear  rules  of  conduct  for  financial  institutions,  combined  with 
programs  of  financial  education  for  consumers,  will  increase  consumer  trust  in  financial 
markets and will support the development of these markets1. 
International initiatives regarding consumer protection – initiatives by International 
organisations 
11. 
Globally,  several  initiatives  have  been  taken  for  consumer  protection  by  both  the 
international  standard  setting  bodies  and  the  regulators.  Regarding  initiatives  taken  by 
standard  setting  bodies,  the  G20  requested  the  OECD  /  FSB  and  others  to  articulate 
principles  on  Financial  Consumer  Protection.  These  broadly  state  that  financial  consumer 
protection should be an integral part of the legal, regulatory and supervisory framework and 
there should be equitable and fair treatment of consumers with special attention dedicated to 
the  needs  of  vulnerable  groups. It  should  include  access  to  adequate  complaints  handling 
and  redress  mechanisms  that  are  accessible,  affordable,  independent,  fair,  accountable, 
timely  and  efficient.  The  G20  /  OECD  Task  Force  on  Financial  Consumer  Protection  is 
currently focused on supporting the implementation of the High-level Principles. The OECD 
is workingon how to enhance financial consumer protection, which includes determining what 
is  required  to  help  consumers  gain  the  confidence,  knowledge,  information,  security  and 
choices  they  need  to  enable  them  to  fully  participate  in  financial  markets.  In  2011,  the 
Financial Stability Board published its report on Consumer Finance Protection with particular 
focus on credit. 
12. 
Consumers International (CI) is a world federation of consumer groups. Recently, CI 
conducted  a  global  survey  of  80  member  jurisdictions  to  assess  the  state  of  consumer 
protection across the world. Key findings include: 
• 
Since 2012, Members felt the top three advances they had witnessed in consumer 
protection were from: new legislation, consumer representation and regulation and 
enforcement. Increasing consumers’ awareness of their rights was also an important 
factor. 
Members felt that the three main factors that contribute to consumer detriment are: 
economic  and  development  challenges,  lack  of  regulation  and  enforcement;  and 
poor quality products and services. 
 Financial Consumer Protection 
13. 
a) 
Various national initiatives: 
In USA, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 
(Dodd-Frank Act) established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to 
protect  consumers  by  carrying  out  federal  consumer  financial  laws.  The  CFPB  is 
authorized to exercise its authority to ensure that: (1) Consumers are provided with 
timely  and  understandable  information  to  make  responsible  decisions  about 
transactions involving consumer financial products and services; (2) Consumers are 
protected  from  unfair,  deceptive,  or  abusive  acts  and  practices  and  from 
discrimination;  (3)  Outdated,  unnecessary,  or  unduly  burdensome  regulations 
concerning  consumer  financial  products  and  services  are  regularly  identified  and 
                                                
1  Good Practices for financial consumers World Bank June 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 b) 
c) 
d) 
 addressed in order to reduce unwarranted regulatory burdens; (4) Federal consumer 
financial law is enforced consistently, without regard to (service providers’) status as 
depository  institutions,  in  order  to  promote  fair  competition;  and  (5)  Markets  for 
consumer  financial  products  and  services  operate  transparently  and  efficiently  to 
facilitate access and innovation. 
In  UK,  the  Financial  Services  Act  of  2012  set  up  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority 
(FCA) which is responsible for regulating the consumer credit industry from 1 April 
2014, taking over the role from theOffice of Fair Trading. The FCA supervises banks 
to  ensure  they  treat  customers  fairly,  and  encourages  innovation  and  healthy 
competition.  The  authority  has  significant  powers,  including  the  power  to  regulate 
conduct related to the marketing of financial products. It is able to specify minimum 
standards and to place requirements on products. In addition, the FCA is able to ban 
financial products for up to a year while considering an indefinite ban; it will have the 
power to instruct firms to immediately retract or modify promotions which it finds to 
be misleading, and to publish such decisions. 
In  the  European  Union,  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  promotes  a 
transparent, simple and fair internal market for consumers in financial products and 
services. The EBA seeks to foster consumer protection in financial services across 
the EU by identifying and addressing detriments consumers may experience, or are 
at risk of experiencing, in their dealings with financial firms. The role and tasks of the 
EBA  related  to  consumer  protection  and  financial  activities  include:  collecting, 
analysing and reporting on consumer trends in the EU; reviewing and coordinating 
financial  literacy  and  education  initiatives;  developing  training  standards  for  the 
industry;  contributing  to  the  development  of  common  disclosure  rules;  monitoring 
existing and new financial activities; issuing warnings if a financial activity poses a 
serious threat to the EBA’s objectives as set out in the its funding Regulation; and 
temporarily  prohibiting  or  restraining  certain  financial  activities,  provided  certain 
conditions are met. The market is governed by the various directives issued by the 
EU such as the Directives on Consumer Credit. 
In Hong Kong, the industry-established Code of Banking Practice (CoBP) promotes 
good  banking  practices  by  setting  out  the  minimum  standards  which  financial 
institutions  should  follow  in  their  dealings  with  customers.  The  Code  is  a  non-
statutory one issued by the financial industry associations for voluntary compliance 
by  financial  institutions.  The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  expects 
financial  institutions  in  Hong  Kong  to  comply  with  the  CoBP  and  will  monitor 
compliance  as  part  of  its  regular  supervision.  There  are  also  examples  of 
international voluntary codes. 
Consumer protection in India – initiatives by the Reserve Bank 
14. 
Consumer  protection  has  been  an  ongoing  effort  of  Reserve  Bank.  For  greater 
effectiveness and a more focused approach, several committees were appointed on aspects 
of customer service in banks from time to time, including the Talwar Committee (1975), the 
Goiporia Committee (1990), the Tarapore Committee (2004), the Sadasivan Working Group 
(2006),  and  the  Damodaran  Committee  on  Customer  Service  (2010).  The  importance  of 
consumer  protection  was  also  highlighted  in  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Reform 
chaired by Dr Raghuram G. Rajan. The RBI had set up the Banking Ombudsman Scheme to 
act as a visible and credible dispute resolution agency for common persons utilizing banking 
services and to ensure redress of grievances of users of banking services in an inexpensive, 
expeditious  and  fair  manner  that  provides  impetus  to  improve  customer  services  in  the 
banking sector on a continuous basis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some recent initiatives by the Reserve Bank 
15. 
protection: 
a) 
Let me now detail some recent initiatives by the Reserve Bank regarding consumer 
Most  important  perhaps  was  the  release  of  a  Charter  of  Customer  Rights,  which 
enshrined  broad,  overarching  principles  for  protection  of  bank  customers  and 
enunciates  the  “five”  basic  rights  of  bank  customers.  These  are:  (i)  Right  to  Fair 
Treatment;  (ii)  Right  to  Transparency;  Fair  and  Honest  Dealing;  (iii)  Right  to 
Suitability;  (iv)  Right  to  Privacy;  and  (v)  Right  to  Grievance  Redress  and 
Compensation. The Reserve Bank also advised the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
and the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) to formulate a “Model 
Customer  Rights  Policy”  encapsulating  the  principles  enshrined  in  the  Charter. 
Initially,  all  the  scheduled  commercial  banks,  regional  rural  banks  and  urban 
co-operative  banks  are  expected  to  prepare  their  own  Board  approved  policy 
incorporating the five basic rights of the Charter which, among other things, would 
contain a monitoring and oversight mechanism for ensuring adherence. 
The Reserve Bank of India undertook several measures on KYC, including releasing 
a  note  along  with  a  poster  and  a  booklet  comprising  a  few  common  questions 
relating  to  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  norms  for  opening  bank  accounts.  The 
objective  of  this  is  to  bring  awareness  among  the  general  public  about  the  KYC 
simplification measures taken by the Reserve Bank in the recent times with a view 
to helping the common man in opening bank accounts. 
The measures taken for simplification of KYC include prescribing a single document 
for  proof  of  identity  and  proof  of  address,  removing  the  requirement  for  separate 
proof  of  address  for  current  address,  making  KYC  a  bank  process  rather  than  a 
branch  process,  relaxing  the  officially  valid  documents  (OVDs)  for  low  risk 
customers, increasing the time intervals for periodic updation of KYC for existing low 
/ medium and high risk customers from 5/2/1 years to 10/8/2 years, respectively. 
Further,  banks  need  not  seek  fresh  proofs  of  identity  and  address  at  the  time  of 
periodic updation, from those customers who are categorised as “low risk”, in case 
of  no  change  in  status  with  respect  to  their  identities  and  addresses.  A  self-
certification by the customer to that effect should suffice in such cases. Banks may 
not  insist  on  physical  presence  of  such  low  risk  customer  at  the  time  of  periodic 
updation. Further, if an existing KYC compliant customer of a bank desires to open 
another account in the same bank, there should be no need for submission of fresh 
proof  of  identity  and  /  or  proof  of  address  for  the  purpose.  Further,  Business 
Correspondents and Business Facilitators were allowed to act as Customer Service 
Point (CSP) for e-KYC purpose. 
To mitigate the difficulties faced by transgender persons in opening accounts, banks 
were  directed  to  include  “third  gender”  in  all  forms  /  applications,  etc.  as  a  valid 
classification. 
Initiatives were taken to further enhance transparency in pricing of credit, based on 
the recommendations of Working Group on Pricing of Credit. Banks were advised to 
display on their website inter alia, the interest rate range of contracted loans for the 
past  quarter  for  different  categories  of  advances  granted  to  individual  borrowers 
along with mean interest rates for such loans; the total fees and charges applicable 
on various types of loans to individual borrower which should also be disclosed at 
the  time  of  processing  of  loan  for  transparency  and  comparability  and  to facilitate 
informed  decision  making  by  customers;  Annual  Percentage  Rate  (APR)  or  such 
similar  other  arrangement  of  representing  the  total  cost  of  credit  on  a  loan  to  an 
individual borrower so as to allow customers to compare the costs associated with 
borrowing across products and / or lenders. Apart from displaying such information, 
banks were also advised to provide a clear, concise, one page key fact statement / 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 g) 
h) 
i) 
6 
  fact sheet, to all individual borrowers at every stage of the loan processing as well 
as in case of any change in any terms and conditions, which would also be included 
as a summary box to be displayed in the credit agreement. 
While  undertaking  insurance  distribution  business,  either  under  the  corporate 
agency or broking model under the relevant IRDA Regulations, banks were directed 
to put in place a system of assessment of the suitability of products for customers, 
and classify products into universally suitable products and complex products which 
necessarily require customer need assessment prior to sale. It should be ensured 
that there is a standardized system of assessing the needs of the customer and that 
initiation / transactional and approval processes are segregated. Banks should treat 
their  customers  fairly,  honestly  and  transparently,  with  regard  to  suitability  and 
appropriateness of the insurance product sold. There should be no violation either of 
Section 10(1) (ii) of the BR Act, 1949 or the guidelines issued by IRDA in payment of 
commissions / brokerage / incentives. This may be factored in while formulating a 
suitable performance assessment and incentive structure for staff. Further, it must 
be ensured that no incentive (cash or non-cash) should be paid to the staff engaged 
in  insurance  broking  /  corporate  agency  services  by  the  insurance  company.  The 
bank should not follow any restrictive practices of forcing a customer to either opt for 
products  of  a  specific  insurance  company  or  link  sale  of  such  products  to  any 
banking product. It should be prominently stated in all publicity material distributed 
by the bank that the purchase by a bank’s customer of any insurance products is 
purely voluntary, and is not linked to availment of any other facility from the bank. 
Further,  the  details  of  fees  /  brokerage  received  in  respect  of  insurance  broking  / 
agency  business  undertaken  by  them  should  be  disclosed  in  the  “Notes  to 
Accounts” to their Balance Sheet. A robust internal grievance redressal mechanism 
should be put in place along with a Board approved customer compensation policy 
for  resolving  issues  related  to  services  offered.  It  must  also  ensure  that  the 
insurance  companies  whose  products  are  being  sold  have  robust  customer 
grievance  redressal  arrangements  in  place.  Further,  the  bank  must  facilitate  the 
redressal of grievances of the customer. 
To encourage the usage of credit and debit cards, Reserve Bank has issued various 
instructions on security of card transactions and risk mitigation measures, including 
directions  on  online  alerts  as  well  as  on  additional  factor  of  authentication  which 
have  significantly  increased  customer  confidence  in  using  cards.  Some  initiatives 
taken recently are as under: 
• 
To avoid inconvenience, the requirement of Additional Factor of Authentication 
for  small  value  card  present  transactions  was  relaxed  for  customers  making 
small  value  payments  on  contactless  cards  up  to  a  maximum  value  of 
₹ 2,000/- per transaction subject to certain conditions. 
Banks were also advised in the interest of customer awareness and protection 
to clearly explain to customers about the technology, its use, and risks while 
issuing  such  contact  less  cards;  indicate  the  maximum  liability  devolving  on 
the  customer,  if  any,  at  the  time  of  issuance  of  such  cards  along  with  the 
responsibility of the customer to report the loss of such cards to the bank; and 
to put in place robust mechanism for seamless reporting of lost / stolen cards, 
which can be accessed through multiple channels. 
To further  put  in  place  risk mitigation  measures for  customers  using  various 
types  of  cards,  banks  are  advised  that  with  effect from  Feb  1,  2016  all  new 
cards issued – debit and credit, domestic and international – by banks shall be 
EMV chip and pin based cards. 
  To alleviate the hardships faced by pensioners who are deprived of regular pension 
payments  in  case  of  misplacement  of  life  certificates,  all  agency  banks  handling 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 j) 
k) 
l) 
m) 
n) 
 to 
government  pension  payments  were  advised 
issue  a  duly  signed 
acknowledgement  to  pensioners  on  receipt  of  the  life  certificate  submitted  in 
physical form. Banks were also advised to promote the use of digital life certificates 
among  pensioners,  which  would  eliminate  the  need  for  physical  presence  at 
branches and issue of acknowledgement. 
To  ensure  transparency  in  the  promotional  material  and  to  build  an  enduring 
relationship with the customers, correlate a product brand name to the name of the 
entity  /  company  authorised  under  the  PSS  Act,  all  authorised  entities  issuing 
payment  products  were  advised  that  all  the  information  available  to  the  public 
regarding the product as advertisements, on website, application form, etc. should 
prominently  carry  the  name  of  the  entity  /  company  authorised  by  RBI  under  the 
PSS Act. 
Banks were advised to ensure that penal charges on non-maintenance of minimum 
balances  in  savings  bank  accounts  are  directly  proportionate  to  the  extent  of 
shortfall observed, reasonable and not out of line with the average cost of providing 
the  services  that  the  balance  in  the  savings  account  does  not  turn  into  negative 
balance  solely  on  account  of  levy  of  charges  for  non-maintenance  of  minimum 
balance the bank should notify the customer clearly by SMS / email / letter etc. that 
in  the  event  of  the  minimum  balance  not  being  restored  in  the  account  within  a 
month  from  the  date  of  notice,  penal  charges  will  be  applicable.  In  case  the 
minimum balance is not restored within a reasonable period, which shall not be less 
than one month from the date of notice of shortfall, penal charges may be recovered 
under intimation to the account holder. 
To further boost the quality of customer service and to ensure that there is undivided 
attention to resolution of customer complaints in banks, all public sector banks and 
select  private  sector  and  foreign  banks  were  advised  to  appoint  an  internal 
ombudsman  thereby  providing  a  forum  available  to  bank  customers  for  grievance 
redressal before they approach the Banking Ombudsman. 
Apart from issuing instructions to banks, the Reserve Bank also issues cautionaries 
to members of the general public. We cautioned members of the public against an 
app  (application)  doing  rounds  on  WhatsApp  purportedly  to  facilitate  checking  of 
balance in customers’ bank accounts. 
The Reserve Bank of India also cautioned the public against Multi-level Marketing 
(MLM) activities explaining the functioning of these entities, and advising that falling 
prey to such offers can result in direct financial losses, apart from the fact that these 
are cognizable offences under the Prize Chit and Money Circulation (Banning) Act 
1978. 
Some lingering questions 
16. 
I  understand  that  in  many  a  depositor’s  mind,  several  questions  linger  and  they 
eagerly await the regulator’s response. As I understand, it is not the answer they seek but 
the rationale and explanation for our actions and the so called “inactions”. It is our duty to 
explain. Let me discuss some of these contemporary issues and questions. 
Deposit insurance 
17. 
First issue that I want to discuss relates to deposit insurance. More specifically, the 
issue relating to increasing the limit on deposit insurance cover. Deposit Insurance protects 
depositors against the loss of their deposits in case a deposit institution is not able to meet its 
obligation to the insured depositors. In India, the commercial banks, Regional Rural Banks 
(RRBs), Local Area Banks (LABs) and co-operative banks are covered by deposit insurance. 
There  has  been  a  persistent  demand  from  stakeholders  and  public  representatives  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  recent  past  for  a  hike  in  deposit  insurance  cover  from  the  current  level  of  ₹1 lakh.  The 
Deposit Insurance Systems around the world have evolved over time by reforms adopted by 
various jurisdictions based on experience, international developments, guidance from supra 
national  bodies  like  IMF,  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers  (IADI  and  other 
environmental changes from time to time. One of the basic principles of deposit insurance is 
that  the  deposit  insurance  system  should  cover  at  least  80%  of  the  deposit  accounts  and  
20–30%  of  the  total  assessable  deposits.  In  India,  we  have  surpassed  this  norm  in  a 
substantial way; as on  March 31, 2015, our DICGC’s deposit insurance covers as high as 
92.3% of the deposit accounts and 31% of the total assessable deposits. 
18. 
Therefore, before deciding on this demand, we have to factor in two major issues 
viz., the moral hazard issue and the risk based premium issue. Deposit insurance inherently 
creates a moral hazard i.e. the parties to the deposit insurance viz. a bank and its insured 
depositors get an incentive to take more risk because the costs of risk, in whole or in part, 
are borne by others, generally a deposit insurance agency, in our case the Deposit Insurance 
and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC). Most deposit insurance systems initially adopt 
an ex-ante flat-rate premium system because they are relatively simple to design, implement 
and administer. However, these systems were open to criticism in that they do not reflect the 
level  of  risk  that  banks  pose  to  the  deposit  insurance  system.  Flat-rate  premium  systems 
have  also  been  viewed  as  being  unfair  as  “low-risk”  banks  are  required  to  pay  the  same 
premium as “higher-risk” banks. With no inbuilt incentive for “higher risk” banks to improve 
their risk profile, a flat rate system would accentuate the moral hazard problem. Therefore 
the primary objective of most differential premium systems has been to provide incentives for 
banks to avoid excessive risk taking, minimise moral hazard and introduce more fairness into 
the  premium  assessment  process.  Introducing  fairness  into  the  system  bolsters  industry 
support for deposit insurance. A hike in cover  without calibrating the premium rates to the 
risk  profile  of  the  insured  banks  only  exacerbates  the  moral  hazard.  Recognising  this,  a 
Committee on Differential Premium System for Banks in India (Chairman: Shri Jasbir Singh) 
has  been  constituted  by  DICGC  and  has  submitted  its  Report  yesterday.  We  hope  that 
introduction  of  Risk  Based  Premium  system  will  make  ground  for  considering  raising  the 
insurance cover from the present ceiling of ₹ 1 lakh. 
Structure of differentiated banks and consumer protection 
19. 
You have noticed that we have recently granted “in principle” licenses to 11 entities 
to form  Payments  Banks  in  the  country;  and  several  of  you  nurture  a  vague feeling  about 
how these differentiated banks will subserve consumers interests. I want to explain to you 
how  we  have  carefully  structured  the  regulatory  arrangements  of  these  banks  from  the 
perspective of consumer protection. 
20. 
As you will recall, consequent to the discussion paper called “Banking Structure in 
India  –  The  Way  Forward”,  brought  out  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  August  2013,  and  the 
recommendations  of  the  Committee  headed  by  Shri  Nachiket  Mor,  on  Comprehensive 
Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low-Income Households to look into the issues 
relating  to  financial  inclusion,  in  November  2014  we  announced  our  intention  to  grant 
licenses to two types of differentiated banks viz., the Payments Banks and the Small Finance 
Banks. 
21. 
The objective of setting up of Payments Banks will be to further financial inclusion; 
the strategies will be by providing (i) small savings accounts and (ii) payments / remittance 
services  to  migrant  labour  workforce,  low  income  households,  small  businesses,  other 
unorganised  sector  entities  and  other  users.  The  scope  of  the  activities  permitted  for  the 
Payment Banks included a. Acceptance of demand deposits. Payments Bank will initially be 
restricted to holding a maximum balance of ₹ 1 lakh per individual customer, b. Issuance of 
ATM / debit cards c. Payments and remittance services through various channels and some 
ancillary activities. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  22. 
The  deposits  collected  by  them  can  be  only  in  current  or  savings  account;  they 
cannot accept fixed deposits. The payments banks are prohibited from lending activity. They 
can deploy the deposits largely in government securities only; a small portion, up to 25% of 
their deposits, can be held in deposits with other banks. 
23. 
The consumer protection aspects of the design are as follows: The public deposits 
in  the  Payments  Banks  will  be  covered  by  the  deposit  insurance  of  the  DICGC.  As  the 
deposit ceiling is ₹ 1 lakh and the deposit insurance ceiling is also ₹ 1 lakh, it means that the 
depositors of the Payments Banks will be fully insured. Actually, there were arguments why 
Payments Banks should be covered under deposit insurance, when their assets will be fully 
in high quality liquid assets of government securities and high credit bank accounts. Still, we 
concluded  that  such  an  assurance  as  deposit  insurance  is  needed  for  the  depositors  of 
payments banks, as the concept is new and depositors will need additional confidence. 
24. 
As the payments bank may operate in remote areas mostly through BCs, ATMs and 
other networks, the payments bank will be required to have at least 25 per cent of physical 
access points including BCs in rural centres. Further, we require that a controlling office for a 
cluster  of  access  points  should  also  be  established  for  control  over  various  outlets  and 
customer grievance redressal. We have insisted that the bank should have a high powered 
Customer  Grievances  Cell  to  handle  customer  complaints.  The  payments  banks  will  also 
come under the purview of RBI’s Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006. 
25. 
Now,  let  me  explain  the  arduous  process  we  adopted  for  granting  “in  principle” 
licence. I want to emphasize here that granting banking licenses is not a tick box exercise; it 
needs to be based on the high regulatory comfort about the “fit and proper” position of those 
who  will  manage  the  bank.  Further,  banks  are  high  leverage  organisations;  and  whose 
moneys  they  leverage?  They  actually  leverage  public  deposits.  Should  we  not  require 
highest degree of assurance about the entities with whom public moneys can be entrusted? 
Will this not actually mean, as we said in our Guidelines, licenses shall be issued on a very 
selective basis. The licensing authority has to apply its mind and exercise judgment. To do 
this, we had multiple layers of checks so that the exercise is not arbitrary. Actually, we had 
five  layers  of  assessment  –  the  first  round  was  the  preliminary  scrutiny  by  staff  based  on 
eligibility  criteria,  the  second  round  was  a  detailed  analysis  of  applications  by  staff  after 
information  collection,  including  from  agencies,  the  third  round  by  an  external  committee 
comprising  people  with  high  integrity  and  expertise,  the  fourth  round  by  the  internal 
committee, and the fifth round by the Committee of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank. 
We are convinced that our decision to adopt the cautious approach in licensing of payments 
banks in the initial years is very prudent and sound. 
26. 
Another care that we have taken is to keep intact the difference between authorising 
financial  service  providers  versus  licensing  financial  product  purveyors.  The  Financial 
Service  Providers  do  not  deal  in the  consumers’  money; they  only  render  broking,  agency 
and / or advisory services to the consumers. Whereas, the financial product purveyors like 
the  banks,  mutual  funds  and  insurance  companies,  actually  receive  moneys  from  the 
consumers  and  manage  those  moneys.  This  handling  of  public  moneys  need  a  totally 
different regulatory approach, as compared to handling of servicing the consumers through 
agency or advisory function. That is why the prudential regulations on the former are much 
more  stringent  than  the  conduct  regulations  on  the  latter.  It  clearly  follows  that  while  the 
liberal  authorisations  may  be  possible 
the  case  of  service  providers,  cautious 
authorisations will be needed in the case of authorisations of banks. 
27. 
We have also announced that we will license Small Finance Banks, another new set 
of differentiated banks. The objective of setting up of small finance banks, like the payments 
banks, is also to further financial inclusion; however, it is sought to be achieved through a 
different  set  of  strategies  viz.,  (i)  provision  of  savings  vehicles  primarily  to  unserved  and 
underserved sections of the population, and (ii) supply of credit to small business units; small 
and  marginal  farmers;  micro  and  small  industries;  and  other  unorganised  sector  entities, 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  through high technology-low cost operations. The small finance bank, in furtherance of the 
objectives  for  which  it  will  be  set  up,  shall  primarily  undertake  basic  banking  activities  of 
acceptance  of  deposits and  lending  to  unserved  and  underserved  sections  including  small 
business  units,  small  and  marginal  farmers,  micro  and  small  industries  and  unorganised 
sector  entities.  It  can  also  undertake  other  non-risk  sharing  simple  financial  services 
activities,  not  requiring  any  commitment  of  own  fund,  such  as  distribution  of  mutual  fund 
units, insurance products, pension products, etc. 
28. 
The prudential guidelines for the Small Finance banks have been suitably tweaked. 
It will be required to extend 75 per cent of its Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) to the sectors 
eligible  for  classification  as  priority  sector  lending  (PSL).  The  maximum  loan  size  and 
investment limit exposure to a single and group obligor would be restricted to 10 per cent and 
15 per cent of its capital funds, respectively. Further, in order to ensure that the bank extends 
loans primarily to small borrowers, at least 50 per cent of its loan portfolio should constitute 
loans and advances of up to ₹ 25 lakh. 
29. 
Keeping customer protection requirement in view, we have prescribed that the Small 
Finance  Banks  should  have  high  powered  Customer  Grievances  Cell  to  handle  customer 
complaints  and  the  small  finance  banks  will  come  under  the  purview  of  RBI’s  Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme, 2006. 
We have received 72 applications and are in the final stages of determining who all 
30. 
can be granted licenses. At the cost of repetition, I want to emphasize here also that granting 
banking  licenses  is  not  a  tick  box  exercise;  it  needs  to  be  based  on  the  high  regulatory 
comfort  about  the  “fit  and  proper”  position  of  those  who  will  manage  the  bank.  The  Small 
Finance  Banks  are  also  high  leverage  organisations,  and  we  require  highest  degree  of 
assurance about the entities with whom public moneys can be entrusted. Therefore, licences 
shall be issued on a very selective basis only; we will soon announce grant of licenses to the 
selected applicants. 
Market development and customer protection 
31. 
As  regulators  we  often  face  the  dilemma  of  market  development  or  market 
innovations  versus  customer  protection.  We  are  still  a  developing  and  emerging  market; 
while  in  several  respects  we  have  reached  international  standards,  there  are  still  quite  a 
sizable segments in the financial sector that needs development and innovations. Financial 
inclusion  is  a  case  in  point.  New  ideas  need  to  be  encouraged;  initial  cost  which  will  be 
typically  high  needs  to be  recovered;  initial  period  risks  and failures  need  adequate  return 
and  compensation.  On  the  other  hand,  these  compulsions  will  militate  against  consumer 
protection.  As  regulators,  we  recognise  this  dilemma.  We  did  face  this  dilemma  in  recent 
years  in  the  cases  of  micro  finance  institutions,  the  ATMs,  credit  and  debit  cards,  the 
electronic fund transfer services like the RTGS and NEFT and even the cash services. We 
were  convinced  about  the  need  for  expansion  of  these  services  and  conveniences;  we 
understood  the  trade-offs  between  the  charges  for  these  services  and  the  consumer 
interests.  Our  approach  has  been  a  gradual  move  from  facilitating  entrenchment  of  such 
developments and innovations by ensuring competition and choices for consumers to a fairer 
treatment of consumers and fair charges. 
Life in low interest rate regime 
Now, I would like to paint the scenario that will emerge in our country in the next few 
32. 
years and some preparations that all of us as savers should be undertaking. For a very long 
period, more specifically in our own living memory of the post-Independence era, India had 
been  going through  high  inflationary  period;  of course, thankfully,  we  never  had  the  hyper 
inflationary  periods  like  in  several  African  or  South  American  countries;  but  certainly,  our 
experience of inflation was in high single digits to teens and hence inflationary expectations 
were  very  well  entrenched.  Though  we  did  experience  low  inflationary  levels  in  some 
periods, we could not sustain it. For yet another time, we are now experiencing low levels of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation and it is amply clear that this time around we will be able to sustain it for the years to 
come. Also, the monetary policy framework agreement that we have with the Government, 
prescribes that the objective of monetary policy will be to maintain the consumer inflation at 
four, plus or minus two percent. This gives the necessary assurance and confidence to keep 
the inflationary expectations at bay. It is heartening to note that influential thinkers now worry 
about recession. 
33. 
What does this low inflationary period entails for the savers? For one thing, they will 
realize that the real value of their savings is higher and remains preserved and protected. In 
periods of low inflation, the real value of money does not change much. However, they will 
find that the nominal interest rates that they receive will be low, as compared to the interest 
rates  that  they  enjoyed  during  the  high  inflation  period.  After  all,  the  simple  formula  for 
determining interest rate is: 
Nominal Interest rate = Real Interest rate + Rate of Inflation. 
34. 
As the real interest rate in any economy will be more or less constant, the nominal 
interest rate is directly proportional to rate of inflation. Thus it will rise when rate of inflation 
increases and fall when the rate of inflation falls. 
35. 
The uninformed may get worried; it may give rise to an illusion – more specifically in 
the  minds  of those  who  live  on  fixed  interest  income;  as  if their  income  levels  have  come 
down. It is not so; actually, their low nominal interest income will now command and fetch 
better  goods  and  services,  as  the  real  value  of  their  saving  and  incomes  have  been 
preserved. 
36. 
As  business  and  consumer  confidence  will  be  higher  and  better  during  low 
inflationary levels, savers will have higher appetite for risk taking. This will mean less reliance 
on pure fixed interest income; before investing, savers will weigh various financial products of 
capital  market  for  appropriate  risk-reward  combination.  Savers  will  increasingly  need  and 
seek the services of financial advisers and analysts to help them decide investments. This is 
the life we must all be prepared for. 
Conclusion 
37. 
To  conclude,  let  me  once  again  recall  what  “the  uncommon  common  man’, 
Shri M R Pai  espoused.  In  his  words  “most  Indians  are  ignorant  of  their  rights  and  are 
therefore taken for a ride”. As regulators, we are conscious of this position and that is why we 
constantly  pay  our  closer  attention  on  financial  consumer  protection,  more  specifically  the 
protection of the vulnerable, defenseless retail consumers. 
38. 
Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
