Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, Nicosia, 
5 March 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference,  here,  in  Nicosia. I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Georghadji  for her  kind 
hospitality and to express our special gratitude to her staff for the excellent organisation of 
today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  As  regards  non-
standard monetary policy measures, the focus is now on implementation. 
Following  up  on  our  decisions  of  22  January  2015,  we  will,  on  9  March  2015,  start 
purchasing euro-denominated public sector securities in the secondary market. We will also 
continue purchasing asset-backed securities and covered bonds, which we started last year. 
As previously stated, the combined monthly purchases of public and private sector securities 
will  amount  to  €60  billion.  They  are  intended  to  be  carried  out  until  the  end  of  September 
2016 and will, in any case, be conducted until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of 
inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term. Further information on certain implementation aspects of the public 
sector purchase programme will be released at 3.30 p.m. CET on the ECB’s website. 
We  have  already  seen  a  significant  number  of  positive  effects  from  these  monetary  policy 
decisions.  Financial  market  conditions  and  the  cost  of  external  finance  for  the  private 
economy  have  eased  further,  also  following  our  previous  monetary  policy  measures.  In 
particular,  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households  have  improved  considerably. 
Moreover, money and credit dynamics have been firming. 
The substantial additional easing of our monetary policy stance supports and reinforces the 
emergence of more favourable developments for the euro area economy. In an environment 
of improving business and consumer sentiment, the transmission of our measures to the real 
economy will strengthen, contributing to a further improvement in the outlook for economic 
growth  and  a  reduction  in  economic  slack.  Thereby,  our  measures  will  contribute  to  a 
sustained return of inflation towards a level below, but close to, 2% over the medium term 
and underpin the firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.3%, quarter on 
quarter, in the last quarter of 2014, which was somewhat higher than previously expected. 
The latest economic data and, particularly, survey evidence available up to February point to 
some further improvements in economic activity at the beginning of this year. Looking ahead, 
we expect the economic recovery to broaden and strengthen gradually. The low level of the 
price  of  oil  should  continue  to  support  households’  real  disposable  income  and  corporate 
profitability.  Domestic  demand  should  also  be  further  supported  by  our  monetary  policy 
measures  leading  to  ongoing  improvements  in  financial  conditions,  as  well  as  by  the 
progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover,  demand  for  euro 
area exports should benefit from improvements in price competitiveness and from the global 
recovery.  However,  the  euro  area  recovery  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  dampened  by  the 
necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  various  sectors  and  the  rather  slow  pace  of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2015  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.5% in 2015, 
1.9%  in  2016  and  2.1%  in  2017.  Compared  with  the  December  2014  Eurosystem  staff 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
macroeconomic  projections,  the  projections  for  real  GDP  growth  in  2015  and  2016  have 
been  revised  upwards,  reflecting  the  favourable  impact  of  lower  oil  prices,  the  weaker 
effective  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  and  the  impact  of  the  ECB’s  recent  monetary  policy 
measures. 
The risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area remain on the downside but 
have diminished following recent monetary policy decisions and the fall in oil prices. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  –0.3  %  in 
February 2015, after –0.6% in January. The negative outcomes largely reflect the impact of 
the  significant  fall  in  oil  prices  since  July  2014.  On  the  basis  of  current  information  and 
prevailing  futures  prices  for  oil,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  very  low  or 
negative in the months ahead. Supported by the favourable impact of our recent monetary 
policy measures on aggregate demand, the impact of the lower euro exchange rate and the 
assumption of somewhat higher oil prices in the years ahead, inflation rates are expected to 
start increasing gradually later in 2015. 
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2015  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.0% in 2015, 1.5% in 
2016  and  1.8%  in  2017.  In  comparison  with  the  December  2014  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic projections, the inflation projection for 2015 has been revised downwards, 
mainly reflecting the fall in oil prices. In contrast, the inflation projection for 2016 has been 
revised slightly upwards, also reflecting the expected impact of our recent monetary policy 
measures. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term. In this context, we will focus in particular on the pass-
through of our monetary policy measures, geopolitical developments, and exchange rate and 
energy price developments. 
When  discussing  the  economic  outlook  and  the  new  projections,  the  Governing  Council 
acknowledged that the staff projections are conditional on the full implementation of all our 
policy measures. Moreover, the March staff projections extend the horizon to 2017. In this 
context, the Governing Council again stressed that the degree of forecast uncertainty tends 
to increase with the length of the projection horizon. 
Turning  to  the monetary analysis,  recent  data  confirm  the  gradual  increase  in  underlying 
growth in broad money (M3). The annual growth rate of M3 increased to 4.1% in January 
2015, up from 3.8% in December 2014. Annual growth in M3 continues to be supported by 
its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual 
rate of 9.0% in January. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  was  –0.9%  in  January  2015,  after  –1.1%  in  December  2014,  continuing  its 
gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February 2014. The three-month cumulated net 
lending  flows  were  positive  in  January  for  the  second  consecutive  month,  compared  with 
sizeable  net  redemptions  still  recorded  a  year  ago.  Despite  these  improvements,  the 
dynamics of loans to non-financial corporations remain subdued and continue to reflect the 
lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and the ongoing 
adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of 
loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) increased further to 0.9% in 
January 2015, after 0.8% in December 2014. Our recent monetary policy measures should 
support a further improvement in credit flows. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the appropriateness of the Governing Council’s recent 
decisions. The determined implementation of all our monetary policy measures will provide 
support to the euro area recovery and bring inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 
2% in the medium term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  need  to  contribute 
decisively. Given high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro 
area, a cyclical recovery along the lines of the March ECB staff projections is no grounds for 
complacency.  In  particular,  in  order  to  increase  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity, both the decisive implementation of product and labour market reforms and 
actions  to  improve  the  business  environment  for  firms  need  to  gain  momentum  in  several 
countries. It is crucial that structural reforms be implemented swiftly, credibly and effectively, 
as  this  will not  only  increase  the  future  sustainable  growth  of  the  euro  area  but  also  raise 
expectations of higher incomes and encourage firms to increase investment today, bringing 
forward the economic recovery. Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery while 
remaining 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Full  and  consistent 
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. 
In view of the necessity to step up structural reform efforts in a number of countries, it is also 
important that the macroeconomic imbalance procedure is implemented effectively in order 
to address the excessive imbalances as identified in individual Member States. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
in  compliance  with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
