   Ewald Nowotny: CESEE outlook - reconciling fiscal consolidation and 
growth 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Austria,  at  the  Seminar  on  the  IMF’s  Regional  Economic  Issues  Report  “CESEE  Outlook: 
Reconciling Fiscal Consolidation and Growth”, Vienna, 13 November 2015. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
            On  behalf  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to 
today’s seminar on the IMF’s new „Regional Economic Issues Report“, the REI. 
The REI is a semiannual publication by the IMF and assesses the macroeconomic 
outlook for the Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE) region in light of 
the latest global economic and financial developments. 
Hence, this report covers more than twenty countries, including Central and Eastern 
Europe  (CEE),  Southeastern  Europe  (SEE),  the  Baltic  region,  the  CIS  group,  and 
Turkey. 
CESEE is a region of strategic interest for the OeNB and is therefore in the focus of 
our analytical work. 
This year, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank has the honour to host the launch of the 
new REI in Vienna. The REI will then be presented in a series of seminars in several 
European cities, such as Ljubljana and Zagreb. 
By launching the new REI here in Vienna, the OeNB continues a well-established 
tradition,  as  the  OeNB  has  already  hosted  several  REI  launches,  with  the  last 
presentation having taken place in October 2013. 
The title of this new REI is „Reconciling Fiscal Consolidation and Growth in CESEE“. 
This is without doubt a well chosen topic, which is also highly relevant in the Euro 
Area and in Austria. 
The  REI  shows  that  especially  the  Central  European  countries  are  growing  at  a 
healthy pace, while Russia, Ukraine and the rest of the CIS countries are in recession, 
mainly because of Russia. Overall, activity in the region is set to contract by 0.6 % in 
2015, but to expand by 1.3 % in 2016. 
Compared to the 2015 Spring REI, the policy challenges have not changed much and 
still  include  supporting  domestic  demand  and  rebuilding  buffers  against  external 
shocks. 
However, the balance of risks has shifted to the downside, as new risks stem from 
further slowdown in major emerging markets (China). The ongoing refugee crisis in 
Europe  constitutes  a  potential  risk,  but  will  bring  a  fiscal  stimulus  outside  of  the 
restrictions  of  the  EU  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Hence,  it  should  have  an 
expansionary  effect  and  will  contribute  to  growth  and  employment,  especially  in 
Austria and Germany. 
When  analyzing  the  fiscal  consolidation  in  CESEE,  the  REI  finds  that,  despite 
improvements in the quality of budgets in recent years, large fiscal challenges still 
remain. Especially in the SEE region, sizeable budgetary adjustments are needed. 
Just a few words on today’s seminar: We will start out with two presentations: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The  first  one  on  „CESEE  Outlook,  Risks  and  Policy  Priorities“,  will  be  given  by  Mr.  Jörg 
Decressin. 
The  second  presentation  by  Mr.  Johannes  Wiegand  will  deal  with  “Reconciling  Fiscal 
Consolidation and Growth in CESEE”. 
Mrs. Anna Ilyina will then be happy to answer any questions. 
These presentations will be followed by a panel discussion, to be chaired by my colleague 
Franz Nauschnigg. The idea is to have an interactive discussion with the audience. 3 
Let me now introduce the distinguished panellists: 
Jörg Decressin: 
Since early 2014, Mr. Decressin is Deputy Director in the European Department of the IMF. 
Before that, Mr. Decressin was the Research Department’s Deputy Director and was in charge 
of the IMF’s WEO (World Economic Outlook). 
Mr. Decressin holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University, a B.Sc. from LSE and has published on 
Labor  and  Capital  Market  Adjustments,  Deflation,  and  on  Fiscal  Policy  and  Financial 
Integration in Europe. 
Johannes Wiegand: 
Mr. Wiegand is Economist in the IMF’s European Department and was Mission Chief to Kosovo 
and Desk Officer for Hungary. Before that, Mr. Wiegand has worked in the IMF’s Research, 
Policy Development and Review Department as well as in the African Department, and has 
published  on  Macro-Financial  Linkages,  Financial  Stability  and  on  Emerging  Market 
Vulnerabilities. 
Mr. Wiegand holds a Ph.D. and M.Sc. from the University College London. 
Anna Ilyina: 
Mrs. Ilyina is Chief of the Emerging Economies Division in the IMF’s European Department 
since 2013. Before that, she was Deputy Chief of the Global Markets Analysis Division and of 
the Financial Sector Analysis Division in the IMF’s Monetary and Capital Markets Department. 
Mrs. Ilyina holds a Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania and a B.A. from Moscow State 
University  and  has  published  on  Europe’s  Problem  Loans,  Analytical  Tools  for  Crisis 
Vulnerability Assessment, and on Emerging Markets as Net Capital Exporters. 
Franz Nauschnigg: 
As of 2000, Mr. Nauschnigg is the Head of the OeNB’s European Affairs and International 
Financial Organizations Division. Before that, he worked in the Austrian Ministry for Agriculture 
and Economy as well as in the Austrian Ministry of Finance. 
Mr. Nauschnigg holds a Master degree from Graz University and has published extensively on 
European 
International  Trade  and 
Infrastructure. 
Integration  and  Monetary  Policy,  Fiscal 
Issues, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
