  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Financial  System  Review,  Ottawa,  Ontario, 
15 December 2015. 
 Good  morning.  It’s  a  pleasure for  Senior  Deputy  Governor Wilkins  and  me  to  be  with  you 
today to talk about the December issue of the Bank’s Financial System Review (FSR), which 
we published this morning. 
Let me take a moment to give some context for this report. The FSR highlights key financial 
vulnerabilities and some potential triggers that could turn those vulnerabilities into risks to the 
stability of Canada’s financial system. The FSR is an essential complement to our Monetary 
Policy  Report  –  together,  these  two  reports  give  the  basis  for  a  complete  discussion  of 
monetary policy within our risk-management framework. 
At  our  last  interest  rate  announcement,  we  kept  our  key  policy  rate  unchanged,  as  the 
economy was unfolding reasonably in line with our latest projection in October. We also said 
that risks to financial stability were evolving as expected. Today’s FSR provides the analysis 
behind that assessment. 
Our  interest  in  financial  stability  risk  has  grown  since  the  financial  crisis,  for  two  distinct 
reasons.  First,  the  global  regulatory  architecture  has  been  strengthened  to  prevent  future 
crises, and how the system adapts to those changes needs to be well understood. Second, 
persistently  very  low  interest  rates  in  response  to  the  crisis  are  fuelling  new  financial 
vulnerabilities that bear constant monitoring. 
Let  me  start  with  the  financial  stability  implications  of  new  regulations  for  financial 
intermediaries. The global financial system is clearly safer than it was before the crisis. This 
is  important,  for  it  means  that  vulnerabilities  that  appear  worrisome  today  need  to  be 
assessed against a more resilient system. 
At the same time, our financial system is adapting to new regulations, and we must be alert 
for any new vulnerabilities that might emerge as a result. As one example, some observers 
contend that new capital and liquidity rules have led to reduced market-making in secondary 
fixed-income  markets  and  may  also  be  responsible  for  occasional  liquidity  shortfalls  and 
market gaps. We analyze this vulnerability in greater depth in today’s FSR. 
In fact, it is proving very difficult to assess the liquidity issue empirically. Most of the available 
data suggest that government-bond liquidity may have improved in recent years, but these 
data  tell  only  part  of  the  story.  The  Bank  recently  established  the  Canadian  Fixed-Income 
Forum to enable a continuing dialogue, and we’ve modified our operations to help alleviate 
some of these issues. The Governing Council believes it’s important to continue studying the 
matter, not just as it pertains to government bonds, but also to other asset classes. Given the 
new  regulatory  architecture,  we  may  not  know  just  how  resilient  market  liquidity  is  until 
there’s a true stress event. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  vulnerabilities  being  created  by  persistently  very  low  interest  rates  in 
Canada. The post-crisis situation has quite naturally fuelled the accumulation of household 
debt, as well as heightened activity in the housing sector. We can observe other elements of 
risky financial  behaviour,  but these  two  vulnerabilities  have  been  our  main  focus for  some 
time and have continued to grow in importance since our last FSR. 
In  terms  of  household  debt,  income  growth  hasn’t  kept  pace  with  increases  in  borrowing, 
since mortgage growth continues to rise. More borrowing was expected, given the reductions 
in  our  policy  interest  rate  earlier  this  year.  It’s  important  to  remember  that  while  rate 
reductions have increased vulnerabilities at the margin, they’ve also mitigated the risk to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial system by helping offset the decline in incomes and employment tied to the drop in 
commodity prices. 
Our  analysis  shows  that  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  number  of  highly  indebted 
households in Canada, by which I mean those whose debts are more than 350 per cent of 
their annual gross income. Not only are there more of these highly indebted households, they 
also carry a growing share of household debt. These people are more likely to live in British 
Columbia, Alberta or Ontario, where house price gains have been the largest. The Governing 
Council’s reading of the situation is that these vulnerabilities are quite highly concentrated – 
about 720,000 households fall into this vulnerable category. 
In terms of the housing market, we continue to see regional markets evolving along different 
tracks,  as  we’ve  indicated  before.  Activity  in  the  energy-producing  regions  of  Alberta, 
Saskatchewan,  and  Newfoundland  and  Labrador  has  declined  noticeably,  which  was 
expected following the decline in oil prices. The housing markets of Toronto and Vancouver 
have seen renewed momentum, driven by stronger employment growth and migration, both 
interprovincial and international. 
The  Governing  Council’s  base-case  scenario  continues  to  be  a  constructive  one:  housing 
activity should stabilize in line with economic growth as the driver of growth in the economy 
switches from household spending to non-resource exports. However, recent momentum in 
prices in Toronto and Vancouver may increase the likelihood of a correction in house prices, 
which could affect vulnerable households. Unsurprisingly, house prices are correcting in oil-
producing regions. 
As in the past, we have illustrated how certain triggers could turn these vulnerabilities into 
full-blown  risks  to  the  Canadian  financial  system.  Risks  assessed  in  this  FSR  are  (1)  a 
severe recession that would reduce households’ ability to service their mortgages and cause 
a broad correction in house prices; (2) an unexpectedly sharp rise in global risk premiums 
that  could  spill  over  to  the  cost  of  domestic  financing;  (3)  economic  or  financial  stress 
emanating from China and other emerging markets; and (4) more downside risk in resource 
pricing.  These  risks  are  not  meant  to  be  exhaustive  but  rather  are  used  to  illustrate  the 
potential  consequences  of  the  vulnerabilities  we  have  identified.  Other  possible  triggers 
might include a large-scale credit event in the global resource sector or a sovereign credit 
event, for example. 
The Governing Council acknowledges that certain vulnerabilities are still edging higher, but 
the  overall  level  of  risk  they  pose  to  the  Canadian  financial  system  has  remained  roughly 
unchanged since our June report. In this regard, recent changes by Canadian authorities to 
the rules for mortgage financing will help to mitigate these risks as we move into 2016. 
Finally,  I’d  note  that  the  FSR  features  reports  that  take  a  close  look  at  aspects  of  the 
Canadian  and  global  financial  systems.  With  this  issue,  there’s  a  report  that  analyzes  the 
microdata  related  to  household  debt,  as  well  as  a  review  of  mortgage  securitization  in 
Canada. These are very important and useful reports, and I hope you’ll take the time to read 
them. 
With that, Carolyn and I will be happy to respond to your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
