William C Dudley: The evolving structure of the US Treasury Market 
Conference – welcoming remarks 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  evolving  structure  of  the  US  treasury 
market  conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 20 November 2015.
 Frank Keane, Michael McMorrow, Joseph Tracy and Nate Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference  on  the  evolving  structure  of  the  U.S. 
Treasury market. As you all know, the Treasury market plays a unique and crucial role in our 
economy, and in global financial markets more broadly. Treasury securities serve as a liquid 
investment  and  hedging  vehicle  for  global  investors,  a  ready  source  of  collateral  for  many 
financial transactions and serve as a risk-free benchmark for other financial instruments. The 
Treasury market is important for the Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy and 
also is a focus here at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in our statutory role as the 
Treasury’s fiscal agent. The Treasury market also helps to underpin the U.S. dollar’s status as 
the global reserve currency. And, of course, it is the primary means for borrowing to finance 
the U.S. federal government.1 
In recent years, the structure of the Treasury market has changed significantly. Trading has 
become increasingly electronic, and, in many cases, highly automated. Less traditional firms, 
often  with  a  primary  focus  on  automated,  low-latency  trading  strategies,  have  entered  the 
arena  and  helped  to  transform  the  landscape.  In  addition  to  adapting  to  these  changes, 
traditional broker-dealers are complying with a more rigorous regulatory framework and are 
also expanding their use of automated trading technologies. 
These developments raise a number of important questions. They include: Who are these new 
entrants and what are their motivations? Has the changing composition of firms affected the 
nature  of  market  making  and  liquidity  provision?  How  have  traditional  liquidity  providers 
responded to the expanded use of new technology? Has the changing structure introduced 
operational risks in the clearing and settlement infrastructure? How has the evolution of the 
repo  market  affected  the  secondary  market  for  Treasury  securities?  Are  the  regulatory 
requirements imposed upon the Treasury market sufficient in today’s world? And finally, are 
there any changes – regulatory or otherwise – that could improve the functioning, efficiency 
and/or integrity of the Treasury market? 
As  I  noted  in  my  recent  remarks  on  market  liquidity,  many  open  questions  remain  on  the 
subject of Treasury market liquidity.2 At the same time, the agenda for this conference makes 
it  clear  that  there  are  many  other  important  questions  beyond  market  liquidity  worthy  of 
consideration and debate. The breadth and expertise of the attendees at this conference make 
this forum an excellent opportunity to advance our collective thinking on this range of important 
subjects. 
While the recent joint staff report on the events of October 15 certainly revealed that much has 
changed, it is also important to recognize that both private and official sector efforts to ensure 
a  healthy  and  efficient  Treasury  market  have  been  ongoing  for  some  time.3  One  obvious 
example is the Treasury Market Practices Group, or the TMPG. Set up in February 2007, the 
1  What I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
2  See Regulation and Liquidity Provision, remarks at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, September 30, 2015. 
3  Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market On October 15, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   TMPG is a group of market professionals committed to supporting the integrity and efficiency 
of the Treasury market.4 A core purpose of the TMPG is to develop and update a set of best 
practices related to trading, settlement and risk management, thereby establishing a set of 
behavioral  norms  to  which  market  participants  are  expected  to  adhere.  Most  recently,  the 
TMPG  updated  its  best  practice  guidance  to  address  automated  trading,  and  published  a 
companion white paper on the subject. And no discussion of the TMPG can go without mention 
of the “fails charge.” Instituted in May 2009, this practice provides a standard procedure for 
market participants to assess – or pay – a fee for settlement failures, and this has proven to 
be a highly effective remedy for curbing the volume of fails in the Treasury market.5 I want to 
thank  the  entire  TMPG  for  their  leadership  in  supporting  the  efficiency  and  integrity  of  the 
Treasury market. I’d like to single out Tom Wipf with a personal thank you. Tom has served 
with  distinction  as  the  TMPG’s  chair  since  its  inception,  providing  credible,  balanced  and 
independent leadership to the Group. 
I would be remiss if I did not also mention the ongoing work of the Inter-Agency Working Group 
on Treasury Market Surveillance, or the IAWG. After the Salomon auction bidding scandal in 
January 1992, the official sector established the IAWG. Since that time, it has been a useful 
forum for the official sector to coordinate and communicate on the various issues that have 
arisen in the Treasury market. Indeed, over the years there have been numerous examples of 
questionable  behavior  that  has  come  to  the  attention  of  the  IAWG,  and  these  have  been 
channeled onwards to the appropriate authorities. The IAWG continues to meet biweekly, as 
it has since its inception. 
As you all know, the Joint Staff Report concluded that further work is necessary in light of the 
evolving structure of the Treasury market, and it also highlighted a series of additional steps 
that the official sector will take to evaluate its approach to this market. I remain very supportive 
of these efforts. In fact, this conference is among the first of those next steps, and presents a 
perfect opportunity to have a rich debate on the market’s evolving structure and the actions 
that may be appropriate in response. 
Thank you once again for coming here today. I look forward to our engagement and discussion. 
                                                
4  The TMPG has since expanded its mandate to include the agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) markets. 
5  A more recent and equally successful practice has also been instituted for the MBS market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
