  Benoît Cœuré: The international regulatory agenda on CCP links 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at 
interoperability 
arrangements, Frankfurt am Main, 2 November 2015. 
the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  workshop  on  CCP 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the European Systemic Risk Board for inviting me to speak on such an 
important topic. Central counterparty (CCP) interoperability is a relatively new development 
in  the  European  clearing  landscape  –  the  first  interoperability  arrangements  between  two 
European  CCPs  were  only  established  in  the  early  2000s,  covering  transactions  on 
government bonds and equities. Nonetheless, Europe has been at the forefront of the global 
debate  on  interoperability  arrangements  and  is  beginning  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the 
knowledge  it  has  built  up  so  far1.  CCP  interoperability  has  undoubtedly  improved  the 
efficiency  of the  EU  post-trading  infrastructure. However,  it  is  also  fair  to  say  that  industry 
participants  and  regulators  are  facing  a  number  of  ongoing  questions  regarding  the  full 
implications of CCP interoperability in terms of competition, financial innovation and systemic 
risk. 
In this address, I will try to give an overview of the main benefits that CCP interoperability 
has brought to the EU financial system, and outline why in my view interoperability should be 
supported and enhanced. I will also discuss some of the challenges CCPs and authorities 
are currently facing in establishing and managing safe interoperability arrangements. Lastly, I 
will raise a number of questions, which I believe are important to the implementation of CCP 
interoperability going forward and which could warrant a place on the international regulatory 
agenda. 
CCP  interoperability  has  improved  the  efficiency  of  the  EU  post-trading  landscape, 
and is one aspect of broader initiatives to reduce fragmentation in financial markets 
First of all, I would like to say that it is rather topical to be discussing CCP interoperability, 
particularly as just a few weeks ago the Commission released its Action Plan on Building a 
Capital Markets Union. One of the priorities put forward by the Commission for this ambitious 
project is to step up efforts in removing barriers to the cross-border clearing and settlement 
of  securities.  CCP  interoperability  can  play  a  key  role  in  meeting  this  objective,  as  the 
Giovannini Group highlighted in 2001 already. In fact, it is thanks to the work of this group 
that some barriers were removed and links started being established.2 
Indeed, supporting CCP interoperability seems particularly relevant in the context of the EU 
financial system, where securities and funds need to flow across borders, but where clearing 
and  settlement  infrastructures  have  traditionally  been  largely  domestic  in  nature.  On  one 
hand,  CCP  interoperability  allows  financial  entities  to  access  centrally  cleared  markets 
across the EU and to transact with multiple counterparties without bearing the costs of joining 
multiple CCPs. Thus, it is possible for participants to expand the range of products they can 
trade while preserving the benefits of using a single clearing venue3. On the other hand, it 
                                                
1  See:  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (2015),  “Final  Report  :  the  Extension  of  the  Scope  of 
Interoperability Arrangements”. 
2  See:  The  Giovannini  Group  (2002),  “Cross-Border  Clearing  and  Settlement  Arrangements  in  the  European 
Union”, Section 5 (Barrier 2), European Commission, Economic Papers, No. 163. 
3  See: Garvin (2012), “Central Counterparty Interoperability”, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, June Quarter 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  can also provide market participants with a choice of multiple CCPs through which to clear 
products traded on the same venue. Interoperability can reduce demand for collateral assets 
to meet margin requirements, by allowing participants to concentrate all their clearing activity 
within a single CCP, and by increasing netting efficiency across CCPs4. However, we should 
also keep in mind that covering the exposures resulting from interoperability arrangements 
may  create  a  need  for  extra  collateral5.  Overall,  interoperability  has  the  potential  to  help 
reduce  the  fragmentation  in  financial  markets,  spur  competition  and  innovation,  and 
decrease the cost of central clearing. 
To  sum  up,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  among  market  participants  that  today’s 
interoperability  arrangements  covering  cash  equities,  fixed  income  products  and  certain 
exchange-traded  derivatives  have  improved  the  liquidity  of  these  markets.  I  think  it  is 
therefore safe to say that the implementation of CCP interoperability has benefited clearing 
members and their clients alike. 
If  they  are  prudently  managed  and  supervised,  interoperability  arrangements  can  also  be 
beneficial  for  the  resilience  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The  fact  that  the  same 
markets  are  cleared  by  several  CCPs  increases  the  likelihood  that  these  markets  can 
continue to be served in the event that one CCP suffers an operational or financial failure – 
although it should be pointed out that a CCP failure is an extremely unlikely scenario. 
One issue to be further analysed is whether interoperability arrangements could facilitate the 
porting  of  open  positions  to  an  alternative  CCP,  thus  preventing  a  total  close-out  of 
transactions and containing any potential knock-on effects to clearing members. Discussions 
regarding  the  global  and  EU  framework  for  CCP  resolution  are  still  under  way,  and  more 
work  will  need  to  be  done  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  interoperability  can  help  during a 
resolution process; however, there are reasons to believe that it could indeed be an asset 
from the perspective of CCP substitutability6. Furthermore, greater netting efficiency – which 
is one of the effects of CCP interoperability – can lead to financial stability benefits such as 
lower expected counterparty exposures and lower collateral demand, when compared to a 
situation in which the clearing landscape would be fragmented7. 
While interoperability arrangements might give rise to contagion risks in the event one linked 
CCP were to default, the financial stability benefits resulting from increased netting efficiency 
are  likely  to  outweigh  the  potential  contagion  costs  –  providing  that  interoperability 
arrangements are appropriately supervised – as the failure of a CCP is an extremely unlikely 
event8. In fact, the development of interoperability arrangements could provide a solution for 
reaping the  benefits  of reduced fragmentation  in  the  CCP  landscape,  without  incurring the 
monopoly costs linked to a single clearing provider. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  CCP  interoperability  should  be  understood  within  the  context  of 
broader  market-led  efforts  to  improve  market  infrastructure  integration.  In  the  area  of 
securities settlement, integration has increased substantially in the last 15 years as a result 
                                                
4  See:  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2011),  “The  macrofinancial  implications  of  alternative 
configurations for access to central counterparties in OTC derivatives markets”, CGFS Paper n° 46, November 
2011. 
5  See:  Singh,  M  (2013),  “Making  the  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets  safe:  a  fresh  look”,  Journal  of 
Financial Market Infrastructures, 1(3), Spring 2013. 
6  See:  Coeuré,  B  (2015),  “Ensuring  an  adequate  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  central  counterparties”,  Special 
invited lecture at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 2015 Symposium on Central Clearing, Chicago, 10 
April 2015. 
7  See:  Duffie,  D;  Zhu,  H  (2011),  “Does  a  central  clearing  counterparty  reduce  counterparty  risk?”,  Review  of 
Asset Pricing Studies, 1(1), July 2011. 
8  See: Cox, N; Garvin, N; Kelly, G (2013), “Central counterparty links and clearing system exposures”, Reserve 
Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper, October 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of the establishment of links between securities settlement systems. Furthermore, the launch 
of TARGET2-Securities earlier this year has given Europe a new single securities platform. It 
has  helped  optimise  the  use  of  liquidity  and  collateral,  as  well  as  pushing  forward  the 
harmonisation  agenda  in  Europe.  These  initiatives  have  brought  us  closer  to  our  ultimate 
goal  of  a  fully  integrated  financial  market  and  have  laid  down  fundamental  elements  of 
market infrastructure integration. Going forward we should continue to build on collaboration 
between authorities and the industry with the aim of enhancing the integration of post-trading 
infrastructures, fostering  innovation  and  efficiency,  and  ultimately  benefiting  end  users  and 
the real economy. 
Nonetheless, we should bear in mind that achieving greater integration in the field of central 
clearing may create different challenges than in the case of settlement, namely with regard to 
risk management. 
to 
The  regulatory  framework  established  at  EU  and  international  level  ensures  that 
interoperability links are managed in a safe and prudent manner. However, CCPs face 
a number of challenges in applying these risk management standards 
Building on the foundations established by the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market 
Infrastructures, EMIR sets out strict binding rules for managing the potential risks stemming 
from interoperability arrangements. 
These rules relate to the provision of margins between interoperating CCPs, the necessary 
harmonisation of CCP risk management frameworks and the use of inter-CCP resources in 
default situations. Crucially, the establishment of interoperability arrangements is subject to 
the approval of colleges that are set up under EMIR in order to supervise CCPs. Cooperative 
supervision  arrangements  are  particularly  necessary  with  regard 
interoperability 
arrangements, which require a high level of scrutiny from a number of relevant authorities, 
including the supervisors of the two interoperating CCPs and the central banks of issue of 
the most relevant currencies cleared through the link. 
Nonetheless,  we  should  not  underestimate  the  challenges  CCPs  face  in  establishing  and 
managing  safe  interoperability  arrangements.  The  task  of  harmonising  risk  models  and 
ensuring that interoperating CCPs cannot contaminate each other in the event of a clearing 
member  default  is  not  straightforward.  While  CCP  interoperability  is  and  should  remain  a 
market-led process, the close involvement of all relevant authorities is vital in ensuring that 
CCPs  have  appropriately  compared  their  risk  management  frameworks  and  taken  the 
necessary steps to make these models compatible with each other. Authorities also have a 
key role in making sure interoperating CCPs have comprehensively assessed the risks they 
pose to each other. As an example, CCPs which enter into an interoperability arrangement 
must  collect  and  exchange  margins  to  cover  their  reciprocal  exposures.  Under  EU  rules, 
these  resources  are  not  part  of  the  CCPs’  regular  default  waterfalls,  and  are  exclusively 
provided for the purpose of covering losses from one interoperating CCP going into default. 
In  other  words,  they  cannot  be  used  to  cover  other  types  of  losses,  such  as  a  participant 
default.  Authorities  must  ensure  that  the  resources  contributed  by  one  CCP  are  fully 
protected from potential defaults or stress events which could occur in the other CCP(s). 
While  I  believe  the  current  European  regulatory  framework  achieves  a  high  degree  of 
protection, it could be further improved by reducing the scope for regulatory interpretation, 
and by making sure that the same outcomes are achieved by all regulators and supervisors 
when dealing with interoperability arrangements. 
At present, the requirements related to CCP interoperability set out in EMIR Level 1 and in 
the dedicated ESMA guidance leave room for some degree of interpretation by competent 
authorities. More granular rules may need to be defined in EMIR so as to address some of 
these issues and provide greater clarity to supervisors and regulators. Authorities could work 
together to identify such potential issues, and discuss whether and how additional guidance 
should be incorporated into EMIR. Allow me to share two examples of areas where the need 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  for more rules could be explored: first, the criteria and requirements for harmonising the risk 
models  of  interoperable  CCPs;  and  second,  the  treatment  of  exposures  resulting  from 
interoperability within CCP stress testing frameworks. While a degree of clarification may be 
beneficial,  we  should  also  recognise  that  regulation  probably  cannot  address  all  issues 
related to such a complex subject as CCP interoperability, and that competent authorities will 
need to continue playing a role in deciding how best to tackle certain issues not entirely dealt 
with under the legislation. 
Looking  ahead, 
interoperability 
arrangements  will  be  further  strengthened  with  the  entry  into  force  of  the  CPMI-IOSCO 
Public quantitative disclosure standards for central counterparties. 
Starting  in  January  2016,  all  CCPs  with  interoperability  arrangements  will  be  required  to 
publish  data  on  the  volume  of  activity  cleared  through  these  links.  They  will  also  have  to 
publish data on the financial resources provided and collected to cover exposures resulting 
from  these  links,  and  on  the  results  of  back-testing  performed  on  the  level  of  coverage of 
these  resources.  Transparency  towards  market  participants  is  paramount,  especially  for  a 
relatively  new  and  complex  practice  such  as  interoperability.  The  plan to  release  this  data 
across all jurisdictions is one of the major policy achievements reached at international level. 
that  market  confidence 
the  safety  of 
I  believe 
in 
In  sum,  I  am  confident  that  the  current  EU  regulatory  framework  and  the  rules 
established  at  international  level  ensure  a  high  overall  level  of  safety  for  CCP 
interoperability arrangements. However, looking ahead, several questions still remain 
open to discussion. As I have already mentioned, authorities and the industry need to 
work  together  to  examine  these  issues  and  to  continue  to  enhance  the  safe  and 
efficient implementation of interoperability arrangements 
An  initial  question  to  be  examined  is  whether  regulators  should  set  any  limits  on  the 
potential scope of interoperability. 
At  the  moment,  EMIR  only  explicitly  provides  for  interoperability  arrangements  relating  to 
cash products and money market instruments; however, the Regulation does state that the 
scope  of  interoperability  should  be  subject  to  future  review.  The  existence  of  this  review 
clause, as well as the forthcoming entry into force of the mandatory clearing obligation, make 
discussions  concerning  the  scope  of  interoperability  rather  topical.  Market  participants  and 
authorities  will  need  to  exercise  caution  in  determining  whether  to  extend  the  scope  of 
interoperability further, for example to OTC derivatives links. ESMA has in fact recommended 
this extension for exchange traded derivatives, but not for OTC derivatives9. Potential credit 
exposures are greater for OTC derivatives, and the cost of assessing risk and making risk 
management  models  compatible  are  clearly  higher.  It  should  be  noted  that  no  OTC 
derivatives  links  have  yet  been  established  in  the  EU,  nor  does  there  appear  to  be  any 
market demand for such links for the time being. 
Regulators need in general to ensure they do not set any excessive barriers to innovation: 
the costs and risks of interoperability are unambiguously higher for OTC derivatives but the 
benefits are nonetheless there, including in terms of having more competition. If CCPs can 
deliver interoperability for OTC derivatives in future in a safe and efficient manner, then we 
should  seek  to  ensure  they  are  not  prevented  from  doing  so  because  of  excessively 
restrictive regulations. Interoperability for OTC derivatives may also be important in view of 
the  forthcoming  entry  into  force  of  the  clearing  obligation:  indeed,  the  establishment  of 
interoperability arrangements might help ensure that these markets remain sufficiently liquid 
once  they  are  subject  to  mandatory  central  clearing.  However,  it  will  still  be  a  far  greater 
challenge to implement interoperability for more complex products such as OTC derivatives 
than for the relatively standard products which are currently covered. Authorities will need to 
                                                
9  See: ESMA (2015), “Final Report : the Extension of the Scope of Interoperability Arrangements”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  be  fully  aware  of  micro  and  macro-prudential  risks  when  assessing  such  links,  and  the 
additional risk control measures will come at a cost for CCPs and their clients. 
A second question which warrants attention is whether interoperability is likely to shake 
up, or even destabilise, the EU CCP landscape. 
Indeed,  the  EMIR  requirements  regarding  interoperability,  together  with  the  MiFID/MiFIR 
requirements concerning trading-venue access to CCPs, could have certain implications for 
the future shape of FMIs in Europe. One of the issues that should be closely watched is how 
interoperability might contribute to increasing competition in the CCP landscape, and what 
effects this might have on the structure of the market. Doubts have long been raised within 
the  industry  as  to  whether  the  high  number  of  CCPs  currently  established  in  the  EU  is 
sustainable. A future drive towards consolidation in certain asset classes cannot be ruled out 
– although, like most market-driven dynamics, it is difficult to predict what exactly will happen 
in  the  future.  Enhanced  competition  in  the  FMI  sector  can  deliver  lower  costs  and  more 
efficiency for end users and the real economy. 
It  is  sometimes  argued  that  excessive  competition  among  CCPs  can  have  short-term 
destabilising effects by undermining their ability to build up resilience and risk management 
capacity.  This  argument  is  however  not  consistent  with  the  expectation  which  underlies 
current regulatory thinking that social benefits, such as innovation and incentives for sound 
risk management, will arise from CCPs remaining for-profit entities. That said, authorities and 
market participants will need to closely monitor market dynamics and ensure they do not lead 
to adverse consequences in terms of financial stability, such as a “race to the bottom” over 
risk management standards. 
Third,  I  believe  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  why  EU  CCPs  have  not  been  more  active in 
developing interoperability arrangements. 
The EMIR provisions were designed in part to incentivise the establishment of interoperability 
arrangements,  yet  no  new  links  have  been  established  since  the  entry  into  force  of  the 
Regulation.  This  is  a  somewhat  surprising  development  when  one  considers  the  obvious 
efficiency gains that interoperability brings to participants as well as to CCPs themselves. I 
can  think  of  several  potential  explanations  for this  state  of  affairs.  First,  clearing  members 
may not yet have fully grasped the potential benefits they would reap from widespread CCP 
interoperability:  as  I  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  interoperability  is  a  relatively  new 
phenomenon in the CCP landscape, and it may take some years for market participants to 
seize  all  that  EMIR  has  to  offer  in  terms  of  incentivising  interoperability.  Another  possible 
explanation could be that EU CCPs are still “processing” the implementation of EMIR: over 
the  last  two  years,  they  have  been  required  to  go  through  a  comprehensive  authorisation 
phase, and have had to adapt to a demanding new regulatory environment. We may see an 
uptake  in  the  establishment  of  interoperability  arrangements  now  that  these  regulatory 
hurdles have been cleared. I hope that the feedback received from market participants today 
will help us answer this question. 
One  final  question  which  comes  to  mind  is  whether  systemic  risk  is  adequately 
addressed in the current regulatory framework regarding interoperability. 
As I mentioned above, the collegial process established under EMIR ensures that multiple 
regulatory perspectives are captured within the cooperative supervisory framework. Some of 
the  authorities  involved  in  the  supervision  of  interoperability  arrangements  bring  a  clear 
systemic risk perspective – this is namely the case for the central banks of issue of the most 
significant  currencies  cleared.  Therefore,  systemic  risk  concerns  are  by  no  means 
overlooked  in  the  supervisory  process,  as  it  now  stands.  However,  on  certain  specific 
aspects,  the  role  of  macro-prudential  authorities  could  be  further  enhanced.  The  ESRB’s 
forthcoming  report  to  the  Commission  on  the  systemic  risk  implications  of  interoperability 
arrangements will certainly make some relevant proposals in this regard. To inform this work, 
data availability will be of the essence. Besides the transparency provided by the new CPMI-
IOSCO public quantitative disclosure standards, the joint analytical work recently started by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  scope 
in  various  asset  classes,  and 
the FSB, BCBS and CPMI-IOSCO on CCP interdependency will shed more light on cross-
exposures  and  contagion  channels  between  CCPs  and  their  clearing  members,  including 
potentially  through  interoperability.  Understanding  the  multiple  interdependencies  between 
CCPs  and  their  participants  will  be  an  important  factor  in  designing  appropriate  crisis 
management and resolution mechanisms, including for interoperability. Going forward, trade 
repository  data  collected  under  EMIR  may  be  another  important  source  of  information  for 
authorities,  and  may  help  shed  light  on  certain  industry  dynamics,  such  as  the  extent  of 
cross-CCP  participation 
for  expanding 
interoperability. 
Allow me to say a few words in conclusion. I have tried to present some of the benefits 
and  challenges  I  would  see  from  the  continuing  implementation  of  CCP  interoperability. 
Since  the  early  days  of  the  Giovanni  Group,  authorities  have  kept  their  focus  on  financial 
markets  integration,  but at  the  same  time  they  have  given  increasing  attention  to financial 
stability concerns. CCP interoperability can play an important role to foster the first objective. 
Nonetheless, we should not underestimate the complexity and the potential risks involved in 
establishing  and  supervising  interoperability  arrangements,  particularly  if  interoperability 
spreads to new asset classes in future. I am confident that the collective supervisory process 
established under EMIR, which allows all relevant authorities to contribute to the monitoring 
of risks, can meet these challenges. 
The ongoing EMIR review process, as well as the upcoming report on the systemic risk and 
cost implications of interoperability arrangements, to be delivered by the Commission to the 
European Parliament and Council, will provide us with an opportunity to discuss these issues 
and think about potential enhancements to the current regulatory framework. The ECB and 
the Eurosystem look forward to contributing to these discussions. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
