  Patrick Njoroge: Entrepreneurial initiatives in Kenya 
Speech by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 4th Annual Citi 
Micro-Entrepreneurship Awards (CMA), Nairobi, 27 October 2015. 
 I  am  delighted  to  join  you  today  for  this  important  celebration,  the  4th  Annual  Citi  Micro-
Entrepreneurship  Awards  (CMA).  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  of  the  Awards 
ceremony, Citibank N.A. Kenya, and the Association of Microfinance Institutions (AMFI), for 
providing an appropriate platform to celebrate extraordinary entrepreneurs in Kenya. I also 
take this opportunity to appreciate all Award nominees and participants of this event. You are 
all winners as the efforts you individually and collectively make in providing services to your 
fellow citizens are hallmarks of outstanding service. 
I commend Citibank for the concept of the CMA awards, and for consistency in hosting them. 
The objectives of the Awards are noteworthy – not just celebrating innovative contributions of 
micro-entrepreneurs in Kenya, but also showcasing the effective role that microfinance plays 
in supporting poverty alleviation, social empowerment and economic development within the 
broader context of financial inclusion. 
Financial inclusion continues to play a critical role in the global development agenda given 
that over half of the world adult population does not have access to basic financial services, 
and is essential for developing strong financial institutions, reducing poverty, and financing 
broader  economic  development.  In  fact,  there  is  ample  evidence  that  financial  inclusion  is 
key  in  reducing  the  economic  vulnerability  of  households,  promoting  economic  growth, 
alleviating poverty and improving the quality of peoples’ lives. The extraordinary narratives 
shared  today  confirm  this.  I  am  privileged  to  have  heard  the  wonderful  success  stories  of 
transformative growth and development that are being feted today. 
With  regard  to  micro-small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (MSME’s),  there  is  a  direct 
correlation  between  MSME  development  and  financial  inclusion  efforts.  MSMEs  represent 
over 90 percent of private business and contribute more than 50 percent of employment and 
of GDP in most African countries1. Nevertheless, MSMEs face several challenges, including 
access to finance,  which  is  often  considered the  most  significant  constraint for this  sector. 
For  instance,  the World  Bank  Enterprise  Surveys  indicate  that  41  percent  of  SMEs  in  low 
income  countries  report  that  access  to  finance  is  a  major  constraint  to  their  growth  and 
development, compared with 30 percent in middle-income countries, and only 15 percent in 
high-income countries.2 
These constraints are not absent in Kenya despite the increased lending to SMEs. A recent 
study  [by  Financial  Sector  Deepening  Trust  Kenya  (FSD  Kenya)  and  the  World  Bank  in 
collaboration with the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK)] has established that the share of lending 
to SMEs by Kenyan banks has grown over the last few years, from 19.5 percent of the total 
loan portfolio in 2009, to 23.4 percent of the total loan portfolio in December 2013. 
This increase is rather impressive, especially when compared to SME lending in other Sub-
Saharan African economies like Nigeria (SME lending is 5 percent), South Africa (8 percent), 
Rwanda (17 percent) and Tanzania (14 percent). However a lot more needs to be done to 
address the long-standing constraint of financing of MSMEs. 
An important channel in Kenya is the microfinance industry, which is playing a larger role in 
deepening  the  financial  markets,  expanding  access  to  affordable  and  appropriate  financial 
                                                
1  http://www.afdb.org/en/topics-and-sectors/sectors/private-sector/activities/. 
2  http://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2013/04/05/msme-finance-expanding-opportunities-and-creating-jobs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   services  and  products  to  MSMEs  and  low  income  households.  In  recognition  of  this,  the 
Central Bank has initiated and supported numerous reforms to develop a robust and effective 
microfinance  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  supports  innovations  to 
enhance the development of MSME financing and growth, and boost overall inclusion. This is 
part  of  CBK  efforts  towards  intentionally  developing  an  all-inclusive  financial  system  that 
reduces the impediments to accessing finance for majority of Kenyans. 
The operationalisation of the Microfinance Act in 2008 and subsequent amendments over the 
years point to game changing efforts to providing an enabling environment for microfinance 
banks to grow and develop. Through these efforts, microfinance banks have been able to: 
• 
Expand  their  footprints  to  the  remote  and  far  flung  parts  of  the  country  using 
innovative delivery channels and payment systems; 
Enhance  the  soundness  of  their  credit  appraisals  through  participation  in  credit 
information sharing mechanism; 
Ensure financial integrity; and, 
Offer an expanded and diversified product range to better serve their clients. 
• 
• 
These  initiatives  and  reforms  have  led  to  an  increase  and  diversification  of  the  financial 
sector  infrastructure  and  innovative  instruments  targeting  the  MSMEs  and  the  lower 
segments of the population. Microfinance banks have been able to expand their reach and 
depth cost effectively while ensuring the stability and soundness of the financial system. 
As  the  microfinance  sector  in  Kenya  continues  to  grow  and  empower  more  micro-
entrepreneurs  across  Kenya,  it  is  the  success  stories  behind  the  numbers  that  prove  the 
power of access to finance to transform and improve lives. It is a pleasure to see tangible 
proof that our collective public and private sector efforts have a powerful impact on Kenyan 
households  and  MSMEs.  Therefore,  as  we  celebrate 
the  4th  Annual  Citi  Micro-
Entrepreneurship Award winners today, we celebrate efforts made by the key players in the 
financial sector in enhancing inclusive financial systems to serve Kenyans with appropriate 
and sustainable financial services. 
In closing, let me salute all the worthy award winners. The recognition today should provide 
further impetus to deepen your commitment in your entrepreneurial initiatives. 
Thank you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
