   Janet L Yellen: Economic outlook 
Testimony by Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 3 December 
2015. 
 Chairman Coats, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify 
before you today. In my remarks I will discuss the current economic outlook before turning to monetary policy. 
The economic outlook 
The U.S. economy has recovered substantially since the Great Recession. The unemployment 
rate, which peaked at 10 percent in October 2009, declined to 5 percent in October of this year. 
At that level, the unemployment rate is near the median of Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) participants’ most recent estimates of its longer-run normal level. The economy has 
created  about  13  million  jobs  since  the  low  point  for  employment  in  early  2010,  and  total 
nonfarm payrolls are now almost 4-1/2 million higher than just prior to the recession. Most 
recently, after a couple of months of relatively modest payroll growth, employers added an 
estimated 271,000 jobs in October. This increase brought the average monthly gain since June 
to about 195,000 – close to the monthly pace of around 210,000 in the first half of the year and 
still sufficient to be consistent with continued improvement in the labor market. 
At the same time that the labor market has improved, U.S. economic output – as measured by 
inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP), or real GDP – has increased at a moderate 
pace, on balance, during the expansion. Over the first three quarters of this year, real GDP is 
currently estimated to have advanced at an annual rate of 2-1/4 percent, close to its average 
pace over the previous five years. Many economic forecasters expect growth roughly along 
those same lines in the fourth quarter. 
Growth this year has been held down by weak net exports, which have subtracted more than 
1/2 percentage point, on average, from the annual rate of real GDP growth over the past three 
quarters. Foreign economic growth has slowed, damping increases in U.S. exports, and the 
U.S. dollar has appreciated substantially since the middle of last year, making our exports 
more expensive and imported goods cheaper. 
By contrast, total real private domestic final purchases (PDFP) – which includes household 
spending,  business  fixed  investment,  and  residential  investment,  and  currently  represents 
about 85 percent of aggregate spending – has increased at an annual rate of 3 percent this 
year, significantly faster than real GDP. Household spending growth has been particularly solid 
in 2015, with purchases of new motor vehicles especially strong. Job growth has bolstered 
household income, and lower energy prices have left consumers with more to spend on other 
goods and services. Increases in home values and stock market prices in recent years, along 
with reductions in debt, have pushed up the net worth of households, which also supports 
consumer spending. Finally, interest rates for borrowers remain low, due in part to the FOMC’s 
accommodative monetary policy, and these low rates appear to have been especially relevant 
for consumers considering the purchase of durable goods. 
Other  components  of  PDFP,  including  residential  and  business  investment,  have  also 
advanced this year. Indeed, gains in real residential investment spending have been faster so 
far this year than last year, although the level of new residential construction still remains fairly 
low. And outside of the drilling and mining sector, where lower oil prices have led to substantial 
cuts in outlays for new structures, business investment spending has posted moderate gains. 
Turning to inflation, it continues to run below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. 
Overall consumer price inflation – as measured by the change in the price index for personal 
consumption  expenditures  –  was  only  1/4  percent  over  the  12  months  ending  in  October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
However, this number largely reflects the sharp fall in crude oil prices since the summer of 
2014.  Because  food  and  energy  prices  are  volatile,  it  is  often  helpful  to  look  at  inflation 
excluding those two categories – known as core inflation – which is typically a better indicator 
of future overall inflation than recent readings of headline inflation. But core inflation – which 
ran at 1-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in October – is also well below our 2 percent 
objective,  partly  reflecting  the  appreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  which  has  pushed  down  the 
prices of imported goods, placing temporary downward pressure on inflation. Even after taking 
account of this effect, however, inflation has been running somewhat below our objective. 
Let me now turn to where I see the economy is likely headed over the next several years. To 
summarize, I anticipate continued economic growth at a moderate pace that will be sufficient 
to generate additional increases in employment and a rise in inflation to our 2 percent objective. 
Although the economic outlook, as always, is uncertain, I currently see the risks to the outlook 
for economic activity and the labor market as very close to balanced. 
Regarding U.S. inflation, I anticipate that the drag due to the large declines in prices for crude 
oil  and  imports  over the  past  year  and  a  half  will  diminish  next  year. With  less  downward 
pressure on inflation from these factors and some upward pressure from a further tightening 
in U.S. labor and product markets, I expect inflation to move up to the FOMC’s 2 percent 
objective over the next few years. Of course, inflation expectations play an important role in 
the inflation process, and my forecast of a return to our 2 percent objective over the medium 
term  relies  on  a  judgment  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  reasonably  well 
anchored. 
Monetary policy 
Let me now turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy. In the policy 
statement issued after its October meeting, the FOMC reaffirmed its judgment that it would be 
appropriate to increase the target range for the federal funds rate when we had seen some 
further improvement in the labor market and were reasonably confident that inflation would 
move  back to the  Committee’s  2  percent  objective  over  the medium term. That  initial  rate 
increase would reflect the Committee’s judgment, based on a range of indicators, that the 
economy  would  continue  to  grow  at  a  pace  sufficient  to  generate  further  labor  market 
improvement  and  a  return  of  inflation  to  2  percent,  even  following  the  reduction  in  policy 
accommodation. As I have already noted, I currently judge that U.S. economic growth is likely 
to be sufficient over the next year or two to result in further improvement in the labor market. 
Ongoing  gains  in  the  labor  market,  coupled  with  my  judgment  that  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain reasonably well anchored, serve to bolster my confidence in a return of 
inflation to 2 percent as the disinflationary effects of declines in energy and import prices wane. 
Committee participants recognize that the future course of the economy is uncertain, and we 
take account of both the upside and downside risks around our projections when judging the 
appropriate stance of monetary policy. In particular, recent monetary policy decisions have 
reflected our recognition that, with the federal funds rate near zero, we can respond more 
readily to upside surprises to inflation, economic growth, and employment than to downside 
shocks. This asymmetry suggests that it is appropriate to be more cautious in raising our target 
for the federal funds rate than would be the case if short-term nominal interest rates were 
appreciably above zero. Reflecting these concerns, we have maintained our current policy 
stance even as the labor market has improved appreciably. 
However, we must also take into account the well-documented lags in the effects of monetary 
policy. Were the FOMC to delay the start of policy normalization for too long, we would likely 
end  up  having  to  tighten  policy  relatively  abruptly  to  keep  the  economy  from  significantly 
overshooting  both  of  our  goals.  Such  an  abrupt  tightening  would  risk  disrupting  financial 
markets and perhaps even inadvertently push the economy into recession. Moreover, holding 
the federal funds rate at its current level for too long could also encourage excessive risk-
taking and thus undermine financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
On balance, economic and financial information received since our October meeting has been 
consistent with our expectation of continued improvement in the labor market. And, as I have 
noted,  continuing  improvement  in  the  labor  market  helps  strengthen  our  confidence  that 
inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. That said, between 
today and the next FOMC meeting, we will receive additional data that bear on the economic 
outlook. These data include a range of indicators regarding the labor market, inflation, and 
economic activity. When my colleagues and I meet, we will assess all of the available data and 
their implications for the economic outlook in making our policy decision. 
As you know, there has been considerable focus on the first increase in the federal funds rate 
after nearly seven years in which that rate was at its effective lower bound. We have tried to 
be as clear as possible about the considerations that will affect that decision. Of course, even 
after the initial increase in the federal funds rate, monetary policy will remain accommodative. 
And  it  bears  emphasizing  that  what  matters  for  the  economic  outlook  are  expectations 
concerning the path of the federal funds rate over time: It is those expectations that affect 
financial conditions and thereby influence spending and investment decisions. In this regard, 
the  Committee  anticipates  that  even  after  employment  and  inflation  are  near  mandate-
consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal 
funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. 
Summary 
In closing, the economy has come a long way toward the FOMC’s objectives of maximum 
employment and price stability. When the Committee begins to normalize the stance of policy, 
doing so will be a testament, also, to how far our economy has come in recovering from the 
effects of the financial crisis and the Great Recession. In that sense, it is a day that I expect 
we all are looking forward to. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
