   Andrew Bailey: Governance and the role of Boards 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Westminster 
Business Forum, London, 3 November 2015. 
 It is a pleasure to be speaking at the Westminster Business Forum again. I am going to use 
my time this morning to set out some thoughts on how at the PRA we are thinking about the 
role of governance and Boards in the prudential supervision of deposit takers, insurers and 
major investment firms. We work very closely with Boards, more so than in past approaches 
to  prudential  regulation,  and  I  find  it  a  very  important,  constructive  and  informative 
engagement. 
There is a lot of focus at present on the Senior Managers and Certification Regime which will 
be implemented by next March, and on the proposal before Parliament to change one element 
of the test, namely the Presumption of Responsibility. This morning I am going to focus on the 
substance that underpins the regime. Also, I am not for the most part going to comment on the 
issue of diversity in Board membership, but not because I think it is unimportant, far from it.  
The best place to start is the objectives given by Parliament to the PRA, namely the safety and 
soundness  of  firms  that  we  supervise,  the  protection  of  insurance  policyholders  and  our 
secondary objective in respect of competition, best described as requiring us to act in respect 
of the implications for competition of our own actions and inactions but only to the extent that 
we are not undermining our primary objectives.  
At the heart of what we do in the PRA is risk assessment. Understanding how firms take and 
manage risk, the controls they have and the quality of risk management, is at the heart of the 
job of a prudential supervisor. That’s what we do every day, and the standards of this work 
have been raised extensively since the crisis, which was very necessary. I never tire of saying 
that the PRA is a judgement-based supervisor, by which I mean the application of judgement 
against a framework of rules and regulation. As Mark Carney said recently in the context of the 
European Union, from which the largest part of our framework of rules and regulations comes: 
- “Ensuring the Bank of England has the instruments necessary to achieve its financial stability 
objective will depend on the EU continuing to have regulations of the highest standards, which 
strike the appropriate balance between harmonisation and flexibility, and which accommodate 
necessary national responsibilities, including for supervision”. Narrow rules-based approaches 
to  regulation  create  inflexibility  and  can  be  easy  to  arbitrage.  The  sensible  application  of 
judgement involves looking at a situation from several angles, and employing forward-looking 
tools such as stress tests.  
For us, “judgement” is most certainly not a slogan. So judgement by whom, how, and to what 
end are reasonable questions to ask. I am going to place most emphasis today on the “by 
whom” question, but use that to illustrate the others. I want to consider the role of Boards, but 
in  the  broader  setting  of  three  groups  of  people:  Executive  Senior  Management  of  firms; 
Boards (with Non-Executives in the majority); and Supervisors.  
It is the job of senior Executives to exercise judgement on risks and returns on a day-to-day 
basis. I know that you could be confused to hear me say this given some of the things that are 
written about financial regulation, but we want firms to earn sustained and thus sustainable 
returns  through  the  exercise  of good  business judgement.  Senior  Executives  exercise  that 
judgement  within  frameworks  set  by,  and  overseen  by,  their  Boards,  namely  the  overall 
strategy,  the  risk  appetite  and  assessment  frameworks  and  the  oversight  of  controls  and 
compliance.  As  supervisors  we  apply  our  judgement  against  our  framework  of  rules  and 
regulations, the distinctive feature of which is that they represent public policy objectives and 
thus the public good, which is the overall objective of the Bank of England.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   I want now to focus on the role of Boards. They must be able to set a strategy and risk appetite 
and oversee implementation, but they do not substitute for the role of the Executive. Likewise, 
supervisors challenge hard and can ask for changes, but they do not substitute for the Board 
or the Executive.  
The recent past has not been an easy story in this area. It is very understandable that in the 
wake of the financial crisis, there was hard questioning of the role of Senior Executives and of 
Boards. Change in the approach of supervision to approving senior managers was needed. It 
is perhaps natural given the scale of the shock, that some change went too far or not in the 
best direction. I think there was a rebound in the direction of wanting all Non-Executive Board 
members to have technical skills of a similar sort, and thus deeper technical knowledge of the 
business. But that is the job of an Executive. When I came back into supervision in 2011, a 
senior  insurer  told  me  that  in  the  supervisory  interview  process  at  appointment  all  his 
prospective  NEDs  were  being  tested  on  whether  they  understood  the  mathematical 
underpinnings of a “Gaussian Copula”. I could not verify this story, but it would be a mistake 
to stock a Board full of people chosen for their expertise in probability theory and nor would 
that Board be diverse.  
I have to say that this is not an undisputed statement, because I told this story at a general 
business event and someone took me to task that every member of an insurance board should 
be fluent in the theory of a Copula. To be clear, we do not expect Copula fluency for all.  
But the moral of the story is that there is not a strong consensus on how to set the expectations 
of Boards so that they can perform their role. We may at times have gone too far in the direction 
of  individual  technical  knowledge,  and  by  the  way  it  was  the  Copula  story  and  others  that 
convinced me to stop interviewing people taking up standard NED positions. 
The PRA has close contact with many Boards, so as supervisors what do we expect of Boards? 
Three things stand out for me:- 
1. 
we expect Boards to exercise good judgment in overseeing the running of the firm 
and to do so on a forward-looking basis; 
that judgement is improved by good constructive challenge from Non-Executives. A 
firm’s culture should promote discussion, debate and honest challenge. The alarm 
bells ring for us when we are told that the CEO or other Senior Executives are very 
sensitive to challenge; 
so we as supervisors depend on Non-Executives, under the leadership of the Chair, 
to challenge the Executive in all aspects of the firm’s strategy, which includes the 
viability and sustainability of the business model and the establishment, maintenance 
and use of the risk appetite and management framework. We also of course rely on 
the Non-Executives to mentor and coach the Executives and balancing this with the 
essential ability to challenge is a vital component of an effective Board.  
2. 
3. 
In the terms of the Senior Managers Regime, this frames the responsibility of Boards. But, as 
many Board members have said to me, if only it was that simple, but you have made it so 
fiendishly  complicated.  Well,  actually  we  didn’t  make  it  fiendishly  complicated,  finance  has 
become that way itself – we didn’t invent exotic derivatives. There are those who think the 
answer  is  to  make  finance  less  complicated,  but  in  the  real  world  there  are  benefits  to 
innovation if risk management is effective. 
So, how do we square the responsibilities with the complexity? Not by drowning in complexity, 
or by doing a Canute and trying to tell it to go away. For Boards it means having a certain level 
of understanding, not at the level of the maths of a Copula. The key challenge for all of us is 
to  be  able  to  boil  the  complexity  down  to  understand  what  are  the  key  drivers  –  which 
judgements are likely to matter when bad things happen in the tail of the distribution of risks.  
This is a description of one of the hardest things in many walks of life – how to explain complex 
things in simple terms. In the Bank of England, it is a challenge we face regularly in terms of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   key elements of model design; 
significant assumptions and expert judgements; 
key sensitivities; and 
significant limitations and uncertainty in the model. 
where is the model expected to work well; 
in what circumstances is it likely to break down; 
is the overall model output credible; 
what “moves the dial” in terms of key assumptions or judgements; and 
are those assumptions and judgements reasonable? 
explaining complex areas of public policy – it’s the same issue for our judgements on monetary 
policy.  
So, let me put forward a proposition for Boards. It is the job of the Executive to be able to 
explain in simple and transparent terms these complex matters to Non-Executives. In doing 
so, you should understand the uncertainty around judgements, in what circumstances they 
could  be  wrong,  and  how  there  can  reasonably  be  different  ways  to  measure  things  like 
liquidity. Non-Executives should not be left to find the answers for themselves, and they should 
not feel that they have to do so out of a lack of sufficient confidence in what they are being 
told. In other words, they should not be pointed towards the haystack with warm wishes for the 
search ahead.  
Let me give an illustration of this in a highly topical area for banks and insurers, internal risk 
models. What does a Board need to understand? Try the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
To restate, the challenge is to reduce complexity to simplicity, so that Board members feel that 
they understand: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Non-Executives should be put in a position to possess a general understanding of the model 
and  meet  these  expectations  without  detailed  technical  knowledge.  That’s  the  job  of  the 
Executive,  to  explain  complexity,  provide  good  Management  Information  (to  serve  up  the 
needle,  to  continue  the  saying)  and  enable  challenge  and  thus  accountability.  If  Non-
Executives do not feel that they can meet these expectations, they should demand the time 
and support to enable them to do so, rather than head off for the haystack. 
I want to conclude by putting this into a broader context of governance. I am sympathetic to 
the view that the demands on Non-Executives have risen to the point where it is time to stand 
back and take stock and find ways to improve the approach. There are three answers that I 
would  rule  out:  the  answer  is  not  to  go  back  to  the  good  old  days,  because  viewed  with 
hindsight they don’t look that good; the answer is not to wish that finance should be simpler, 
something that is too idealistic to have relevance to today’s challenge; and the answer is not 
to repeal the duty of responsibility as it will apply to the Chairs of Boards and Board committees 
because as quite a few have said to me, “what’s all the fuss, this is just a description of what 
we are here to do.” 
So,  what might  the  answer  be?  In  the  work that  we  are  doing  at  the  PRA  to  overhaul  our 
approach to supervision of governance in firms as it relates to our statutory objectives, we want 
to help to get this issue on the table and make real progress. My hunch, as I have explained 
today,  is  that  one  answer  lies  in  the  approach  by  which  Non-Executives  are  informed  by 
Executives about firms and thus for Executives to enable rigorous challenge and to be given 
credit for doing so even where the consequences will be sometimes uncomfortable. We will 
always be cautious of Executives who seem to see Non-Executives as some form of threat; 
the really effective Executives are those who see their Non-Executive colleagues’ experience 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   and knowledge as a means of improving the effectiveness of the Board’s judgement through 
constructive support and challenge.  
One thing is clear in our work, it is time to take stock on this issue. Thank you.  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
