   Fritz Zurbrügg: Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
10 December 2015. 
 In my remarks, I will start with an analysis of the situation at the Swiss banks from a financial 
stability perspective, looking at both the big banks and the domestically focused banks. I will 
then finish with some information on the new banknote series. 
Big banks 
Since the publication of our Financial Stability Report in June, the two Swiss big banks have 
improved their capital situation further. The improvement was especially pronounced at Credit 
Suisse,  following  a  capital  increase.  The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  acknowledges  the 
progress made by both big banks in this area. However, a further strengthening of the leverage 
ratio in particular is necessary. 
Strengthening the leverage ratio – and hence resilience – will be achieved by means of the 
measures recently decided upon by the Federal Council as part of the revised ‘too big to fail’ 
regulations. The substantially increased leverage ratio requirements will put Switzerland back 
among the international leaders in this regard. Given that the ‘too big to fail’ issue is particularly 
pronounced  in  Switzerland  compared  to  other  countries,  these  measures  are,  in  our  view, 
essential. The SNB therefore welcomes the revision of the ‘too big to fail’ regulations as a 
crucial step in the overall process of resolving the ‘too big to fail’ issue in Switzerland. It is very 
important for our country that a lasting solution be found. The SNB will continue to play an 
active role in this endeavour and in the implementation of the approved measures. 
In the process of designing and calibrating the revised capital requirements, care was taken to 
retain the complementarity and interplay between risk-weighted requirements and leverage 
ratio  requirements.  Risk-weighted  requirements  should  guide  economic  decision-making, 
while the leverage ratio should serve as a backstop. The leverage ratio requirement thereby 
takes into account the fact that the models used for risk-weighting are not perfect and do not 
always capture all risks accurately. 
To ensure this complementarity is also retained in the future, the Federal Council has already 
factored in the expected reforms by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision with regard 
to risk-weighted capital requirements. Overall, these reforms are likely to result in an increase 
in risk-weighted assets and, hence, to a balance between the leverage ratio and risk-weighted 
requirements  in  Switzerland.  The  SNB  will  actively  support  the  finalisation  of  the  Basel 
Committee’s reforms as planned and the publication of these reforms by the end of 2016. 
In addition to these measures on capital requirements, the SNB still considers it necessary for 
the  big  banks to  increase  their transparency  with  regard  to their risk-weighted  assets. The 
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA) has called on the banks to disclose the 
differences  between  calculations  using  the  model-based  and  standardised  approaches.  At 
international level, the aforementioned Basel Committee reforms will likewise result in higher 
requirements in terms of bank transparency. 
Domestically focused banks 
I would now like to turn to the situation of the domestically focused banks. For these banks, 
developments on the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets still represent the 
greatest source of risk. Over the last six months, momentum on these markets has again eased 
slightly overall. Growth in mortgage volumes and prices for owner-occupied residential real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   estate  has  been  roughly  in  line  with  fundamentals.  As  a  result,  imbalances  on  the  Swiss 
mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  for  owner-occupied  residential  property  have  remained 
unchanged since the last news conference. 
From a financial stability perspective, this is a welcome development. The measures taken to 
date to contain the risks on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets appear to be having 
an  effect.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  for  instance,  has  contributed  not  only  to 
strengthening the resilience of the Swiss banking sector, but also – together with the other 
measures taken, such as the revision of the self-regulation rules – to reducing momentum. 
However, it is still too early to sound the all-clear. For one thing, interest rates continue to be 
exceptionally low. For another, the residential investment property market, in contrast to the 
owner-occupied  segment,  shows  no  sign  of  cooling.  Various  indicators  suggest  that  yields 
have fallen further from a low level, and that prices have risen once again. Moreover, there are 
isolated  signs  that  risk  appetite  among  the  domestically  focused  banks  has,  if  anything, 
increased again over the last six months. For example, affordability risk and direct interest rate 
risk at domestically focused banks have risen once more. 
The  SNB  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  on  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets 
closely. Accordingly, it will regularly reassess the need for an adjustment of the countercyclical 
capital buffer. 
Announcement of issue date 
I  would  like  to  round  up  my  speech  with  a  few  remarks  on  the  new  banknote  series.  On 
14 August  2015,  the  SNB  announced  that  it  would  begin  issuing  the  new  Swiss  banknote 
series in April 2016. The first denomination to be released will be the 50-franc note. Today, we 
can announce the exact issue date. The new 50-franc note will be presented to the public for 
the first time at a news conference on 6 April 2016, and will first be issued on Tuesday, 12 April 
2016. The new notes will be put into circulation continuously from that date onwards. A large-
scale information campaign will inform the general public about the new note and on ways to 
check its authenticity. The remaining banknotes in the series will be issued subsequently at 
half-yearly or yearly intervals. The SNB will announce each new issue date well in advance. 
The current eighth banknote series will continue to be legal tender until further notice. The date 
on which the current series is to be withdrawn from circulation will also be announced well in 
advance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
