   François Groepe: The challenges for domestic monetary policy amid US 
policy normalisation 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Bank of America-Merrill Lynch Investor Conference, Johannesburg, 27 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. I am grateful to the Bank of America-Merrill Lynch for 
the invitation to address this fourth edition of their annual Fixed Income Investor Conference. 
I think that the subject of my speech is a matter that is widely debated. In my address today I 
will highlight the different channels through which United States (US) monetary policy shifts 
can affect South Africa’s economic, price and financial variables, and how this is likely to impact 
on domestic monetary policy. 
The global rate environment may be changing 
There is no denying the impact that the prolonged period of near-zero US short-term interest 
rates has had on global economies and financial markets. The target for the federal funds rate 
has now been at zero to a quarter of a per cent for as long as seven years. Since the end of 
the Second World War, episodes of low US interest rates had not seen rates fall so low for 
such a long period. Furthermore, the policy response to the Fed was not limited to a near-zero 
Fed funds target: sizeable purchases of government and agency debt by the central bank, 
together with “forward guidance” regarding the future path of interest rates, were implemented 
with  the  stated  aim  of  lowering  interest  rates  across  the  whole  yield  curve.  These 
unconventional policy tools were also not limited to the US. Over time, central banks in the 
eurozone, Japan and the United Kingdom, among others, moved to a combination of very low 
policy rates and asset purchases. 
The extent to which these measures reduced long-term interest rates in advanced economies 
and encouraged capital flows towards emerging markets remains a point of debate. Other 
factors no doubt were at work. These include moderating inflation and slower potential growth 
in  the  developed  world  and,  in  the  immediate  years  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  more 
attractive fundamentals in emerging countries. Nonetheless, various academic studies suggest 
that unconventional tools, via their effect on term premiums, may have depressed 10-year US 
yields by as much as 50 to 100 basis points.1 As for capital flows to emerging markets, it may 
be no surprise that the era of very accommodative policy in the developed world coincided 
(according to data of the Institute of International Finance) with inflows in excess of US$ 1 
trillion per year from 2010 to 2014, a level that had only been exceeded once before the global 
financial crisis.2 
This backdrop, however is likely to change soon. The Fed’s FOMC has, of late, repeatedly 
expressed its confidence in meeting its dual target of full employment and a return of inflation 
towards its targeted levels. Addressing the House of Representatives on 4 November, Chair 
Janet Yellen remarked that “if we were to move, say in December, it would be based on an 
expectation, which I believe is justified, that – with an improving labour market and transitory 
factors fading – inflation will move up to 2 per cent.” In the wake of recent Fed communication 
                                                
1   We can refer, among others, to “The macroeconomic effects of the Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary 
policies” by Eric M Engen, Thomas T Laubach and David Reifschneider, Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2015–005, Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board, 2015. 
2   See “Capital flows to emerging markets”, Institute of International Finance, 1 October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
and US labour market data, financial market participants are now discounting an approximate 
65 per cent probability of a hike in the Fed funds future on 16 December. By the end of next 
year,  market  participants  see  Fed  funds  around  0,75  to  1,00  per  cent,  while  the  median 
projection of FOMC members currently lies at 1,4 per cent. 
Why does it matter for South Africa? 
On its own, a slow and gradual normalisation of US monetary policy need not be negative for 
South Africa, or indeed for the emerging world as a whole. The reasoning being that if the Fed 
is  considering  a  “lift-off”  in  its  policy  rate,  it  is  because  in  their  view  the  US  economy  has 
recovered sufficiently from the legacies of the global financial crisis, and that it can continue 
growing  at  a  steady  and  sustainable  pace  without  further  need  for  unusually  large 
accommodation. Secondly, the normalisation path is likely to be very gradual. 
Nonetheless, because of the role that US policy played in encouraging inflows to emerging 
markets in particular and “risky” assets in general, many people are awaiting the prospective 
US rate “lift-off” with elevated nervousness. Volatility has risen across a broad range of assets; 
the rand, together with other major emerging currencies, has come under pressure; and some 
observers have asked the question whether the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) needs 
to “shadow”, or even pre-empt the Fed in raising interest rates. 
Before I go more into detail on that subject, let me repeat an important point: the SARB does 
not  have  an  exchange  rate  target;  it  has  an  inflation  target.  Furthermore,  both  theory  and 
experience do show that in the case of the latter, domestic interest rates need not respond to 
policy rate changes in the US as they would in the event of a dollar peg. If one targets the 
dollar exchange rate, the interest rate differential with the US is key to sustaining the target. 
However, if one targets inflation, the role of US rates becomes indirect. 
In fact, one could see two main reasons why a rise in US interest rates could justify a similar 
move in a country like South Africa: first, if the US move reflects an inflationary acceleration in 
the US economy that looks set to be replicated in South Africa; and second, if the US rate 
increase affects capital flows to South Africa to the point that the rand depreciates significantly 
and raises prospective domestic inflation. 
The first argument can be dismissed in the present situation. As I previously indicated, the Fed, 
if it begins to raise interest rates in the coming months, will not do so because of a strong, 
potentially inflationary acceleration in US gross domestic product (GDP) growth. It will do so 
to  ensure  sustained  US  growth  through  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation.  The  FOMC’s  median  projection  does  not  see  US  GDP  growth  deviating 
substantially from the current trend in the next two or three years, and most official and private 
forecasters share that view. 
In addition, historical experience seem to indicate that while major cycles in the US economy, 
including the last recession, influence those in South Africa, there is much less correlation 
between GDP trends in the two countries during moderate growth cycles, as is now the case. 
Therefor the “growth transmission channel” will have a limited role. 
“Push and pull” factors and portfolio flows 
The “capital flows” transmission channel is of much bigger concern at present. In recent years, 
a lot has been written about the “push and pull” factors that drove private capital flows, and in 
particular portfolio flows, from developed to emerging economies. On the  “push” side, as I 
alluded to earlier, the mix of very low policy rates, quantitative easing and forward guidance by 
key major central banks, including the Fed, created an incentive for large investment funds to 
“search for yield” in other destinations. On the “pull” side, in the first few years following the 
global  financial  crisis,  a  combination  of  rising  commodity  prices  and  a  stronger  economic 
recovery in emerging economies, relative to their advanced economy counterparts, enhanced 
the attractiveness of these countries as an investment destination. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Yet, just as some of the “push” factors look set to recede with the beginning of US monetary 
policy normalisation, the “pull” factors attracting capital towards emerging markets have been 
equally waning. The Reuters-CRB index of commodity prices has fallen by nearly 50 per cent 
since its peak in April 2011; in real terms, adjusted for US inflation, it is back to levels last seen 
in  2001.  Such  a  large-scale  adjustment,  unsurprisingly,  has  led  to  a  marked  slowdown  in 
commodities  exporters’  growth.  Yet,  even  those  emerging  countries  that  are  net  resource 
importers have experienced a loss of economic growth momentum, in part because of growing 
economic  and  financial  interconnections  within  the  developing  world.  In  2011,  the  growth 
differential between the emerging and developed world was as high as 4,6 percentage points; 
in 2015, according to International Monetary Fund (IMF) projections, it will be as low as 2,0 
percentage points, the narrowest gap in 15 years. 
International capital flow data are already highlighting the impact of these developments on 
cross-border funding. In a report released last month, the Institute of International Finance (IIF) 
projected that non-resident capital flows into emerging economies would fall to only US$548 
billion in 2015, down from US$1,305 billion two years ago, with bank lending and bond portfolio 
flows likely to account for the bulk of the decline. At the same time, the IIF projects that private 
residents  of  emerging  economies  will  increase  their  investments  in  the  developed  world, 
resulting in the developing world being a net exporter of capital for the first time since 1988.3 
The vulnerabilities of South Africa 
Recent experience indicates that South Africa is not immune to the risks I have just outlined. 
The rand has depreciated by around 17 per cent against the US dollar since the start of the 
year. Whilst the rand is not an exception, it is nonetheless underperforming, on average, its 
emerging-market peers. Indeed, despite some improvement over the past year or two, our 
current-account deficit still appears likely to remain elevated, at around 4,2 per cent of GDP in 
2015, and around 4,6 per cent next year. With the balance of foreign direct investment flows 
in deficit, on average, over the past year and a half, this means a continued reliance on portfolio 
inflows to ensure a smooth financing of the current-account deficit. 
Generally, portfolio flows into South African assets do not behave differently from those into 
other major emerging markets. IIF Portfolio Tracker data show a positive correlation of 56 per 
cent in the current year, and indeed since 2010, between net non-resident flows into South 
Africa  and  into  emerging  markets  as  a  whole.  Non-residents  became  net  sellers  of  South 
African bonds and equities in the last three months, coinciding with an underperformance of 
the domestic bond market and renewed rand weakness. We have noted that for emerging 
markets as a whole, there seems to be an increased correlation between the performance of 
local-currency bonds and the exchange rate. This observation also applies of late to South 
Africa, providing further evidence of the linkages between bond flows and currency trends. 
Furthermore, the same data also show that in the past few years net flows into South African 
securities have become increasingly sensitive to shifts in the US yield curve. Since the “taper 
tantrum” of May 2013, months when 10-year US Treasury yields rose by more than 10 basis 
points  coincided  with  net  non-resident  outflows  from  South  African  bonds,  whereas  other 
months saw net inflows. Equally, the period since May 2013 has seen, on balance, a negative 
correlation between US Treasury yields and the performance of the rand, in contrast to what 
prevailed in the immediate years after the recession. At that time, rising US yields may have 
been perceived as signalling a stronger global recovery. Nowadays they appear reflective of 
tighter global financial conditions, with negative implications for the South African rand. The 
risk of a negative “feedback loop” between US yields, outflows from domestic bonds and rand 
depreciation is therefore real. 
                                                
3   Op. cit., page 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The challenges of a slowing South African economy 
The prospective normalisation of monetary policy in the US, with the possible implications I 
have just described, comes at a challenging time for South Africa and for monetary policy. On 
the one hand, underlying inflation trends and inflation expectations are already relatively high, 
and the potential for sizable portfolio outflows and ensuing currency depreciation clearly poses 
an upside risk to the inflation outlook. On the other hand, the domestic economy is weak, and 
policy tightening could aggravate such weakness. 
There is indeed no denying that the South African economic growth outlook is more challenging 
than a year ago. At present, the SARB is projecting real economic growth of 1,4 per cent in 
2015  and  1,5  per  cent  in  2016.  At  the  time  of  the  November  2014  MPC  meeting,  these 
forecasts stood at 2,5 per cent and 2,9 per cent respectively. We are a far cry from the 4,8 
average growth rate seen in the five years prior to the global recession, or even from the growth 
rate that prevailed in its immediate aftermath, when it averaged 2,8 per cent between 2010 
and 2012. 
Adding to the challenge for monetary policymakers is that such a slowdown in growth reflects 
a mix of structural as well as cyclical factors. These include slowing growth in some of South 
Africa’s major trading partners, such as China; the negative shock from falling terms of trade; 
and the moderate rise in the tax burden that has weighed on disposable income growth and, 
especially  in  the  last  few  quarters,  consumer  demand.  These  developments,  coupled  with 
domestic  constraints  such  as  reduced  and  uncertain  power  supplies,  labour  market 
disruptions, and relatively high transportation and logistics costs, have in turn undermined the 
supply side of the economy. In particular, they constrained private-sector fixed investment, 
which measured 13 per cent of GDP on average in the first half of this year, down from a peak 
of 15,4 per cent just before the 2008–09 recession. 
The SARB estimates that short-term potential real GDP growth in South Africa has slowed to 
1,8 per cent this year, from an estimated pace of 3,25 per cent around 2010. Hence, the country 
probably has a narrower negative output gap than was assumed a few years ago. Still, some 
slack persists in the South African economy, a pattern that is confirmed by other indicators 
such as capacity utilisation in manufacturing, which has actually been declining throughout the 
current  year.  Under  normal  circumstances,  one  would  expect  such  slack  to  generate 
disinflationary pressures and call for an accommodative monetary policy stance to close the 
output gap. This is particularly the case in situations where fiscal policy is constrained, because 
of rising debt levels, in its ability to support the economy, as is currently the case in South 
Africa. 
However, monetary policy has already been accommodative for several years, at least judging 
by the level of real short-term interest rates, which remains unusually low. Furthermore, the 
impact  of  such  accommodation  has  not  been felt  as much  as  previous cycles  would  have 
suggested. In addition to the absence of demand pressures, the relatively subdued growth in 
money and credit extension, and the lack of significant gains in property prices over the past 
few years, suggest a lack of appetite among private agents for new borrowing. Most probably, 
the elevated degree of households’ leveraging at the time of the recession has acted as a 
constraint on their willingness and ability to respond to the sharp decline in interest rates. It is 
also noticeable that non-resident capital inflows into South Africa have not, in recent years, fed 
into the kind of fast domestic credit expansion that one saw in several Asian or Latin American 
economies. 
The South African Reserve Bank’s policy response 
I have already emphasised that the SARB does not target the exchange rate. Amid weaker 
economic growth, and with the currency depreciating for many reasons, several of which are 
independent of our domestic environment, raising interest rates aggressively in an attempt to 
prevent  currency  depreciation  could  quickly  become  a  futile,  if  not  counter-productive 
approach. The IMF recently highlighted in its latest issue of the World Economic Outlook that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
currency depreciation can play a welcome role as an absorber of shocks, including terms of 
trade shocks. This is the case, of course, as long as the depreciation does not spill over into 
lasting and more broad-based price pressures, or threaten the stability of a country’s financial 
system. 
The risk of price pressures is where the main focus lies for the SARB. Admittedly, financial 
stability  is  also  an  integral  part  of  our  mandate  and  focus.  But  at  present,  the  latest  rand 
depreciation does not pose immediate threats to financial stability. Due to prudent financial 
management  by  both  the  public  and  private  sectors,  South  Africa’s  foreign  currency-
denominated external debt represented less than 20 per cent of GDP as of the second quarter 
of 2015, even though it has risen in recent years.4 It is true that foreign debt issuance by South 
Africa’s corporate sector has increased quite significantly in recent years. However, it has not 
reached the levels seen in some other emerging countries, particularly in Asia. Furthermore, 
the banking sector’s foreign assets and liabilities remain relatively low, at 14 and 10 per cent 
of the banks’ total balance-sheets respectively, which means banks enjoy a positive “buffer” of 
net foreign assets. 
The most pressing concern for South Africa, however, would be a sustained, currency-induced 
overshoot of the 3 to 6 per cent inflation target, which could in turn “unanchor” broader-based 
inflation expectations from their current levels. These inflation expectations, as measured by 
the quarterly Bureau for Economic Research survey of analysts, trade unions and business 
leaders,  have  recently  displayed  greater  stability  than  in  the  early  years  of  the  inflation-
targeting era. However, they are anchored around the upper end of the inflation target, implying 
limited “margin for error” in the event of a severe or prolonged price shock. In addition, wage 
demands typically remain well in excess of the inflation target, and could very conceivably rise 
in the event of a lasting overshoot of that target, prompting an unfavourable wage-price spiral. 
Over the past couple of years, there has been evidence of a reduced exchange rate pass-
through to inflation compared with previous cycles of rand depreciation. Core inflation – that 
is, headline inflation excluding food, petrol and energy – has actually slowed in recent months, 
from a high of 5,8 per cent in February 2015 to 5,2 per cent in October. Financial market 
participants  have  been  cognisant  of  these  encouraging  developments,  as  shown  by  the 
relatively muted reaction of domestic bond yields to this year’s rand depreciation. 
This lower inflation pass-through of currency depreciation to consumer prices is not unique to 
South Africa. It has been observed in other emerging countries. Possibly, the lack of dynamism 
in demand around the world, the difficulties economies are experiencing in closing output gaps, 
and  the  very  low  inflation  rates  in  the  world’s  major  economies  are  reasons  why  the 
transmission channel of imported to domestic prices has been unusually muted. But perhaps 
because it is not yet well understood, this lower observed pass-through may indeed require 
increased vigilance. After all, the reaction of domestic prices may not be lower, but merely 
delayed. Central banks cannot afford any form of complacency. 
For this reason, the SARB’s MPC had to consider the optimal strategy on how to deal with an 
inflation path that looks set to remain mostly within target, but with clear and elevated risks of 
amongst  others  a  more  durable  overshoot.  The  MPC  could  have  taken  advantage  of  the 
recent, moderately positive trends in core inflation to delay a hike in the policy rate and instead 
wait to assess potential market, currency and portfolio flow developments around the likely 
start of US policy normalisation. But, such an approach would have carried the risks of a further 
upward drift in inflation expectations and risks and, eventually, second-round effects that would 
have required an even stronger policy response. In light of the fragility of domestic economic 
growth, such delayed but more aggressive responses are best avoided. 
                                                
4   This measure excludes rand-denominated liabilities held by non-residents, which are also counted into the broad 
definition of external debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Conclusion 
To conclude, let me again restate that the timing and speed of eventual US policy normalisation 
may be uncertain, but unless the US economy again experiences a durable loss of momentum, 
which is in nobody’s interest, it appears unavoidable. The best that emerging-market central 
banks can do is to be ready to respond to any potential negative side-effects on either price or 
financial stability. Some factors may play in our favour: because of the Fed’s concern about 
generating  undue  volatility  in  global  financial  markets,  the  general  framework  of  future 
normalisation  has  been  clearly  laid  out  and,  hopefully,  well  understood  by  markets. 
Consequently, one would also hope for a lesser reaction of financial asset prices, when US 
rates eventually rise, than at the time of the “taper tantrum” in 2013. 
Nonetheless, in light of the large degree of leverage in the world’s financial markets, and of 
still-stretched valuations in some categories of assets, relative stability of financial asset prices 
is  far  from  guaranteed.  Higher  market  volatility,  at  least  relative  to  a  few  years  ago,  may 
become the norm. The SARB will continue to closely monitor any impact of such volatility on 
domestic market and economic variables, and react accordingly, if needed. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
