  Andreas Dombret: Banking on big data – different policy issues? 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Third  Frankfurt  Conference  on  Financial  Market  Policy  “Digitizing 
Finance”, Frankfurt am Main, 6 November 2015. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to briefly state my opinion on data-based banking 
and policy issues. 
First of all, I would like to talk about one received idea in connection with new technologies 
flooding the financial sector that I find somewhat misleading. It is a common perception that 
Fintechs have been set up purely in opposition to banks. As a matter of fact, their distinctive 
features are the all-embracing use of IT and, in particular, internet-based technologies and 
their business structure and appearance. They may look different from traditional banks and 
they  may  care  about  customers’  needs,  such  as  24/7  accessibility,  ease  of  use  and 
individualised  services,  but  that  doesn’t  render  the  basic  financial  functions  of  banks 
obsolete. Some Fintechs have even already acquired a banking license. 
Although the appearance of banking business and its technical implementation may very well 
change across the entire sector, banks as they are defined by regulation are still necessary 
and important players in our financial system. You cannot grant loans to businesses or offer 
deposits without adhering to the prudential requirements regulators impose on banks. Our 
financial system relies on licensed monetary intermediaries, and computer algorithms don’t 
change this fact. 
Nevertheless,  banks  are  definitely  coming  under  pressure  with  respect  to  their  profitability 
and visibility. Fintechs naturally focus on the most profitable areas of banking. This implies 
that banks have to deal with new competitors, and it is conceivable that we will encounter 
substantial changes in the composition of the sector over the next decade. But banks are not 
destined  to  become  obsolete.  First  of  all,  banks  have  built  up  trusting  relationships  with 
customers, which includes knowing about the business and also knowing about changes in 
regulation over the past decades. 
And there is not only a competitive relationship between banks and technological innovators. 
From what I gather from the sector, Fintechs are frequently approaching banks as soon as 
their ideas have matured. Banks are not likely to be as innovative and as quick off the mark 
as newcomers, although many cooperative arrangements are possible. 
With regard to regulation, this means that we should stop drawing an imaginary line between 
technology-driven and traditional approaches to financial services. Regulation by no means 
serves to penalise certain players or to give  them special privileges. The main purpose of 
financial  regulation  is  still  to  ensure  financial  stability  by  avoiding  risks  to  a  stable  and 
trustworthy financial sector. 
In  the  case  of  both  Fintechs  and  banks,  new  risks  stemming  from  intelligent  technologies 
cannot be ruled out. Big data is a good example: on the one hand, it may definitely prove 
helpful in terms of keeping a proper and timely overview of risks and processes in a complex 
banking world. But big data technologies may also give rise to whole new categories of risk. 
For  example,  big  data  could  entice  banks  and  also  unregulated  players  to  let  algorithms 
become even greater decision-makers – think of decisions regarding credit assessment or 
trading, for example. But we have to ensure that humans, or, more precisely, well-informed 
risk takers ultimately take responsibility for their decisions. 
The  same  applies  to  risk  management  via  intelligent  data  processing  methods:  The 
approaches I have witnessed so far sound very promising. But we have to bear in mind that 
computer algorithms may not always be right. Cyber security is another issue that needs to 
be dealt with in an industry that is becoming increasingly reliant on IT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
All in all, regulators will have to remain alert with regard to new technologies. There are many 
new businesses and technologies out there, and we cannot foresee for the time being all of 
their possible risks, nor can we limit the scope of potential risks. The objective is therefore 
more a matter of ensuring a risk-adequate prudential approach and the necessary degree of 
intervention. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
