 Andrew G Haldane: Labour’s share 
 Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at the Trades Union Congress, London, 12 November 2015. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank William Abel, Simon Caunt, Jeremy Franklin, Edward Hall, Philip King, Priya Gupta, Alex Mitchell, Rachana 
Shanbhogue,  Bradley  Speigner  and  Tom  Smith  for  their  help  in  preparing  the  text.  I  would  also  like  to  thank 
James Bell, Oliver Burrows, Melissa Davey, Gareth Ramsay, Stephen Seawright and Sebastian Walsh for their 
comments and contributions. 
General Secretary. It is a great privilege for me to be invited to speak to you. 
In the early nineteenth century, the unions were struggling to cope with the on-going impact 
of the Industrial Revolution on jobs and wages. They came together in the 1860s to present a 
united front and face down the threat of legislation to curtail workers’ rights. The TUC was 
born.  The  first  meeting  of  Congress,  in  1868,  debated  wage  inequalities,  workers’  hours, 
technical education and threats to jobs and workers’ rights (London Metropolitan University 
(2015)). 
Almost  150  years  on,  Congress today  represents  more than  5.8 million  workers  across  all 
sectors and regions of the UK. The 147th Congress was recently held in Brighton. The topics 
it debated may have a familiar ring: wage inequalities, workers’ hours, technical education 
and threats to jobs and workers’ rights. As Mark Twain almost said, labour market history, if 
not repeating itself, has certainly rhymed. 
This should come as no surprise. As in the mid-19th century, this is a time of huge change in 
the jobs market. Rarely a day passes without concerns about job prospects in some of the 
UK’s  most  iconic  industries,  from  steel  to  oil  and  gas  to  cars.  And  rarely  a  week  passes 
without evidence of jobs and industries being fundamentally reshaped by globalisation and 
technology,  be  it  the  digital  economy,  the  sharing  economy  or  even  the  Second  Machine 
Age. 
There is no shortage of explanations for these searing developments. They are part cyclical, 
as the global economy continues to recover from a financial crisis which is likely to be the 
most costly since the Great Depression. But these changes are also in part structural given 
tectonic shifts in demography, inequality and technology, to name but three. 
None of these challenges is of course entirely new either. My own interest in economics was 
spawned in the early 1980s by just such a challenge. At that time, more than 3 million people 
were unemployed in the UK, or almost 12% of the working population. In Yorkshire, where I 
grew up, the unemployment rate peaked at close to 13%, hit by a double whammy of deep 
recession and a contraction in steel, textiles and coal-mining. 
Unemployment at that stage was not for me a statistic. Nor was it the bloodless theorising I 
would  go  on  to  study  at  university.  For  my  family,  it  was  real.  For  many  communities  and 
regions  it  was  a  blight,  social  every  bit  as  much  as  economic.  Across  the  country,  it 
depressed  the  everyday  lives  of  millions  of  adults,  some  of  whose  sons  and  daughters  I 
knew as friends. And it was a blight that affected not one generation, but many. 
It  was  that  experience  as  a  teenager  that  led  me  to  commit  to  economics,  and  to  public 
service,  as  a  way  to  understand,  and  perhaps  try  and  correct,  that  economic  and  social 
blight.  And  more  than  thirty  years  on,  those  are  the  same  reasons  I  remain  committed  to 
better  understanding,  and  perhaps  hoping  to  improve  a  fraction,  the  functioning  of  the 
economy to this day. 
Those  wrenching  developments  in  the  UK  labour  market  in  the  early  1980s  have  been 
repeated throughout history, since at least the Industrial Revolution. The cycles and shifts in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  jobs  and  wages,  and  attempts  to  moderate  them,  are  as  old  as  civilisation  itself.  Today’s 
cycles and shifts in the labour market are, in some respects, an echo of that past. 
As in the past, technology is changing the quantum and nature of work, displacing some jobs 
while creating others. As I will discuss, through each of the Industrial Revolutions innovation 
has disrupted the number and nature of jobs. Often, it has led to a so-called “hollowing out” 
of mid-skilled workers and a widening wage gap across the economy. 
Yet, in other respects, this time may be different. Technology may be set to change jobs and 
wages  more  fundamentally  than  in  the  past.  Job  displacement  and  creation  may  come 
thicker  and faster than ever  previously.  “Hollowing  out”  may become more  pervasive.  And 
gaps between those with and  without skills, or with and  without jobs, may widen as never 
before. Or that, at least, is the picture some have painted. 
These issues have fundamental implications for the functioning of industries and economies 
and  the  well-being  of  families  and  societies.  They  also,  of  course,  have  fundamental 
implications  for  the  TUC  and  for  policymakers  like  me.  So  after  reviewing  labour  market 
developments,  historically  and  prospectively,  I  want  to  conclude  with  some  reflections  on 
policy, including monetary policy. 
Good news, bad news 
Let me start with a review of recent developments in the labour market. There is plenty of 
good  news  to  report  here,  with  a  boom  in  jobs  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  wages  in  the  UK. 
Yesterday’s  labour  market  data  confirmed  that  picture.  But  there  are  also  strong  cross-
currents at work, often rooted in longer-term structural shifts in the labour market, which offer 
a more worrying window on the world of work. 
• 
In the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis, there were understandable 
fears that unemployment would rise rapidly. At the start of 2009, the Monetary Policy 
Committee (MPC)  was forecasting that the UK unemployment rate would rise into 
double  figures,  equivalent  to  over  the  3.4  million  people.  In  the  event,  the 
unemployment rate in the UK peaked at 8.5%, or 2.7 million people. 
Since  2013,  the  UK  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply,  to  a  rate  of  5.3%  or 
1.8 million people. This fall in unemployment is considerably faster than the MPC, 
and other outside forecasters, had predicted. At the start of 2014, the MPC forecast 
that  the  unemployment  rate  today  would  be  more  than  a  percentage  point  higher 
than its current rate (Chart 1). 
The main reason for this striking fall in the unemployment rate has been very strong 
rates  of  new  job  creation.  Since  2010,  more  than  2  million  new  jobs  have  been 
created in the UK. The lion’s share of these new jobs – around two-thirds – have 
been  full-time  positions  and  in  highly-skilled  professions  (Chart  2).  The  level  of 
employment is at a forty-year high. 
This rise in the demand for workers has been met, in part, by increased participation 
in the workforce. Participation by women has picked up strongly and is now close to 
its  all-time  highs.  So  too  has  participation  by  those  aged  over  50,  in  part  taking 
advantage of more flexible working practices and removal of the official retirement 
age. 
The other end of the age spectrum has also seen improvement. The percentage of 
18–24 year olds who are not in employment, education or training – the so-called 
“NEETs” – has fallen sharply from close to 17% to below 13%. That is its lowest rate 
in a decade (Chart 3). 
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     These improvements in the labour market have also been reasonably well dispersed 
across the UK. Unemployment has fallen in every UK region since 2012, by at least 
2 percentage points. 
Last, but by no means least, aggregate pay across the economy has begun to rise. 
A year ago, Mark Carney told the TUC that “Britain deserved a pay rise”. Today, I 
am  delighted  to  say  it  has  had  one.  Aggregate pay  across  the  whole  economy  is 
growing at around 3% year-on-year, compared to less than 1% a year ago. 
In inflation-adjusted terms, the picture is even more heartening. Real pay is rising at 
over  3%  year-on-year.  A  year  ago,  it  was  falling  by  around  0.4%  (Chart  4).  Real 
wages are rising at their highest rate for 8 years and, encouragingly, some of the 
fastest rates of real wage growth have been among the lowest paid. 
These developments have in large measure been driven by the recovery in the UK economy 
over  the  past  few  years.  But  let  me  now  add  some  cross-currents  to  this  fast-flowing 
employment stream. Many of these cross-currents will be familiar to the TUC’s membership. 
They pose some real challenges, economically and societally. 
• 
Rates of unemployment still remain high among some cohorts and in some regions. 
Unemployment  rates  among  those  aged  18–24  is  still  over  13%,  8  percentage 
points above the national average. Unemployment rates in some parts of the UK, 
such  as  the  North  East  and  Northern  Ireland,  remain  several  percentage  points 
above the national average. And those unemployed for more than one year remain 
above their long-term average. 
Even  among  those  with  a  job,  there  remains  a  sizable  number  who  wish  to  work 
longer hours than are currently available to them. Surveys suggest three and a half 
million people would like to work for longer, or around 10% of the working population 
(Chart 5). On average, they wish to work an extra 11 hours per week. These people 
are not unemployed, but they are under-employed. 
Another  dimension  of  under-employment  is  the  extent  to  which  people  are  using 
their skills in the workplace. Under-utilised skills are as much an economic waste as 
under-utilised time. At present, there are around 5 million people  whose skills are 
mismatched,  or  are  over-qualified,  for  the  job  they  are  doing.  This  number  has 
increased by two percentage points since the start of the crisis. 
Even for those who have found work, levels of job security appear to be lower than 
in  the  past.  Around  6.4%  of  all  employees  in  the  UK  are  on  temporary  contracts. 
Rates of self-employment have risen from 12% a decade ago to around 15% now. 
For some firms and workers, those trends are a welcome sign of job flexibility. But 
not for all. Around a third of temporary contract workers would prefer a permanent 
contract.  Since  2011  the  reported  incidence  of  zero-hours  contracts  has  risen 
rapidly,  from  0.6%  to  2.4%  of  the  working  population  (Chart  6).  What  may  be 
welcome flexibility for a company may be unwelcome insecurity for its workforce. 
While participation rates in the UK  workforce have increased, in some cases they 
remain low by international standards. Female participation in the UK labour market 
remains  well  below  our  European  neighbours,  such  as  Germany,  the  Netherlands 
and Sweden. And compared to these same countries, the fraction of NEETs in the 
UK is almost twice as high. 
Finally on wages, real wages have yet to return to their pre-crisis peak. Rather, they 
are still 6% below that level. Since the crisis, we have seen one of the largest and 
longest squeezes on wages since at least 1850 (Table 1). 
Indeed,  since  the  crisis  real  wages  have  fallen  faster  even  than  UK  productivity, 
which itself has been extra-ordinarily  weak having flat-lined for the past six  years. 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     Put differently, labour’s share of the national income pie has fallen since 2009, from 
around 58% to 53% (Chart 7). 
That  squeeze  on  real  wages  has  been  even  more  acute  for  some.  Declines  in 
median real wages among the young have been roughly twice as large as among 
the old. And workers in sectors such as construction, health and social work have 
seen far-larger declines in their take-home pay (Chart 8). In short, many workers in 
the UK have not in fact had that pay rise. 
Partly  in  consequence, the  number  of  people  earning  less  than  the  living  wage  is 
currently estimated to be around 5.8 million. That is 700,000 people more than in 
2013. That fraction ought to shrink in future, once the statutory National Living Wage 
is introduced. The Bank itself is already a London Living Wage employer. 
The New Economics Foundation has recently constructed a summary measure of 
the  number  of  secure  jobs  which  allow  for  a  reasonable  standard  of  living  (NEF 
(2015)).  From  2011  to  2014,  despite  the  number  of  people  in  employment  rising 
sharply, 
jobs  declined  by  around 
2 percentage points. It currently stands at a remarkable 19.2 million people. 
in  secure  and  well-paid 
the  proportion 
So how do we make sense of these rather disparate patterns? By looking through a historical 
lens,  I  want  to  try  to  provide  some  perspective  on  these  current  trends  and,  more 
speculatively, their implications for future jobs and wages. 
The “lump of labour” fallacy 
Over the longer run, technology may be the single most important force shaping the fortunes 
of jobs and wages. That has meant, through the ages, the relationship between technology 
and jobs has been a recurring, and sometimes contentious, one. Debates on the potentially 
negative impact of technology on jobs – so-called technological unemployment – go back at 
least to the invention of the wheel (Woirol (1996)). 
Certainly, the Ancient Civilisations of Greece and Rome wrestled with the problem of how to 
deal with the consequences of workers displaced by technological advance. The responses 
then  included  large-scale  public  work  programmes  and  income  support  policies  for  the 
needy. Indeed, they have an eerie echo in many of today’s public policy debates. 
The  debate  about  technological  unemployment  really  picked  up  pace  in  the  19th  century, 
with the blossoming of the Industrial Revolution in Britain. Then, it spilt over into the streets 
with worker protests and machine-breaking, most notably by the Luddite movement. These 
fears  about  technological  displacement  gathered  intellectual  support  from  no  less  a  figure 
than the classical economist, David Ricardo (Ricardo (1821)). 
Yet the intellectual tide was by no means in one direction. It was accepted that technological 
advance could damage some workers in the short run. But its benefits to most workers in the 
longer-run were felt likely to dominate. In the middle of the 19th century, that view came to 
prominence  through  such  figures  as  John  Stuart  Mill  (Mill  (1848))  and  Karl  Marx  (Marx 
(1867)), two unlikely intellectual bedfellows. 
The technology debate was re-stirred in the 1930s, at the time of mass unemployment during 
the Great Depression. In his essay, “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren”, Keynes 
predicted on-going technological advance and workers being replaced by machines (Keynes 
(1930)). Yet far from being a threat, Keynes viewed this as a huge opportunity. He predicted 
that, by 2030, the average working week would have shrunk to 15 hours. Technology would 
give birth to a new “leisure class”. 
Debates on the relationship between jobs and technology stirred again during the 1960s in 
the US, during the 1970s in advanced economies, and again in the 1980s and 1990s in the 
UK and parts of Europe. In each case, the prompt was rising rates of unemployment. And in 
each case, this debate subsided as unemployment rates fell. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moving into the 21st century, this debate has once again been re-kindled. The prompt this 
time  has  not  so  much  been  rising  rates  of  unemployment.  Rather  it  is  been  the  rapid 
emergence  of  smart  machines,  jet-propelled  by  modern  computing.  These  machines  are 
different. Unlike in the past, they have the potential to substitute for human brains as well as 
hands (Autor et al (2003), Manyika et al (2013)). 
In Race Against the Machine and The Second Machine Age, Eric Brynjolfsson and Andrew 
McAfee  paint  a  persuasive  picture  of  robot-fuelled  growth 
in  productivity  and  an 
accompanying  reshaping  of  the  role  and  nature  of  work  (Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee  (2011, 
2014)). Whether this vision is utopian or dystopian, it poses a fundamental challenge to the 
relationship between jobs and technology, to which I will return. 
The  economics  of  these  debates,  which  I  hope  is  not  too  bloodless,  is  relatively 
straightforward.  There  are  two  opposing  effects  at  work.  The  first  is  the  substitution  or 
displacement  effect.  Labour-saving  technologies  displace  workers,  almost  by  definition. 
Capital substitutes for labour, machine for man. If there is a “lump of labour” to be allocated 
across a fixed pool of jobs, technology will raise unemployment, other things equal. 
This  being  the  real  world,  other  things  are  of  course  never  equal.  As  cheaper  capital 
displaces  labour,  goods  and  services  become  cheaper,  raising  real  incomes  across  the 
economy. That boosts the demand for new goods and services and new industries to supply 
them.  To  complete  the  loop,  displaced  labour  then  switches  to  meet  this  new  demand, 
lowering  unemployment.  These  are  the  income  or  compensation  effects  of  technological 
progress. They are what make the “lump of labour” a fallacy. 
Which of these two effects – displacement or compensation – wins out? Ultimately, this is an 
empirical question and we have several hundreds of years of empirical evidence as a test-
bed. Perhaps unusually, these historical data tell a remarkably consistent story. 
• 
Since  1750,  there  has  been  a  steady  and  continuous  stream  of  labour-saving 
technologies  which  have  boosted  economy-wide  productivity,  as  measured  by 
output  per  unit  of  labour  inputs  (Chart  9).  On  average  since  1750,  growth  in  UK 
labour productivity has been around 1.1% per year. That means the productivity of 
our  economies  has  improved  by  around  a  third  each  generation,  a  massive  leap 
forward. 
This improvement in labour productivity has not, over the medium term, caused any 
reduction in employment. In the UK, the employment rate today as a proportion of 
the total population is around 50%, very similar to levels in the early 19th  century 
(Chart  10).  Over  time,  the  employment  share  has  fluctuated  around  a  stationary 
average. The same is true in other countries. 
The effects of technology have been felt, at least to some degree, in hours worked, 
as Keynes predicted back in the 1930s. In the UK, the average working week has 
fallen  from  50  hours  a  century  ago  to  around  30  hours  today  (Chart  11). 
Nonetheless,  this  fall-off  has  fallen  well  short  of  Keynes’  prediction  of  a  15-hour 
week. The “leisure classes” are no more numerous today than a century ago. 
Shifts in population – through changes in birth/death rates or through immigration – 
have  also  had  no  obvious  impact  on  employment.  The  relationship  between 
population  growth  and  the  employment  share  is,  if  anything,  positive  (Chart  12). 
This,  too,  is  evidence  of  the  compensation  effects  of  population  growth  –  higher 
output and demand – outweighing any displacement effects in the jobs market. 
As technology has boosted productivity and incomes, its fruits have been harvested 
by workers, typically in the form of higher wages. Since 1750, the upwards march of 
productivity has largely been matched by the upwards march of real wages (Chart 
13). Since the Industrial Revolution, the former has risen on average by 1.1% per 
year, the latter by 0.9% per year. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      The same pattern was evident prior to the Industrial Revolution. Then, the absence 
of technological progress led to productivity flat-lining. The real incomes of workers 
similarly  flat-lined  (Chart  13).  Over  the  course  of  the  past  millennium,  perhaps 
longer, technological progress has held the key to rising worker wages. 
Acting in parallel to this secular rise in labour incomes has been a secular rise in 
workers’  skills.  Levels  of  educational  attainment  have  risen  dramatically  since  the 
middle  of  the  19th  century  (Chart  14).  As  machines  displaced  man  in  conducting 
manual tasks, man has kept one-step-ahead of the machine by continuously skilling-
up to meet the new demands of new industries for new products. 
With rates of employment steady, and with real wages rising in line with productivity, 
labour’s  share  of  the  national  income  pie  is  little  different  today  than  in  the  18th 
century  (Chart  15).  In  other  words,  the  suppliers  of  both  labour  and  capital  have 
shared, in roughly fixed proportions, in the fruits of higher incomes. 
Moreover,  workers  with  different  skills  have  benefitted  broadly  equally  from  these 
gains.  The  distribution  of  wages  is  little  different  today  than  at  the  dawn  of  the 
Industrial  Revolution  (Chart  16).  In  other  words,  technological  progress  has  not 
obviously widened income inequalities. 
Viewed  over  the  sweep  of  history,  then,  there  is  essentially  no  evidence  to  suggest 
technology has damaged jobs and plenty to suggest it has boosted wages. Technology has 
enriched labour, not immiserated it. Mill was right; Ricardo was wrong. Labour is not dead 
wood to be carved up between tasks. It is a tree whose trunk and branches have lengthened 
and thickened with time. The “lump of labour” fallacy is just that. 
Industrial revolution and “hollowing-out” 
Or is it? Looking more closely at past phases of rapid technological change paints a more 
nuanced picture. Each phase has eventually resulted in a growing tree of rising skills, wages 
and  productivity.  But  they  have  also  been  associated  with  a  “hollowing  out”  of  this  tree. 
Indeed, this hollowing-out has widened and deepened with each new technological wave. 
Economic historians tend to partition the growth timeline into three distinct phases: the first 
Industrial  Revolution,  the  era  of  steam  engines  and  spinning  jennies,  commencing  in  the 
middle of the 18th century; the second, the era of mass industrialisation, commencing in the 
second half of the 19th century; and the third, the era of information technology, commencing 
in the second half of the 20th century (Haldane (2014)). 
These  industrial  revolutions  each  brought  about  a  remarkable  re-shaping  of  the  jobs 
landscape (Chart 17). The employment share of agriculture and other primary activities has 
fallen  from  around  50%  in  1700  to  around  1%  today.  Secondary  activities,  notably 
manufacturing, rose to 45% of employment at the end of the 19th century, before falling to 
around 10% today. Meanwhile, the employment share of services has roughly doubled each 
century since 1700, to reach around 80% today. 
These  dramatic  shifts  are  even  more  striking  at  an  occupational  level.  Chart  18  plots 
employment in four occupations since 1870: agricultural labourers, telephonists, accountants 
and  hairdressers  (Deloitte  (2015a)).  The  relentless  upwards  march  of  the  accountant  and 
hairdresser,  at  the  expense  of  the  downtrodden  (but  presumably  better-coiffed)  farmer,  is 
one of the lesser-known societal power struggles of the post-Industrial Revolution period. 
But  transition  on  this  scale  is  not  costless,  with  complex  shifts  in  the  pattern  of  skilled 
employment and wages. In its first phase, the Industrial Revolution appears to have led to a 
shift towards unskilled employment as “the artisan shop was replaced by the factory and later 
by  the  assembly  line”  (Acemoglu  (2008)).  The  share  of  unskilled  UK  workers  doubled 
between  1700  and  1850,  from  around  20%  to  40%  (Chart  19).  The  same  was  true, 
somewhat later, in the US (Katz and Margo (2013)). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Later in the 19th and into the 20th centuries, the demand for high-skilled workers also began 
to  rise.  Rising  incomes  created  a  demand  for  new  goods  and  new,  more  complex  and 
technical,  ways  of  producing  them.  That  increased  the  demand  for  operatives,  engineers, 
mechanics and managers, in addition to hairdressers and accountants. 
Between 1850 and 1910, the share of skilled workers in US manufacturing rose from 3% to 
around  12%  (Katz  and  Margo  (2013).  The  share  of  low-skilled  jobs  also  increased,  from 
around  58%  to  65%.  Over  the  same  period,  the  share  of  mid-skilled  workers  shrank  from 
40%  to  23%  (Chart  20).  In  other  words,  there  was  a  “hollowing  out”,  or  U-shape,  in  the 
pattern of employment – the hollowing-out, in effect, of the artisan. 
By the middle of the 19th century, aggregate real wages were rising in the US and UK. Yet 
despite increased demand for their services, unskilled workers do not seem to have shared 
in  this  pay  rise.  Higher  demand  for  their  services  was  more  than  matched  by  increased 
supply,  both  from  child  labour  and  from  displaced  artisans  as  they  moved  down  the  skill 
spectrum (Clark (2010)). As a result, their pay appears to have flat-lined. 
At the high-skill end, the supply of workers was also increasing as some workers skilled-up 
(Clark (2010), Wallis (2014)). Despite that, there is evidence the skill premium for clerks and 
other professionals rose through the 19th century. The net effect of these complex shifts was 
thus  to  widen  the  distribution  of  wages  between  skilled  and  unskilled  workers  (Katz  and 
Margo (2013)). Income inequality rose. 
The pattern of labour’s share of the national income is also interesting. This appears to have 
fallen in the first part of the 19th century (Allen (2009)), as Chart 21 illustrates. Workers do 
not appear to have enjoyed the early fruits of the Industrial Revolution. That perhaps explains 
why David Ricardo entered the fray at this time. 
In the event, these concerns proved ephemeral. With a lag, the rising tide of productivity and 
incomes lifted all boats, whatever their level of skill. Inequalities in wages started shrinking 
and labour’s share of income began to rise, returning to their levels at the end of the 18th 
century. If the first part of the 19th century had seen substitution effects dominate, the latter 
half saw compensation effects in the ascendancy. 
Moving into the 20th century, and the third industrial revolution, these emerging patterns in 
jobs  and  wages  have  become  clearer. Technology  appears  to  be resulting  in faster,  wider 
and deeper degrees of hollowing-out than in the past. Why? Because 20th century machines 
have substituted not just for manual human tasks, but cognitive ones too. The set of human 
skills machines could reproduce, at lower cost, has both widened and deepened. 
Chart 22 shows the employment pattern in the UK over recent years, ranking professions’ 
skills  by  their  average  pay,  while  Chart  23  shows  the  picture for  a  set  of  countries  over  a 
similar period. They tell a striking and consistent story of mid-skill jobs being lost, counter-
balanced by employment gains at the high-skill and, to lesser extent, low-skill segments of 
the workforce. The U-shape, or “hollowing out”, has deepened and widened. 
What has happened to these displaced mid-skill workers? Some appear to have “skilled-up”, 
typically  through  higher  or  further  education.  In  the  UK,  total  numbers  in  higher  education 
have  increased  from  around  130,000  in  1970  to  over  2  million  today.  In  the  US,  total 
numbers  in  higher  education  have  increased  from  2.4  million  just  after  the  Second  World 
War, to over 20 million today. As in the late 19th century, this skilling-up has enabled workers 
to keep one-step-ahead of the machine. 
But some displaced workers have not been on the up-escalator. They appear instead to have 
“skilled-down”, typically by taking a job for which they are over-qualified. They have become 
not  unemployed  but  “under-employed”.  Rates  of  under-employment  have  risen  and  are  at 
significant levels (Table 2). Across the EU, rates of under-employment average around 15%. 
As  in  the  early  19th  century,  by  adding  to  the  unskilled  pool  of  labour,  this  will  have 
dampened unskilled wage growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  These switching patterns of employment demand and supply would be expected to show up 
in wages. UK evidence shows no clear pattern (Salvatori (2015)). But US evidence is more 
conclusive. It suggests that wages at the top end of the skill spectrum have risen, in some 
cases significantly. But there is little evidence of that having happened at the lower-skill end 
(Autor  (2015)).  In  other  words,  only  the  higher-skilled  appear  to  have  gained  in  both 
employment and wage terms. 
A rising skill premium is consistent with the well-documented widening gap between the top 
1%  and  0.1%  of  income  earners  and  the  rest  over  recent  years  (Piketty  (2014),  Atkinson 
(2015)) (Chart 16). In the words of Tyler Cowen Average is Over, with a widening bifurcation 
between a high-skilled elite and everyone else (Cowen (2013)). 
By itself, a widening distribution of incomes need not imply any change in labour’s share of 
national income: in the past, technology’s impact on the labour share appears to have been 
broadly  neutral.  But  this  time  could  be  different.  There  is  evidence,  across  a  number  of 
countries, of the labour share having fallen over recent decades (Chart 24). Even in the UK, 
the labour share has glided south, if more slowly than elsewhere, over recent years. 
The relationship between productivity and real wages tells a similar story. Across a number 
of countries, there is recent evidence of real wages falling short of productivity (IMF (2015)). 
In  the  US,  this  has  been  evident  since  at  least  1970,  with  average  real  wages  rising 
0.6 percentage points per year more slowly than productivity (Chart 25). In the UK, that gap 
has averaged 0.3 percentage points per year since 1990. For median wages, these gaps are 
larger still (Chart 26). 
Over  time,  these  gaps  can  accumulate  into  big  income  differences.  Had  US  real  wages 
tracked productivity since 1970, the median worker today would be 40% better off. Had UK 
wages  tracked  productivity  since  1990,  the  median  worker today  would  be  20%  better off. 
Unlike  earlier  phases  of  rapid  technological  change,  labour  has  not  shared  equally  in  the 
fruits of recent great leaps forward – or at least not yet. 
A number of explanations have been put forward for these falling labour shares, including the 
falling  relative  cost  of  capital  goods  and  globalisation  (OECD  (2012)).  A  third  explanation, 
related to the first two, is technological change. As machine has substituted for man across a 
greater  number  of  tasks,  and  as  hollowing-out  has  intensified,  the  balance  of  bargaining 
power has swung against labour. That would tend to show itself as labour securing a smaller 
slice of the income pie, as we have seen. 
In sum, the third industrial evolution appears to have resulted in an intensification of trends 
already  fledgling  in  the first  two:  a  hollowing-out  of  employment,  a  widening  distribution of 
wages and a fall in labour’s income share. The key question is what happens next? A re-run 
of the 19th century, with productivity gains eventually boosting wages and the labour share? 
Or, different than in the past, a permanent re-shaping of the labour landscape? 
Race against the machine 
A number of authors have recently argued, persuasively, that it is the latter. Based on past 
patterns, it is argued that information technology may be poised for exponential growth, as its 
full fruits are harvested. Indeed, we may be on the cusp of a fourth Industrial Revolution or 
Second Machine Age (Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), Ford (2015)). 
Its  defining  feature  would  be  that  new-age  machines  will  be  thinking  as  well  as  doing, 
sensing as well as sifting, adapting as well as enacting. They will thus span a much wider 
part  of  the  skill  distribution  than  ever  previously.  As  robots  extend  their  skill-reach, 
“hollowing-out” may thus be set to become ever-faster, ever-wider and ever-deeper. Or that, 
at least, is the picture some have painted painted. 
How  much  wider  and  deeper?  Research  by  Carl  Benedikt  Frey  and  Michael  Osborne  has 
tried to quantify this hollowing-out, by assigning probabilities to certain classes of job being 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  automated over the course of the next few decades. Their work was initially done for the US, 
but has recently been extended to the UK (Frey and Osbourne (2013), Deloitte (2015b)). 
Using  this  methodology,  the  Bank  has  recently  done  its  own  exercise  for  the  UK.  Table  3 
classifies jobs three ways in the US and UK – high (greater than 66%), medium (33–66%) 
and low (less than 33%) probability of automation. It also shows the fraction of employment 
these jobs represent. Chart 27 provides a more granular breakdown of these jobs. 
For  the  UK,  roughly  a  third  of  jobs  by  employment  fall  into  each  category,  with  those 
occupations most at risk including administrative, clerical and production tasks. Taking the 
probabilities of automation, and multiplying them by the numbers employed, gives a broad 
brush estimate of the number of jobs potentially automatable. For the UK, that would suggest 
up to 15 million jobs could be at risk of automation. In the US, the corresponding figure would 
be 80 million jobs. 
The BBC website contains a handy algorithm for calculating the probability of your job being 
robotised. For an accountant, the probability of vocational extinction is a whopping 95%. For 
a  hairdresser,  it  is  33%.  On  these  numbers,  the  accountant’s  sun  has  truly  set,  but  the 
relentless upwards ascent of the hairdresser is set to continue. For economists, like me, the 
magic number is 15%. At first I found that number disconcertingly high. But in fact it puts me 
in the lower third of “prone” professions. 
Another perspective on hollowing-out comes from looking at how automation might affect the 
distribution  of  skills  and  wages  in  the  economy.  Chart  28  ranks  job-types  by  their  median 
wage  rate  and  plots  this  against  their  probability  of  automation.  This  probability  rises 
strikingly as we move down the wage/skill curve. Those most at risk from automation tend, 
on average, to have the lowest wage. In other words, technology could act like a regressive 
income tax on the unskilled. It could further widen income disparities. 
I do not want to make this sound like a counsel of despair. All of these projections, like those 
of Ricardo and Keynes previously, may be far too pessimistic. The lessons of history are that 
rising real incomes have ridden to the rescue, boosting the demand for new goods from new 
industries requiring new workers. During previous phases of technological growth, workers 
have moved up the income escalator by “skilling up”, thereby keeping one-step-ahead of the 
machine. 
And some have argued that this pattern is set to repeat itself in future. Humans will adapt 
their skills to the tasks where they continue to have a comparative advantage over machines 
(Autor (2015), Mokyr et al (2015)). One source of such advantage is that Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) – the machine brain – differs in several important respects from human intelligence – the 
human brain. 
AI uses the law of large numbers to solve problems and learn, sifting multiple permutations 
for a solution. All AI problems are, in effect, big data problems involving long strings of ones 
and  zeros;  they  are  digital.  The  brain,  by  contrast,  is  more  analogue  in  its  configuration, 
processing and problem-solving. Solutions are often condensed down to a small number of 
learned behaviours or heuristics. 
These differences become clear with a task such as learning a language. This is one where 
huge strides have been made by machines over the past decade (Pratt (2015)). That rapid-
learning has not come from computers feasting on the classics like a college student. Rather, 
it  has  arisen  from  them  devouring  the  whole  library  in  one  digital  mouthful,  then  seeking 
matching patterns in the text and syntax. Language, paradoxically, has become a numbers 
not a words game. 
These different approaches to problem-solving are important when defining where humans 
may have the edge. This appears to be in tasks requiring high-level reasoning – large logical 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  leaps of imagination rather than repeated small experimental steps. It is in tasks where the 
focus is on cognition and creativity, rather than production and perception. And it is activities 
where EQ trumps IQ1, where social capital is scored as or more highly than financial capital. 
To bring that down to planet earth, no-one anytime soon is I think going to choose a robot to 
cut their hair – I told you the hairdressers were safe. Nor are they likely to choose a robot to 
look  after their  young children  or  elderly  parents  (tempting  as that can sometimes  sound). 
When it comes to forecasting the economy, I can quite believe a thinking machine might over 
time displace me. But it is less likely an “Andy Robot” will be giving this lecture to the TUC 
even a decade from now. 
Even if this diagnosis is right, it nonetheless may suggest a fundamental reorientation in the 
nature of work could be underway. We may already be seeing early signs of that in the move 
towards  part-time  working,  temporary  contracts  and,  in  particular,  self-employment.  Some 
have speculated that these seismic shifts could result in the emergence of a “new artisan” 
class : micro-businesses offering individually-tailored products and services, personalised to 
the needs of customers, from healthcare and social care, to leisure products and luxuries. 
This really will be Back to the Future. 
Yet  the  smarter  machines  become,  the greater  the  likelihood  that  the  space  remaining for 
uniquely-human  skills  could  shrink  further.  Machines  are  already  undertaking  tasks  which 
were  unthinkable  –  if  not  unimaginable  –  a  decade  ago.  The  driverless  car  was  science 
fiction no more than a decade ago. Today, it is scientific fact. Algorithms are rapidly learning 
not just to process and problem-solve, but to perceive and even emote (Pratt (2015)). 
As digital replaced analogue, perhaps artificial intelligence will one day surpass the brain’s 
cognitive  capacity,  a  tipping  point  referred  to  as  the  “singularity”  (Stanislaw  (1958))).  Brad 
Delong has speculated that, just as “peak horse” was reached in the early part of the 20th 
century, perhaps “peak human” could be reached during this century (Delong (2014)). In the 
words of Marc Andresen, in future there could be two types of worker – those who own the 
robots and those who work for them. 
If  these  visions  were  to  be  realised,  however  futuristic  this  sounds,  the  labour  market 
patterns of the past three centuries would shift to warp speed. If the option of skilling-up is no 
longer available, this increases the risk of large scale un- or under-employment. The wage 
premium  for  those  occupying  skilled  positions  could  explode,  further  widening  wage 
differentials. And labour’s share of the pie could fall even more dramatically than in the past. 
On this view, the tree could become hollowed-out to the point that it may no longer be able to 
support itself. 
This  too  may  sound  like  science  fiction.  Yet  in  a  survey  of  almost  2,000  (admittedly  self-
selecting) technologists and economists in 2014, the Pew Research Center found that almost 
half thought AI and robots would cause a significant and persistent displacement of labour in 
future (Pew Research Center (2014)). Maybe Ricardo and the Luddites had a point after all, 
albeit two hundred years too early. 
Public policy implications 
If one of these scenarios were to play out, its implications for the economy and society, for 
industries and individuals, would be massive. So, if only on insurance grounds, it would be 
prudent to give some thought to what role policy might play in cushioning that impact, both in 
the short (cyclical) and longer (structural) run. 
                                                
1 
IQ refers to a measure of intelligence known as the “Intelligence Quotient”.  EQ refers to a concept called the Emotional 
intelligence Quotient.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Of the longer-term solutions, let me briefly discuss three: relax, retrain and redistribute. The 
path of least commitment would be to relax and follow, over the course of the next century, 
the  path  Keynes  charted  a  century  ago  –  a  world  of  progressively  shorter  working  weeks, 
where mini-breaks become maxi-breaks. 
Whether  that  path  is  desirable,  for  individuals  or  societies,  is  less  clear.  Work  delivers 
significant non-pecuniary, as well as pecuniary, benefits (Freeman (2008)). Studies show it 
really  isn’t  just  about  the  money.  Work  creates  a  sense  of  personal  worth  and  social 
attachment. Its loss serves as a personal and societal blight, the like of which I experienced 
in  1980s  Yorkshire.  There  is  evidence  the  loss  of  work  worsens  public  health  (McAfee 
(2015), Case and Deaton (2015)). Life among the leisure classes may be less attractive than 
it superficially sounds. 
Maybe  those  costs  will  be  small  and  fleeting.  Maybe  attitudes  will  change  as  we  grow 
accustomed to life in leisure class. Maybe “zero hours contracts” will take on a whole new 
aspirational meaning. Maybe I am lacking imagination in thinking a life of loafing, surfing and 
gaming could be fulfilling. Nonetheless, I doubt this is quite what Keynes had in mind as the 
economic possibilities for our grandchildren. 
If  lower  hours  are  not  a  full  answer,  retraining  workers  in  line  with  their  comparative 
advantage  might  be.  One  important  dimension  of  this  is  education.  School  education  has 
tended  to  focus  on  developing  the  core  cognitive  competences  –  for  example,  reading, 
writing and arithmetic. Smart machines have long since surpassed humans in their ability to 
do the first and third of these. And they are fast catching-up on the second. 
That  begs  the  question  of  whether  there  are  other  skills  where  humans’  comparative 
advantage is greater. For example, humans are known to possess an equally-important class 
of non-cognitive skills – self-confidence, self-esteem, relationship-building, negotiation skills, 
empathy. In studies of children, these non-cognitive attributes have been found to be as, if 
not more, important than cognitive competences in enhancing jobs, incomes and well-being 
(Heckman (2007)). 
In a world in which machines came to dominate tasks involving core cognitive processing, 
the importance of, and skill premium attached to, non-cognitive skills is likely to rise. The high 
skill – high pay jobs of the future may involve skills better measured by EQs than IQs, by jobs 
creating  social  as  much  as  financial  value.  Yet  our  education  system,  at  present,  has  a 
strongly cognitive slant. Perhaps in future that will need to change, with as much effort put 
into cultivating social CVs as academic ones. 
On  redistribution,  if  the  past  repeats  itself  Mark  Twain-style,  the  gap  between  skilled  and 
unskilled workers could further widen as hollowing-out intensifies. This could bring pressures 
to  reallocate  income  from  rich  to  poor,  from  owners  to  workers  (Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee 
(2014)). It could also mean the gap between capital (those who own the robots) and labour 
(those who work for them) shares could widen further. If so, that may require a rethink of the 
relative roles of capital and labour, not least when it comes to running public companies. 
At present, owners of capital have the whip hand – no longer literally, but legally – when it 
comes  to  running  public  companies.  That  is  why  shareholders  are  often  called,  quite 
misleadingly,  the “owners”  of  a  company. This model  of corporate governance  has served 
the world well for over a century. But, today, it may not always make for the best outcomes, 
either for companies themselves or for wider society (Haldane (2015)). And a further tilt in 
the balance of power in favour of capital could make that situation worse. 
There are already corporate governance models which strike a somewhat different balance. 
Interestingly,  many  of  today’s  largest  and  most  successful  technology  companies  are  in 
private hands. Even for those technology companies which have gone public, ownership and 
control  has  often  been  separated  from  financing  through  dual-class  share  listings  which 
retain voting rights for the founders and workers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  These  alternative  models  of  corporate  governance  offer  a  different  balance  of  power 
between capital and labour. Indeed, the distinction between the two is blurred: the owners of, 
and  workers  for,  the  robots  are  in  effect  one  and  the  same.  These  governance  structures 
may allow a more equitable distribution of robotic rents and generate greater value for the 
companies themselves and for wider society. 
Turning to the nearer-term, what if any implications do these labour market trends carry for 
the  economy  and  monetary  policy?  Last  week,  the  MPC  set  out  its  view  in  the  quarterly 
Inflation  Report.  This  painted  a  picture  of  solid  UK  growth,  alongside  subdued  price 
pressures.  The  UK  is  growing  roughly  at  trend,  but  inflation  is  2  percentage  points  below 
target. The picture among other advanced economies is not greatly dissimilar. 
The  UK  inflation  picture  is  relatively  easy  to  explain,  at  least  in  an  accounting  sense.  The 
lion’s share of inflation’s weakness is accounted for by external factors – weak world prices 
and a strong exchange rate. These factors are themselves in part a reflection of weak world 
demand,  pushing  down  the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities.  The  impact  of  external 
disinflationary pressures on UK inflation is thus likely to be persistent. 
Nonetheless,  in  time  these  external  pressures  should  wane.  What  will  then  determine  UK 
inflation is the evolution of domestic costs, specifically labour costs. The UK labour market 
has been hard to read over the past few years. In common with other forecasters, the MPC 
has consistently been surprised by the weakness of wages, given the strong cyclical bounce 
in job creation. It has over-predicted the path of wages in recent years (Chart 29). 
There are a number of possible explanations for this wage weakness. One is that there is 
simply greater labour market slack in the economy than we have estimated. Another is that 
the narrowing of slack is having less impact on wage pressures than in the past – the slope 
of the so-called Phillips curve is flatter. There is international evidence of the Phillips curve 
having flattened over recent decades (IMF (2006, 2013), BIS (2014)). 
That  might  arise  because  technology  has  made  it  easier  and  cheaper  than  ever  before to 
substitute  labour  for  capital,  man  for  machine.  That  is  the  very  essence  of  the  Second 
Machine Age hypothesis. It would manifest itself in weaker than expected wage growth and a 
secular  fall  in  the  labour  share  of  income,  both  of  which  we  have  seen  in  a  number  of 
countries. 
The  central  projection  in  the  November  Inflation  Report  assumes  the  labour  share  reverts 
over time to its historical mean, with the fruits of productivity harvested by labour and capital 
in line with their historical shares. And because wages have lagged behind productivity for 
several  years,  this  implies  the  labour  share  is  currently  at  a  cyclical  low,  but  would  be 
expected to mean-revert in the period ahead. 
This  pattern  is  embodied  in  the  MPC’s  forecasts,  with  wages  projected  to  outpace 
productivity  in  the  next  few  years  (Chart  31).  Put  differently,  growth  in  unit  wage  costs  is 
expected  to  pick  up  and  the  labour  share  to  rise  fairly  sharply  (Chart  32).  That  path  is 
certainly plausible if cyclical factors are the key drivers of the low labour share. 
But there may be alternative forces at play. If substitutability between labour and capital is 
higher  than  in  the  past,  labour’s  bargaining  power  and  share  of  income  might  be 
commensurably lower, as we have seen across a number of countries before and after the 
crisis.  So  how  different might the  MPC’s  projections  look  if  the  labour  share  was,  say, flat 
rather than rising over the next few years? 
Charts 32 and 33 show the path of wage growth and inflation that would imply. Wage growth 
is  weaker,  averaging  around  3¼%  rather  than  4½%  at  the  year  three  point.  So  too  is 
consumption given weaker take-home pay, though this is largely offset by stronger company 
profits and higher investment, leaving aggregate output little altered. 
The  upshot  is  a  materially  lower  path  for  inflation  than  contained  in  November’s  Inflation 
Report:  inflation  reaches  around  1.6%  at  the  two-year  horizon  and  remains  around  these 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  levels. That would put the balance of risks squarely towards a more protracted undershoot of 
the inflation target, even without any downdraught from external prices and demand. 
Holding flat the labour share may be too strong an assumption if the UK continues its cyclical 
rebound. Nonetheless, even the rise in wage growth seen through this year appears to have 
subsided somewhat over recent months. Shorter-term measures suggest annualised rates of 
pay growth of around 1 to 1.5% in Q3, down from 2.5 to 3% in Q2. Wage growth appears to 
be fizzling. 
And, of course, those are not the only potential downside risks facing the UK. World events 
have added to those downside skews over the past few months. There is now rather more 
convincing evidence of a gentle slowing in the UK and world economies since the summer. 
In the UK, this gentle slowing has been apparent since the middle of 2014. It leaves growth, 
in the UK and globally, little more than trend. 
Growth could accelerate in the period ahead, with the cost of credit at historically very low 
levels. Since the crisis, however, the pattern of UK output has been shaped less by the cost 
of  credit  today  than  by  uncertainty  about  demand  tomorrow.  It  was  that  uncertainty  which 
cratered world demand in 2008. It was that uncertainty which flattened UK growth during the 
euro-area crisis of 2011–12. And it was the relief rally after that euro-area uncertainty abated 
which caused UK growth to bounce back during 2013–14. 
Uncertainty about demand is, once more, on the rise. Given its source – the third in a triplet 
of  crises,  this  time  afflicting  the  emerging market  economies  –  I  do  not expect  that rise  in 
uncertainty to be temporary. I expect its impact to be greater in today’s world of post-crisis 
traumatic  stress  and  could  more  than  offset  the  cost  of  capital  accelerator,  as  we  have 
already seen repeatedly since the crisis. 
Against that  backdrop, my  view  is  that  the case for raising  interest  rates  is  still  some  way 
from being made. Whatever the reason, the economic aircraft appears to be losing speed on 
the runway. That is an awkward, indeed risky, time to be contemplating take-off. Meanwhile, 
inflationary trends do not at present given me sufficient confidence that inflation will be back 
at target, even two years hence. 
Growth has slowed towards trend in the UK, US and globally. And speed limits matter. Any 
further loss of momentum would risk taking growth below trend, widening the output gap and 
adding  to  downward  pressures  on  already-weak  prices.  My  personal  view  is  that,  in  the 
current environment, a rate rise would increase unnecessarily the chances of the economy 
falling below critical velocity, thereby extending the period inflation remains below target. 
For those reasons, I have continued to vote to leave rates unchanged, with a neutral stance 
on the future direction of monetary policy. Now more than ever in the UK, policy needs to be 
poised to move off either foot depending on which way the data break. 
General Secretary. I have covered 250 years of labour market developments in 40 minutes. 
Perhaps a robot could have done it in half that time or twice as well. Perhaps “Peak Andy” 
has been reached. Either way, these are issues I know the TUC will want to take seriously in 
its words and actions over the next 150 years, as it has over the past 150 years. 
Thank you. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  References 
Acemoglu, D (2008), “Introduction to modern economic growth.”, Princeton University Press. 
Aikman,  D,  Haldane,  A  G,  and  Nelson,  B  D,  (2014)  “Curbing  the  credit  cycle.”  The 
Economic Journal. 
Allen,  R  C  (2001)  “The  great  divergence  in  European  wages  and  prices  from  the  middle 
ages to the First World War”, Explorations in Economic History 38, 411–47. 
Allen, R (2009) “Engels’ pause: technical change, capital accumulation, and inequality in the 
British industrial revolution”, Explorations in Economic History 46, 418–35. 
Atkinson,  A  B,  and  Stiglitz,  J  E,  (2015)  “Lectures  on  public  economics”,  Princeton 
University Press. 
Autor, D H (2003) “Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the 
growth of employment outsourcing.” Journal of labor economics, Vol21(1), pages 1–42. 
Autor, D H (2015) “Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace 
Automation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol29(3): pages 3–30. 
Barro, R J, and Lee, J (2015) “Education Matters: Global Schooling Gains from the 19th to 
the 21st Century”, Oxford University Press. 
BIS (2014) ‘Inflation: domestic and global drivers’, BIS 84th Annual Report page 49 onwards. 
Broadberry,  S,  Campbell,  B  M  S,  Klein,  A,  Overton,  M,  and  van  Leeuwen,  B (2015) 
“British Economic Growth 1270–1870”, Cambridge University Press, working paper version 
available at 
http://www.lse.ac.uk/economicHistory/pdf/Broadberry/BritishGDPLongRun16a.pdf. 
Brynjolfsson,  E,  and  McAfee,  A  (2011)  "Race  against  the  machine."  Digital  Frontier, 
Lexington, MA. 
Brynjolfsson,  E,  and  McAfee,  A  (2014)  “The  second  machine  age:  work,  progress,  and 
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies”, WW Norton & Company. 
Case, A and Deaton, A (2015) “Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-
Hispanics Americans in 21st century, available at:  
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2015/10/29/1518393112. 
Clark,  G  (2005)  “The  condition  of  the  working  class  in  England,  1209–2004”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy, 113, 1307–40. 
Clark, G (2009) “Farewell to Alms”, Princeton University Press, ISBN: 978–0691141282. 
Cowen,  T  (2013)  “Average  is  over:  powering  America  beyond  the  age  of  the  great 
stagnation”, Penguin. 
de Pleijt, A M, and Weisdorf, J L, (2014) “Human capital formation from occupations: the 
‘deskilling hypothesis’ revisited”, Centre for Global Economic History Working Paper 57. 
Deane,  P  and  Cole,  W  A  (1967)  “British  Economic  Growth  1688–1959  Trends  and 
Structure”, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, Tables 3 and 31. 
Deloitte  (2015a)  “Technology  and  people:  The  great  job-creating  machine”,  available  at 
http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/finance/deloitte-uk-technology-
and-people.pdf. 
Deloitte  (2015b)  “From  brawn  to  brains:  The  impact  of  technology  on  jobs  in  the  UK”, 
available  at  http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/growth/articles/from-brawn-to-brains--the-
impact-of-technology-on-jobs-in-the-u.html. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Delong,  B  (2015)  “Technological  progress  anxiety:  thinking  about  peak  horse  and  the 
possibility of peak human”, available at:  
http://www.bradford-delong.com/2015/09/highlighted-the-history-of-technological-anxiety-
and-the-future-of-economic-growth-is-this-time-different.html. 
Feenstra,  R  C,  Inklaar,  R,  and  Timmer,  M  P  (2013)  “The  Next  Generation  of  the  Penn 
World Table”, available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt. 
Ford, M (2015) “Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future” Basic 
Books. 
Freeman, R (2008), “Why do we work more than Keynes expected?”, Chapter 9 in Revisiting 
Keynes: Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren, MIT Press. 
Frey, C B, and Osborne, M A (2013) “The future of employment: how susceptible are jobs 
to computerisation.”, available at: 
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf. 
Heckman, J J, and Masterov, D V (2007) “The productivity argument for investing in young 
children”  Review  of  Agricultural  Economics,  American  Agricultural  Economics  Association, 
vol. 29(3), pages 446–493, available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w13016. 
Haldane,  A  G  (2015)  “Who  owns  a  company?”,  speech  given  at  University  of  Edinburgh 
Corporate Finance Conference 22 May 2015, available at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
Hills, S, Thomas, R and Dimsdale, N (2010) ‘The UK recession in context — what do three 
centuries of data tell us?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2010 Q4. 
Hills,  S,  Thomas,  R  and  Dimsdale,  N  (2015),  ‘Three  Centuries  of  Data  –  Version  2.2’, 
available here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/onebank/datasets.aspx. 
IMF (2006) ‘How Has Globalisation Affected Inflation’, available at: 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/pdf/c3.pdf. 
IMF (2013) ‘The dog that didn’t bark: Has inflation been muzzled or was it just sleeping?’, 
World Economic Outlook, April 2013. 
Katz, L F, and Margo, R A (2013), “Technical change and the relative demand for skilled 
labor: The united states in historical perspective.” National Bureau of Economic Research, 
No. w18752. 
Keynes,  J  M  (1933)  "Economic  possibilities  for  our  grandchildren."  Essays  in  persuasion: 
358–73. 
London Metropolitan University (2015), “Proposed congress of trade councils”, available 
at: 
http://www.unionhistory.info/britainatwork/emuweb/objects/nofdigi/tuc/imagedisplay.php?irn=
2000001&reftable=ecatalogue&refirn=2000000. 
Maddison, A (2011) “The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective”, available for download 
at: 
http://www.oecd.org/dev/developmentcentrestudiestheworldeconomyamillennialperspective.h
tm. 
Manyika, J, Chui, M, Bughin, J, Dobbs, R, Bisson, P, and Marrs, A (2013), “Disruptive 
technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global economy” McKinsey 
Global Institute, Vol180, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
Marx, K (1867) “Capital: Volume 1”, available at:  
http://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Marx/mrxCpA1.html. 
McAfee,  A  (2015)  “A  life  without  work  can  be  fatal”  Financial  Times,  available  at: 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1b99abe2-8249–11e5-8095-ed1a37d1e096.html#axzz3rAvk1er8. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 (2015), 
“Five  headline 
indicators  of  national 
 
 
Mill,  J  S  (1848),  “Principles  of  political  economy  with  some  of  their  applications  to  social 
philosophy”, JW Parker. 
Mokyr, J, Vickers, C, and Ziebarth, N L (2015) “The history of technological anxiety and the 
future  of  economic  growth:  Is  this  time  different?”  The  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives, 
Vol29(3): pages 31–50. 
NEF 
success”,  available  at: 
http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/five-headline-indicators-of-national-success. 
OECD (2012)  “Labour  losing to  capital:  what  explains  the  declining  labour  share?”,  OECD 
Employment Outlook 2012, available here:  
http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/EMO%202012%20Eng_Chapter%203.pdf. 
Pessoa,  J  P,  and  Van  Reenen,  J  (2013)  “Decoupling  of  wage  growth  and  productivity 
growth?  Myth  and  reality”  Centre  for  Economic  Performance,  DEP  Discussion  Paper 
No 1246. 
Piketty, T (2014) “Capital in the 21st Century.” Cambridge: Harvard Uni. 
Pratt,  G  A  (2015)  “Is  a  Cambrian  Explosion  Coming  for  Robotics?”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, Vol29(3): pages 51–60. 
Salvatori, A (2015), “The anatomy of job polarisation in the UK”, IZA DP 9193. 
Shaw-Taylor, L, and Wrigely, E A (2014) “Occupational structure and population change”, 
in Floud, Humphries and Johnson (eds) The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, 
Volume 1 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014). 
Stanislaw, U (1958) ‘Tribute to John von Neumann’, Bulletin of the American Mathematical 
Society. 
Ricardo,  D  (1821)  “On  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy  and  Taxation”,  Library  of 
Economics and Liberty Online. 
Trade  Union  Congress  (2014)  “UK  workers  suffering  the  most  severe  squeeze  in  real 
earnings  since  Victorian  times”,  Labour  Market  and  Economic  report,  available  at: 
http://www.tuc.org.uk/economic-issues/labour-market-and-economic-reports/economic-
analysis/britain-needs-pay-rise/uk. 
Wallis, P (2014) “Labour markets and training”, in Floud, Humphries and Johnson (eds) The 
Cambridge  Economic  History  of  Modern  Britain,  Volume  1  (Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, 2014). 
Woirol,  G  R  (1996),  “The  technological  unemployment  and  structural  unemployment 
debates” (No. 173), Greenwood Publishing Group. 
 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix 
 
Chart 1: Unemployment rate and projections 
 Chart 2: Cumulative Employee growth by skill 
level 
Cumulative increase since 2010Q1, thousands
16+ Unemployment Rate
February 09 IR projection
February 14 IR projection
Highly skilled
Medium skilled
Low skilled
Total
Unemployment 
rate , %
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
Chart 4: Nominal and Real total pay growth  
Real pay growth
Total nominal pay growth
Per cent yoy
2006
2008
2009
2010
2012
2013
2014
4
2016
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 3: Percent of 18–24 year olds not in 
employment, education or training 
Per cent
2010 Q2 2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Source: ONS Labour Force Survey 
 
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
-200
-400
 8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
2005
2007
 
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
 
2009
2011
2013
-10
2015
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 Chart 5: Percentage of people in employment  
who would like to work longer hours 
Per cent
12
11
10
9
8
7
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
6
2015
   
 
Chart 6: Percentage of people in employment  
on a zero hours contract 
Per cent 
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
3
2
1
0
Source: ONS Labour Force Survey 
Notes: Responses to the Labour Force Survey can be affected by 
respondents recognising the term “zero-hours contract”. It is not 
possible to say how much of this increase is due to greater 
recognition of the term. 
  
Chart 7: Fall in the labour share since 2009 
Per cent 
2000 2001 2003 2005 2007 2008 2010 2012 2014
  60%
55%
50%
45%
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
Chart 8: Median real pay decline by sector since 2009 
 
Per cent 
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%
-12%
 l
i
a
c
n
h
c
e
t
 
d
n
a
 
c
i
f
i
t
n
e
c
s
 
,
l
i
i
a
n
o
s
s
e
o
r
P
f
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
i
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
d
o
o
f
 
d
n
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
d
o
m
m
o
c
c
A
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
k
r
o
w
i
 
l
a
c
o
s
 
d
n
a
 h
t
l
 a
e
h
n
a
m
u
H
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
e
t
a
t
s
e
 
l
a
e
R
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c
e
r
 
d
n
a
 
t
n
e
m
n
a
i
t
r
e
n
e
t
 
,
s
t
r
A
i
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
d
n
a
 
e
v
i
t
i
a
r
t
s
n
m
d
A
i
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
e
t
s
a
w
 
,
e
g
a
r
e
w
e
s
 
;
y
p
p
u
s
 
r
e
l
t
a
W
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
d
e
m
e
r
 
i
d
n
a
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
f
o
 
r
i
a
p
e
r
 
;
e
d
a
r
t
 
l
i
a
t
e
r
 
d
n
a
 l
e
a
s
e
o
h
W
l
l
s
e
c
y
c
r
o
t
o
m
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
c
h
e
v
 
r
o
o
m
t
i
l
;
e
c
n
e
f
e
d
 
d
n
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
s
n
m
d
a
 
c
i
i
i
l
b
u
P
i
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s
 
l
a
c
o
s
 
y
r
o
s
u
p
m
o
c
l
  
Table 1: Comparison of major earnings crises in UK history 
 
 
 Duration (years) 
Depth (%) 
Recovery (%) 
Total change over seven 
years (%) 
     
2 
-10 
12.8 
1.2 
1874–78 
4 
-1.7 
0.6 
-1.1 
  i
g
n
y
r
r
a
u
q
 
d
n
a
 
g
n
n
M
i
i
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
C
 
d
n
a
n
o
 i
t
a
m
r
o
n
f
I
i
g
n
h
s
i
f
 
d
n
a
 
y
r
t
s
e
r
o
f
 
,
e
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
A
g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
r
e
h
O
t
i
r
i
a
 
d
n
a
 
m
a
e
t
s
 
,
s
a
g
 
,
y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
E
l
l
y
p
p
u
s
 
g
n
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
i
e
g
a
r
o
t
s
 
d
n
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
e
c
n
a
r
u
s
n
i
 
d
n
a
 
l
i
a
c
n
a
n
F
i
   1921–23 
2 
-8.2 
4.5 
-4 
1976–77 
2 
-6.6 
14.5 
6.9 
2007–14 
7 
-7.9 
N/A 
-7.9 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  Chart 9: Labour productivity since 1750,  
log scale 
 
Log scale, index 2000=100
Chart 10: Employment ratio in the UK,  
since 1801 
 
Per cent
100
10
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
 1801 1826 1851 1876 1901 1926 1951 1976 2001
55
50
45
40
35
  
Source: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015), Deane and Cole (1967) 
 
 
 
Chart 12: Population growth and change in 
employment share 
Population 
growth, % 
Population growth (lhs)
Change in employment ratio (rhs)
Change in employment 
ratio, pp 
 
Source: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015) 
 
 
 
Chart 11: Average weekly hours worked UK and 
US, since 1856 
 
UK
US
Number of hours
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1856
1881
1906
1931
1956
1981
2006
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1856
 1881
1906
1931
1956
1981
2006
 
Source: Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2013); St Louis FED and 
Maddison (2011); Hill, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015) 
 
 
 
Source: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015) 
 
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
   Chart 13: Labour productivity and real wages, 
since 1750 
Chart 14: Global participation in education, since 
1870 
 
Real wages
Labour productivity
Index 1750=100 
Tertiary
Secondary
Primary
No Schooling
Percentage of workforce 
100
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 1870
1890
1910
1930
1950
1970
1990
2010
 
Source: Barro and Lee (2015) 
 
Chart 16: Long run inequality 
 
Per cent 
55%
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
Top 10% income share in the US
Top 10% income share in the UK
1900
1950
2000
 
Source: Piketty (2014) 
  80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
 1750
1800
1850
1900
 
 
Source: Hill, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015) 
Chart 15: The UK labour share of income, since 
1770 
1950
2000
Per cent of 
income 
Allen, 2009 (a)
Piketty & Zucman, 2014 (b)
Blue Book, 2015 (c)
1770
1810
1850
1890
1930
1970
2010
 
Source: Allen (2009); Piketty (2014); Piketty and Zucman (2014) 
Notes:  (a)  Taken  from  Allen  (2009)  and  Piketty  (2014).  (b) 
Constructed  using  data  reported  in  the  supplementary  tables  to 
Piketty & Zucman (2014). (c)  These data are consistent with the 
ONS  Quarterly  National  Accounts  Q2  2015  release.   Self-
employed labour income is imputed differently than series (b) due 
to data availability.   
 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
 Chart 17: Share of employment by sector, since 1688  
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
 Percentages of workforce 
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
  0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 1718
1688
 
Source: Shaw-Taylor and Wrigley (2013); ONS; Bank calculations. 
 
1748
1778
1808
1838
Chart 18: Percentage of workforce by job type 
Agricultural Labourers 
Percentage of workforce  
Accountants 
Percentage of workforce  
 8
 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
 -
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 -
  Source: Deloitte (2015) 
 
1868
1898
1928
1958
1988
Telephonists and Telegraph Operators 
Percentage of workforce  
Hairdressers 
Percentage of workforce  
   0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 -
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
-15.0
-20.0
   Chart 19: Share of unskilled workers in the UK, 
1550–1849  
Chart 20: Employment shares in US 
manufacturing, 1850–1910  
White collar
Skilled blue collar
Operative/unskilled
Percentage point change in 
relative to 1850
Percent
155-Q99 1600-49 1650-99 1700-49 1750-99 1800-49
 
Source: de Pleijt and Weisdorf (2014) 
 
 
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 1850
1860
1870
1880
1900
1910
 
Source: Katz and Margo (2013) 
 
  Chart 21: Average real wages of unskilled building workers and GDP per capita, since 1270 
Log scale, mean of 
1270-1870=100 
Real Wages (Allen) 
Allen
320
Clark
Real Wages (Clark) 
GDP/cap
GDP/cap 
160
80
40
20
1870
 1270
1320
1370
1420
1470
1520
1570
1620
1670
1720
1770
1820
 
Source: Broadberry, Campbell, Klein and van Leeuwen (2015); Clark (2005); Allen (2001) 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
 Chart 22: Change in employment shares, 2004 – 2014 
 Percent change in employment
Professional
Occupations
Managers,
Directors and
Senior
Officials
Associate
Professional
and Technical
Occupations
Skilled
Trades
Occupations
Process,
Plant and
Machine
Operatives
Administrative
and
Secretarial
Occupations
Elementary
Occupations
Caring,
Leisure and
Other Service
Occupations
Sales and
Customer
Service
Occupations
Decreasing median pay
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
  
Source: ONS 
Notes: This chart shows the percentage point change in employment as a share of total employment. Occupations are ordered according to 
decreasing gross weekly median pay in 2004.  
 Chart 23: Change in employment share of different occupational groups, 1996–2014  
High skill
Middle skill
Low skill
 
Source: Eurostat 
 
Percentage point change in 
employment share 
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 24: Labour share across countries, since 1970 
United States
Spain
Italy
Germany
Sweden
Canada
France
Per cent labour 
share 
1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
 0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
 
Source: OECD 
 Chart 25: Labour productivity, mean and median 
real wages in the US, since 1974 
Chart 26: Labour productivity,  mean and median 
real wages in the UK, since 1972 
 
Labour productivity
Real median hourly
earnings
Real mean hourly
earnings
Indexed 1974=1 
Labour productivity
Real Median hourly
earnings
Real mean hourly
earnings
Indexed 1972=1 
1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014
 
Source: Pessoa and Van Reenen (2013); St. Louis FED; Bank 
calculations 
 
Source: Pessoa and Van Reenen (2013); Bank calculations 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
      UK 
France 
Germany 
Spain 
EU Average 
Table 2: Underemployment across countries 
 
 
Table 3: Percent of employment at risk of 
automations 
  
Underemployment in 2013 
(percent of workforce) 
 15 
13 
14 
25 
14 
Risk of 
automation 
 Low 
(<33%) 
Medium 
(33–66%) 
High 
(>66%) 
US 
(Frey and 
Osborne (2013)) 
 33 
10 
47 
UK 
37 
28 
35 
  
Source: OECD 
Notes: This table shows the percentage of the workforce who hold a 
qualification that is more advanced than that required for the 
profession they are in, split by country. 
 
Source: Frey and Osborne (2013); Bank calculations.  
Notes: The UK probability of automation figures are based on 
estimates in Frey and Osborne (2013) matched against UK 
occupations. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 27: Distribution of occupational employment in the UK by probability of automation 
 
Employment
Elementary Occupations
Low
37% 
Medium
28% 
High
35% 
8,000,000
7,000,000
6,000,000
5,000,000
4,000,000
3,000,000
2,000,000
1,000,000
Process, Plant and Machine
Operatives
Sales and Customer Service
Occupations
Caring, Leisure and Other
Service Occupations
Skilled Trades Occupations
Administrative and Secretarial
Occupations
Associate Professional and
Technical Occupations
Professional Occupations
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.4
Probability of automisation
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Managers, Directors and Senior
Officials
  
Source: Frey and Osborne (2013); Bank calculations 
Notes: This chart shows the probability of automation based on estimates in Frey and Osborne (2013) matched against UK 
occupations 
  26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 28: Average probability of automation by occupation 
Average probability of 
automation across population 
Managers,
Directors and
Senior
Officials
Professional
Occupations
Skilled Trades
Occupations
Associate
Professional
and Technical
Occupations
Process,
Plant and
Machine
Operatives
Administrative
and
Secretarial
Occupations
Elementary
Occupations
Caring,
Leisure and
Other Service
Occupations
Sales and
Customer
Service
Occupations
Decreasing median pay 
 90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
  
Source: ONS; Frey and Osborne (2013); Bank calculation 
Notes: This chart shows the estimated average probability of automation across occupations using the probabilities in Frey and Osborne 
(2013) weighted by UK employment 
 Chart 30: Inflation Report projections of nominal 
wages 
Nov. 2008
Nov. 2010
Nov. 2012
Nov. 2014
Data
Nov. 2009
Nov. 2011
Nov. 2013
Nov. 2015
Per cent change on 
a year earlier
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 2016
2007
2004
 
Source: Bank of England Inflation Report projections 
2010
2013
Chart 31: November 2015 Inflation Report 
productivity and real wages projections and 
alternative scenario forecast 
 
Productivity (heads)
Real wages
Real wages (scenario)
Index: 2006=100
110
108
106
104
102
100
98
2006Q1
2008Q3
2011Q1
2013Q3
2016Q1
 
Source: ONS; Bank calculations 
 
96
2018Q3
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
  Chart 32: November 2015 Inflation Report labour 
share projection and alternative scenario 
Chart 33: November 2015 Inflation Report inflation  
projection and alternative scenario 
Labour share
Labour share (scenario)
Per cent
59
58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
50
49
2018Q4
CPI Inflation
CPI Inflation (scenario)
% change oya
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2000Q1
2003Q4
2007Q3
2011Q2
2015Q1
 Source: ONS; Bank calculations 
-1
2018Q4
  2000Q1
2003Q4
2007Q3
2011Q2
2015Q1
Source: ONS; Bank calculations 
  28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
