   Cyril Roux: Risk appetite and its role in commercial organisations 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, to the Institute of Directors’ Risk Appetite Forum, Dublin, 22 October 2015. 
 It  is my  pleasure  to  make the  opening  comments  at  this  event  bringing  together  directors, 
senior executives and risk management professionals from both financial services and non-
financial services organisations. The purpose of our forum is to facilitate discussion on the 
important topic of risk appetite and its role in commercial organisations, including of course 
financial firms. 
One of the key reasons behind the financial crisis was the weakness of risk culture and the 
failure of effective risk management in many financial firms. While a good deal of progress has 
been made across the financial services industry in addressing such issues, both risk culture 
and risk appetite remain areas where there remains much to be learned and done. 
With this in mind, the Central Bank of Ireland and the Institute of Directors in Ireland are hosting 
this joint event to facilitate a broad discussion and sharing of ideas from theoretical, practical 
and regulatory perspectives. We look forward to hearing your opinions and experiences and 
we hope it will be an informative and thought-provoking forum. 
What is risk appetite? 
The Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) defines risk appetite as: 
“The  aggregate  level  and  types  of  risk  an  organisation  is  willing  to  assume  within  its  risk 
capacity to achieve its strategic objectives and business plan”. 
In other words, the Risk Appetite Statement is the formal articulation of an entity’s willingness 
to take on and effectively manage certain risks and avoid, or minimise, other risks in the pursuit 
of its strategic objectives. 
Why establish risk appetite? 
Exposure to risk is an inevitable part of doing business. Successful businesses take on and 
manage calculated risks in order to achieve their goals. The challenge is to identify the risks 
which the firm is able to take on, that is to say the risks which the executive team has the 
appropriate skills, knowledge and experience to manage, up to a degree which the firm has 
the wherewithal to withstand. 
A clearly defined risk appetite provides the directors, management and staff with a framework 
which  facilitates  the  identification  and  management  of  risks.  Strategic  objectives  should 
underpin  the  risk  appetite  statement.  An  effective  risk  appetite  statement  enables  the 
assumption of risk in line with the strategic objectives of the organisation while giving the board 
and management confidence to avoid risks that are not in keeping with them. 
Given the links between the strategy and risk appetite, the risk appetite statement should be 
viewed as a positive and dynamic document which will allow an organisation to demonstrate 
that deliberate choices are made within a consistent risk framework. 
In the most effective risk cultures, risk management informs the decisions made throughout 
the organisation. Well defined roles and responsibilities of staff, for risk taking and incident 
reporting, together with appropriate training, will embed risk culture within the organisation. 
Decision makers must be accountable for their actions, and firms managed accordingly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   International focus on risk appetite 
Since the global financial crisis, there has been increased focus on risk management standards 
and,  more  specifically,  on  risk  appetite  as  evidenced  by  work  undertaken  by  the  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB). 
Following a peer review on risk governance, in November 2013 the FSB published “Principles 
for an Effective Risk Appetite Framework” which sets out key elements for an effective risk 
appetite framework, an effective risk appetite statement, risk limits, and defining the roles and 
responsibilities of the board of directors and senior management. The FSB Principles are broad 
enough to allow financial institutions to develop a framework that is tailored to their institution, 
that reflects their business model and structure, and that can be adapted to changes in the 
economic  and  regulatory  environment.  On  the  industry  side,  in  2009  the  IIF  published 
“Implementing Robust Risk Appetite Frameworks to Strengthen Financial Institutions”, which 
noted that risk appetite frameworks are an essential tool of risk management and highlighted 
the need for extensive judgment and challenge on the part of Boards and management in this 
respect. It is the role of board of directors to which I now turn. 
The role of directors 
The Financial Stability Board lists in its 2013 principles 12 tasks and responsibilities for the 
board of directors of financial firms with respect to the risk appetite framework. It starts with 
the approval of the framework, and ensuring its consistency with business and capital plans, 
continues with holding management accountable for the identification of risk exposures and 
for the escalation of breaches in risk limits, and ends with the establishment of internal and 
external safeguards and assessment of the risk framework. 
In September 2014 the Financial Reporting Council in the UK published a revised Corporate 
Governance Code (“the Code”) along with two associated guidance documents. In respect of 
risk management the Code has been amended to require directors to “confirm in the annual 
report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the company, 
including  those  that  would  threaten  its  business  model,  future  performance,  solvency  or 
liquidity”.  It  also  requires  directors  to  describe  those  risks  and  explain  how  they  are  being 
managed  or  mitigated.  In  addition,  it  assigns  responsibility  to  the  board  for  monitoring  the 
company’s risk management and internal control systems. 
Good  corporate  governance,  including  proper  risk  appetite  framework,  is  needed  in  any 
venture.  But  it  is  even  more  critical  in  firms  that  have  a  fiduciary  duty.  Financial  firms  are 
regulated for a reason: they hold liabilities towards their clients in the form of client assets, 
funds, or sums necessary to pay claims. This means that directors are required to extend their 
responsibilities  beyond  shareholders  and  take  full  account  of  the  interests  of  depositors, 
policyholders, victims of accidents, and savers This is in keeping with the Basel Corporate 
Governance Principles for Banks which provide that a bank’s board and senior management 
should “protect the interests of depositors, meet shareholder obligations, and take into account 
the interests of other recognised stakeholders”. Having a risk appetite cognizant of these wider 
responsibilities is a key part of meeting them. 
Central bank of Ireland initiatives 
From a Central Bank perspective, the Corporate Governance Code for Credit Institutions and 
Insurance Undertakings includes a requirement that the Board of Directors understands the 
risks to which an institution is exposed and documents the institution’s risk appetite. The Code 
requires that risk appetite be expressed in both qualitative and quantitative terms to facilitate 
tracking of performance and compliance with agreed strategy. Risk appetite is also subject to 
annual review by the board. 
The  Central  Bank’s  experience,  based  on  thematic  work  and  reviews,  is  that  such 
documentation is of variable quality and that the risk appetite may not always be embedded 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   throughout the organisation. Further, we have noted varying degrees of skills, experience and 
knowledge with respect to risk and its management. 
In order to address these concerns the Central Bank has launched a series of initiatives aiming 
to advance understanding as to what an effective risk appetite encompasses and to establish 
what constitutes good practice in relation to setting risk appetite. 
In mid-2014, we published a Discussion Paper to generate debate with stakeholders on risk 
appetite, its link with strategy and its importance for financial institutions. The Discussion Paper 
considered the main concepts and theories relating to risk appetite and its place within a risk 
appetite framework. It also provided suggestions as to what a risk appetite statement should 
contain. Responses to the Discussion Paper provided a useful insight into the current practices 
employed  in  the  Irish  financial  services  industry  and  the  Central  Bank  would  again  like  to 
acknowledge respondents’ contributions. 
The benefits of a risk appetite framework 
All  respondents  agreed  that  organisations  benefit  from  a  risk  appetite  framework  and 
concurred  that  it  is  necessary  to  align  risk  appetite  with  the  goals  and  strategies  of  the 
business. However, the majority of respondents stated that the development of a formal risk 
appetite within their organisation was driven by regulatory and legislative obligations. While it 
is, of course, necessary to fulfil the regulatory requirements in this regard, it is disappointing 
that the benefits arising from the successful implementation of risk appetite framework are not 
more widely appreciated. Indeed, it is these benefits that drive so many non-financial services 
organisations which are not bound by such requirements to invest considerable time and effort 
in implementing an effective risk appetite framework. 
The  Central  Bank  also  recognises  that  there  is  no  “one-size-fits-all”  approach  to  the 
implementation  of  risk  appetite  within  an  organisation.  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  risk 
appetite  is  organisation-specific  and  should  reflect  the  nature,  scale  and  complexity  of  the 
entity. 
It is this very diversity that prompted the Central Bank and the Institute of Directors in Ireland 
to invite you here today to open discussions regarding the role and benefits, as well as the 
challenges, of risk appetite and to share practical experiences and lessons. 
Conclusion 
The support for this Forum and the large number of attendees present this morning reflects 
the positive attitude of directors, senior executives and risk management professionals towards 
advancing the understanding of risk appetite. 
Thank you for your attendance this morning and I hope that this morning’s discussions lead to 
a clearer vision as to both the role and the benefits of a clearly articulated and embedded risk 
appetite framework. 
I would also like to thank Maura Quinn and her team at the Institute of Directors in Ireland for 
agreeing to co-host todays Forum with the Central Bank and for their invaluable support and 
assistance arranging today’s event. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
