  Andreas Dombret: Totally digital? The future of banking business 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 2015 Bavarian Financial  Summit “The opportunities and challenges of 
digitalisation for banks and insurers”, Munich, 26 October 2015. 
 Professor Gerke 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to lay out some ideas and challenges 
regarding the digitalisation of the banking industry here at the prestigious Bavarian Financial 
Summit as a prelude to the discussion. 
1. 
Digitalisation of the financial industry: a better era or the seeds of the next 
crisis? 
There is no doubt that the wave of digitalisation has walloped the banking industry and will 
leave  no  stone  unturned.  The  percentage  of  bank  clients  in  Germany  who  regularly  bank 
online is now 63%.1 Many of them have smartphones and want to be able to do their banking 
anywhere, anytime. The banks need to figure out their role in this new world. It would help, of 
course, to know which direction this wave of digitalisation is sweeping us in. Will the financial 
industry become totally digital? Allow me to address this question. 
Digitalisation has created great expectations for the financial industry: using today’s IT can 
make the financial system much cheaper, much faster, more customised, more flexible and 
more efficient. Retail customers today are able to conduct their banking business and asset 
planning  anywhere  in  the  world  on  their  smartphones.  And  you  can  use  online  loan 
brokerage portals to grant loans to the Mittelstand company of your choice or obtain advice 
on  how  to  invest  assets  from  a  computer  algorithm.  We  can  thus  look  ahead  to  the 
emergence of a more advanced financial system which better serves society at large and, in 
particular, retail customers in many respects – Mr Gerke, allow me to quote your expectation 
that the change will make transparency, security and fairness a matter of course in future.2 
Many  new  financial  services  providers  are  seeing  a  new  dawn,  while  some  banks  feel 
threatened. I see a wealth of economic potential if the new ideas are properly implemented. 
Any societal development, however, can also have its dark side. In a highly networked world, 
the dark side even extends as far as one’s breast pocket. A security service provider has 
identified a new malware sample every 14 seconds for Android smartphones alone.3 Banks 
are having to fend off thousands of attacks on their IT systems every day. Innovation can 
have sobering side effects – that’s something that financial supervisors know only too well 
based on the experience of the past 20 years. 
Digital financial technologies are certainly no exception. Whenever humans innovate, errors 
and  unwelcome  developments  are  possible,  if  not  to  say  highly  probable.  The  financial 
system  is  particularly  vulnerable;  rogue  innovation  can  have  severe  consequences  for 
society. There are therefore notable voices asserting that information technology will be at 
the  core  of  a  forthcoming  financial  crisis.  Greg  Medcraft,  chair  of  the  board  of  the 
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), has predicted that the next 
                                                
1   Roland Berger (2015), Digital Revolution in Retail Banking. 
2   BearingPoint (2015), 7 digital questions for banks. 
3   G-Data (2015), Mobile Malware Report Q2/2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
big financial shock will come from cyber space following a succession of attacks on financial 
players. To be frank: I share this view. 
So the wave of digitalisation can wash us up on all sorts of coasts. This means banks and 
supervisors need to set about charting the right route without delay. One thing I wish to state 
upfront: I do not believe that full digitalisation is the right destination for everyone: instead, we 
need to strike the right balance and seek out the right overall package which will convince 
society  over  the  long  term.  In the following,  I  would  like  to  outline  what  I  think  banks  and 
savings banks need to do in order to survive in a digital world, and I will address the new 
challenges I believe regulators and supervisors of this industry will be facing. 
Banks: finding their feet in the digital world 
2. 
Banks can no longer discount digitalisation as just one of many trends they can simply sit 
out. Pressure is being created not only by new expectations among customers and within the 
industry,  but  also  by  the  influx  of  new  competitors  from  other  industries.  Having  a  large 
skyscraper and a branch network is simply no longer what it is needed to be taken seriously 
as a legitimate financial services provider and to be able to provide services nationwide. 
Fintechs, as they are known, symbolise the attack of the “small and quick”. These are hi-tech 
financial services firms which mostly provide just a limited range of services but are highly 
innovative  and  show  huge  competitive  potential.  Banks  need  to  acknowledge  fintech 
companies’ great innovative power without envy. These new players have come up with all 
sorts  of  ideas:  loan  brokerage  platforms,  for  instance,  bring  together  loan-seekers  and 
investors – through this digital platform, both sets of parties can obtain access to one another 
quickly  and  relatively  inexpensively.  PayPal,  Google  Wallet,  ApplePay  and  others  are 
providing innovative payment solutions. Automated investment tools are also available online 
for  investors.  Their  growth  has  been  impressive:  across  the  globe,  fintech  companies  are 
now  collecting  around  US$1  billion  per  month  in  capital,  and  there  are  many  pioneering 
companies, particularly in the United States. 
Banks  simply  have  to  be  in  a  state  of  high  alert  –  not  only  because  of  the  threat  of  a 
redistribution  of  profit margins,  but  also  out  of  the  knowledge  that,  in  a fast-moving  digital 
world,  they  could  fall  irrecoverably  behind  if  they  fail  to  respond  quickly  enough  with 
competitive  products.  To  put  it  differently:  the  banking  industry  cannot  put  their  collective 
heads in the sand but have to rise to the challenge. 
And this is due not only to fintech companies and shrinking profit margins. What are termed 
“disruptive technologies” are playing a decisive role here. Technologies are disruptive if they 
not  only  make  individual  processes  more  efficient  but  also  render  entire  business  models 
obsolete. Once music started to be spread over the internet as compressed files, a whole 
value-added chain was suddenly rendered superfluous – from the CD pressing machine to 
the  record  store.  Smartphones,  with  their  highly  developed  lenses,  are  currently  putting 
pressure  on  the  camera  industry.  The  financial  industry,  too,  needs  to  come  to  grips  with 
these  “destructive”  technologies.  Mobile  payment  methods,  for  instance,  could  erode 
payment structures that have evolved over years. 
“Blockchain” technology is credited with having a particularly sobering impact on banks. By 
using the global computer network, this technology is enabling all transactions conducted in 
the  world  of  finance  to  be  documented  in  a  presumably  forgery-proof,  near-real-time  and, 
above  all,  decentralised  manner,  ie  potentially  without  central  securities  depositories  or 
banks. Any individual and any company could therefore settle money, securities or any other 
type of asset and liability directly with other financial market agents – thus obviating the need 
for the existing, unwieldy settlement infrastructure used by banks, CSDs and central banks. 
As  a  solution  for  the  entire  financial  system,  this  technology  is  thus  raising  fundamental 
questions  –  including  regulatory  questions.  Banks are  currently  researching  ways  of  using 
this  new  technology  internally,  especially  for  cross-border  transactions.  The  US  NASDAQ 
stock exchange is already using blockchain technology for some of its services. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  the  light  of  these  developments,  it  would  be  criminally  negligent  for  banks  and  savings 
banks to simply adopt a wait-and-see attitude: other industries have seen new technologies 
become the standard in no time at all. Examples include digital photography, the advent of 
smartphones and online media. Once digital technology has established a foothold, banks 
will no longer be able to put the genie back into the bottle. With regard to online and mobile 
payments,  German  banks  have,  in  the  meantime,  seen  the  writing  on  the  wall  and  have 
developed their own in-house solution, known as PayDirekt. 
The frustration felt by many bank clients over the mounting negative headlines on banks in 
the  past  few  years  –  with  customers  and  the  real  economy  being  far  removed,  in  many 
cases, from the centre of banks’ interest – certainly explains some of the rush to embrace the 
digital  newcomers.  That  is  why  fintech  companies  have  little  in  common  with  banks:  their 
staff do not wear ties, and their websites have been purposefully designed to be “minimalist”. 
I therefore see the interest in fintech companies and new service providers as an indication 
of the beating the banking industry’s image has taken in the past few years. 
Digitalisation therefore highlights customers’ desire for fair treatment and transparent bank 
services. However, even in the area of digital applications, confidence is fragile: an algorithm 
which acts as a financial decision-making aid needs to actually help, and not to manipulate, 
its user. The use of “big data” analysis makes sense only if it does not abrogate human self-
responsibility. After all, confidence is not programmable. 
I therefore do not wish to fan the flames of a dispute between innovative and economically 
promising new competitors and presumably ageing, tottering banks. On the contrary, I do not 
believe that the financial system can be fully broken down into individual digital processes 
and  services.  There  is  much  more  to  good  financial  services  than  simply  assembling  a 
collection of clever algorithms. The financial industry needs to demonstrate broad experience 
with the economy and financial products and to constantly refresh its insights. And I agree 
with Mr Gerke that customers won’t want to use a separate bank or fintech for each different 
financial  service  they  need.  This  favours  one-stop-shop  banks.  In  addition,  new  business 
ideas need to pass the acid test first – statistically, a large percentage of new ideas end up 
failing.No  one  single  digital  banking  business  model  is  superior  to  all  others,  and  fintech 
companies are not the banks’ arch-enemy: cooperation is just as conceivable, and is already 
being actively pursued by many banks. 
But at the same time, I also believe that, at the core, the banks’ objective cannot be to swim 
as close as possible to the crest of the innovative wave. It must be in their interest instead to 
provide  a  competitive  all-in-one  package.  This  is  naturally  predicated  on  banks’  boards  of 
directors  taking  digitalisation  seriously.  However,  in  actual  fact,  I  believe  some  banks  and 
savings banks are not even truly aware that digitalisation even exists. And, where it is being 
noticed, there seems to be, in many cases, significant resistance to reform. 
One  thing  needs  to  be  clear,  however:  change  is  irreversible  and  will  require  banks  to 
recognise the importance of digitalisation and develop a suitable digital strategy in response 
in  order  to  remain  profitable.  In  my  eyes,  an  important  factor  is  to  always  bear  in  mind 
customers’ individual needs in order to develop sound products with long-term added value. 
Sector supervisors: have the courage of clairvoyance 
3. 
Let us now look at the new tasks for banking supervisors created by digitalisation. After all, 
digitalisation is also forcing supervisors to keep pace with new developments. 
This does not mean an independent regulatory framework for digital financial services – after 
all, our overarching objective is, and remains, financial stability. What we therefore need to 
do is, through regulation, cover all the relevant hazards to a reliable financial system. 
Our regulatory framework should therefore continue to be geared to these threats and not, 
say, make a distinction between analogue and digital financial services. Wherever risks to 
the  stability  of  the  financial  market  architecture  arise,  they  have  to  be  addressed  by  legal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
requirements  – for instance, if a company grants loans on a commercial scale through an 
online platform. 
But, without paying attention to digital change, we cannot supervise the banking industry in a 
risk-appropriate  manner.  Wherever  new  risks  are  potentially  created  by  digitalisation,  we 
therefore  need  to  respond  in  a  sensitive  manner;  regulatory  and  supervisory  practice 
therefore need to adapt. Upheaval  in the financial industry caused by, for instance, murky 
securitisations  of  mortgages  or  high-frequency  trading,  teach  us  that  supervisors  need  to 
look at innovation and financial trends early on with a critical eye and in a forward-looking 
manner – there will be no getting around this in future. 
A  major  threat  lies  in  looking  at  innovations  mainly  in  terms  of  profits,  whereas  the 
background services or long-term impacts are often ignored. We cannot afford such myopia. 
We therefore demand that banks’ boards of directors fully understand the risks of their bank’s 
business model and that responsibilities are clearly laid out. Even if, for instance, IT services 
and servers are outsourced, the bank still needs to bear responsibility, in the form of an audit 
trail for supervisors, for the security and availability of data. 
There are additional and, in some cases, completely new threats, not only in the area of IT 
security but also in areas such as data protection, manipulation of behaviour by computers or 
cluster  risk  caused  by  algorithms.  We  need  to  deal  with  a  host  of  new  issues  which  are 
constantly cropping up: how  well can crowdfunding and peer-to-peer lending, for instance, 
support the economy in a slump? What systemic risks lurk in algorithms if they are widely 
used to aid customers’ decisions? 
I am firmly convinced that there should not be a race for total digitalisation; instead, the goal 
should be to deliver benefits for all which continue to be perceived as such ten years down 
the line. We need to address the specific problem areas affecting the digital financial world 
from the outset so that digital banking will justify the upfront confidence and even sceptical 
consumers can be convinced for the right reasons. 
One particular challenge here is that we can by no means be sure that we already know all 
the  problems  that  lie  ahead  in  the  digital  world.  These  “unknown  unknowns”  –  risks  that 
cannot  even  be  named  –  first  need  to  be  staked  out  on  the  charts  of  regulators  and 
supervisors. 
Prime examples are to be found among cyberattacks and IT risks. Advances in these areas 
have been very rapid over the past few years – not just in terms of the methods of attack but 
also  in  terms  of  how  they  are  organised  economically.  Attacks  have  become  extremely 
professional in the meantime: in some cases, we can even say that hacking has become an 
industry. Not only are black markets for data being created, but there are even markets with 
a division of labour:4 specialists, for instance, can be hired to attack a bank’s network. This 
development will continue, simply because more and more valuables are now digital – such 
as account balances, credit card information or service availability. It must therefore be clear 
to us that we have to prepare for new types of attacks and many completely new types of 
risk. These threats are impossible to eradicate entirely; all that can be done is to fight them 
adequately. 
In the light of what I have just said, I also have something to say to my fellow supervisors and 
regulators. We need to be ready to “think outside the box”, to go beyond our experience and 
think in entirely new dimensions. 
I therefore demand that regulators be required to think proactively. This means, first, that no 
topic should be off-limits to us supervisors. We cannot assume that all new risks will fit into 
the existing categories of rules and supervisory practices. We need, second, to identify and 
                                                
4   Cybercrime-as-a-service. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
understand  new  trends  and  developments  in  order  to  obtain  a  picture  of  potential  risks  in 
good  time.  Those  who,  for  instance,  neither  know  nor  understand  the  aforementioned 
concept  of  a  “blockchain”  will  not  be  able  to  keep  up.  Therefore,  even  though  there  are 
enough regulatory and supervisory issues to keep us busy, we need to have the courage to 
address  even  those  topics  which  have  not  yet  demonstrably  caused  a  crisis.  To  be  quite 
frank: I am calling for an entrepreneurial approach to supervision. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Totally digital or not: at the end of the day, we should judge the financial system in terms of 
how  well  it  serves  people  and the real  economy. I  urgently  encourage  banks  and savings 
banks to help shape digitalisation by offering innovative and sound products. This will require 
a spirit of entrepreneurship which does not respond half-heartedly and aimlessly to change 
but embraces it as an opportunity. Banks and savings banks will therefore need to reinvent 
themselves  to  some  degree.  By  this,  I  do  not  mean  dressing  up  old  business  ideas  in 
fashionable new attire but business models which make the banking sector more stable and 
resilient over the long term and which are unfailingly centred on the needs of customers. 
Regulators  and  supervisors  need,  more  than  ever,  to  have  the  courage  of  clairvoyance. 
Digital innovation is not an end in itself and is not immune to unwelcome developments. It is 
precisely because  we cannot see into the future that we must not allow ourselves to hide 
behind our current regulatory and supervisory standards. Responsibility for effective banking 
supervision means looking at new ideas and developments without prejudice – especially in 
times of radical change. 
I now look forward to the discussion. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
