  Mario Draghi: The European Central Bank – rebuilding trust, restoring 
prosperity and re-establishing price stability 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, to mark the opening of 
the academic year at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, 5 November 2015. 
 The  adult  lives  of  the  students  gathered  here  today  have  been  marked  by  crisis:  a  global 
financial  crisis  of  a  magnitude  that  many,  more  fortunate,  generations  have  never  had  to 
experience; a European economic crisis that has lasted too long, and from which we are only 
gradually emerging; and a series of critical situations that has significantly tested the solidity 
of European Monetary Union. 
Everyone has paid a very high price, but particularly younger generations. The crisis has laid 
bare the imbalances that built up in the preceding years, which were certainly due to serious 
errors  in  the  economic  policies  of  member  states,  but  also  to  shortcomings  in  Europe’s 
institutional  architecture.  Those  shortcomings  in  turn  contributed  to  making  the  policy 
response  to  the  crisis  slow  and  cumbersome.  The  price  paid  has  been  the  unacceptable 
number of unemployed, of whom many, too many, are young people. 
Today  I  will  try  to  explain  what  the  ECB,  the  central  bank  of  the  euro  area,  in  fulfilling  its 
mandate,  has  done  and  is  doing  to  rebuild  trust,  restore  prosperity  and  re-establish  price 
stability. 
The mandate of the ECB 
What is our mandate? Central banks have different mandates, depending on the jurisdiction 
and institutional framework in which they operate. Ours is not like that of the United States or 
of  Japan,  for  example.  Broadly  speaking,  central  banks  exist  to  preserve  the  integrity  of 
money. 
This  function  of  central  banks  comes  from  historical  experience,  which  shows  that  sound 
money is crucial to economic prosperity and social stability. In the words of John Kenneth 
Galbraith: “When money is bad, people want it to be better. When it is good, they think of 
other things”. We want sound money precisely so that people can think of other things and 
do other things: work, save, invest, innovate. 
If today we only rarely ask ourselves if money is “good” or “bad”, it is because for most of our 
lives  it  has generally  been  stable. The  youngest  amongst  you  have  not suffered first-hand 
from the damage caused by the inflationary episodes of the 1970s. Few of us have felt the 
consequences of deflation, as in the 1930s. That is a sign that, in recent times, central banks 
have largely succeeded in delivering their mandates. 
The  mandate  entrusted  to  the  ECB  is  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  –  i.e. 
ensuring  the  value  of  money  over  time.  Specifically,  our  objective  is  an  annual  rate  of 
inflation  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Note  that  this  definition  of  price 
stability  is  symmetric:  inflation  should  be  neither  too  high  for  too  long,  nor  too  low  for  too 
long.  History  teaches  us  that  deflation,  although  relatively  less  common,  can  have 
consequences just as destabilising as excessive inflation; above all for young people, who 
are generally net debtors, the consequences can be particularly distressing. 
But to ensure price stability, a currency must be sound in other respects, too. In particular, it 
must be a reliable unit of account – i.e. its value must be the same across the jurisdiction of 
the central bank and across whatever forms money takes. 
The money people use every day, however, is not only that created by the central bank. In a 
fractional  reserve  banking  system,  as  is  the  case  in  the  euro  area  and  other  modern 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economies,  the  bulk  of  the  money  stock  takes  the  form  of  bank  deposits.  Money  is  the 
liability of the banking system as a whole, and it circulates electronically. 
For  money  to  be  “single”,  then,  the  payments  system  has  to  work  smoothly  across  the 
jurisdiction – that is actually one of our statutory tasks – and the banking system that creates 
money  has  to  be  sound.  It  is  above  all  for  this  reason  that  we  attach  great  importance  to 
high-quality banking supervision, a task that has been entrusted to the ECB since November 
last year. And it is for the same reason that we act as lender of last resort to solvent banks in 
the event of a liquidity crisis. 
These  functions  are  not  designed  to  protect  individual  banks  per  se.  They  aim  to  ensure 
confidence  in  deposits  and  their  continuous  fungibility  with  banknotes  and  other  forms  of 
money  across  the  Union.  Moreover,  as  monetary  policy  impulses  are  transmitted  in  part 
through bank lending channels, sound banks are a prerequisite for ensuring price stability. If 
only  for  that  reason,  countering  fragmentation  in  the  banking  system  falls  without  doubt 
within our mandate. 
The  ECB’s  mandate,  in  its  broadest  sense,  is  based  on  a  consensus  rooted  in  society. 
Politicians  receive  their  mandates  from  elections  which  reflect  the  preferences  of  the 
electorate. The ECB’s mandate, by contrast, is inscribed in a document with a constitutional 
status: the Treaty. A constitution rests on those shared values deeply felt by citizens; that is 
why constitutions are not, nor should be, subject to periodic scrutiny by voters. 
To fulfil our mandate, we enjoy a large measure of independence in how we formulate our 
monetary policy. But that freedom has precise limits. 
We cannot use instruments prohibited by the Treaty to achieve our objectives. For example, 
we  are  prohibited  from engaging  in  monetary financing  of governments.  Neither  are  we  at 
liberty to redefine those objectives: abandoning the pursuit of our mandate, for instance, is 
simply not an option. And neither can we engage in behaviour that would de facto redefine 
the  provisions  of  the Treaty,  such  as  a country’s  membership,  or  not,  of  the  euro  area. In 
other words, our mandate is defined by the Treaty. 
In recent years, when pursuing the objectives in our mandate, we have been confronted with 
extremely  demanding  challenges  which  have  called  for  unprecedented  monetary  policy 
measures  in  terms  of  nature,  scale  and  number. We  have  had  to  ward  off risks that  were 
corroding the integrity of money both over time – price stability – and across space – within 
the  euro  area  –  especially  when  doubts  arose  about  some  countries’  membership  of  the 
area. 
In each instance we have responded in full compliance with our mandate, within the limits set 
by the Treaty. To illustrate this point, I would like to consider two recent examples: the launch 
of the ECB’s asset purchase programme (APP) in September last year and the Eurosystem’s 
provision of emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to Greek banks in recent months. 
The asset purchase programme 
In  the  early  phase  of  the  crisis,  inflation  on  the  whole  remained  well  anchored  to  our 
objective. Having recovered after the effects of the Lehman Brothers shock, consumer price 
inflation averaged 1.6% from September 2008 until the end of 2011. Afterwards, against a 
backdrop  of  persistent  macroeconomic  weakness,  inflation  began  a  prolonged  downward 
drift, consistently undershooting our staff projections. 
From  the  start  of  2014,  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  without  our  comprehensive 
response, medium-term price stability was at risk. 
Initially,  we  judged  the  main  barrier  to  higher  inflation  to  be  impairments  in  the  monetary 
transmission process that were preventing our policy from gaining traction in the economy. 
To remove those impairments, our policy response – launched in the summer of last year – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  focused  above  all  on  supporting  bank  lending  to  the  real  economy  with  longer-term 
refinancing operations. 
Unlike  the  long-term  operations  we  launched  in  2009  and  again  between  the  end  of  2011 
and early 2012, these targeted refinancing operations are, for the most part, conditional. In 
other words, any bank, starting in March this year, can have a long-term loan from the ECB 
at a very advantageous rate only if its lending to businesses and households increases at a 
higher pace than in the recent past. The banks have, to date borrowed an amount totalling 
just under €400 billion. This has been critical in stimulating the pick-up in bank lending that 
we are currently witnessing. 
Later in 2014, however, the inflation outlook worsened due to the steep fall in oil prices. Very 
low  oil-driven  inflation  is  not  necessarily  problematic  for  the  central  bank  if  that  inflation  is 
perceived  as  being  temporary  and  if,  as  a  consequence,  inflation  expectations  remain 
unchanged. But what we saw was that inflation expectations were tending, at all horizons, to 
become dis-anchored from our price stability objective and increasingly affected by the low 
level of current inflation. 
This called for monetary policy to shift up a gear, for two reasons. First, when policy interest 
rates are at zero – as was the case by that time – falling inflation expectations imply a rise in 
real  interest  rates,  which  amounts  to  a  tightening  of  our  monetary  policy  stance.  If  left 
unaddressed,  that  could  have  started  a  further  fall  in  inflation  expectations  and  a  sharper 
tightening of the monetary stance. 
Second, though oil price movements can permanently affect the price level, they should not 
exert a longer-term influence on the inflation rate. So the fact that we were seeing longer-
term  inflation  expectations  responding  to  low  oil  prices  was  a  source  of  concern.  It 
suggested,  perhaps,  that  people  believed  the  central  bank’s  scope  of  action  to  achieve  its 
objective  was  in  some  way  constrained,  and  hence  where  inflation  would  settle  was 
uncertain. 
It  was  in  that  context  that  we  launched  our  asset  purchase  programme  in  September  last 
year, and expanded it in January this year to include public sector securities. The transition 
from  a  monetary  policy  based  on  adjusting  short-term  interest  rates  to  one  carried  out 
through asset purchases constituted, in reality, a natural evolution. But it nonetheless helped 
dispel some misunderstandings about the meaning and boundaries of the ECB’s mandate, 
and confirmed the Governing Council’s independence of judgement and of decision-making 
from the political views within Member States. 
Recently,  the  European  Court  of  Justice  has  confirmed  that  the  ECB  can  deploy  any 
available  instrument,  unless  explicitly  ruled  out  by  the  Statute,  to  ensure  price  stability.  If 
risks  to  price  stability  arise,  we  have  to  use  all  the  tools  that  are  legally  available  to  us. 
Indeed, the clearest demonstration of the determination of the Governing Council to act when 
necessary  was  provided  precisely  by  the  decision,  taken  by  the  majority  of  the  Council 
members, to proceed with the asset purchase programme. 
Today,  like  before,  we  are  not  constrained  in  our  capacity  to  intervene;  we  have  many 
instruments at our disposal. We are confronting a situation in which price dynamics are very 
weak and the macroeconomic picture remains uncertain. That is why the Governing Council 
is  committed  to  re-examining  the  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  at  its  next 
meeting in December. The programme so far has without doubt been effective. But we must 
assess whether, with the weakening of the economy, the current stance is still sufficient to 
counter the headwinds which could obstruct a return to medium-term price stability. 
Should  we  believe  this  not  to  be  the  case,  we  will  examine  how  it  can  be  enhanced  to 
achieve our policy objective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Emergency liquidity assistance for Greek banks 
In  its  decisions  the  ECB  is  bound  both  by  the  Statute  and  by  the  other  provisions  of  the 
Treaty. The choices of the Governing Council concerning Greece were another example of 
strict adherence to the letter and spirit of both. 
This  was  apparent  a  few  months  ago  when,  amid  a  worsening  economic  and  political 
situation, the government and the Greek banks lost access to market funding and depositors 
started to withdraw their money from the banks. The banks became completely dependent 
on  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  a form  of  “lending  of  last  resort”, from  the  Eurosystem. 
ELA  became  the  sole  channel  through  which  Greek  banks  could  continue  to  function  and 
make payments, and through which deposits could continue to flow to other parts of the euro 
area. At the peak we were lending €127 billion euro to the Greek banking system, or 71% of 
the country’s GDP. 
In keeping with Article 123 of the Treaty which prohibits the ECB from monetary financing, 
the Governing Council imposed strict limits on the use of government securities as collateral 
for  loans  that  the  Greek  banks  received  from  the  ECB.  Otherwise  the  government  would 
have  obtained  refinancing  from  domestic  banks  which  would  have  in  turn  used  the 
government  securities  to  obtain  our  funding.  We  nevertheless  continued  to  supply  the 
necessary  liquidity  so  as  to  ensure  the  functioning  of  the  Greek  banking  system  and  the 
continuation of lending to businesses and households. This was in line with the principle by 
which the Eurosystem may lend to banks which are solvent and have sufficient collateral. 
The  authority  competent  in  this  matter,  the  European  supervisor,  deemed  that  the  banks 
were solvent. But clearly their solvency, like the availability of sufficient collateral, depended 
crucially on the prospects for success of the programme negotiations that were underway: if 
they  failed,  the  value  of  the  Greek  government  securities  would  have  fallen,  impairing  the 
solvency of the banks and the quality of their collateral, excluding them from financing by the 
Eurosystem.  The  Governing  Council  thus  found  itself  having  to  judge  the  prospects  of 
success of these negotiations. 
Two  extreme  options  were  put  forward.  The  Governing  Council  could  immediately  have 
considered a positive outcome as improbable, it could have objected to further extensions of 
ELA  or  even,  as  some  were  demanding,  asked  for  the  liquidity  granted  to  be  reimbursed, 
thus causing the whole of the Greek banking system to fail. 
Or,  as  some  have  subsequently  argued,  the  Governing  Council  could  have  allowed  the 
supply of liquidity assistance, in unlimited amounts, even in the event of the talks with the 
Greek government failing. 
As you will remember, our decision was controversial, but it was the right one. 
We granted ELA for as long as it was deemed that there were conditions favourable for a 
positive outcome to the negotiations. Its expansion was suspended when it appeared these 
conditions  were  no  longer  confirmed.  ELA  was  then  resumed  when  it  was  clear  that  the 
prospects for a positive solution were restored. 
Looking back at these months just past, we can see that it is not only the actual course of 
events that proved this to be the right decision. We chose the only path compatible with the 
Statute and the Treaty, the only path that would have preserved the integrity of the currency. 
Other possible paths would have infringed the principle whereby the ECB must lend only to 
solvent banks, and only if the collateral is adequate – and those paths would probably have 
destroyed the integrity of the currency. 
Similarly,  the  ending  of  ELA  would  most  likely  have  started  a  process  that  would  have 
resulted  in  Greece  exiting  the  euro  area,  thereby  negating  the  irrevocability  of  the  euro 
envisaged by the Treaty. And this would have happened not as a result of a new decision, 
reached  democratically,  by  the  signatory  countries  of  the  Treaty.  It  would  have  been  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  consequence of the central bank renouncing to apply strictly and in full the provisions of the 
Treaty. 
The  ECB’s  support  for  Greece  is  based  on  its  Statute  but  also  on  the  assumption  in  the 
Treaty that the status of each member of the euro area remains inviolate. 
Indeed, the same conviction and the same independence from the political process led us in 
the  summer  of  2012,  when  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  endangered  the  integrity  of  the  euro 
area, to resolutely declare our determination to defend the single currency. 
To sum up, the balance we achieved with our interventions during the Greek crisis was fully 
within our mandate; it respected the political commitment to the single currency contained in 
the Treaty,  but  at  the  same time  we  implemented  that  commitment  within  the  limits  of  our 
Statute. 
Conclusion 
The  ECB’s  response  to  the  exceptional  challenges  posed  by  the  crisis  has  preserved  the 
integrity  of  money  in  the  euro  area.  Monetary  stability  is  however  only  one  necessary 
condition for the prosperity of the economy. Indeed, so much attention has been paid to our 
commitment to a sound currency that, to paraphrase Galbraith, little thought has been given 
to other things. We must now look ahead, and move from stability towards prosperity. 
We  need  a  new  pact  that  prevents  the  re-emergence  of  the  type  of  challenges  we  have 
addressed,  and  that  above  all  strengthens  the  constitutional  architecture  of  the  euro  area. 
This  is  not  a  new  conclusion.  It  was  already  reached  in  the  summer  of  2012,  when  the 
European Council mandated the President of the Council, the Commission, the Eurogroup 
and me, and subsequently the President of the European Parliament, to outline a credible 
path that completes our monetary union and makes it “more perfect”. Since then, we have 
made various proposals, all of which go in that direction. 
I hope that what I have said to you today will convince you of the urgency of this reflection, of 
the need to turn it without undue delay into an institutional process able to secure concrete 
results, in line with a clear calendar for action. 
This is a long and complex journey which can only be based on the strong determination of 
the member states. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
