   Stephen S Poloz: Integrating financial stability into monetary policy 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the National Association 
for Business Economics, Washington, DC, 12 October 2015. 
 I would like to thank Don Coletti and Stephen Murchison for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
I appreciate the opportunity to be part of this event. As usual, NABE is confronting some of the 
most important and difficult issues in economics at this meeting. For central bankers, as we 
work to understand and react to the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the key question is 
how we should integrate financial stability concerns into the conduct of monetary policy. 
Over the weekend, I attended the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the 
World Bank, where this question was a topic of discussion. There is some urgency to this issue, 
given the way the crisis highlighted how much we have yet to learn about the linkages between 
the financial system and the real economy. If you think back to the pre-crisis period, nobody 
gave much credence to the idea that focusing on price stability could somehow contribute to 
the  buildup  of  dangerous  imbalances.  Central  bankers  now  know  that  we  must  consider 
financial  stability  as  we  set  policy.  The  idea  that  central  bankers  should  pay  little  heed  to 
financial stability issues and simply “stick to our knitting” of inflation control – a position once 
advocated by many – seems quaintly naïve. 
Fortunately, the profession appears to be up to the challenge. Understanding real-financial 
linkages is a research priority at the Bank of Canada and elsewhere. After all, we’ve seen how 
financial imbalances in one sector of one economy can be amplified and propagated across 
the entire financial system, leading to the worst global downturn since the Great Depression. 
So what I will do today is share our perspective on how we integrate financial stability concerns 
into the pursuit of our goals of price stability and macroeconomic stabilization. This exercise is 
fraught with risks and uncertainties, and it is complicated by the fact that macroeconomic and 
financial  stability  objectives  are  not  always  consistent  with  each  other.  Coping  with  this 
becomes a problem, not of policy optimization, but of risk management. In other words, we put 
aside the idea of engineering the perfect policy and focus instead on the more realistic goal of 
finding an appropriate policy setting, given the risks and uncertainties. 
Monetary policy and financial imbalances 
The debate about using monetary policy to respond to financial imbalances has evolved rapidly 
since the pre-crisis era. A decade or so ago, the discussion was essentially between those 
who  argued  that monetary  authorities  should  lean  against  imbalances such  as  asset-price 
bubbles and those who said that monetary policy should be reserved for cleaning up the mess 
after the bubble popped. 
Before the financial crisis, the Bank of Canada basically straddled the two camps. On the one 
hand, we argued that it’s very difficult to identify an asset-price bubble, and central bankers 
have no comparative advantage in making this determination. Like many, we questioned the 
wisdom of using the blunt instrument of interest rates on a bubble that could be confined to 
one asset class. Indeed, if a bubble was particularly large and persistent, a central bank that 
used the cure of higher interest rates could end up causing the very economic damage it was 
trying to prevent. 
On the other hand, the Bank recognized that price stability was a necessary, but not sufficient, 
condition for financial stability. Given our keen interest in a well-functioning financial system 
and our macro perspective, we worked to raise awareness of stability threats. Our decision to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
begin publishing our Financial System Review (FSR) in 2002 showed our early commitment 
to  promoting financial  stability. We  used  the  phrase  “global  imbalances”  a  lot  in  speeches 
leading up to the crisis. In other words, we weren’t content to just stand on the sidelines and 
wait to clean up messes. 
The widespread and extremely high cost of the Great Recession made it clear just how difficult 
the clean-up job can be. It has been roughly seven years since the crisis, and the damage 
done to the global economy has left many central banks still struggling with weak growth and 
inflation. 
However,  the  more  fundamental  lesson  we  learned  is  that  “lean  versus  clean”  is  a  false 
dichotomy. It’s far too simplistic to say that financial stability threats compel central banks to 
choose between leaning and cleaning. In a perfect world, we would have a macroeconomic 
model sophisticated enough to capture the emergence and resolution of financial imbalances, 
along with their related impacts on the real economy. With such a model, we would be able to 
incorporate financial stability threats into our reaction function, if not with absolute precision, 
then at least as well as we incorporate other economic variables. 
Unfortunately, we don’t live in that perfect world. A general-equilibrium model containing a 
grand synthesis of real and financial variables doesn’t exist and isn’t likely to. I don’t mean to 
downplay  the  importance  of  research  and  the  development  of  stylized  models,  which  are 
crucial in helping us understand aspects of the relationship between the real economy and 
financial stability. But the reality is that central banks have to cope with tremendous uncertainty 
regarding financial stability issues, and this is layered on top of the regular uncertainties of 
monetary policy concerning unobservable variables such as potential output. 
Given all of the uncertainty, it seems to me the proper response of the monetary authority is to 
acknowledge and accept all the things we don’t know, gauge the risks facing the economy as 
best we can, and manage those risks as we conduct monetary policy. I’ll describe our risk-
management framework in detail later on. But we still have the question of how policy-makers 
should respond to financial imbalances, particularly those that are concentrated in a specific 
sector or asset class. 
The Bank of Canada’s view is that monetary policy should be the last line of defence against 
threats  to  financial  stability,  behind  the  joint  responsibility  of  borrowers  and  lenders, 
appropriate  regulatory  oversight  within  the  financial  sector,  and  sound  macroprudential 
policies. Let me say a little bit about each of these. 
Financial stability threats – lines of defence 
Borrowers and lenders are the first line of defence. They bear the ultimate responsibility for 
their own decisions at the individual and firm level. It is not the role of monetary policy to protect 
individuals from making bad choices. It is possible that the sum of those bad decisions could 
threaten financial stability or the economy as a whole, and so we monitor the situation as a 
matter of course. But there is no reason to assume that, in all circumstances, equilibrium will 
devolve into turmoil as borrowers and lenders inevitably sow the seeds of a financial crisis. 
Indeed, market discipline enhanced by appropriate transparency can be very helpful in this 
regard. 
That’s  not  to  say  policy-makers  have  no  role  in  enhancing  this  line  of  defence.  Financial 
education and efforts to improve financial literacy can help consumers better understand the 
important decisions they make. 
In Canada, we have seen increasing levels of household debt that represent a key vulnerability 
for the financial system. The main driver behind this rise has been an increase in home-backed 
debt against a backdrop of rising house prices, particularly in two of Canada’s largest cities – 
Toronto and Vancouver. Among other factors, this was due to low interest rates that resulted 
in  the  ratio  of  debt  service  to  income,  including  principal  repayment,  remaining  roughly 
unchanged since 2008. Given this, the increase in household debt levels is no surprise. Rather, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
this rational response by consumers to easy monetary policy is a sign that the transmission 
mechanism has been working. 
I’m not trying to diminish the threat posed by elevated household debt. We are continuing to 
watch this closely. The point is that there is more to the story than the debt-to-income ratio. 
Because house prices have generally been rising faster than incomes, we have seen increases 
in the size of a first-time mortgage that a new borrower might take out. Mathematically, the 
total debt-to-income ratio rises as a result. But it doesn’t necessarily mean an increase in the 
vulnerability of the economy or the financial system. 
The second line of defence is sound regulatory oversight of the financial sector. This oversight 
has been significantly strengthened since the financial crisis. Basel III has made the world a 
safer place; there can be no doubt about that. But even before the crisis, Canada’s banking 
system  was  well  served  by  its  strong  regulatory  environment  and  prudent  culture,  which 
allowed our institutions to avoid the worst of the turmoil. 
Given the scale of the damage caused by the financial crisis, it’s not surprising that authorities 
devised a reform agenda of corresponding proportions. The G20 pledged to do everything 
necessary to address the weaknesses exposed by the crisis. 
The proper implementation of the Basel rules will go a long way to preventing certain threats 
to financial stability from forming in the first place. It will also reduce the potential consequences 
of those threats by making the financial system much more resilient. 
Nonetheless, Basel III can’t prevent the formation of all financial imbalances, such as those in 
housing  markets.  Elevated  house  prices  can  become  a  concern  for  central  bankers, 
particularly if they are associated with higher levels of household indebtedness and leverage. 
And we know that house prices can deviate in a meaningful way from underlying fundamentals, 
especially  if  expectations  of  price  gains  are  based  on  simple  extrapolations  and  become 
disconnected  from  economic  fundamentals.  A  sudden  reversal  of  such  misalignments  can 
cause significant stress in the financial system and the economy as a whole. 
That  is  where  the  third  line  of  defence  –  macroprudential  policy  –  comes  into  play. 
Macroprudential  policies  have  a  relatively  short  history,  and  there  isn’t  a  lot  of  empirical 
evidence  yet.  But  one  set  of  tools  that  has  been  used  more  frequently  and  studied  more 
extensively consists of those that deal with housing. The International Monetary Fund and 
several central banks – including the Bank of Canada – have looked at this area. They’ve found 
that  some  macroprudential  policies,  such  as  limits  on  mortgage  loan-to-value  ratios  and 
increased capital weight on bank holdings of mortgages – can moderate the growth of credit 
and house prices as well as improve the average creditworthiness of borrowers. The impact 
of recent macroprudential tightening in Canada, which was aimed primarily at rules for insured 
mortgages, appears to support these findings. 
If we accept that properly implemented macroprudential policies can help to effectively combat 
financial  vulnerabilities  by  strengthening  resilience  in  the  financial  system  and  reducing 
systemic risk, this supports the view that authorities should look to these policies first when 
imbalances arise, before turning to monetary policy. 
Across  the  advanced  economies,  there  is  a  wide  variety  of  governance  models  for 
macroprudential policy-making. In many cases, the mandate is centralized – sometimes within 
the central bank, as is the case at the Bank of England, or outside the central bank, as in the 
United States. Some macroprudential bodies have the power to write regulations; others are 
limited to monitoring and making recommendations. 
While their precise roles may differ, it’s crucial that central banks be involved, because we 
bring  a  unique,  system-wide  perspective  that  can  help  identify  and  assess  systemic 
vulnerabilities  and  risks.  Further,  our  interests  in  financial  stability  cut  across  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s functions – not only do we need a well-functioning financial system to transmit our 
monetary  policy,  but  we  also  have  oversight  of  systemically  important  financial  market 
infrastructures and, of course, we are the lender of last resort to the system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
When  more  than  one  body  is  involved  in  macroprudential  policy,  there  needs  to  be  a 
mechanism to discuss and coordinate responses and to provide checks and balances within 
the  regulatory  system.  In  Canada,  the  Senior  Advisory  Committee  fulfills  this  role.  The 
committee is chaired by the Deputy Minister of Finance and includes the Bank of Canada, the 
Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation and the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada. It is an informal forum where 
members can share information and perspectives on their own policies as well as on the overall 
regulatory  environment.  The  committee’s  strength  lies  in  the  way  it  allows  members  to 
understand the views of other members and to coordinate macroprudential policies, which is 
essential, given the potential side effects that macroprudential and monetary policies can have 
on each other. 
The last line of defence is monetary policy, and this is the context in which we think of leaning 
against imbalances. To be clear, I’m defining leaning as choosing a different path for interest 
rates than would be optimal for the inflation target in order to mitigate risks to financial stability. 
This could mean, for example, accepting a significant delay in getting inflation back to target 
so as not to exacerbate financial vulnerabilities along the way. 
Understanding the links 
At this point, let me remind you of a complicating factor for policy-makers that I mentioned 
earlier – the fact that macroeconomic and financial objectives aren’t always consistent. It’s 
clear that financial system policies – including global frameworks such as Basel III and country-
specific macroprudential policies – can reduce the likelihood of financial imbalances and crises 
by reducing tail risks. However, it is also clear that these policies, and the state of the financial 
system in general, can also influence the effectiveness of monetary policy. So we need to 
deepen our understanding of the links and potential trade-offs between monetary and financial 
system policies. 
Let me explain. Sometimes the economic and financial cycles move in tandem. Consider a 
demand shock where excess demand and upward inflationary pressure lead the central bank 
to raise interest rates. Here, monetary policy can restrain both demand and credit growth. Now 
consider a different scenario, where a central bank is running easy monetary policy to try to 
encourage borrowing and spending. Over time, the increased borrowing could potentially lead 
to imbalances, in the housing market for example. In this case, you could have macroprudential 
policy tightening that’s working in the opposite direction of monetary policy. 
It’s therefore crucial to deepen our understanding of how the various transmission channels 
for monetary policy can  be affected by variables that could be targets for financial system 
policies. 
These types of questions are urgent research priorities for the Bank of Canada as we work 
toward  renewing  our  inflation-  targeting  agreement  with  the federal  government  next  year. 
Indeed, assessing the costs and benefits of possible monetary policy interventions to address 
financial stability concerns continues to be a priority in the lead-up to the renewal. Let me give 
you a taste of some of the specific areas the Bank is looking at in terms of the relationship 
between financial stability and monetary policy. 
We are gathering empirical evidence about the effects of household debt levels on monetary 
policy. We are conducting research specifically on financial imbalances in the household sector 
to determine the best way to minimize the risk of future crises. We are developing models that 
will do a better job of quantifying the costs and benefits of using monetary policy to combat the 
build-up of imbalances. We are drawing lessons from the experiences of other central banks 
and  the  different  ways  they  have  reacted  to  financial  stability  developments.  And  we  are 
looking  at  ways  of  measuring  how  much  safer  the  financial  system  has  become  following 
regulatory reform in Canada and elsewhere. You can monitor the results of these efforts on 
our website, where we have a section dedicated to the research that is informing the renewal 
of the inflation-control target. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  have  made  progress  in  developing  new 
economic  models  and  adapting  existing  ones  to  integrate  financial  system  variables  and 
stresses as we conduct monetary policy. We’ve added potential sources of vulnerability, such 
as the balance sheets of households, companies and banks, to our macroeconomic models. 
We are  using  enhanced frameworks, fuelled  by more  and  better  data,  to  help  monitor the 
financial system and make more informed judgments about stability risks and how they might 
interact with each other. We have boosted the profile of our semi-annual FSR publication. 
We  will  continue  to  strive for  a  better  understanding  of  the  interactions between  monetary 
policy and financial stability, and I expect to see a large amount of groundbreaking research 
that will shed light on various aspects of this relationship. However, there is a fundamental 
problem – policy-makers need models that analyze a wide variety of variables and shocks in 
order to do their projections, but it is enormously difficult to capture bubble-related behaviour 
within  a  typical  general-equilibrium  model.  So  we  have  to  rely  on  our  regular  models  and 
supplement  them  with  stylized  models  that  give  us  insights  into  specific  financial  stability 
issues. These models show us a view of certain parts of the economic picture, but we will never 
have a single tool that can provide the complete picture by itself. 
Risk management in monetary policy 
So, given that we’re working with an incomplete picture of the economy, what is a central bank 
to do? At the Bank of Canada we take a risk-management approach to monetary policy. Let 
me explain what that means, and what it doesn’t mean. 
Since  the  early  1990s,  inflation  targeting  has  become  increasingly  popular  among  central 
banks,  and  Canada  was  an  early  adopter.  Under  our  current  agreement,  we  aim  to  keep 
inflation around a target of 2 per cent, and we usually try to accomplish this over six to eight 
quarters. 
Even in the absence of financial stability threats, the practice of monetary policy requires the 
central banker to deal with vast amounts of uncertainty. Think of the most important aspects 
of a macroeconomic model – the level and growth rate of potential output, the real neutral 
interest rate, and the transmission of terms-of-trade shocks. None of these can be observed; 
they  all  must  be  estimated.  The  assumptions  that  we  make  in  running  our  models  inject 
uncertainty throughout the policy-making process. And, since the crisis, we have also been 
confronted with the risk that our models have been distorted because of fundamental shifts in 
economic behaviour. 
Now, on top of all this uncertainty, we have to add the uncertainty represented by risks to financial 
stability, a concept that is difficult to quantify. Adding this whole other dimension of uncertainty 
complicates  the  practice  of  monetary  policy  by  forcing  us  to  weigh  both  sets  of  risks,  the 
probabilities that they will be realized and the potential consequences of a policy error. 
So how do we manage the risks? At the Bank of Canada, we try to be realistic about the things 
we don’t know and do a thorough examination of the related risks. Every time we come to a 
decision, there are a number of potential paths for policy that could be consistent with the 
inflation goal. In the process of formulating policy, we weigh these possibilities and focus on 
those that fall into a zone where the range of likely outcomes makes us reasonably certain that 
we’ll achieve the inflation target over an acceptable time frame and that financial stability risks 
will evolve in a constructive way. 
Still, we know there can be times when setting policy to achieve the inflation target within the 
usual time frame can increase the level of financial stability risk to an unacceptable level. This 
would take us out of the zone where the risks are essentially balanced. Because the flexibility 
in our framework allows it, we reserve the right to choose our policy tactics so that our actions 
don’t significantly worsen financial stability concerns by opting for a policy path that aims to 
return inflation to target over a longer time frame than normal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
Risk management, then, does not mean that the central bank will adjust policy to try to lean 
against every emerging financial imbalance. Since we are an inflation- targeting central bank, 
our policy tool must always be directed first at our inflation target. Even in extreme conditions, 
when financial stability risks constrain monetary policy from achieving the inflation target over 
a reasonable time frame, a central bank would want to ensure that all macroprudential options 
were exhausted before trying to address those risks with monetary policy. 
Let me give a real-life example to illustrate how we put our risk-management approach into 
practice. Last year, before the oil price shock hit the Canadian economy, our policy was in the 
zone I just described, with inflation on course to return to target in a reasonable time frame 
and vulnerabilities in the household sector looking as if they would evolve constructively. 
The  oil  price  shock  changed  the  outlook  dramatically.  It  represented  a  potentially  sizable 
reduction  of  our  national  income  and  threatened  to  drive  inflation  below  target  for  an 
unacceptably long time. The expected sharp decline in economic activity and employment also 
represented  a  possible  trigger  for  Canadian  financial  stability  risks  related  to  elevated 
household debt. Our monetary policy was knocked out of the zone, and the downside risk to 
future inflation was material. So, in January, we lowered our policy interest rate, and we did so 
again six months later as the impact of the shock became clearer. 
We knew that easing policy would have implications for financial stability. However, we also 
knew that those concerns had to remain subordinate to the primary mission of achieving our 
inflation target and getting our policy back in the zone where the risks are balanced. Our risk-
management  approach  implied  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  additional  macroprudential 
measures,  our  actions  would  affect  the  balance  of  risks  in  opposite  directions.  Lowering 
interest rates could worsen vulnerabilities related to household debt at the margin, but it would 
also lessen the chances of the oil price shock triggering financial stability risks. In the current 
context, getting the economy back to full capacity with inflation on target is central to promoting 
financial stability over the longer term. 
Conclusion 
It’s time to conclude. The dramatic events of the financial crisis required a dramatic reaction. 
New financial sector rules are being implemented to make the global economy safer. Policy-
makers are working hard to understand the impact of new regulations and to develop effective 
frameworks and best practices for implementing macroprudential policies. 
For  central  banks,  we  know  that  financial  stability  has  now  become  a  permanent 
preoccupation. We can’t have a firm grasp on the economy and its outlook without also having 
a good understanding of the links between financial stability and monetary policy. This is a 
critical  area  of  research  for  central  bankers  everywhere,  and  we  look  forward  to  the 
contributions that economists will make in the months and years ahead.] 
At the Bank of Canada, we will remain committed to delivering on our mandated inflation goal. 
We will continue to strive toward improving our understanding of how monetary policy and 
financial stability influence each other. And we will continue to use the flexibility in our inflation 
targeting  framework  as  needed  to  integrate  financial  stability  concerns  into  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy, while always keeping inflation control as our primary mission. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
