Sabine Lautenschläger: Fostering global growth 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the panel during the G30 International Banking Seminar, Lima, 11 October 
2015. 
 I would like to thank Jacob and Jean-Claude for inviting me to participate in this panel. You will 
not be surprised that I will focus on the growth challenge faced by the euro area countries in 
my intervention. 
Let me stress from the outset that I believe that the euro area can make a much stronger 
contribution to global growth than it has done so far. But for this to happen, we need a stronger 
reform impetus in many euro area countries. 
To substantiate this claim, I would like to address two questions: first, where do we stand on 
growth and reforms in the euro area? And second, which structural reforms are still needed to 
support stronger and sustainable growth? 
Where do we stand on growth and reforms in the euro area? 
Growth has been recovering in the euro area, albeit at a modest pace. 
Output  growth  has  been  gathering  pace  throughout  2014  and  in  the  first  half  of  2015  and 
employment has been increasing. 
However, developments are still uneven across member countries and it is not clear that the 
recovery can be sustained in the medium term. 
Our main concern is that across euro area countries domestic vulnerabilities are still very large, 
which implies a limited ability to withstand adverse external shocks and to kick start a new 
phase of sustainable growth. The vulnerabilities of many euro area countries are related to the 
high  stock  of  debt,  both  public  and  private,  and  to  a  number  of  structural  rigidities  and 
institutional  bottlenecks  that  prevent  an  optimal  allocation  of  resources  across  factors  of 
production, and thus limit total factor productivity growth. 
The current environment not only urgently calls for the implementation of structural reforms, 
but also provides the right conditions for their implementation. With our monetary policy, the 
ECB is greatly contributing to an environment favourable to implementing structural reforms: 
our accommodative monetary policy stance helps countries to gain time, time to implement the 
necessary measures to increase resilience and thus support sustainable growth. 
However,  there  is  only  a  limited  role  for  demand-side  policies.  Fiscal  space  is  limited  and 
monetary policy cannot carry the burden of the adjustment alone. For the euro area to become 
more resilient and sustain stronger growth, national governments need to bring about further 
structural change1. 
Work in this regard has already started, and the reform wave of the countries hardest hit by 
the crisis is showing some initial results, such as a GDP recovery related to comprehensive 
labour market reforms. Other reforms, mainly on product markets, are expected to bring about 
GDP gains, but they need to be implemented in full. 
                                                
1  See ECB, “Progress with structural reforms across the euro area and their possible impacts”, Economic Bulletin, 
Issue 2 / 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However, since 2013, very low financing costs for sovereigns and rising share prices have 
eased the pressure to implement more difficult policies2. By definition, for structural policies to 
be  most  effective,  a  long-term  commitment,  continuous  implementation  and  strong  reform 
ownership are needed. This is the only way to permanently change expectations and growth 
prospects. 
This leads me to our second, more concrete, question: 
Which structural reforms are still needed to support stronger and sustainable growth? 
To start with, let me stress that all euro area countries, albeit to different degrees, still need to 
implement structural reforms. 
There  are  a  number  of  credible  reforms  that  are  able  to  increase  permanently  total  factor 
productivity; to affect confidence; and to help reduce uncertainty and increase investment and 
sustainable demand. 
In particular, for the euro area I see the need to forcefully work on: 
1. 
reducing red tape – by easing licensing procedures and facilitating access to credit 
by viable firms; 
improving the judicial systems – including the effectiveness of insolvency regimes; 
increasing the efficiency of the public administration and tax systems; 
reducing entry barriers in sectors sheltered from competition; and 
reducing hiring costs and skill mismatch. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
These reforms would unlock immediately “hidden” demand, increase economic resilience and 
facilitate the working of monetary policy. 
Among  these  reforms  I  believe  that  particular  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  all  legal, 
administrative and bureaucratic impediments that can lead to an increase of the overall costs 
for debt workouts, make the distinction between viable and non-viable firms more difficult, and 
hamper firms’ exit from and entry to markets as well as investment. 
In concrete terms, this means improving the efficiency of insolvency regimes. 
In corporate debt restructuring, experience to date shows that an effective insolvency regime 
is critical to facilitate the early rescue of viable firms and the speedy exit of non-viable ones. 
IMF analysis also shows that weak debt enforcement and ineffective insolvency frameworks 
tend to lower the recovery values of problem loans3. Our internal analysis finds that in order to 
be able to cope with high private debt ratios and to deleverage reasonably quickly, the strength 
of the insolvency framework is important. Also, recent analysis from the European Commission 
found evidence that in the presence of a high stock of private debt, the quality of insolvency 
frameworks is important for financial stability and for spurring entrepreneurship and thereby 
mitigating  the  impact  of  deleveraging  on  growth.  In  particular,  it  was  found  that  a  good 
insolvency framework is associated with speedier adjustment of non-performing loan ratios.4 
                                                
2  See OECD, “Economic Policy Reforms 2015: Going for Growth”, 2015. 
3  Aiyar, S., Bergthaler, W., Garrido, J. M., Ilyina, A., Jobst, A., Kang, K., Kovtun, D., Liu, Y., Monaghan, D. and 
Moretti, M., “A Strategy for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, September 2015. 
4  Carcea, M. C., Ciriaci. D, Cuerpo, C., Lorenzani, D. and Pontuch. P., “The Economic Impact of Rescue and 
Recovery Frameworks in the EU”, European Economy Discussion Paper No 004, September 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
out-of-court procedures; 
hybrid preventive restructuring procedures; and 
formal insolvency or restructuring procedures. 
To highlight the differences in insolvency frameworks across euro area member countries, let 
me  mention  a  few  country  figures:  in  Slovakia  it  takes  on  average  4  years  to  resolve  an 
insolvency case, while in Portugal it takes 2 years and in Ireland it takes less than 5 months. 
When looking at international practices, one can find three types of procedures through which 
firms can deal with debt restructuring: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In the euro area countries formal insolvency procedures are very common, while out-of-court 
procedures have been much less used so far. However, voluntary out-of-court restructuring 
can  provide  a  speedy,  cost-effective  and  market-friendly  alternative  to  court  insolvency 
proceedings. This tool is particularly useful in cases where there is a lack of confidence in the 
institutional capacity to support the operation of the insolvency system. 
In the past few years insolvency laws have been amended, in particular in Spain, Italy and 
Portugal, to better support early rescue of viable firms, to help the deleveraging process and 
to free up resources for further investment and thus productivity growth. I believe that these 
reforms, if the effort to implement them continues, will help us to grow out of the current high 
private sector debt problem. 
Of course, there are other possibilities and the list of potential reforms is long. I could elaborate 
further, but my time here is unfortunately limited so I chose to constrain myself to this crucial 
area of structural reforms. 
Conclusions 
Let me now conclude. As I said at the beginning, the euro area can make a much stronger 
contribution to global growth than it has done so far. The conditions are very favourable for a 
strong push for reforms; in particular, our monetary policy stance is supportive. 
Reforms should now focus on boosting productivity and reducing the burden of the high debt 
stock. Work in this direction has started and is ongoing, but the euro area governments need 
to continue on this track with more determination and impetus. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
