   Andrew Bailey: Progress on prudential regulation and three areas to 
complete 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at the City Banquet, 
Mansion House, London, 22 October 2015. 
 My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen – it is a great pleasure to be here again at the regulators 
dinner, and it is very good of you to entice so many people here tonight with the prospect of 
an evening with regulators. I won’t speculate on how this ranks on the scale of evenings spent 
in our cosmopolitan capital city. It is also a great pleasure to be speaking here tonight with 
Tracey. 
This evening I want to describe the progress we have made on prudential regulation and then 
examine a number of topical issues for the PRA and the Financial Services industry: the Senior 
Managers and Certification Regime; structural reform and ring fencing; and what the PRA is 
doing to pursue its secondary objective on competition. A common theme here is getting the 
incentives right to support good outcomes in relation to both prudential and conduct objectives. 
Progress 
It  is  over  eight  years  now  since  the  financial  crisis  began  in  this  country.  And  to  continue 
Tracey’s theme for a moment, it is possibly salutary to recall that amidst the many bad events 
of Autumn 2007, England reached the Final of the Rugby World Cup. I didn’t expect to say 
“those were the days” about 2007. It was natural that the first response to the financial crisis 
in terms of reforms was focused on the bedrock prudential issues of capital and liquidity in 
banks. This has been supplemented by the drive both internationally and domestically to solve 
the too big to fail problem through a combination of resolution measures at the centre of which 
is agreement on total loss absorbing capacity for those banks which require such a bulwark to 
ensure orderly resolution in the event of failure. This is crucial to break the dependence of 
failing  banks  on  injections  of  public  money  and  likewise  to  break  the  impact  of  solvency 
problems in banks on the public finances. 
This is an international as well as domestic agenda of reforms aimed at fixing the fault lines 
that caused the financial crisis, building a more resilient and open global financial system, and 
deepening  and  building  trust  across  jurisdictions.  I  have  said  before,  but  I  think  it  justifies 
repeating,  that  we  are  unwavering  supporters  of  an  open  global  financial  system  which 
finances  the  investment  and  trade  necessary  to  support  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth. As we see and seek to deal with new risks to the world economy and to global financial 
stability  it  is  always  important  to  remember  that  free  trade  and  free  capital  flows  are  the 
foundation of a successful world economy with all the benefits that brings for the welfare of 
people. 
So, it should be no surprise that our focus is on three things: first, full, consistent and prompt 
implementation of the already agreed reforms across the financial system, and here I would 
note that the largest single activity for the PRA this year is to complete the implementation of 
Solvency 2 for insurers for the end of this year, something I believe we are on course to do; 
secondly, finalising the design of the remaining post-crisis reforms and thus providing the much 
needed clarity around the future regulatory system; and thirdly, scanning the horizon for new 
risks  and  vulnerabilities  that  appear  on  our  landscape,  ones  such  as  the  risk  of  cyber 
disruption. 
I think there is solid evidence of progress in all of these three areas. Internationally, there is 
plenty of evidence of shared objectives and effective co-operation among national authorities 
to solve common problems and “own” and thus implement the resulting reforms. An example 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
over the last year has been the building of strong working relations between the PRA and our 
colleagues at the Single Supervisory Mechanism of the ECB. This can only be for the good, 
and represents the much needed close working of people who are on the front line supervising 
the system. 
We also  want  to  encourage  sound  market-based finance  and  we  are, for  example,  strong 
supporters of the EU initiative on simple, transparent and standardised securitisation. 
Finalising design 
When I look at the remaining agenda of post-crisis reforms to be agreed, it is striking that they 
are not about capital levels in the same way that we saw immediately post-crisis. True, there 
is work in Basel but that is much more about refining the framework than a step change in 
capital requirements. As part of this there is work to agree and implement the leverage ratio 
internationally, and to improve the use of models to estimate capital requirements so that they 
are used only for asset classes that lend themselves to modelling of this sort and we have an 
acceptable degree of consistency across banks. 
There are two important points I want to draw out which are by no means uncontroversial. 
First, it is sometimes said that the banking system still needs markedly more capital, and that 
a focus on other issues is a distraction from tackling a system that is still over-leveraged. The 
second, closely-related, point is that we should focus much more exclusively on non-risk based 
measures of capital requirements. 
I don’t agree with either of these positions, and nor would I say do most supervisors I know. I 
have been and remain a strong supporter of the reforms to date and the higher levels of capital 
put in place, and I am a strong supporter of having the leverage ratio in our toolkit and that for 
some assets it is the “biting” approach and therefore it is not just a backstop. But I disagree 
with those who want to go much further, for reasons which are at the heart of what we are 
doing. 
First, because to argue for much higher capital on top of what has been done since the crisis 
is to argue that what is being done on resolution and loss absorbency is of little use. This 
misses the point that resolution is about being able to stabilise and then where necessary close 
or restructure failing banks. In other words, resolution is a much more extensive approach, and 
in my view very necessary. The design of international policy measures to end too big to fail is 
now largely complete for banks, but substantial work remains to put these into effect in terms 
of resolution plans. 
Second,  understanding  how  banks  take  and  manage  risk,  the  controls  they  have  and  the 
quality of risk management, is at the heart of the job of a prudential supervisor. That’s what we 
do every day, and the standards of this work have been raised extensively since the crisis, 
which was very necessary. Now, it is possible I suppose to argue that a focus on oversight of 
risk  management  should  be  pursued  alongside  a  sole  focus  on  a  non-risk  based  capital 
measure  like  the  leverage  ratio.  But  in  my  view  that  is  a  flawed  argument  because  the 
prevailing capital regime has a strong influence on how firms take and manage risk, in other 
words  it  creates  the  incentives.  And,  if  we  only  used  a  non-risk  based  system,  we  would 
incentivise firms to disregard the amount of risk per unit of assets on their balance sheet. The 
leverage  ratio  is  firmly  in  the  camp  of  necessary  but  not  sufficient,  as  is  the  risk-based 
approach. 
The third reason why I disagree with the much more capital school of thought is because there 
are  more  important  things  for  us  to  do,  which  revolve  around  getting  the  incentives  for 
behaviour right in firms. This is why as supervisors, both prudential and conduct, we spend so 
much time on governance in firms and on getting the incentives aligned for individuals through 
our approach to remuneration and to the responsibility of individuals. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
We have achieved much progress towards strengthening the resilience of the global banking 
system,  with  stronger  capital  ratios,  and  this  has  demonstrated  in  my  view  the  important 
principle that appropriately strong capital positions support rather than deter lending by banks. 
Jobs still to finish: three topical issues 
The Senior Managers Regime 
The Senior Managers and Certification regime for banks is a product of the Parliamentary 
Commission on Banking Standards chaired by Andrew Tyrie, put into legislation and to be 
implemented by the PRA and FCA by next March, so not long to go now. The current approved 
persons regime has not delivered effective incentives and thus behaviour. 
As part of last week’s announcement on the Bank of England and Financial Services Bill, the 
Government put forward an important change to the senior managers regime for banks, by 
removing the “presumption of responsibility” and replacing it with a “duty of responsibility”. I 
can  tell  you  from  my  postbox  in  all  its  many  forms,  that  the  “presumption”  is  the  most 
controversial element of the new regime. On its own that is not a good reason for change. I 
want therefore to explain why the change does make sense, and why the new regime should 
create the right incentives. 
In  the  current  Approved  Persons  regime,  the  PRA  and  FCA  can  take  formal  action  for 
misconduct against an approved person either if that person has failed to comply with the 
statements of principle (which will become in the new regime common rules of professional 
conduct) or they have been knowingly concerned in a breach of a regulatory requirement by 
the firm. The burden of proof in an enforcement action falls on the regulator. 
The  Banking  Reform  Act  adds  a  third  reason  to  take  enforcement  action  against  senior 
managers (not others) in these firms if: the firm (and I emphasise here the firm – going beyond 
the individual) has breached regulatory requirements; and the senior manager is responsible 
for the area of the firm in which the breach occurred. The Act goes on to say that the person 
would not be guilty of misconduct if they satisfy the Regulator that they have taken such steps 
a person in that position could reasonably be expected to take to prevent the breach. For the 
first two limbs the burden of proof would fall on the Regulator in the same way as the continuing 
provisions I mentioned earlier. But, crucially, it would be for the senior manager to satisfy the 
Regulator  on  the  question  of  reasonableness  –  thus  the  presumption  is  created  until  it  is 
rebutted. The change that the Government has announced to create “the duty of responsibility” 
will,  if  Parliament  approves  it,  replace  the  presumption  with  a  statutory  duty  on  senior 
managers to take reasonable steps to prevent breaches of regulatory requirements by their 
firms from occurring. Thus it will be for the Regulator to show that the senior manager did not 
take such steps as it was reasonable for a person in that position to take to prevent the breach 
of regulatory requirements. 
In my view this does not represent a watering down of the requirement. Why? Well the “duty 
of  responsibility”  creates  a  positive  duty  on  senior  managers  to  take  reasonable  steps  to 
prevent regulatory breaches occurring. This will be on a statutory footing, which hardwires the 
concept  in  the  very  fabric  of  the  regulatory  regime,  rightly  reflecting  the  importance  which 
society places on this issue. 
Let  me  be  very  clear,  substituting  “duty”  for  “presumption”  changes  the  mechanism  of 
enforcement not the substance of the requirement on senior managers, and I would not support 
changing the latter. There has been a lot of noise around the new regime in recent months, 
and I have asked people involved whether their problem was with the “presumption”, or with 
the  regime  more  broadly.  The  universal  answer  has  been  that  the  difficulty  was  with  the 
“presumption” not the regime which appears to have broad support. 
So, if Parliament is in agreement, and I do not presume to take that for granted, I expect that 
the new regime will be put into effect in the spirit with which it is intended, and that the focus 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
will shift to that spirit and away from finding ways to circumvent the “presumption”. To be blunt, 
I hope that those within firms and their advisors will respect the will of Parliament on this crucial 
point. 
The new regime matters hugely for getting the right incentives for people running firms. The 
important word is not “presumption” or “duty but rather “responsibility”, it’s about holding people 
more personally to account. If there are people who wish to argue that they should not take on 
the responsibilities of the job they do, then I believe they have no place in the industry, it’s that 
simple. We all want well-run firms where senior people lead and take responsibility. And I know 
that this is how the vast majority of people do behave, because I observe it. 
The  senior  managers  and  certified  persons  regime  is  also  not  purely,  or  in  my  view  even 
primarily,  a  tool  of  enforcement.  Our  job  is  always  to  apply  forward-looking  judgement  to 
prevent  problems  occurring;  and  the  new  regime  will  ensure  that  the  incentives  on  senior 
managers in the roles that they perform align with that approach. But, just as Parliament has 
recognised that it is not the PRA’s role to ensure that no firm fails, likewise we should not 
expect  the  Regulators  to  prevent  all  failures,  or  misconduct,  by  individuals.  The  PRA’s 
enforcement powers are a necessary part of its toolkit, and we will use those tools when the 
circumstances  warrant  it.  But  they  are  not  our  primary  mode  of  operating.  Also,  the 
Government announced last week that  – subject to agreement  by Parliament  – it plans to 
extend the Senior Managers regime to other firms across the industry. This is a further step in 
the right direction. There is no doubt that one regime will be better than many. 
Lastly  on the  senior  managers  regime,  there  is one  other  very  important  broad  reason for 
putting it into place. On and off I have been involved in regulation for over twenty five years. 
During that time a few regimes have come and gone, and there have been debates about self-
regulation versus a regime more purely in the hands of public authorities. This debate strikes 
me  as  a  gross  over-simplification.  Self-regulation  doesn’t  work  if  there  is  no  clear  and 
consistent allocation of responsibility for the public interest objectives of financial regulation to 
public bodies that are answerable to the government and to parliament. But likewise, public 
bodies cannot seek to take on the responsibility of managing within firms, something that has 
to be the responsibility of boards and management. The senior managers and certification 
regime is vital here because it creates the framework to establish effective responsibility within 
firms, while maintaining the role of the public authorities, the PRA and FCA, for supervising 
and enforcing the public interest. A very good example of how this should work can be seen in 
the recommendations of the Fair and Effective Markets Review, which provide a means to 
establish and maintain high conduct standards in financial markets. 
Structural reform 
I want now to turn to structural reform and ring fencing. This is a subject in its own right, but I 
can  assure  you  that  I  intend  to  be  brief  on  this  one  tonight.  We  are  now  well  into 
implementation.  Last  week  we  issued  our  second  consultation  paper  on  implementing  the 
regime, and we plan one more such paper which will be more in the form of a wrap up of points 
raised and a few outstanding actions. 
Any structural reform measure involves complex implementation, the devil is always in the 
detail, and we need to get that right. I read from time to time that we are apparently watering 
the regime down via the implementation. I can assure you that we are not doing so, and we 
should not because that would go against the will of Parliament. But, sensibly, the regime 
sensibly allows for a degree of flexibility in how the requirements are implemented, recognising 
the differences in business models, legal structure and strategy of various firms. That was 
essential and sensible because a rigid definition of the fence would not work well for all firms. 
To  ensure  balance,  I  should  say  that  I  also  get  the  opposite  commentary,  that  the 
implementation is too rigid. One particular form of this commentary is that our rules on the 
governance  of  the  ring  fenced  bank  within  a  group  mean  that  it  will  be  independent  in  all 
respects, and that, proverbially, it will be able to stick two fingers up at its parent. No. The ring 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
fenced bank will have to observe the law in respect of the requirements of ring fencing, not 
more than that. This is not really different from the position for banks that have subsidiaries 
operating in other countries, they have to respect the laws of the country in which they operate. 
But, let me be clear what it does not mean: it does not mean that the ring fenced bank can set 
its own strategy and thereby ignore the group to which it belongs; it does not mean that it can 
set its risk appetite in isolation of the group to which is belongs; it does not mean that it can 
refuse  to  pay  a  dividend  to  its  parent  if  it  is  adequately  capitalised  both  now  and  looking 
forwards using stress tests (in other words, it does not have a reason to trap excess capital); 
and it does not mean that its CEO can ignore the Group CEO. But, and this is crucial, the group 
cannot require the ring fenced bank to break the rules of ring fencing. I hope this is clear. If 
you think we have watered down the regime, please let me know. 
Competition 
I want to finish on an equally important subject, namely competition in the banking industry, 
which is of course topical today in view of the CMA’s report. The PRA has been given by 
Parliament a so-called secondary objective which I think is best described as requiring us to 
act in respect of the competitive implications of our own actions and inactions but only to the 
extent that we are not undermining our primary objective for banks of safety and soundness. 
We have been working to embed the secondary objective in the PRA, and to date our most 
publicised actions have been in the area of new bank authorisations. The PRA has authorised 
ten  banks  in  the  last  two  years,  and currently  we  have  a  substantial  pipeline  of  interested 
parties. 
We are thinking about competition in our domestic work, but also about how we approach 
international  policy  issues.  For  instance,  this  week  our  response  to  the  European 
Commission’s consultation on the impact of the new capital regime has been published. It is 
quite  often  said  that  aspects  of  the  capital  regime  discriminate  against  smaller  banks  and 
building societies that use the so-called standardised capital approach versus larger banks 
that use their own models. The consequence of this is that smaller banks and building societies 
cannot compete effectively in lower risk asset markets such as prime mortgages because the 
capital requirements are too far apart and in favour of large banks. This forces them into riskier 
assets and undermines their position. 
This is an area where the leverage ratio acts to counterbalance the difference, a point that is 
not well enough understood. But in our response to the European Commission we said that 
while the financial stability benefits from regulation of large, internationally-active banks mean 
these firms should meet global standards, a differentiated approach for smaller firms would 
recognise the high costs and smaller benefits of applying global standards to them, and should 
enable  us  to  find  ways  to  create  a  regime  which  is  more  simple  and  which  reduces  their 
reporting burden. This would help to foster competition and would be good for the European 
Single  Market. This is an important issue, and one that matters if we are to have growing 
challenger banks. We want to put such a regime into effect, and thus demonstrate that at the 
PRA we are very serious about our competition objective. I hope the European authorities will 
likewise pursue this important change. 
We will also be arguing in Basel and in the EU to narrow the gap between standardised and 
internally modelled capital requirements for prime mortgages including by having more risk 
sensitivity in the standardised approach. And, we have also tightened the standard for models. 
I also want to be clear that we welcome internal model applications by smaller banks and we 
will do what we can to help them meet the required prudential standards, which are largely set 
out in the EU legislation. 
Lord Mayor, a year in your office is never dull, and likewise our world is certainly full of interest. 
I have ranged quite widely this evening to give a report on a number of our key areas of activity. 
There are however some very important core principles at the heart of our work, getting the 
incentives  right  for  firms  and  individuals,  and  establishing  the  importance  of  personal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
responsibility within an appropriate setting. I have been blunt on one or two points and this 
may provoke debate. This is a good thing, and we will have the opportunity to return to the 
debate on these issues at The Open Forum being organised at the Guildhall on November 
11th. I know you will be there, as will Tracey and I. Please, will everyone participate, and to 
find out more consult the Bank of England website. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
