  Mario Draghi: Atlantic Council Remarks 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the 2015 Atlantic 
Council Global Citizen Award, New York, 1 October 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for honouring me today with this Global Citizen Award. And thank you also for 
honouring, through me, all those who have worked – and continue to work – to maintain the 
cohesion of the European Union, and to bring its integration process closer to completion. 
The fate of Europe is naturally of immediate interest to its citizens. But it is also indeed of 
direct  relevance  to  the  world  at  large.  The  European  Union  and  its  monetary  union  are 
regional projects with global implications. 
This is firstly due to the size of Europe in the global economy. Though the euro area has not 
made a major contribution to world growth over the past seven or eight years, it nonetheless 
accounts for 17% of global GDP and 16% of global trade. When the integrity of the euro area 
was under threat, so too  was global prosperity. Christine Lagarde, who has chaired many 
IMF gatherings where the first topic under discussion was the euro area, can testify to that. 
By  the  same  token,  the  return  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  sustained  growth,  under  the 
impulse of our monetary policy, is good news for everybody, everywhere. 
To my mind, however, there is another reason why the euro area is crucially relevant to the 
global economy. It comes from the fact that European integration is by far the most advanced 
experiment  in  managing  issues  that  cut  across  borders,  through  a  combination  of 
international and supranational arrangements. 
65 years ago, the founders of the EU decided that we could only achieve results if we were 
united in facing common problems. At the time, the problem was war and the objective was 
peace. And it worked. 
But  now,  the  nature  of  the  many  challenges  we  face  shows  how  right  this  approach 
fundamentally was: think of migrants seeking refuge in our countries, the threat of terrorism, 
the consequences of climate change, the recent succession of financial and economic crises. 
And these challenges are not specific to Europe. They are global. 
I am certainly not suggesting that the path followed by Europe to manage them is replicable 
at  a  global  level.  But  the  experience  we  have  gathered,  the  experimentation  with 
supranationalism, the failures and the successes, all carry invaluable information for those 
involved in managing global issues. 
It may seem at times that we in Europe are not able to cope with these challenges, but we 
do. Each and every time, we prevail. 
And why is that? Because when we work as a union, we can address problems that would 
overwhelm us if each country tried to address them alone. And sometimes, what seems like 
a  difficulty  of  working  together  is  simply  a  reflection  of  the  difficulty  of  overcoming  the 
challenges thrown in our way. One should not mistake the one for the other. 
Many argue that our societies are not homogenous enough to operate as a union. But others 
would argue that further integration is necessary to extract all the economies of scale and 
scope that our union brings. 
I am firmly in this second camp. And I am firmly among those who believe that we can better 
protect the interest of citizens in every country by making our Union, to use a phrase from 
your constitutional tradition, “more perfect”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The progress achieved over the past three years to stabilise and strengthen the euro area is 
real. Growth  is  returning. The  way  forward  is  well  identified.  And  we  will  not  rest  until  our 
monetary  union  is  complete.  It  is  in  our  interest.  It  is  also  in  your  interest  and  that  of 
everybody, everywhere. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
