  
 
Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Beyond borders – bridging new horizons in Asia 
Pacific 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 5th Malaysia Insurance Summit “Beyond Borders: Bridging 
New Horizons in Asia Pacific”, Kuala Lumpur, 7 October 2015. 
 I  am  delighted  to join  you  today  at  the  2015  Malaysia  Insurance  Summit  themed  “Beyond 
Borders: Bridging New Horizons in Asia Pacific”. I understand that this is the fifth year the 
Malaysian Insurance Institute has organised this event which brings together insurance and 
takaful professionals from around the region and beyond to discuss key developments in the 
industry. 
Prospects of the Asia Pacific region 
The world is undergoing rapid structural changes amidst a rapidly evolving Asia Pacific as an 
important  centre  of  growth.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  has  projected  a  growth  of 
5.6 per cent for the Asia and Pacific region in 2015 and 5.5 per cent in 2016, with the region 
expected  to  remain  the  global  growth  leader  over  the  medium  term.  Growth  is  primarily 
driven by domestic demand of Asia’s 4.3 billion inhabitants who account for 60 per cent of 
the world’s population. The region is also expected to be the strong driver of world insurance 
growth, with its share of the global insurance market likely to rise to 40 per cent in the next 
five years. 
In  the  medium  term,  the  region  is  expected  to  benefit  from  the  deeper  regional  financial 
integration  agreed  by  the  leaders  of  ASEAN  and  recently  reported  concluding  of  TPP 
negotiation. These agreements would result in a more efficient allocation of regional savings 
to  meet  the  region’s  large  investment  needs  which  will  support  growth  and  consequently 
financial  well-being  and  soundness.  The  improved  income  arising  from  the  economic 
developments  will  spur  greater  demand  for  insurance  services  in  the  region  and  present 
immense growth opportunities for the insurance and takaful industry. 
The  Asia  Pacific  region  offers  high  growth  prospects  over  the  long  term  underpinned  by 
potential demand arising from structural changes and evolving risk exposure. This will have 
the  implication  of  increasing  wealth  and  shifting  preferences,  but  challenged  by  a  rapidly 
ageing population and frequent incidences of catastrophic events. 
First, increasing wealth and shifting preferences in Asia Pacific 
Rising  incomes  have  increased  the  spending  power  and  affluence  of  consumers  in  Asia 
Pacific. GDP per capita for the region reached 15,242 US dollars as at end-2013, well above 
the world average of 10,613 US dollars for the same period. Reflecting higher standards of 
living  and  enhanced  purchasing  power,  demand  for  insurance  products  in  the  region  has 
evolved to encompass a broader range of protection and investment solutions that are more 
responsive to differing risk and return preferences. 
This  has  also  been  Malaysia’s  experience,  with  the  significant growth  of  investment-linked 
insurance premiums over the last decade alone. Investment-linked insurance products now 
account  for  more  than  38  per  cent  of  the  domestic  insurance  market,  almost  equal  to  the 
share  of  more  traditional  whole-life  and  term  insurance  products  that  had  historically 
dominated the market for many years. 
Second, Asia is rapidly ageing 
Improvements  in  living  standards  and  life  expectancy,  combined  with  falling  fertility  rates, 
contribute  to  a  rapidly  ageing  population  globally,  including  in  Asia  Pacific.  Studies  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  projected  that  the  population  of  seniors,  ages  65  and  older,  will  grow  the  fastest  in  Africa 
(296 per cent) between 2010 and 2050, followed by Asia and the Oceania countries (216 per 
cent), while the population of young children below the age of 15 is projected to fall by 12 per 
cent in Asia and Oceania. The share of the global population of people aged 65 and older 
living in Asia should correspondingly rise from 54 per cent in 2010 to 61 per cent in 2050 with 
the  median  age  increasing  from  29  to  40  over  the  same  period.  A  United  Nations  study 
estimates that by 2050, the older population in the region will triple in number to more than 
1.26 billion. This demographic transition has far-reaching social and economic implications 
as it exerts a significant strain on the social security systems, infrastructure and provision of 
health care services of economies. 
The limited capacity of Governments are constrained to meet these rising demands to care 
for the elderly and the need to provide for the new demographics has increasingly become a 
focus  of  attention.  Rightly  so.  As  a  civilised  society  we  should  care  for  our  seniors.  Many 
efforts  are  being  initiated  by  economies  to  improve  social  and  economic  developments, 
including strengthening social safety nets and improving health care systems. The insurance 
industry has an important role to play in supporting such efforts through the provision of well-
designed retirement security, private health and long-term care products. 
In Malaysia, to encourage retirement savings, the Malaysian Government has provided tax 
incentives to encourage the purchase of deferred annuity products which provide an income 
stream  during  retirement.  The  Government  has  removed  the  8  per  cent  tax  which  was 
imposed  on  investment  income  on  deferred  annuity  products.  A  tax  relief  of  RM3000  was 
also granted to encourage the purchase of deferred annuity products. Despite this, response 
from the insurance industry is lethargic at best. The industry ought to improve product design 
and delivery channel to benefit from the tax incentives given by the Government. 
With  the  more  challenging  economic  conditions  that  are  confronting  our  societies,  there  is 
also  a  broader  educational  imperative  that  needs  to  be  met.  The  industry  should  come 
together to aggressively raise awareness on the importance of retirement planning, and to 
help consumers understand and purchase retirement products. I believe more opportunities 
can be tapped if the industry could collectively work on this matter. The need is urgent. It is 
time  for  the  industry  to  come  together  and  make  a  more  significant  impact  through  well-
planned  investments  in  product  design,  risk  management  and  to  support  consumer 
education in retirement planning solutions. 
Third, catastrophic events in Asia Pacific is rising. 
The region is also confronted by an increasing frequency and severity of catastrophic events. 
Eight of the 10 countries in the world with the highest annual natural catastrophe losses as a 
percentage of GDP are located in Asia. Over the last 20 years, natural catastrophe losses 
suffered  by  Asia  accounted  for  almost  half  of  the  world’s  estimated  economic  losses  from 
natural  disasters,  yet  only  7.6  per  cent  of  such  economic  losses  in  Asia  were  insured 
compared to 67 per cent in the United States for example. These significant protection gaps 
that  are  prevalent  across  most  of  Asia  and  expose  the  vulnerability  of  the  population  and 
economies of the region to hardship due to loss of lives and damage to properties following a 
catastrophic event. 
The poor are most severely affected. While some countries have implemented disaster-risk 
insurance  schemes  or  provide  Government  assistance  to  alleviate  such  losses,  others 
continue to be exposed. In response to this challenge, more is being done among developing 
economies,  including  under  public-private  sector  partnerships,  to  develop  and  increase 
access to affordable micro protection plans as a means of helping millions of people cope in 
the most difficult times. 
Strategies to seize opportunities in the new horizon 
Allow me now to turn to some of the key strategic imperatives for the industry going forward. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First and foremost is the building of strategic and quality human capital. Human capital can 
be likened to the indispensable crew that you need for your ship to sail. Shortage of quality 
talent is one of the most important risks facing organisations globally today and the insurance 
industry  is  no  exception.  The  Malaysian  Insurance  Institute,  like  many  other  insurance 
training  institutes  around  the  world,  ought  to  expand  investments  in  personnel  with  the 
relevant skills and knowledge in particular the ability to adapt and innovate. 
In  today’s  environment,  training  needs  to  be  continuously  changed,  in  some  cases 
overhauled,  to  maintain  its  quality  and  relevance.  Central  to  this  is  the  industry’s 
collaboration with and support for training institutes. The experience of practitioners who are 
experts in their field would enrich training programmer considerably. In this regard, the Bank 
welcomes the efforts of the industry and the Malaysian Insurance Institute to build bridges 
with academia through practical collaborations that aim to create a ready pool of productive 
talent.  New  approaches  and  programmes  could  be  tailored  against  proven  methodology 
implemented by some graduate schools. On the part of Bank Negara Malaysia, the recently 
established Financial Sector Talent Council is collaborating closely with key members of the 
financial  industry  to  identify  issues  surrounding  talent  gaps  and  formulate  innovative 
proposals to address such gaps. 
Another important area is to raise the professional standards of the industry that reflects the 
highest standards of professional conduct, knowledge and competence. In this regard, the 
grand design of the industry, the Financial Sector Blueprint, clearly emphasized on the need 
to develop talents across all levels of an institution, spanning from the entry level to senior 
management  and  the  board  of  directors.  Indeed,  a  holistic  talent  development  and 
management  is  a  good  example  of  an  initiative  that  combine  art  with  science  which  a 
visionary institution must be able to master to achieve its goals. 
The second imperative is the ability of the industry to effectively leverage on technology to 
build  strong,  innovative  and  competitive  businesses.  This  includes  developing  a  deep 
understanding  of  how  changes  in  technology  impact  people’s  lives  and  transforming  how 
consumers and investors behave and view the value proposition of businesses. For instance, 
mobile phone penetration in Asia alone makes up 52 per cent of total global penetration. The 
highly developed telecom markets of Asia with 3.6 billion people across Asia having mobile 
phones  spread  across  a  diverse  range  of  markets,  capitalising  on  mobile  data/wireless 
broadband services would mostly likely chart the way of the future. 
Growth across Asia in high speed access to the internet by mobile wireless devices has been 
largely  driven  by  highly  competitive  markets  combined  with  a  general  population  who  are 
prepared  to  embrace  new  mobile  technologies.  As  consumers  embrace  the  digital  era, 
insurers  will  need  to  rethink  their  distribution  strategies  and  partner  relationships  as  digital 
and  remote  options  are  rapidly  replacing  commonplace  functions  and  tasks.  Digital 
technology  can  be  deployed  effectively  to  accommodate  customers’  priorities  in  ways  that 
would  promote  customer  support  and  loyalty  whilst  significantly  enhancing  the  consumer 
experience and satisfaction. 
In many ways, the human capital and technology imperatives share characteristics that are 
borderless. We are living in a globalised world, with significantly greater capital and labour 
mobility than in any other period in history. For multinational organisations, this enables ideas 
and innovations to transcend borders and be more easily replicated to great positive effect, 
to grow successful businesses and transform the economies in which they operate. This is 
where foreign partners of local entities with international presence have enormous potential 
to make a significant contribution to the development of local economies. 
As international entities that actively operate in more developed insurance markets, foreign 
insurers  should  bring  new  and  proven  systems,  technology  and  experiences  which  can 
enhance their domestic operations and benefit the wider economy of the host country. This is 
the fundamental value of foreign direct investments. We know of successful cases in Europe 
where  digitisation  has  been  transformational,  where  a  higher  adoption  of  straight-through 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  processing, paperless documentation, usage of customer analytics and electronic payments 
have all led to improved efficiency and higher service value for insurers. The same can and 
should be replicated in this region, with the presence of foreign global insurers driving this 
process. 
Major developments in Malaysia – Liberalisation of the life and general insurance 
sectors 
On the home front, two major developments are taking place; (i) the introduction of the Life 
Insurance and Family Takaful Framework and (ii) liberalisation of the Fire and Motor Tariffs. 
Both  these  initiatives  will  allow  the  industry  greater  operational flexibility  to  innovate,  while 
ensuring  that  consumers’  interests  remain  adequately  protected.  Our  goal  remains 
unchanged – to ensure Malaysians have the opportunity to avail themselves of efficient and 
effective means to manage risks with insurance and takaful solutions that are appropriate for 
their  circumstances.  For  the  life  insurance  and  family  takaful  sector,  the  focus  remains  to 
increase  the  penetration  level,  as  measured  by  the  number  of  policies  in  force  per 
population,  from  56  per  cent  currently  to  75  per  cent  by  2020.  This  is  envisaged  in  the 
Economic  Transformation  Programme  and  this  target  is  certainly  achievable.  Product 
innovation remains key to achieve this target, particularly in the micro-insurance and micro-
takaful space which would expand the reach to the underserved segments of society. 
In  the  non-life  or  general  insurance  space,  a  more  market-driven  pricing  structure  will  be 
introduced for motor and fire insurance. This will also pave the way for the development of 
products  that  can  be  more  responsive  to  consumer  and  business  needs  in  the  two  most 
dominant lines of business in the Malaysian general insurance sector. 
Importantly,  this  development  will  be  critically  dependent  on  insurance  and  takaful 
companies  building  strong  internal  underwriting  and  risk  pricing  practices  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of the business, particularly in the highly competitive motor insurance segment. 
Let  me  re-emphasis  the  importance  this  development  to  our  market  and  the  criticality  to 
remove  the  current market  distortions  that  undermine  the  long  term  sustainability  of  motor 
insurance. 
The industry cannot afford to take a short term view; it must keep its sights on building the 
foundations  for  operating  in  a  more  diverse  and  mature  market,  with  stronger  value 
propositions  for  consumers.  Presently,  with  the  high  volume  of  vehicles  referred  to  by  the 
industry, the Malaysian Motor Insurance Pool has a life of its own and I was told the MMIP is 
the  9th  largest  general  insurer  in  Malaysia.  This  was  never  the  intent.  Let’s  revert  to  its 
original mandate as a mechanism to insure the highest risks motor vehicles. 
In tandem with these developments, insurers and takaful operators must be fully accountable 
for the conduct of their intermediaries in ensuring that customers receive proper advice and 
quality service throughout the duration of the policy. It is important that adequate training is 
provided  and  the  right  remuneration  and  incentive  structure  is  implemented  to  promote  a 
committed and professional agency force. 
With this expectation there is increased demand for a full time and professional agency force. 
Conduct  issues  are  viewed  seriously  by  the  Bank  and  we  are  fully  committed  to  the 
responsibility  entrusted  to  the  Bank  to  effectively  enforce  regulatory  requirements  on  fair 
conduct towards consumers. 
The  Financial  Services  Act  provides  the  Bank  with  explicit  and  expanded  enforcement 
powers which include monetary and non-monetary actions. In addition to private and public 
reprimand  as  well  as  direction  to  make  restitution  to  aggrieved  parties.  As  a  result  of 
supervisory interventions by the Bank, more than RM30 million in premiums were refunded 
to the affected policyholders due to mis-selling practices in the sale of life insurance products 
in the past. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  internal  controls  over  sales  and  marketing  practices  with 
The  Bank  had  also  directed  insurers  to  refund  the  premiums  in  more  than  700,000  cases 
involving the forced purchase of personal accident policies. In addition, insurers have been 
directed to modify or withdraw misleading advertisements, make call backs to consumers to 
confirm the products purchased without adhering to proper disclosure practices, as well as 
strengthen 
to 
bancassurance products. 
The  enforcement  measures  undertaken  signals  the  Bank’s  low  level  of  tolerance  for 
misconduct.  It  also  serves  to  remind  the  industry  of  the  Bank’s  expectation  for  common 
complaints  and  grouses  against  the  industry  such  as  delay  in  claim  settlement  and  mis 
selling  practices  by  agents  to  be  completely  eliminated  or  at  the  very  least  reduced 
significantly. 
respect 
Conclusion 
The  period  ahead  for  the  Asia  Pacific  region  presents  new  risks,  challenges  and 
opportunities for  the  insurance  and  takaful  industries.  In facing  them,  we  need  a  visionary 
industry and creative solutions that will lift our economic potential and improve lives of our 
people.  Such  solutions  must  be  built  on  the  strongest  foundations  the  strength  of  our 
technical  capability,  our  financial  strength  and  our  uncompromising  stance  towards 
professional  ethics  and standards. With these foundations firmly  in  place,  the  industry  can 
bridge new horizons and expand beyond traditional borders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
