   Anne Le Lorier: Regulating non-banks – ways forward and challenges 
ahead 
Speech by Ms Anne Le Lorier, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the ACPR- 
Bank of France Conference “Financial regulation-stability versus uniformity, a focus on non-
banks actors”, Paris, 28 September 2015. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
On behalf of the Banque de France and of the ACPR, I would first like to thank very much the 
speakers  and  the  participants  in  today’s  conference  for  the  quality  of  their  presentations. 
Indeed,  they  helped  us  to  have  insightful  debates  on  the  ongoing  efforts  made  to  prevent 
systemic crisis as much as possible, strengthen the global financial system and its resilience 
i.e. its capacity to withstand systemic shocks. 
As  illustrated  today,  this  is  not  an  easy  task  and  the  global  regulators  are  facing  many 
challenges  in  shooting  at  a  moving  target:  the  financial  system  not  only  adapts,  but  also 
transforms  itself  and  anticipates  regulatory  changes,  sometimes  constructively,  sometimes 
less,  thereby  continuously  modifying the  sources,  the  channels  and the shape  of systemic 
risks. Regulation itself can be ill-designed, too narrowly focused or can generate unintended 
consequences. 
There is no doubt that tremendous efforts have been made in the wake of the financial crisis 
to reach our objective of financial stability, providing the policymakers with additional tools to 
build-in robustness into the global financial system, increase the loss absorption capacity of 
financial  institutions  and  infrastructures,  and  limit  the  scope  for  contagion  while  new 
approaches to prevent systemic risk have been developed, namely macroprudential policies. 
However, due to the magnitude of the task, its difficulty and its complexity, global regulators 
had to proceed with a sequential approach, starting by the banking system where their know-
how was the best, and expanding gradually a framework to the rest of the financial system in 
concentric circles. As a consequence, we are currently facing three challenges that I would like 
to focus on: keeping the momentum for reforms, allowing for the diversity and ensuring the 
robustness of the global financial system. 
Keeping the momentum 
1. 
After such a long and intense conference day, you might already feel a sentiment of regulatory 
fatigue!  Consequently,  you  might  appreciate  the  feeling  of  regulators  and  financial 
intermediaries after more than 8 years of intense regulatory developments and debates! And 
yet, the latter are not completed nor their implementation! Banking regulation, which is almost 
complete now, will only come into force in 2018–2019, even though it has already been largely 
factored in by markets and banking institutions. But regulation is still under development for 
the rest of the financial system. Pressures increase from regulated entities, which complain 
about  regulatory  uncertainty,  and  from  policy-makers,  who  are  keen  to  foster  economic 
recovery  and  growth  after  8  years  of  low  economic  performances  almost  a  lost  decade! 
Keeping the momentum relates to three objectives: 
– 
complete  the  regulatory  agenda,  in  particular  regarding  what  is  named  now  as 
“market-based  finance”,  so  as  to  effectively  and  comprehensively  strengthen  the 
financial system and remove regulatory uncertainty; 
make sure that the regulatory spectrum expands well beyond the sole banking sector 
so  as  to  avoid  unfair  level  playing  field,  regulatory  arbitrage  and  a  paradoxical 
outcome that is favoring and encouraging those who are still “in the shadows.” On top 
of that, keeping pace with the creativity of all players is no small challenge. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  devoting adequate resources and designing the proper organization of supervision 
which needs to be intrusive. 
  Preserving diversity 
2 
While  the  objective  of  expanding  the  scope  of  regulation  beyond  the  banking  sector  may 
require  applying  similar  –  though  not  identical-  regulation  to  similar  asset  classes  or  risks, 
irrespective of the legal status of the intermediary bearing them, it must also be acknowledged 
that business models, accounting frameworks, liability structures, time horizons of decisions 
may differ across sectors and entities. In that respect, it can be argued that that “one size does 
not necessarily fit all” and that one should preserve and ensure diversity. This is especially the 
case in the financial system, where identical behaviors at the same critical moments, possibly 
due to identical regulations, may generate endogenous risk and amplification as in Professor 
Shin’s Millennium Bridge analogy. This reasoning applies not only to financial intermediaries 
but also to financial market infrastructures, where networks effects through interlinked Central 
Counterparties  might  actually  amplify  shocks.  Keeping  a  systemic  eye  of  financial 
intermediaries means that one should not look at them in isolation but rather consider both 
how their behaviors can propagate systemic risk in the financial system and how their failure 
can disrupt the provision of critical financial services to the real economy. 
Increasing global robustness 
3. 
This  latter  point  brings  me  to  the  issue  of  recovery  and  resolution  of  both  financial 
intermediaries and market infrastructures. This is probably the key novelty in the regulatory 
framework that is emerging from the crisis. It serves both the objectives of preventing disorderly 
resolutions and of being a tool for effective and efficient crisis management. It encompasses 
both quantitative requirements, at this stage in the form of additional capital requirements for 
systemic banks and more qualitative and strategic plans, designed at the level of systemic 
institutions. Discussions are well advanced for banks, still in their beginning for infrastructures, 
mostly to come for the others, as long as they will be considered as systemic players. This is 
the area where the issues probably are the more complex, having to deal with different legal 
and  failure  regimes,  the  recognition  of  foreign  resolution  authorities  and  powers  and  for 
regulators and supervisors, the need to strike the right balance between the appropriate degree 
of transparency for stakeholders and creditors and of discretion for supervisors, to prevent 
runs or self-fulfilling prophecies. This heavy agenda may keep us quite busy for some times, 
but it is a cornerstone to our overall objective of preserving global financial stability. 
Encompassing  all  these  endeavors,  solving  the  tension  between  globalization,  on  the  one 
hand, and differences between national or area wide regulatory framework, on the other hand 
are no small challenge. 
A healthy debate between academics, regulators and all sectors of the financial industry – who 
are not the least vocal-, is very much needed. I hope that today’s conference has been helpful 
in advancing this debate. Beyond debates, availability of data and access to these data by the 
various  stakeholders  will  be  key  for  making  progress.  Last  but  not  least,  concentration, 
increasing complexity, and the fact that some players are still very much out of the radar screen 
– such as hedge funds for instance- should keep everyone on their toes, in particular when 
assessing interconnectedness. 
I thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
