   Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks at the 3rd IMF Statistical Forum 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 3rd IMF 
Statistical Forum, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr. Zhu, 
Dear Otmar Issing, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning and welcome to the 3rd IMF Statistical Forum. It is probably safe to say that the 
Bundesbank has seldom had the opportunity to welcome such a large body of international 
statistics experts. 
The  objective  over  these  two  days  is  to  bring  together  data  producers,  policy  makers, 
academics and other users to discuss how to further improve the provision of statistics for 
micro and macroeconomic analyses. 
For  central  banks  this  is  of  vital  importance.  Monetary  policy  ultimately  depends  on  the 
availability  of  good  statistics.  The  monetary  and  economic  analyses  that  precede  any 
deliberation on the appropriate monetary policy stance are built on a large amount of data on 
monetary aggregates, financial market data, inflation expectations or labour market indicators. 
I am therefore particularly glad that the Bundesbank is hosting the first IMF Statistical Forum 
to be held outside Washington. 
And, when I tell you that the Bundesbank is attaching great importance to statistics, I am not 
merely paying lip service to you. 
The importance the Bundesbank attaches to statistics and statistical methods is shown, for 
instance, by the fact that Carl Friedrich Gauss, one of the most influential statisticians of all 
time, was portrayed on the 10 Deutsche Mark banknote for a long time. 
Building on the work of Carl Friedrich Gauss, statistical methods have been perfected and the 
process of data collection has been refined again and again. 
Often, the great progress made in the field of statistics has been driven by new demands. If 
you will, the supply of data and new methods has always responded to changes in demand. 
Governments, for example, have always had a demand for statistics on the wealth of their 
citizens, as this helped them to collect taxes. In the 17th century, this led Sir William Petty, an 
Englishman, to count chimneys in order to draw inferences about the wealth of an economy. 
His works can be seen as the foundation of modern social and economic statistics. 
But to find examples of how the supply of statistics has responded to demand one does not 
have  to  go  back  as  far  as  the  17th  century.  In  the  1930s,  the  Great  Depression  provided 
another big push for the development of statistics. At that time, the economic crisis had left its 
scar on workers, consumers and companies in the United States and Europe. Politicians were 
desperate for data allowing them to describe and analyse the economic situation. In 1930, the 
United  States  Congress  therefore  declared  the  estimation  of  national  income  to  be  a 
governmental task. 
And, in the recent past, the financial and economic crisis again defined new requirements for 
statistics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
One of the lessons of the financial crisis is that stable consumer prices do not automatically 
guarantee financial stability. And we have also learned that just because individual banks are 
sound, one cannot conclude that the entire banking system is stable. 
Risks for the stability of banks can arise, for instance, if individual banks are too big to fail, too 
interconnected to fail or if many small institutions are exposed to the same risks. 
This  insight  has  led  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  to  assume 
macroprudential mandates. The objective is to ensure that the financial system as a whole can 
fulfil its central macroeconomic function, even in times of financial market stress. 
But the new task of macroprudential supervision and regulation brings with it new demands for 
statistics:  We  need,  for  instance,  to  identify  suitable  indicators  that  signal  when  “financial 
stability” is in danger. This task is not to be underestimated as financial stability is a more 
complex concept than price stability. 
And  today  we  still  know  little  about  the  effectiveness  of  macro  prudential  instruments.  In 
evaluating the effect of these new instruments, we are often only able to conduct cross-country 
analyses that stretch over comparatively short periods of time. 
To improve our understanding of macro prudential measures, we need to go beyond the use 
of aggregated statistics: The US experience, for instance, shows that a loosening of credit 
restrictions for subprime borrowers can only be identified if micro data are available. 
We also need data allowing us to better understand the financial links between different banks. 
And  to  ensure  that  the  right  conclusions  are  drawn  from  the  data,  we  should  make  more 
anonymised micro data available to the public – at least as far as it is possible with regard to 
our commitment to protect the confidentiality of data pertaining to individual banks, firms or 
citizens. 
the 
third  session 
looks  at  how  data  can  be  used 
The 3rd IMF Statistical Forum: Programme 
2. 
The demands for new data that come from regulators, central banks and supervisory bodies 
are  also reflected  in the  programme for this  conference:  In the first  session,  you  have  the 
opportunity, for instance, to discuss how micro data can be used to evaluate the effects of 
regulatory changes. 
The second session addresses the questions of how and what micro data collected by public 
authorities can be made available to the public via data hubs. 
And 
financial 
interconnectedness, for example by linking a buyer and a seller of a security or by identifying 
who is lending money to whom. 
But  this  conference  is  not  only  about  financial  stability:  The  fourth  session  examines  the 
statistical challenges associated with the measurement of the macroeconomic effects resulting 
from  changes  in  the  price  of  natural  resources.  The  recent  decline  in  the  oil  price  and  its 
consequences for inflation and financial markets may serve as an example for the importance 
of this topic. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  fifth  session  is  concerned  with  the  measurement  of  the  material 
conditions of households. 
By including this session in the conference, the programme committee has proven to have the 
right instinct concerning topical issues: This October, the Royal Swedish Academy of Science 
decided to award the Nobel Prize in Economics to Angus Deaton. Angus Deaton was awarded 
the  prize  not  least  for  his  extensive  research  into  consumption  and  poverty  in  developing 
countries. 
to  understand 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3. 
Responding to new demands: The Bundesbank’s Research Data and Service 
Center 
  Ladies and Gentleman, the demand for new and better statistics is not only reflected in the 
programme for this conference. It has also already left its mark on the organisation of the 
Bundesbank. 
The  Bundesbank  is  not  only  a  user  but  also  a  large  producer  of  high  quality  statistics. 
Aggregate data that are relevant for macroeconomic analysis are regularly published in our 
Monthly Report and our time series database. 
But we also collect a large amount of micro-level data. These sometimes highly sensitive data 
range from banks’ monthly balance sheet statistics to micro data on foreign direct investment. 
To meet data protection rules, we can only make these data available to the public under 
certain restrictions. 
To facilitate access to these data, last year we established our Research Data and Service 
Center.  It  is  located  in  the  20th  floor  of  the  Trianon  tower  here  in  Frankfurt  and  provides 
workspaces for 12 guest researchers. A staff of 12 persons advises these guest researchers 
on data selection and data access. 
The Center does not lift restrictions on data access in place to meet data protection rules, but 
it makes it easier for non-commercial researchers to use the data to the largest possible extent. 
The Panel on Household Finances as an example for the use of micro data 
4. 
One  example  of  the  many  sets  of  micro  data  available  in  the  Research  Data  and  Service 
Center is our Panel on Household Finances. It provides survey data on households’ balance 
sheets,  pension 
incomes,  employment  and  demographic  characteristics  of  German 
households. The second wave of the survey was conducted in 2014 and the first results of this 
second wave will be published at the beginning of next year. Similar panels are now surveyed 
in  all  member  states  of  the  euro  area  under  the  guidance  of  the  ECB,  allowing  empirical 
analyses to exploit variations not only over time but also across countries. 
Monetary  policy  makers  can  gain  important  insights  from  these  data.  They  allow  us,  for 
instance,  to  draw  conclusions  about  the  number  of  liquidity  constrained  households.  Such 
information cannot be obtained from aggregate data on household debt alone, because highly 
indebted households may still have access to bank credit if they possess sufficiently valuable 
assets. In the end, central banks can therefore better analyse the effectiveness of the lending 
channel. 
By  being  able  to  obtain  information  on  the  asset  and  liability  side  of  households’  balance 
sheets, we are also better able to identify financial stability risks. 
But  the  Panel  on  Household  Finances  does  not  only  yield  important  insights  for  central 
bankers. It is also a great treasure trove for academic researchers. To date, 60 researchers in 
Germany and more than 150 users abroad are using the anonymised data from the Panel on 
Household Finances. Their projects cover a broad range of topics. There are, for instance, 
projects  on  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  income  distribution,  on  the  importance  of 
residential property for retirement saving or on measuring poverty and consumption. 
So it is probably fair to say that the Panel on Household Finance is one example where the 
demand for deeper analysis is already producing new statistics and important insights. 
The advance of modern information technology in all areas of society means that we are able 
to analyse ever larger data sets. But does this justify collecting every possible statistic? 
There is no doubt that more data and new data processing technologies can facilitate the work 
of researchers, supervisors and statisticians. But it increasingly also raises serious questions 
of data protection. And it also requires taking into account that the burden of collecting data 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
and  preparing  it  for  processing  has  ultimately  to  be  borne  by  businesses,  banks  and 
households. The famous saying, “there is no free lunch”, holds for data collection too. 
But maybe, this aspect will already be addressed during this conference. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you have two very interesting days ahead of you and I do not already 
want to strain your attention too much. I wish you all a very successful conference and hope 
that the discussions will be intensive and informative. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
