   R Gandhi: NBFCs – medium term prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  1st  Non-
Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs)  Summit,  organized  by  the  Confederation  of  Indian 
Industry, Mumbai, 21 December 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Shri C D Srinivasan and Shri Anuj Sharma is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
I  am  happy  to  be  addressing  this first  ever  CII Summit  on  Non-Banking  Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) to deliberate on “Regulatory Paradigm & Contours of Growth – Vision 
2020”. The context in which such a Summit has been organised is also very apt. World over, 
there is an awakening, post the great financial crisis of 2008, about the existence, contribution, 
magnitude, significance and risks of non-banking financial sector. From a benign neglect of or 
indifference to this sector, either by default or by deliberate choice, the world has now become 
anxious and seriously concerned about it. This awakening has resulted in enhanced attention, 
monitoring and regulation of this sector. Therefore, it is very apt that the sector has also noticed 
it and desires to seriously discuss its prospects in the changed scenario and realign itself with 
a renewed vision. 
Global shadow banking monitoring report of FSB – 2015 
2. 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB), came into existence post financial crisis, when 
the Leaders of the G20 countries decided to convert the then existing Financial Stability Forum 
into  FSB  to  address  vulnerabilities  and  to  develop  and  implement  strong  regulatory, 
supervisory and other policies in the interest of financial stability. The FSB has been monitoring 
the shadow banking sector closely for the past five years and publishing its monitoring report. 
I will like to highlight some of the key findings from its latest report, as they will provide a 
worthwhile background setting for your deliberations today. 
3. 
The  2015  Report  of  the  FSB  presents  the  results  of  the  fifth  annual  monitoring 
exercise using data as of end 2014 for 26 jurisdictions, which together account for about 80% 
of global GDP and 90% of global financial system assets. The report includes the results of 
the  macro-mapping,  including  size  and  growth  trends  of  the  Monitoring  Universe  of  Non-
banking  Financial  Institutions  (MUNFI)  estimate,  cross-jurisdiction  analysis,  trends  in  sub-
sectors  and  interconnectedness  with  the  banking  system.  It  also  discusses  a  narrower 
measure of shadow banking, which is constructed by filtering out non-bank financial activities 
that have no direct relation to credit intermediation (e.g. Equity Investment Funds) or that are 
already  prudentially  consolidated  into  banking  groups.  As  a  result,  it  is  believed  that  this 
narrower measure more accurately reflects the size and composition of the shadow banking 
sector,  subject  to  the  caveats  and  FSB’s  resolve  to  further  refine  the  narrower  measure. 
Another change that has been brought in this time around is a new activity-based “economic 
function” measure of shadow banking, each of which involves non-bank credit intermediation 
that may pose shadow banking risks (e.g. maturity / liquidity transformation and leverage). The 
five  economic  functions  are  certain  entities  that  are  susceptible  to  runs  (EF1),  lending 
dependent  on  short-term  funding  (EF2),  market  intermediation  dependent  on  short-term 
funding  or  secured  funding  of  client  assets  (EF3),  facilitating  credit  creation  (EF4),  and 
securitisation-based intermediation (EF5). 
4. 
The main findings from the latest exercise are as follows: 
The Narrow Measure 
i. 
The narrow measure of global shadow banking that may pose financial stability risks 
amounted to $36 trillion in 2014 for the 26 participating jurisdictions. This is equivalent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
  
to 12% of financial system assets, and has grown moderately over the past several 
years. 
More  than  80%  of  global  shadow  banking  assets  reside  in  a  subset  of  advanced 
economies in North America, Asia and northern Europe. 
The  new  classification  by  economic  functions  shows  that  credit  intermediation 
associated  with  collective  investment  vehicles  with  features  that  make  them 
susceptible  to  runs  (e.g.  money  market  funds  (MMFs),  hedge  funds  and  other 
investment funds) represents 60% of the narrow measure of shadow banking. It has 
grown more than 10% on average over the past four years. By contrast, the level of 
securitisation-based  credit  intermediation  –  among  the  key  contributors  to  the 
financial crisis – has fallen in recent years. 
At the aggregate level, interconnectedness between the banking and the non-bank 
financial system continues to decrease from its pre-crisis peak. 
The broad measure 
i. 
An aggregate “MUNFI” measure of the assets of other financial intermediaries (OFIs), 
pension funds and insurance companies grew by 9% to $137 trillion over the past 
year, and now represents about 40% of total financial system assets in 20 jurisdictions 
and the euro area. 
In aggregate, the insurance company, pension fund and OFI sectors all grew in 2014, 
while banking system assets fell slightly in US dollar terms. 
While non-bank financial intermediation shrank somewhat immediately following the 
financial crisis, it has been rising over the past several years. OFI assets in the 20 
jurisdictions and the euro area reached 128% of GDP in 2014, up 6 percentage points 
from 2013 and 15 percentage points from 2011. It is nearing the previous high-point 
of 130% prior to the financial crisis. 
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) showed the most rapid increases in OFI assets. 
In 2014, 8 EMEs had OFI growth rates above 10%, including two that grew over 30%. 
However, this rapid growth is generally from a relatively small base. 
Among  OFI  sub-sectors  that  showed  the  most  rapid  growth  in  2014  are  trust 
companies, MMFs, and fixed income and other funds. Trust companies (mostly based 
in China) continued to experience growth of 26%, similar to the past several years. 
Perhaps more surprisingly, MMFs experienced 20% growth in 2014 (largely driven by 
some euro area jurisdictions and China), following low or negative growth in the prior 
three year period. Fixed income funds and other funds grew approximately 15% in 
2014. 
It should be noted that hedge funds remain underestimated in the FSB’s exercise due 
to the fact that a portion of international financial centres (IFCs), where a number of 
hedge funds are domiciled, are currently not within the scope of the exercise. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Shadow banking in India 
5. 
While the world generally refers to this sector as “shadow banking sector”, we have 
been calling it as the “non-banking financial sector”. Further, while the world has, as I said, 
now sat up and perked its collar to look at this sector intensely, India had understood the 
sector’s relevance and the risks that it may pose, way back in early 1960s itself, when, in 1963, 
Chapter III B dealing with regulation of the Non-Banking Financial Institutions was added to 
the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934. It recognised that non-banking financial activity is an 
integral  part  of  the  financial  system  and  complements  commercial  banking;  only  that 
appropriate vigilance and due-diligence will be needed to regulate this sector. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   NBFC regulation 
6. 
In a free economy, economic agents are primarily free to undertake any economic 
activity. In their normal course, they will be aspiring for continuous growth. However, certain 
economic activities have, as we all know, greater externalities and financial sector is one where 
the externalities are such that it warrants close regulation and supervision in the interests of 
systemic stability, safety and soundness of banks and other financial institutions and to protect 
the  consumers.  The  objective  of  NBFC  regulations  during  the  twentieth  century  was 
predominantly to protect the interests of the depositors. However, as the NBFCs grew in size 
and their interconnectedness with the banking system became visible and raised concerns 
about their capacity to disturb systemic stability, the NBFCs were brought under prudential 
regulatory framework from 2006 onwards. 
7. 
While the overall approach followed the contours as described above, the Reserve 
Bank,  as  the  regulator  of  NBFCs  has  kept  the  sector’s  potential  to  contribute  to  the 
development  of  identified  segments  of the economy  and  accordingly  has  been following  a 
developmental bias in its regulatory framework relating to the NBFCs. The NBFCs focus on 
niche areas of business addressing specific needs of customers. Therefore, the Reserve Bank 
has classified varieties of specific types of NBFCs separately and regulates each such type 
differently. As on date such types include asset financing, core investment, loan, investment, 
micro-financing, factoring, infrastructure financing, mortgage guarantee, etc. activities. Further, 
the housing finance, insurance and collective investment activities, though statutorily defined 
as NBFI activities, their regulations have been left in the hands of other sectoral regulators like 
the  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB),  the  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority 
(IRDA), the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). 
8. 
This approach reflected the position that non-bank financial system may contribute to 
financial deepening in these identified segments. The NBFCs can be advantageous due to 
their ability to lower transaction costs, quick decision making capabilities, customer orientation 
and  prompt  provision  of  services.  In  terms  of  products  and  services  offered,  the  NBFCs 
complement the banks. 
9. 
Nevertheless,  the  business  model  of  NBFCs  is  inherently  risk-prone.  Weaker 
underwriting standards, enhanced risk taking capabilities and increased complexity of their 
activities cause concerns. 
10. 
Besides  riskiness  pertaining  to  business  model,  NBFCs  are  exposed  to  key  risks 
emanating from regulatory gaps, arbitrage and contagion effect. NBFCs are more prone to 
systemic risks on account of concentration of exposure to specific sectors. Also, since these 
entities  are  more  dependent  on  bank 
the 
interconnectedness  risk  tends  to  be  higher.  Their  asset-liability  mismatches  accentuate 
liquidity risks. All told, these risks can quickly escalate as solvency risks and lead to systemic 
risk as well. 
11. 
Therefore, careful and continuous monitoring is still required to detect any increases 
in systemic risk factors (e.g. maturity and liquidity transformation, and leverage) that could 
arise from the rapid expansion of credit provided by the non-bank sector. Reserve Bank has 
been dynamically making the regulatory framework suitable for the day. Certain changes in 
the framework brought in the last year or so deserve some recollection. 
funding,  both  directly  and 
indirectly, 
Recent NBFC regulations 
12. 
Changes to the regulations concerning NBFC sector over the last decade and a half 
had largely been incremental. However, in November 2014, a detailed review of the entire 
regulatory framework for the NBFC sector was undertaken with a view to transitioning, over 
time, to an activity based regulation of NBFCs as opposed to the current approach of entity-
based regulation. The Bank has been mindful of the fact that the revisions should not impede 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
the  dynamism  displayed  by  NBFCs  in  delivering  innovation  and  last  mile  connectivity  for 
meeting  the  credit  needs  of  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  broad  principles 
followed in framing the revised guidelines was to review the regulations from the perspective 
of the mandate of the Reserve Bank, viz., financial stability, depositor protection and customer 
protection. Hence, a) the focus has been on addressing risks where they exist, b) address 
gaps in regulation, c) reduce complexities and make regulations simple and easy to follow, d) 
harmonise  regulations  within  the  sector  and  with  that  of  banks  to  a  limited  extent,  e) 
acknowledge that there may be pockets within the sector that do not require to be stringently 
regulated and f) give adequate time to the NBFCs to adjust to the revised regulatory framework 
so that there are no disruptions in business. 
13. 
Consequently, the revised regulatory framework for NBFCs was introduced and the 
threshold for systemic significance has been revised to total asset size of ₹ 500 crore. Now, 
there  are  two  broad  categories  of  NBFCs  requiring  closer  attention  of  regulators  and 
supervisors.  These  are  a)  non  –  deposit  accepting  NBFCs  with  asset  size  of  less  than 
₹ 500 crore (NBFCs-ND) and b) non – deposit accepting NBFCs with assets of ₹ 500 crore 
and  above  (NBFCs-ND-SI)  and  deposit  accepting  NBFCs  (NBFCs-D).  Reporting  and 
regulatory provisions are accordingly applied to have better focus on systemically important 
entities and efficient allocation of supervisory resources. 
14. 
Minimal  prudential  regulations  have  been  prescribed  for  non-deposit  accepting 
NBFCs with asset size of less than ₹ 500 crore. For these non-deposit accepting companies 
(NBFCs-ND) below the threshold of systemic significance, prudential regulations, other than 
capital adequacy and credit concentration norms, are applicable only where public funds are 
accepted and conduct of business regulations (FPC, KYC) where there is customer interface. 
A simple leverage ratio of 7 has been put in place so that their asset growth is in sync with the 
capital they hold. Further, reporting by such NBFCs will be through a simplified annual return. 
However, registration under Section 45 IA of the RBI Act is mandatory and they are subjected 
to a simplified reporting system along with minimum net owned funds (NOF) of ₹ 2 crore. 
15. 
For those non-deposit accepting companies (NBFCs-ND-SI) above the threshold of 
systemic significance and for all NBFC-D, prudential regulations are applicable and conduct of 
business  regulations  wherever  customer  interface  exists.  In  line  with  international  best 
practices, core capital requirement has been strengthened (existing 7.5%; raised to 10% to be 
phased over 2 years). Asset classification norms have been aligned with that of banks (from 
the current 180 day and 360 day norm for loan and HP / Leased assets respectively to a 90 
day norm phased in over 3 years). Higher standard asset provisioning has been put in place 
(0.4% against the existing 0.25% phased in over 3 years). Further, credit concentration norms 
have  been  harmonised  between  the  various  categories  of  NBFCs  by  removing  the 
dispensation given to AFCs to exceed the defined norms by 5%. (Dispensation given to IFCs 
and IDFs has been retained as infra loans are high value loans) and corporate governance 
standards, viz., fit and proper criteria for directors, disclosure and transparency have been 
strengthened  so  that  they  are  professionally  managed  and  develop  a  sound  compliance 
culture. 
16. 
In order to harmonise the deposit acceptance regulations across all deposit taking 
NBFCs (NBFCs-D) and move over to a regimen of only credit rated NBFCs-D accessing public 
deposits, existing unrated Asset Finance Companies (AFCs), which were permitted to accept 
deposits,  shall  have  to  get  themselves  rated  by  March  31,  2016.  Further,  the  limit  for 
acceptance of deposits has been reduced for rated AFCs from 4 times earlier to 1.5 times of 
NOF. 
17. 
The Principal Business Criteria (PBC) for NBFC-Factors has been revised to 50:50 
from the existing 75:75, thereby aligning it with the provisions of the Factoring Regulation Act, 
2011. Consequently, an NBFC whose factoring assets and factoring income are 50 percent of 
the total assets and total income respectively are now classified as NBFC-Factors. This is 
expected to provide a boost to factoring activities in the country. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
18. 
In  the  case  of  NBFC-  MFIs  ,  based  on  recommendations  of  the  Committee  on 
Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Businesses  and  Low  Income  Households 
(Chairman: Dr. Nachiket Mor), the limit on the total indebtedness of a borrower was raised to 
₹ 1,00,000/- from ₹ 50,000/-. Income criteria of borrowers for loans to be included as qualifying 
assets of these NBFCs was changed: for borrowers with a rural household annual income not 
exceeding ₹ 1,00,000/- against ₹ 60,000/- earlier and urban and semi-urban household income 
not exceeding ₹ 1,60,000/- against ₹ 1,20,000/- earlier; ceiling on the amount of loan that can 
be disbursed was revised to ₹ 60,000/- from ₹ 35,000/- earlier in the first cycle and ₹1,00,000/- 
from ₹ 50,000/- earlier in subsequent cycles. The income generating loan component has been 
reduced  from  70%  to  50%.  Further,  the  Bank  has  also  raised  the  loan  limit,  requiring  a 
mandatory tenure of 24 months, to ₹ 30,000/- from ₹ 15,000. 
Growth of the NBFC sector 
19. 
Total  number  of  NBFCs  have  come  down  from  51,929  in  1997  to  11,769  as  on 
September 30, 2015 whereas the asset size has grown from ₹ 75913 crore as at end March 
1998 to ₹ 16,10,729 crore at end September 2015. Share of NBFC assets as a percentage of 
scheduled commercial banks’ assets has increased from 7% in 1998 to 14.8% in March 2015. 
There are 202 NBFCs-ND-SI (assets size ₹ 500 crore and above) with a total asset size of 
₹14126  billion.  The  number  of  deposit  taking  NBFCs,  including  Residuary  Non-Banking 
Finance Companies (RNBCs), decreased from 1,420 in 1997–98 to 209 in September 2015. 
Share of NBFC deposits as a percentage of scheduled commercial banks’ deposits has come 
down from 3.34% in March 1997 to 0.30% in March 2015. 
20. 
Position As on September 30, 2015 
Sources and Uses of Funds of NBFC Sector – 
 
21. 
Loans and advances extended by NBFCs-ND-SI posted strong double-digit growth of 
15.5%  during  2014–15,  in  contrast  to  the  slowdown  in  commercial  bank’s  non-food  credit 
during  the  same  period (Chart  4.6).  Strong  growth  in  credit  extended  by  the  infrastructure 
finance companies, microfinance companies and loan companies contributed to sturdy growth 
in the loan portfolio of NBFCs-ND-SI. Among the sectors, infrastructure, medium and large-
scale industries, and the transport sectors contributed to strong growth in credit off-take of the 
NBFCs-ND-SI. During 2014–15, NBFCs-ND-SI raised funds mainly through debentures and 
commercial papers. Borrowings from banks, which earlier constituted to be the main source of 
funding, has been progressively reduced. A notable feature is the rising exposure of mutual 
funds  to  the  financial  instruments  floated  mainly  by  the  NBFC-Infrastructure  Finance 
Companies (IFCs), Loan Companies (LCs) and NBFC-Micro Finance Institution (NBFC-MFIs). 
22. 
In recent years, asset quality of NBFC sector has gone through the vicissitudes of 
overall  deterioration  spreading  across  the financial  system  as the  economy  slowed.  Gross 
NPAs as per cent of credit deployed rose to 4.1 per cent by end-March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    In my opinion, the prospects for the sector in the medium term are not going to be 
Prospects 
23. 
uniform. Different segments of the sector are poised for different prospects and challenges. 
24. 
For example, the NBFC-MFI segment is going to shrink heavily as the big ten of them 
convert themselves into Small Finance Banks in the next one year or so. I will hasten to add 
that this can yet bring higher impetus for the other NBFC-MFIs to grow, not just because of the 
availability of space vacated by the big ten, but also because the capital that will be released 
when many of the converting NBFC-MFIs pay off the current investors as a part of capital 
restructuring,  and  because  of  renewed  interests  by  such  venture  capital  aiming  growth 
prospects in such conversions in the future. 
25. 
The infrastructure NBFCs will have greater scope in the coming years, both because 
the economic growth will bring forth new projects and banks, having learnt lessons in the recent 
past, will have a restrained approach towards such projects. If the Infra-NBFCs will have their 
structuring these projects in a careful way, they will have good prospects. 
26. 
for market funding or loan funding of big corporate financing in the medium term. 
27. 
required to appropriately educate their workforce in selling right. 
28. 
Investment companies will have bright prospects, as the equity and corporate bond 
markets expand, along with economic growth and careful recalibration of bank finance in the 
wake of Basle III. 
As the large exposure regime for the banks will apply by 2018, NBFCs will have space 
Loan  companies  will  face  enhanced  consumer  protection  measures.  They  will  be 
Regulation – The way forward 
29. 
At present, there are several categories of NBFCs and regulations vary across these 
NBFCs. The Committee on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low 
Income  Households  (Chairman:  Dr.  Nachiket  Mor)  had  recommended  merger  of  various 
categories  of  NBFCs,  into  two  viz.,  NBFCs  and  Core  Investment  Companies  (CICs)  and 
moving towards activity based regulation. The regulatory framework, put in place in November 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
2014, is a first step in this direction. Going forward, we will work towards greater harmonisation 
of the regulations with a view to reducing the number of NBFC categories. 
30. 
However, the Reserve Bank is alive to the developmental needs of the economy and 
therefore will continue to approve of new types of NBFCs if the economy will need them. One 
such is NBFC-Account Aggregator (NBFC-AA) about which the Reserve Bank announced on 
July 02, 2015. The NBFC-AA will provide a technology enabled solution to a person to view at 
one  place  the  position  of  his  financial  assets  across  institutions  under  different  sectoral 
regulators. The guidelines for the same are under preparations. 
31. 
Also, the Reserve Bank is actively studying the Peer-To-Peer lending arrangements 
that  are  slowly  gaining  traction.  While  recognising  the  need  for  innovative  products  and 
services, we should be conscious about the risks that may emanate out of such innovations. 
Based on the detailed study, we intend to bring out a Discussion Paper for public consultation. 
32. 
There are demands that the regulations relating to the Core Investment Companies 
need revisiting. This is a work-in-process. 
To conclude, I can only quote what the FSB concluded in its 2015 Report. 
Conclusion 
33. 
“Intermediating  credit  through  non-bank  channels  can  have  important  advantages  and 
contributes to the financing of the real economy, but such channels can also become a source 
of  systemic  risk,  especially  when  they  are  structured  to  perform  bank-like  functions  (e.g. 
maturity and liquidity transformation, and leverage) and when their interconnectedness with 
the  regular  banking  system  is  strong.  Appropriate  monitoring  of  shadow  banking  and  the 
application of appropriate policy responses, where necessary, helps to mitigate the build-up of 
such systemic risks”. The Reserve Bank remains committed to such an approach. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
