   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Steer toward true north 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Awarding Ceremony for “MAP Management Man of the 
Year 2015, Makati City, 24 November 2015. 
 They say receiving the MAP Management Man of the Year award is like winning Best Director 
in the Oscars… 
When I look at the roster of past winners… I guess they have a point … But also, when I look 
at  the  roster,  Best  Director  for  a  particular  film  pales  in  comparison…  Because  everyone 
before me had been judged for the consistency in his whole body of work… 
And so it is with pride and, at the same time, humility that I address you this afternoon… 
 
Since I became BSP Governor in 2005, a frequently used idiom to describe my position is 
that I am “at its helm.” I find this analogy to an ocean-going vessel very appropriate, both from 
the technical and from the operational-management side of central banking. Central banking 
has, after all, often been described as a navigational act of directing… easing, tightening, 
reining-in … balancing. 
Slight changes on the wheel can alter the ship’s direction. Thus, captain and crew must be in 
sync. With this in mind, for the last 10 years, 4 months and 20 days I have approached my 
duties with great respect: 
First, I must know the course with certainty. Many navigational tools can be consulted for 
geographical direction. In my readings, I learned that the compass is limited. It often does not 
point to “the true north” that does not change. Rather, it directs to a magnetic north that varies 
because of fluctuations in the earth’s fields. Thus, for accurate direction one must know where 
the “true north” is. 
For the BSP, our true north is spelled out in our mandates. We are committed to maintaining 
price  stability;  a  stable  banking  system;  and  a  safe,  sound  and  efficient  payments  and 
settlements system. We choose the course that leads to them despite possible trade-offs or 
even criticism, sometimes, lawsuits. In this commitment, we value our independence as we 
cannot be carried by changing currents or tossed by the waves. Our direction determines our 
destination. 
Let me first talk about adherence to our second mandate. 
Something about going through a crisis makes one think long and hard about the direction 
one is taking. The traumatic 1997 Asian Foreign Exchange Crisis and then ten years later, 
the  2007/8  Global  Financial  Crisis  were  valuable  learning  experiences  that  shaped  our 
thinking on how we should approach bank supervision and promote overall financial stability. 
These defining moments have led us to embrace, champion, and implement wide-ranging 
financial reforms. 
The financial reform agenda is exceptionally challenging and complex… Significant progress 
has been achieved but… more can still be done. It began with a long, painstaking, and painful 
post-1997 crisis clean-up of the banking system. We followed through with decisive adoption 
of relevant global banking reforms particularly those advocated by the Basel Committee and 
other international standard setting bodies. Running parallel to this are the implementation of 
regulations to raise the bar for the governance and risk management of banks, on one hand, 
and the risk-based approach that we are now employing to supervise them, on the other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Our  goal  was  behavioral  change  in  how  banks  are  run.  This,  while  consciously  and 
deliberately  nurturing  a  more  dynamic  environment  that  encourages  healthy  competition, 
financial innovation, consumer protection, and financial inclusion. 
As a result, ladies and gentlemen, our banking system is robust. It supports expansionary 
business activities and consumption spending, effectively becoming a truly reliable pillar of 
economic growth. 
Second, as captain, I must have an intimate understanding of the vessel and its equipment. 
Our  primary  mandate,  controlling  inflation  is  often  likened  to  operating  a  big  ship.  Slight 
movements in the monetary policy rudder can cause big changes in economic course. We 
must be focused, precise and deliberate in our decisions. 
In 2002, the BSP adopted the inflation targeting framework. Inflation targetting or IT is an 
exhaustive  policy  framework  where  thoughtful  econometric  modelling  and  forecasting, 
grounded market surveillance, and sound judgement come together. And I am happy to report 
that since we’ve become more adept at IT, we have also become more effective in keeping 
prices low and stable. Economic growth is supported. Income equality is better promoted. 
But the operating environment is evolving. So, again learning from the Global Financial Crisis, 
the BSP enhanced its tool kit to include macroprudential measures to address, among others, 
any unintended financial stresses… that could potentially arise from changes in market risk 
perception... because of monetary policy actions or other related causes. Macroprudential 
tools  can  be  targetted  towards  areas  for  which  traditional  monetary  policy  tools  are  not 
suitable. 
Third, I must delegate to, and trust the ship’s officers. In the book, True North by Bill George 
and Peter Sims, there was insight that as one travels to the true north, a greater appreciation 
for “the We” instead of “the I” is developed. A difficult journey is best undertaken with a capable 
team. In this regard, I am fortunate that among my three deputy governors and myself, we 
have clocked-in about 130 years of central banking experience. I wish to acknowledge them 
this  afternoon.  Deputy  Governor  Nesting  Espenilla  of  our  Supervision  and  Examination 
Sector,  Deputy  Governor  Diwa  Guinigundo  of  our  Monetary  Stability  Sector,  and  Deputy 
Governor Vic Aquino of our Resource Management Sector. I am grateful for the experience 
and expertise of these men, and the excellent and dedicated officers of the BSP, past and 
present, which combined through the years, illuminated a wider and brighter path for us to 
charter. 
I would also like to acknowledge another significant source of illumination: our highest policy 
making body – the Monetary Board. I benefit much from the wisdom and technical knowledge 
possessed and shared, always so selflessly, by the highly accomplished men that comprise 
it. The Monetary Board is not involved in the day-to-day running of the “BSP Ship.” To my 
mind, the Monetary Board is like a lighthouse… guiding toward our true north… warning of 
perilous areas, and marking safe entries to harbors. I wish to acknowledge the presence of 
those  who  are  here  today.  MBMs  Cesar  Purisima,  Freddy  Antonio,  Philip  Medalla,  Andy 
Suratos, Val Araneta and Jun de Zuniga. 
The fourth duty of a captain is to take care of the crew. At present, the BSP has 5,321 officers 
and staff across the country. While we have varied experiences and expertise, we are all 
central bankers. We are taught and trained not just to do routine tasks. Rather, we live out 
our shared mission and vision, which is to be a world-class monetary authority, and a catalyst 
for a globally competitive economy that delivers a high quality of life for all Filipinos. We take 
to  heart,  core  values  of  integrity,  patriotism,  solidarity,  excellence  and  dynamism.  These 
values are sustained by quality recruitment, training, succession and mentorship programs. 
We  are  committed  to  capacity  building.  It  is  the  skillful  sailing  by  all  crew  members  that 
assures a successful voyage. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Fifth,  I  must  provide  clear  and  active  communication  internally,  and  lead  coordination 
externally.  Internally,  a  strong  knowledge  management  system  and  enterprise  wide 
communication policy are being implemented and continually refined in the bank. 
We also give importance to and deeply value our domestic and international stakeholders and 
partners. Last July, together with 12 other government agencies, we launched the National 
Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  to  build  an  inclusive  financial  system.  We  also  chair  the 
voluntary  inter-agency  body,  the  Financial  Sector  Forum  comprised  of  the  BSP,  SEC, 
Insurance Commission and the PDIC. 
Our  Bank  Supervision  Policy  Committee  regularly  conducts  meetings  with  15  industry 
associations for the continuous rationalization of regulations and so that supervisory policy 
remains relevant and responsive. Our Payment and Settlement Steering Committee regularly 
consults PhilPaSS stakeholders who are given the opportunity to raise concerns, grievances, 
as well as recommendations to improve PhilPaSS operations. 
The BSP also actively participates and holds chairmanship positions in international fora such 
as the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, the G-20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  Asian  Consultative  Council,  Financial  Stability  Board 
Regional Consultative Group for Asia, and the BIS Meeting of Governors from Small Open 
Economies. 
As Governor, I represent the country in the Executive Meeting of East Asia and Pacific Central 
Banks (EMEAP), ASEAN and ASEAN +3; and South East Asia Central Banks (SEACEN), 
among others. We are represented in the IMF, the World Bank and ADB. We benefit from a 
continued exchange of ideas, sharing of competencies, and strengthening of linkages. 
Sixth, laws and regulations must be complied with. I understand that common carriers have 
the legal duty to observe extraordinary diligence. In Philippine law, the banking community is 
the only other industry required to observe this highest degree of diligence when acting in a 
fiduciary capacity. And for good reason, given its key role. In the BSP, we are mindful of this 
principle and strive to follow both the letter and the spirit of legal provisions. 
Seventh, the journey must be inclusive. The BSP is continually increasing its interface with 
the Filipino people, our ultimate stakeholder. The phrase “inclusive growth” is now cutting 
across  the  global  reform  agenda.  The  BSP  has  been  doing  its  part  to  promote  financial 
inclusion. And we have done so following three pillars, namely: access and usage, financial 
literacy and education, and increased financial consumer protection. Policy and regulatory 
efforts are designed and directed toward allowing more of our countrymen effective access to 
a  wide  range  of  financial  services,  equipping  them  with  know-how  to  appreciate  which 
financial  service  suits  them  best,  and  creating  an  environment  where  they  are  essentially 
protected from unscrupulous elements. 
We  believe  that  for  economic  development  and  progress  to  be  meaningful,  more  must 
participate in and benefit from the journey. 
Finally, a strong moral and internal compass is essential. It is difficult to find direction when 
one relies only on external aids. Instead, one must listen closely to the dictates of his own 
conscience – his true north - doing his best in each endeavor. In its simplest form, this is how 
one genuinely moves forward: by listening to his inner compass, trusting in God, and doing 
what, in his mind, is his very best, never settling for less in the day-to-day. 
For me, as a young central bank statistician in the 1970s, this meant ensuring that each report 
submitted to my supervisor was accurate and timely. All the numbers had to add up. In the 
1980s, this entailed carefully preparing correct and complete documents for the next external 
debt negotiation. It also required that as Director of the Research Department, my interviews 
be  faithful  to  our  mandate.  As  Deputy  Governor  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s,  this 
translated  to  basing  each  policy  recommendation  only  on  meticulous  academic  research 
sensitive to market reactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   As  Governor,  it  demands  attention to consistency  and  appropriateness  of  policies,  and  to 
consider paramount, the BSP’s mandate and public welfare. 
In  closing,  I  recap  what  for  me,  are  the  core  responsibilities  at  the  helm.  There  must  be 
commitment to the BSP’s true north- its mandates. There must be expert familiarity with the 
vessel and its equipment. Delegation to, and trust in the ship’s officers is essential. The crew 
must be cared for and continously prepared for the journey. Clear and active communication 
must be provided internally, and there must be strong coordination externally. There must be 
compliance with laws and regulations – to the standard of “extraordinary diligence”. To be 
meaningful, the journey must be inclusive. And most importantly, a strong moral and internal 
compass is essential. 
Today, I am humbled and honored that the Management Association of the Philippines (MAP) 
has recognized that under my watch, the BSP has stayed steady on its course. 
I  am  honored  to  join  an  illustrious  roster  of  awardees  that  includes  previous  central  bank 
governors, from whom I have learned a lot. My predecessor, Governor Rafael Buenaventura 
was Management Man of the Year in 2004; Governor Gabriel Singson in 1998; Governor Jose 
Cuisia, Jr. in 2007; and Governor Jobo Fernandez in 1989. Another former CB Governor, 
Jimmy  Laya  was  once  the  President  of  MAP.  For  this  award,  and  for  consistently 
demonstrating trust in the Central Bank and the role it plays, maraming salamat po sa MAP. 
I cannot receive this honor without sharing it. With my wife, Elma; my children Patrick and 
Miko, Eula and Mia, whose support and encouragement allowed me to seek out my own true 
north even amidst trying times. I share this too with my grandchild Zara who gives us much 
joy in the family. I pray that they would each continuously listen to their own internal and moral 
compass. 
With the men and women who with me, serve in the BSP with integrity, excellence and honor 
– members of the Monetary Board, officers and staff, past and present, who have ensured 
that the BSP stay its course, maraming salamat sa inyo. 
Thank you all for listening. To the Management Association of the Philippines, it is with deep 
gratitude  and  honor  that  I  accept  the  award  you  have  bestowed  on  me;  my  family;  and 
ultimately, on the magnificent team that comprises the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
Mabuhay at maraming salamat muli. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
