  Andreas Dombret: Shaken but not stirred? The banking system seven 
years after the crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Financial  Markets  Group  Research  Centre  of  the  London  School  of 
Economics and Political Science, London, 29 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Professor Goodhart, 
Dear Charlie Bean, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak here today. It is a great honour to give a public 
lecture at the LSE and the Financial Markets Group Research Centre, which truly is one of 
the leading European centres for academic research into financial markets. 
In my speech tonight I will outline the status quo in the banking sector and the most pressing 
challenges.  “Shaken  but  not  stirred”  might  be  an  accurate  description  of  its  present  state, 
which still presents many challenges. In saying that, I am, of course, alluding to one of your 
country’s most successful exports: The agent who not only solved the Cold War, but who has 
recently also begun to prevent wrongdoing on the financial markets – James Bond. 
In the 2006 version of Casino Royale, for example, Bond’s opponent, Le Chiffre, engages in 
insider  trading  and  market  manipulation.  In  anticipation  of  his  terrorist  plot  to  destroy  a 
prototype aeroplane, he bets on the fall in the stocks of the aircraft manufacturer. Moreover, 
he engages in extreme leveraging: by financing the bet with money borrowed from African 
rebels, whom he has promised high returns on the ‘invested’ money. Of course, it is not the 
supervisory  authority,  but  Her  Majesty’s  agent  James  Bond  who  prevents  the  attack, 
resulting in the collapse of Le Chiffre’s fraudulent plan. 
Insider  trading,  market  manipulation,  extreme  leveraging,  terrorism  financing  –  you  can 
imagine how daunting a task like financial supervision is in a world without James Bond. 
Seriously,  though,  besides  the  aspects  I  have  just  mentioned,  there  were  even  more 
problems with banks and the financial markets before the financial crisis. 
Reconstructing the financial infrastructure after a perfect storm 
2. 
Seven years ago, we were in midst of a perfect storm unleashed by the financial crisis that 
had  the  Lehman  Brothers  insolvency  as  its  focal  point.  The  events  and  revelations  that 
ensued put the global economy into recession and discredited the banking sector. This led to 
an  overwhelming  demand  to  bring  the  state  back  in:  for  robust  regulation  of  financial 
markets, and of banks in particular, so that the financial sector would serve the real economy 
and society, not the other way around. 
I guess many, if not most observers back then would have expected such a task to have 
been completed seven years later. Nevertheless, I stand here today to convince you that we 
have  not  yet  arrived  at  that  point.  Rather,  we  need  to  continue  the  reconstruction  of  the 
banking sector. We need to finalise reforms with the aim of ensuring a stable banking sector 
that, at the same time, serves the real economy and achieves sustainable profitability – in 
that exact order. This remains a broader challenge for society as a whole – one not only for 
banks, markets and supervisors, but also the general public, academia, and the media. 
The  financial  crisis  and  the  subsequent  recession  revealed  to  us  why  this  is  such  an 
overwhelming challenge: the financial system, and banks in particular, provide an essential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
infrastructure function for modern economies. Their stable functioning is a public good. The 
negative  externalities  of  actions  taken  by  bankers  and  their  banking  institutions  have 
profound repercussions for the entire system. 
In my speech today, I will outline why work on this infrastructure is still in progress: if you 
think of the financial system as streets and bridges, the regulatory reforms around the Basel 
III  package  have  led  to  some  repairs,  some  renovations,  and  some  closures.  The 
infrastructure  has  become  safer,  but  there  are  still  several  potholes  and  too  many 
possibilities of a localised collapse in the system. At present, we are still in the process of 
finalising these reforms, of completing the reconstruction work that is very much needed. 
Lessons learned, realities accepted 
3. 
But first, let me restate three truths that had to be learned the hard way during the crisis. And 
let  me  borrow  the  support  of  one  of  the  leading  academic  figures  in  financial  market 
research. About four months ago in this very room, Nobel laureate Robert Shiller presented 
the  third  edition  of  his  book  “Irrational  Exuberance”,  earlier  editions  of  which  had  already 
pointed to the misguided policies of financial re-regulation in advance of the crisis long before 
policymakers,  markets,  and  the  general  public  even  became  aware  of  them.1  His  simple 
message this time was that irrational exuberance is still a defining feature of how financial 
markets  function.  Investors  still  follow  cycles  of  mania  and  crashes,  rather  than  rationally 
calculating  the  probabilities  of  all  relevant  scenarios  –  and  rather  than  considering  the 
negative externalities of their transactions. Full stop. 
This confirms the three truths or crucial lessons to be learned – realities to be accepted ‒ 
and remembered. First, people are, in the majority of instances, irrational; rational calculation 
is  severely  limited  –  internally,  by  our  limited  neurological  capacities;  and  externally,  by 
uncertainty in a complex world. For supervisors this implies that regulation cannot assume 
rational  behaviour,  but  interconnection  and  herding  behaviour.  Negative  externalities  of 
market participants’ decisions are still pervasive. 
Moreover,  second,  these  human  limitations  are  not  mitigated  by  market  structures.  If 
anything, blind faith in unregulated markets has made herding behaviour worse. Markets are 
not  self-regulating  entities,  but  socially  constructed  institutions  that  need  publicly  enforced 
rules. The third truth is that banks, supervisors, and policymakers neglected these insights 
and failed in providing a stable financial system that serves the real economy. 
So, when we discuss the consequences and further course of regulatory reform, we should 
always keep these simple, but rather inconvenient truths in mind. 
Where we are, and where we need to go 
4. 
What helps this purpose is to remember the costs of the crisis. Combining the direct costs of 
stabilising  the  financial  system  with  the  costs  of  foregone  production  due  to  underutilised 
economic capacities, the global costs are huge. When we carry out cost-benefit analyses of 
regulatory  measures,  we  should  remember  the  enormous  amount  of  tax  money  spent  on 
bank bail-outs. 
This experience and the fact that regulatory failure was one of the key causes of the financial 
crisis,  put  pressure  on  policymakers  and  supervisors  to  revamp  the  regulatory  framework. 
And the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Board and other 
standard-setting bodies have paved the way for this reform. I will come to some elements of 
this later, but, most importantly, the Basel Committee devised the Basel III framework with 
enhanced  capital  requirement  rules,  a  leverage  ratio,  new  liquidity  regulations,  new 
                                                
1   Shiller, R. (2015), Irrational Exuberance. Princeton. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
macro-prudential instruments and several further elements. In the EU these rules have been 
translated  into  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation,  CRR,  and  the  Capital  Requirements 
Directive IV. Moreover, in the euro area, we have created the Banking Union with a single 
supervisory mechanism and a single resolution mechanism. 
And the reforms have actually worked. They have played a considerable part in stabilising 
the  banking  sector.  Between  2008  and  2014  European  banks  have  shrunk  their  balance 
sheets by 20% and have increased their capital ratios by 5 percentage points from less than 
9%  to  around  14%,  where  the  latter  has  been achieved  through  reduced  volumes  of  risk-
weighted assets as well as increases in own funds. As a result, most balance sheets have 
been reduced, and refinancing has become more sustainable. 
Against this backdrop and as memory of the crisis fades, some have begun to argue that 
further  regulatory  reforms  are  no  longer  necessary,  and  that  they  are  choking  the  only 
recently restarted engine of growth. 
But  let  me  be  clear:  all  macroeconomic  studies  on  the  impact  of  regulatory  reforms  are 
consistent in stressing that the overall economic benefits far outweigh the costs.2  
And that means that there is no way around fully implementing the reforms that have already 
been initiated and finalising their outstanding elements. 
To summarise the current status quo, the banking sector’s construction site show that good 
progress has been made; the most important bridges have been renovated, rebuilt or newly 
constructed.  Yet,  several  projects  still  lie  ahead  before  reconstruction  is  complete;  let  us 
move to the, in my view, three biggest challenges facing the banking sector. 
Challenge 1: Manage and supervise banks in a multi-polar regulatory regime 
5. 
The first challenge is encapsulated by a quite technical term, namely multi-polar regulation. 
Andrew Haldane of the Bank of England has published an article on it.3 Multi-polarity refers 
to the now multiple regulatory requirements that banks have to meet. Rather than having to 
meet  just  one  capital  ratio,  they  now  will  have  to  surpass  several  minimum  requirements: 
there  are,  first,  the  improved  risk-weighted  capital  ratio;  second,  two  new  liquidity 
requirements have to be met – a short-term Liquidity Coverage Ratio as well as a longer-
term maturity mismatch ratio; third, the upcoming Leverage Ratio; fourth, macro-prudential 
buffers; and, last but not least, besides better capital also subordinated debt requirements. I 
could  go  on.  But  the  simple  point  is  that  a  multi-polar  regulatory  system  is  a  reasonable 
approach to make banks safer and the system more stable. 
Multi-polar  regulation  is  a  “third  way”  between  overly  complex  measures  on  the  one  hand 
and  very  simple  measures  on  the  other.  Both  alternatives  have  failed  in  the  past.  The 
complex approach ‒ in other words, Basel II ‒ was tested in the crisis. The crisis and the 
rather poor performance of internal market risk models as a basis for calculating regulatory 
capital requirements have made sole reliance on such an approach impossible. The simple 
approach, on the other hand, proved to not to be entirely adequate either: the Basel I capital 
ratio  of  1988,  which  was  such  a  simple  figure,  was  rendered  useless  through  regulatory 
arbitrage.  Therefore,  the  new  framework  combines  the  virtues  of  complex  and  simpler 
instruments in a multi-polar system that overcomes several of the pre-crisis shortcomings. 
Which  is  why  the  Basel  Committee  is  currently  in  the  process  of  finalising  the  Basel  III 
package. The new Basel framework, as agreed in 2010, marked a milestone in the regulation 
                                                
2   Admati, A.; Hellwig, M. (2013), The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do about 
It. Princeton. 
3   Haldane,  A.  G.  (2015),  Multi-Polar  Regulation.  In:  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  Vol.  11,  No.  3, 
pp 385–400. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
of banks. No sooner had it been put in place than the Basel Committee set about tackling the 
variability  of  risk-weighted  assets  in  portfolios  with  essentially  similar  risk  profiles.  This 
variability makes it more difficult for investors to compare one bank with another. That is why 
the Basel Committee is currently overhauling the standardised approaches for credit, market 
and operational risks. It is also planning to introduce capital floors for internal models based 
on  the  standardised  approaches.  And,  finally,  we  will  improve  the  regulation  of  internal 
models so that risk sensitivity, simplicity and comparability will be enhanced. 
Another  much  needed  change  to  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks  is  a  revision  of  the 
privileged treatment of sovereign bonds. This is another item currently on the agenda of the 
Basel Committee, given the experience of the recent sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. 
The  Bundesbank  is  arguing  for  government  bonds  to  be  backed  with  a  risk-appropriate 
amount of capital and for large exposure limits, just like those for claims on private debtors. 
These reforms and the reforms that have already been finalised reforms have led us into a 
world  of  multiple  regulatory  instruments.  Some  criticise  this.  Still,  I  believe  it  to  be  a 
reasonable approach, because it keeps in check the complexity that is  inherent in today’s 
risk-based  regulations.  Each  of  the  new  instruments  will  capture  and  limit  the  risks  from 
banks with differing business models and risk profiles. The leverage ratio might not allow the 
detection  of  high-risk  investment  strategies,  but  that  job  will  be  performed  using  the  risk-
weighted  approach.  And  the  future  floor  will  limit  the  problems  that  have  emerged  with 
internal models. 
For banks, risk regulation becomes an even more complex optimisation problem. A bank’s 
management has to integrate its business model with the multiple regulatory requirements. 
This implies a major challenge for operational processes, for risk management and, last but 
not least, for profit generation. 
To sum up, the successful management and supervision of banks under multiple regulatory 
instruments  is  a  key  challenge  for  bankers  and  supervisors  –  and  one,  I  might  add,  that 
needs to be combined with the challenge of rethinking a bank’s strategy and business model. 
I will come back to this point later. 
6. 
Challenge 2: Ending “Too Big To Fail”. Finalising the recovery and resolution 
framework and making it work in reality 
The second challenge opens up a previously untouched layer of the banking infrastructure 
for  reconstruction.  As  my  colleague  Andrew  Bailey  from  the  Bank  of  England  has  rightly 
criticised,  the  call  for  ever-higher  capital  provisions  neglects  that  there  are  other  ways  to 
successfully  protect  financial  stability.I  refer  to  the  rules  that  are  designed  to  make  banks 
resolvable without systemic disruption. Such reconstruction is sometimes so delicate that we 
might think of it as open heart surgery on the patient bank. Given the scale and sensitivity of 
this issue, the fact that the recovery and resolution regime has been globally agreed and will 
soon be implemented across Europe is an outstanding achievement. It was created to solve 
the  problem  of  “Too  Big  To  Fail”  banks  and  to  protect  taxpayers  from  having  to  bear  the 
costs of a failure. This resolution regime is a vital step forward in acting on one of the key 
lessons  learned  from  the  financial  crisis:  the  much-discussed  issue  of  moral  hazard  –  a 
problem that arose because institutions that were previously “Too Big To Fail” could not be 
held accountable for their actions. 
Looking ahead, there won’t just be recovery and resolution plans for credit institutions: clearly 
defined liability cascades will be established, too, so as to ensure that the taxpayer really is 
last in line to foot the bill – that is to say, after shareholders and creditors have been bailed 
in, and then only in absolutely exceptional cases. But, to put this theoretical resolution model 
into practice, institutions will need to hold a certain amount of additional debt which, should 
the need arise, will be transformed into loss-absorbing capital. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For  global  systemically  important  banks,  this  will  be  achieved  by  a  standard  for  total  loss 
absorbing capacity of banks, TLAC in short, which the G20 leaders will hopefully finalise at 
their summit in Antalya next month. The same principle applies to the European institutions, 
but implementation here is based on what is known as the MREL standard, which differs in 
some respects from the TLAC requirement. One difference is that the minimum requirements 
will be set individually for each institution by the competent resolution authority. 
These new standards will have a transformative impact on the market for loss-absorbing debt 
capital.  They  will 
instruments  and  will  enhance  standardisation  of 
subordinated  debt.  In  combination  with  new  disclosure  requirements,  these  standards  will 
lead to transparent, attractive investment opportunities. But, at the same time, this will also 
lead to the pricing in of the increased probability of a bail-in – in other words, investors will 
demand higher risk premiums. 
introduce  new 
Challenge 3: Learning to live with different market structures 
7. 
This brings me to my third challenge, namely adapting to new, different market structures. 
What do I mean by that? Two things: first, market structures are going to be different than 
before the crisis – in particular less liquid; second, in such a new environment, banks need to 
adapt their strategies to survive. While both trends will be monitored closely by supervisors, it 
is the banks and market participants that have to adapt. 
Let’s  think  first  about  the  market  environment  before  I  come  to  banks  and  their  business 
models.  Before  the  financial  crisis,  ever-present  liquidity  was  the  touchstone  of  the  free 
financial markets philosophy. The belief was that, if only demand and supply of a tradable 
asset were sufficiently high, you could assume perfect, frictionless markets. 
But  this  was  an  illusion.  Rather,  the  pre-crisis  ‘liquid’  market  structure  resulted  in 
interconnectivity  and  the  well-established  problems  of  “Too-Interconnected-To-Fail”  and 
“Too-Many-To-Fail”. Moreover, this liquidity supported unsustainable trading strategies and 
short-termism. 
Now,  in  the  post-crisis  environment,  in  which  tougher  regulation  is  one  element,  we  have 
witnessed  several  new  dynamics  resulting  from  changing  market  structures.  Particular 
attention has been paid to extreme, unexpected price movements that seem to have come 
from  nowhere.  The  incident  which  received  the  most  attention  was  probably  the  so  called 
flash crash of 2010. On  May 6 of that year, investors were stunned when the Dow Jones 
plunged almost 6 per cent before recovering – and all that in 20 minutes. 
In light of such incidents some have argued that post-crisis regulation has put pressure on 
banks  to  quit  activities,  which  led  to  reduced  liquidity,  thereby  increasing  the  likelihood  of 
extreme price swings. This logic provides the basis for some people’s demand for a redesign 
of regulation. 
Regulators  are  carefully  monitoring  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential  implications  of  the 
reforms.  However,  any  analysis  and  recommendation  would  have  to  recognise  that  a 
reduction in the trading activity of banks was a genuine intention of the post-crisis reforms. 
We therefore need to weigh up concerns about liquidity against reduced trading activity. 
To  put  it  bluntly:  Yes,  markets  are  going  to  be  less  conducive  for  the generation  of  quick 
profits,  but  that  was  what  was  intended  by  the  reforms  –  what  we  very  much  need  are 
informed and committed investors, not short-termism. This will strengthen stability. 
But that is also why banks need to adapt to the new environment. While the banking sector 
has  been  shaken,  business  models  have  not  been  stirred  –  that  is,  only  few  have  been 
overhauled. Some stirring, however, might not hurt. And, here, it is market forces, rather than 
regulatory forces that come into play. What I mean is that banks must apply the acid test to 
their  business  models.  Especially  European  banks  are  lagging  behind  in  redirecting  their 
strategies.  Against  the  backdrop  of  changed  market  structures  and  in  a  low  interest  rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
environment  –  which  is,  in  all  likelihood,  here  to  stay  –  banks  must  urgently  rethink  their 
strategies to survive. 
I cannot emphasise enough how pressing it is for banks to assess and adapt their business 
models.  But  let  me  also  stress  that  it  is  not  the  task  of  supervisors  to  intervene  in  the 
strategic orientation of banks. We have a public mandate to put a stop to imprudent activity 
with the aim of securing a stable banking sector that serves the real economy. Therefore, we 
tax  and  limit  negative  externalities.  For  example,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  already 
discussed,  legislation  and  regulation  of  banking  structural  reform  –  also  known  as 
“ringfencing” – is under way in the US, the UK, and the EU. The regulations will ringfence 
those  segments  of  banks  that  deserve  particular  protection,  in  particular  deposits.  This  is 
designed to internalise negative externalities and reduce moral hazard. Banks will have to 
accept  the  new  public  framework  and  construct  sustainable  business  strategies  which  are 
compatible with it and which may restructure their group. In this regard, I fully understand the 
case for a large European investment bank as a response to the large US institutions – as 
long as it is properly regulated and not “Too Big To Fail”. Nevertheless, it is ultimately and 
exclusively  the  banks  themselves  that  have  to  take  these  decisions.  The  role  of  universal 
banks, and whether they should be broken up, should be decided by their owners, not by the 
supervisors. 
In terms of market-induced restructuring, supervisors prefer the banks to be stirred, but not 
shaken. In that sense, living  with new market structures and adapting business models to 
sustainable profitability is the third vital challenge that the banking sector is facing. 
Conclusion 
8. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The crisis has taught us a number of important lessons: humans, whether acting on financial 
markets  or  not,  are  not  rational;  markets  are  not  self-regulating  and  do  need  politically 
mandated  regulations;  and  supervisors,  market  participants  and,  before 
the  crisis, 
policymakers failed in providing a stable financial sector. 
Regulatory  reform  has  already  reversed  some  of  the  earlier  mistakes,  and  these  reforms 
have  been  highly  beneficial  for  our  economy  and  society.  Completing  these  reforms  will 
continue to be a demanding task for markets and supervisors alike. But there is no viable 
alternative. 
In Casino Royale, when asked if he wants his vodka martini shaken or stirred, Daniel Craig 
alias  James  Bond  replies  ‘I  don’t  give  a  damn’.  Well,  I  do.  The  banking  sector  has  been 
shaken by the financial crisis, but not stirred by markets – at least not sufficiently. We cannot 
leave it to 007 to track-down bad guys. Bankers and regulators both still have to do a lot to 
finish the reconstruction of the banking sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes my speech – thank you very much for your attention. I 
am looking forward to a productive discussion. And for those who missed it, the new James 
Bond movie was released on Monday. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
