   
Sabine Lautenschläger: Qualitative and quantitative banking supervision 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  “Banking  Supervision,  Resolution  and  Risk  Management” 
during the 18th Euro Finance Week 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2015. 
 Ms Schönauer, ladies and gentlemen, 
Do you like cars? I personally do and I like what car producers have accomplished, particularly 
in terms of comfort and safety features. But I am not naive: since driving is what cars are made 
for, there will always be the risk of an accident; so I prefer cars that have seat belts, airbags 
and a stable, crash-proof body – ensuring “passive safety”. At the same time, accidents should 
be avoided to the maximum extent possible. This requires active safety features such as a 
flawless car with good brakes and so on, but also a good driver who knows the traffic rules, 
how to operate the vehicle and where and how fast to go. 
You might ask yourself now whether I have mixed speeches up, here at Frankfurt’s trade fair 
centre, where Europe’s biggest motor show was held just a few weeks ago. Believe me, I have 
not. 
Rather, I’m drawing an analogy to show that bank safety and car safety are quite similar. Like 
cars in traffic, there is always a risk that banks may incur losses because risk-taking is their 
business. Instead of seat belts and airbags, we ask banks to hold sufficient capital to be able 
to absorb losses and protect banks’ “passengers”, i.e. their depositors, from harm. Only well-
capitalised banks can withstand shocks and fund the economy on a sustained basis. So the 
“passive safety” of banks, i.e. a sound capital base, is absolutely key for banking supervision 
to achieve its goal of ensuring that we have a banking system which serves the real economy 
throughout the business cycle – in good and in bad times. 
At the same time, it’s extremely important to make sure that banks are able to avoid losses as 
far  as  possible.  Instead  of  having  a  safe  driver,  a  clear  view,  powerful  brakes  and  good 
suspension  in  the  case  of  cars,  this  requires  good  management  with  a  clear  strategy,  a 
forward-looking view, effective internal governance and risk controls, including effective risk 
data  aggregation  processes.  All  these  factors  are  critical  for  banks’  “active  safety”  and, 
therefore, they should also play a key role in banking supervision. 
The car analogy does not extend far enough to assess banks’ active safety features. Whereas 
technical equipment such as brakes and headlights can be assessed on the basis of technical 
requirements  and  clear  rules,  banks  are  far  too  complicated  to  do  this.  Rather,  risk 
management and internal governance – the cause of trouble in a number of banks – can only 
be assessed with a lot of supervisory judgement. It is often referred to as “qualitative banking 
supervision”. 
But the financial crisis also showed that the quantity and quality of capital held by institutions 
was insufficient and did not allow them to absorb the losses they incurred. Judging from this 
experience, it does not seem advisable for supervisors to rely only on qualitative supervision. 
Anyway,  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  supervision  are  an  obligation  under  the  Capital 
Requirements Directive IV, which requires us to determine whether an institution has sufficient 
capital and liquidity to cover its risks. Likewise, supervisors have to judge whether institutions’ 
internal strategies, processes and arrangements ensure a sound management of their risks. 
We are even obliged to come up with our own numerical verdict, namely a decision on pillar 2 
capital  add-ons.  No  choice  here.  The  SSM  complied  with  this  obligation  with  its  primary 
supervisory tool, the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP). 
Now how do we ensure that our SREP methodology adequately combines quantitative and 
qualitative supervision? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
First  of  all,  we  collect  data  on  own  funds,  financial  reporting,  large  exposures,  sovereign 
exposures, credit and operational risk losses, leverage ratios, market risk sensitivities, asset-
liability structures, funding plans and others. This manifold set of data is produced by banks 
following harmonised standards and it is then used in an automated process to generate initial 
risk  scores  and  supervisory  risk  estimates.  The  idea  behind  this  is  to  provide  consistency 
between the assessments of all institutions by producing objective quantitative anchor points. 
This is the quantitative part of the SSM SREP. 
Supervisory  judgement  is  a  second  key  feature  of  the  SSM  SREP.  There  will  always  be 
institutions with idiosyncrasies which cannot be captured by automated algorithms. That is why 
the SSM SREP should not (and cannot) be a “push-the-button” method. Rather, we are fully 
aware of and account for the fact that all standardised rating methodologies are, by their very 
nature, limited. Accordingly, we are responsible for assessing and judging all elements that 
impact on institutions’ viability including, but not restricted to, those factors which cannot be 
captured by automated ratings. This relates not only to traditionally qualitative elements, such 
as internal governance and risk controls, but also to the assessment of institutions’ risk levels. 
This institution-specific qualitative assessment uses up most of the supervisory resources in 
the SREP. If this were not done, too many aspects that are key for the viability of institutions 
could not be factored in. Think, for example, of very “soft”, yet extremely important things, such 
as the risk culture and the general spirit of the institution. 
Furthermore, we do not just conduct quantitative and qualitative assessments separately. We 
work hard to combine both approaches in our methodology by bringing together the strengths 
of both concepts. 
Let me explain briefly the structure of this SREP methodology. The slide shows that it consists 
of four main elements: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
All four elements are assessed and rated. They feed into the overall SREP assessment that 
forms the basis for SREP decisions. 
Of these four SREP elements, only the internal governance assessment is purely qualitative, 
while  all  other  elements  are  assessed  as  a  combination  of  quantitative  anchor  points  and 
qualitative assessments, based on supervisory judgement. In order to ensure consistency in 
the  assessments  while  allowing  the  responsible  supervisor  to  tailor  those  assessments  to 
institutions’ idiosyncrasies, we follow a so-called “constrained judgement” approach that limits 
the extent to which judgement can push qualitative results towards a predefined range around 
the anchor points. 
One example of the combination of quantitative and qualitative supervision is our pillar 2 add-
on  quantification  methodology.  Although  at  first  glance  a  purely  quantitative  concept, 
qualitative elements play a key role in this methodology. 
Under the so-called “block 1” of element 3, we assess risk levels and risk controls for credit, 
market, operational risk and interest rate risk in the banking book. The respective risk controls 
are assessed in a purely qualitative manner, and then combined with risk-level assessments 
that consist of a combination of quantitative anchor points and a holistic, judgement-based 
assessment. 
In  addition,  we  factor  in,  under  blocks  2  and  3,  the  banks’  Internal  Capital  Adequacy 
Assessment Process (ICAAP) figures, including internal stress testing figures plus the results 
of our own risk proxies and stress testing tools. In order to determine potential capital needs 
for the future, our capital determination process is rooted in a strong quantitative fundament; 
Business model assessment, 
Internal governance and risk management, 
Risks to capital, and 
Risks to liquidity and funding. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
but at the same time, we apply supervisory judgement, for example when selecting adequate 
stress testing scenarios and when combining the outcomes of the different risk perspectives 
that are reflected in the three blocks. 
Another principle underlying our methodology, namely the principle of proportionality, is linked 
to the qualitative part of our approach. We tailor the frequency, intensity and also the level of 
supervisory expectations vis-à-vis banks’ internal arrangements and processes to the nature, 
scale and complexity of their activities. 
Let  me  speak  briefly  about  the  results  of  this  capital  determination  process  and  our 
expectations  for  the  future.  Using  our  SREP  methodology  for  the  first  time  this  year,  the 
average pillar 2 capital requirements have slightly increased compared to the previous year by 
a margin of 30 basis points without buffer effects and by 50 basis points with buffer phase-in, 
adding up to an average requirement of 10.1% CET 1 own funds now. Depending on each 
institution’s individual situation, these requirements range from 8% up to about 14%, generally 
speaking.  Obviously,  this  is  not  a  dramatic  increase,  nonetheless  it  allows  for  a  gradual 
transition towards fully loaded Basel III requirements. From my perspective the current level of 
pillar 2 capital requirements is generally adequate in the sense that I regard it as sufficient to 
cover the current risk exposures across significant institutions. 
After  speaking  so  much  about  supervisory  judgement,  let  me  elaborate  briefly  on  how  we 
ensure a level playing field. The SSM is obliged to treat institutions in a fair and equal manner; 
within our single market, we have to provide a level playing field among institutions. And the 
establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism is a major step in this direction. 
There is a range of measures in our SREP process and methodology for ensuring a level 
playing field. First of all, our supervisors follow a common SREP methodology that guides their 
judgement. The “constrained judgement” principle fosters consistency of SREP decisions. In 
addition, extensive peer comparisons for all the different parts of the SREP contribute to a 
consistent exercise of supervisory judgement across all SREP elements and decisions in all 
institutions. It is certainly a big step forward with regard to equal treatment; we can now conduct 
peer comparisons for significant institutions in a far more meaningful and powerful manner, 
given the fact that, firstly, we can create more meaningful peer groups and, secondly, we have 
a prominent role for quantitative SREP elements that allow for easier comparisons. 
Overall,  we  had four  distinct  rounds  of  intensive  horizontal  analyses throughout the  SREP 
2015.  We  sliced  and  diced  the  whole  SREP  assessment  and  determination  process,  and 
compared results for individual banks for more than 80 different aspects among different peer 
groups, assembled on the basis of business models, sizes and geographies. We scrutinised 
the assessments for all four SREP elements, all underlying risk types, both for risk level and 
risk control assessments plus the combination of these two dimensions. We also conducted 
several thematic reviews. 
In several iterations, these horizontal analyses helped us to conduct the first round of SSM-
wide consistent SREP assessments and decisions which we have just finalised for most of the 
individual decisions. For the first time, the 122 most significant institutions from the 19 SSM 
countries were assessed using a single SREP methodology. Considering the high diversity of 
SREP methodologies used in the 19 SSM countries up to last year, this is a major achievement 
of the SSM, and I am very proud of it. 
We are aware of the fact that for some countries, such as Germany, our SREP methodology 
means a completely new approach. Previously, the German approach was characterised by a 
strong qualitative focus, which certainly has its merits, as I explained before. But I think a truly 
European level playing field and equal treatment can only be ensured by combining a strong 
qualitative approach with well-founded quantitative analyses, including peer reviews. A mere 
qualitative supervisory approach, in particular when it is solely based on the “individuality of 
the bank” might be prone to misuse, and justify generally lower rather than higher supervisory 
requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Let  me  conclude.  I  think  that  the  combination  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  supervisory 
elements has passed its first test in the SREP 2015. We will of course continue to improve our 
SREP methodology and its application, as usual. As an important complement to quantitative 
features, we will keep supervisory judgements as a core element of our SREP methodology. 
At the same time, I would like to stress that the supervisor’s view on a bank’s capital level 
cannot and should not relieve the bank and its management from its responsibility to ensure 
an adequate capital level. 
Returning to my car analogy, I am convinced that both active and passive safety features are 
equally crucial to keep cars and their passengers save. The same is true for banks and the 
role  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  supervision.  Banking  supervision  in  the  21st  century 
combines both approaches to keep banks on track and out of harm’s way. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
