   Jon Cunliffe: Market liquidity and market-based financing 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, at 
the British Bankers Association International Banking Conference, London, 22 October 2015. 
 According to Oscar Wilde, there is only one thing in life worse than being talked about and that 
is not being talked about. 
Wilde of course was not a banker. And although he retained his notoriety until well after his 
tragic and unjust end, even he probably never experienced the sustained and hostile public 
attention which bankers and the banking system worldwide have experienced over the past 
eight years. 
So  it  will  probably  come  as  a relief  to those  of you  here  at the  BBA  International  Banking 
Conference that I do not today intend to talk – in the main – about banks and bankers. Rather, 
I want to talk about market not bank-based finance and about market liquidity. I hope you will 
not find that worse than being talked about. 
I will, however, make some important points at the outset about the reform of the regulation of 
the  banking  system.  That  is  not  just  for  any  of  you  that  would  otherwise  have  withdrawal 
symptoms.  It  is  to  illustrate  how  far  we  are  into  the  implementation  phase  of  that  reform 
programme,  what  remains  to  be  done  and,  from  the  vantage  point  of  a  macroprudential 
regulator, how I view the future now that we are eight years on from the financial crisis and 
memories are beginning to fade. 
On  the  first  point,  the  implementation  phase,  it  is  illuminating  in  itself  that  from  a 
macroprudential point of view I have also chosen to talk about something else today. That is 
not to say that there is nothing that remains to be done. There is a vast amount of complex 
and difficult implementation that still needs to happen. My colleague, Andrew Bailey, will set 
out in a speech tonight the progress we’ve made so far on prudential regulation and three big 
areas of implementation left to complete: the Senior Managers Regimes, structural reform and 
competition. But as I have said before, the contours of the reformed regulatory framework for 
banks are clear – the Basel 3 capital and liquidity regime for banks, the reforms that address 
too big to fail, especially the regime for loss absorbing capacity in resolution that needs to be 
held by global systemic banks – which goes by the unlovely acronyms of TLAC and MREL and 
which is on course to be agreed by the G20 in Antalya this November. And the changes to 
derivatives and securities financing designed to increase transparency and reduce risk. 
There are, it is true, some material components of the reforms still under construction. We 
have  an  internationally  agreed  definition  of  the  leverage  ratio  and  we  are  implementing  a 
leverage  related  capital  requirement  in  the  UK.  But  an  international  standard  on  such  a 
requirement has not yet been agreed ahead of planned implementation in 2018. 
And there is still major construction work underway on the denominator of the risk based capital 
adequacy requirement – the Basel Committee work to update the standardised approach for 
those firms that do not use internal models and to review the role of internal models in the 
framework. This work is important; in order to have confidence in the risk based capital regime, 
one has to have confidence in the denominator of the ratio as well as in the numerator. 
My expectation, however, is that this will not lead to a major change in the aggregate level of 
global bank capital requirements, as some have claimed. If we are to trust the use of internal 
models in the approach we need to be sure that models are only used where there is adequate 
data to support them. And although we will I hope have an internationally-agreed leverage, 
non-risk based, requirement alongside the risk-based one, we will need more constraints on 
modelling  assumptions  and  inputs  in  order  to  reduce  variability  of  capital  outputs  between 
banks to an acceptable degree. I imagine this work will lead to a redistribution of capital within 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   the system and to changes in requirements for some institutions. But it should be seen as the 
working through of Basel 3 not as a new regime – a Basel 4. 
Before I test whether Wilde was right and turn my focus to market-based finance, I should 
observe  that  this  is  not  because  I  think  either  that  systemic  risks  from  banking  have 
disappeared or that the new regulatory framework is perfect in every respect. The UK banking 
system is much more resilient now. For example, major UK banks now have an average CET1 
capital ratio of 12%, almost twice their average capital ratio in 2008. Their liquid asset buffers 
have trebled in size since 2008 and their short-term wholesale funding ratio has halved since 
2006 (from 24% to 13%). Last year’s stress test showed that major UK banks could withstand 
a very sharp increase in unemployment, an unprecedented fall in house prices and with the 
Bank of England raising interest rates in the teeth of a recession. This year’s test, I should 
observe, will see if it can withstand the opposite – a prolonged period of deflation triggered by 
an economic collapse overseas. 
But while we are advanced in the implementation in the UK of a much stronger regulatory 
framework, and while UK banks already have much greater resilience, we have not abolished 
the  credit  cycle.  We  have  I  hope,  turned  off  or  dampened  some  of  the  more  damaging 
amplifying mechanisms in the financial system that drive up risks and create booms and drive 
the economy down in the resulting bust. We can test how the system is likely to behave under 
stress. But we have until recently been in a very muted phase of the credit cycle. We are now, 
I hope, entering a more normal phase of the cycle, and approaching the point at which, from a 
macroprudential stand point, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) will have to spend less of 
its time on the design of the regulatory framework and a lot more of its time on whether and 
when it needs to address the build-up of cyclical risk in the financial system. 
And, as we learn how the financial system behaves in first the more normal and then the more 
challenging parts of the credit cycle, we will also learn more about how the new regulatory 
framework functions as a whole. There will, as I and others have said, be areas where we find 
the  reforms  do  not  work  as  intended  and  that  it  is  necessary  to  adjust  them.  It  would  be 
surprising if this were not the case. In response to the biggest global financial crisis since the 
1930s the international regulatory community has agreed and is carrying through the biggest, 
most  complex  and  most  comprehensive  programme  ever  of  interlocking  regulatory  reform. 
There will be elements that need to be adjusted – indeed this process has already started with 
the reforms to securitisation now underway in the EU motivated in no small part by the joint 
work of the Bank of England and the European Central Bank. 
I should however be clear about one extremely important caveat in this process of adjustment 
and about something that seems to be often misunderstood. The risk appetite of the Bank of 
England – both as macro and as micro prudential regulator of the UK banking system – has 
not changed. The financial crisis led to a reassessment of our tolerance to risks that could 
jeopardise financial stability. It brought home that systemic financial crises were not something 
that only happened in history books and in emerging economies. We learned they were both 
possible and indeed even more explosive and damaging in modern, advanced economies and 
in their interdependent financial systems. And we learned the costs to the real economy when 
financial stability is lost. GDP per person in the UK is barely above its pre-crisis level. This 
reassessment  both  of  the  probability  and  of the cost  of  damage to financial  stability  is  the 
foundation of this unprecedented reform programme. 
As we learn how the new regulatory framework operates through the credit cycle we may, nay 
will, adjust – in any direction – reforms that are not operating as intended. We will do this in 
consultation with the industry and other stakeholders – the Open Forum on financial markets 
which the Bank of England will hold on 11 November is an example of this process. But, as 
the memories of the crisis fade, as they inevitably will, we will not reset our underlying tolerance 
of risks to financial stability. There is no “back to future”. 
Finally, before I leave the banking system, I want to highlight one piece of good news in recent 
market developments. We have had a number of incidents of extreme market volatility over 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the past year or so – the removal of the Swiss Franc peg; a 30 basis point fall within 90 minutes 
in UST yields on 15 October 2014; the so called ‘Bund tantrum’ earlier in the year; and the 
seizure of US equity markets this summer, against the backdrop of news about China. These 
have raised a number of issues about changes to market structure and market liquidity. But 
the one dog that has not barked, however, is the transmission of the shock from these market 
events  to  the  core  banking  system  that  support  markets.  For  example,  the  reaction  in  UK 
banks’ CDS premia to these disruptions has been small and not out of line with broader market 
movements. 
I would put this down in no small part to the reforms of bank capital and liquidity that have 
made  banks  more  resilient.  So  while  money  was  lost  in  these  market  episodes  and  some 
people had a very bad day at the office, they did not cause wider shocks in the banking system. 
And that leads me in to the other subject I want to talk about today – the changes we are 
seeing in the liquidity of financial markets, which some indeed ascribe to reforms of the capital 
and  liquidity  standards  in  the  banking  system.  I  want  also  to  touch  upon  some  of  the 
macroprudential challenges posed by the increase in market based finance. A forthcoming 
Bank staff paper will explore these issues in more detail. 
Market liquidity 
Before I talk about liquidity I need first to make some distinctions. Liquidity is a very broad term 
and people mean very different things by it. There are three concepts of liquidity. Monetary 
liquidity;  funding  liquidity;  and  market  or  asset  liquidity.  Monetary  liquidity  captures  the 
looseness of monetary conditions – it is underpinned by the stance of the monetary policy 
authority.  Funding  liquidity  is  the  ease  with  which  banks  and  other  non  bank  financial 
intermediaries can raise funding. And market liquidity refers to the ease with which one asset 
can be traded for another. All three concepts are tightly related. I am going to focus largely on 
market liquidity today. 
Market liquidity is in itself a very good thing. It allows investors to transact at a reasonable size 
at or close to prices prevailing in the market prior to the trade. It contributes to markets that are 
“effective” – by which I mean both fair and resilient. Liquid markets play an important role in 
the financing of investment in the real economy. Bonds account for virtually all credit growth 
since the crisis in the US, UK and euro area. So if market liquidity is a very good thing, can 
you ever have too much of a good thing? Surely any reduction in market liquidity is unwelcome. 
This question is very pertinent today as it is clear that market liquidity in the system is more 
fragile, not just in particular market sectors, but also across the system as a whole. Dealers 
are holding less inventory. For example, in US fixed income corporate securities, market maker 
inventories are half the size they were immediately before the crisis and back at levels seen in 
the early 2000s even though corporate bond markets have doubled in size since then. How 
much should we worry about that? If liquidity is always a good thing, how far can we and should 
we  seek  to  restore  liquidity  to  levels  seen  before  the  crisis?  This  is  a  question  that  is 
increasingly asked of prudential regulators. 
I think the issue is more complex, however. Nothing in life is free and that is most certainly true 
in financial markets. Liquidity comes at a price. And that price is not at all the same for all 
financial assets. It should reflect the underlying liquidity characteristics of the asset itself and 
how it is traded. 
Financial  assets  cannot  escape  entirely  their  underlying  risk  characteristics.  Financial 
intermediation and financial engineering can reduce the costs of those risks by enabling them 
to be held by those who can best bear them – and I will return to that. But when pricing the 
liquidity risk of an asset its underlying characteristics matter. And, the more its liquidity depends 
on intermediaries being able and willing put their capital at risk, the higher the price should be. 
Indeed, it is worth observing in passing, one of the puzzles in recent years has been the degree 
to  which  market  participants  have  expressed  their  concerns  about  the  fragile  liquidity  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   markets and the higher risk while at the same time charging less to hold those assets. Though 
they have increased somewhat of late, liquidity premia are still well below historic averages 
suggesting  that  liquidity  risk  is  being  under-priced  and  prices  do  not  reflect  the  underlying 
characteristics of the assets. 
Assets that attract a more diverse set of participants are likely to be traded more frequently. 
This, in turn, should raise the likelihood of finding an instant match at any point in time, meaning 
there is limited need for intermediaries to warehouse risk. If trading is sufficiently frequent, this 
should also minimise the need to transact in larger trade sizes. 
In this respect, assets with standard terms and structures increase price transparency and the 
ease of price discovery, thereby attracting a larger pool of buyers and sellers. Government 
bonds, equities, foreign exchange and futures are good examples. 
Similarly assets that are designated benchmark instruments and those included in indices tend 
to attract a larger pool of buyers and sellers. And assets that can be posted as collateral against 
securities financing and derivatives transactions experience greater demand. 
On the other hand, while some characteristics make assets more liquid, some make them more 
illiquid. Assets that tend to be traded primarily by “buy-and-hold” investors may require greater 
warehousing of risk to facilitate the matching of trades at or close to prevailing market prices. 
By way of illustration, there is a sharp contrast between the frequency of trading in equities 
and  corporate  bonds.  For  example,  McKinsey  estimates  that  NYSE  and  NASDAQ-listed 
equities trade around 3800 times per day, compared to around 85 times per day and 65 times 
per day for the most liquid US investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds respectively. 
Assets exposed to tail risks tend to exhibit larger price falls and become less liquid in times of 
stress.  Examples  of  such  assets  include  high  yield/EME  bonds,  financial  debt  and  OTC 
derivatives. 
Complex and/or opaque assets are less well understood and the risks can be more difficult to 
manage, so reducing the pool of potential buyers. 
Finally,  assets  with  relatively  news-insensitive  cash  flows  like  investment-grade  corporate 
bonds may be less attractive to more active investors seeking to profit from information, but 
more attractive to buy-and-hold investors seeking predictable long-dated cash flows. 
And the related issue of how assets are traded matters. The costs of liquidity on order driven 
electronic platforms is much lower than in markets that depend on voice quotes from market 
makers. 
Against that backdrop, I’d like to make two observations. 
First,  funding  and  monetary  liquidity  can  exacerbate  the  illusion  of  market  liquidity.  The 
exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policy  seen  internationally,  which  has  intentionally 
increased the amount of cash available for the purchase of risky assets, may have masked the 
underlying liquidity risk characteristics in a number of markets, including advanced economy 
high-yield and emerging market economy bonds. This is almost certainly one factor behind the 
apparent disconnect between market participants’ concerns about the fragility of liquidity and 
the current low level of liquidity premia. 
Second,  financial  intermediaries  and  financial  engineering  can  make  a  very  important 
contribution to liquidity – but they cannot turn lead into gold. The underlying risk characteristics 
of  an  asset  cannot  be  changed.  They  can  be  separated  out,  combined  with  other  risks, 
repackaged.  And  that  is  important.  Because  although  the  liquidity  risks  generated  by  the 
underlying characteristics of an asset cannot be changed, they can be structured to enable the 
risk to be held by those most able to bear it. This doesn’t change the underlying risks but it 
does change the impact if they crystallise. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   However, if the effect of financial intermediation and financial engineering to increase liquidity 
is not to distribute liquidity risk to those most willing and able to bear it but rather to obscure it, 
then it contributes only to the illusion of liquidity that can evaporate very quickly and painfully. 
Market making, securitisation and exchange traded funds (ETFs) illustrate the balance to be 
struck. 
1. 
Securitisation technology allows securities to be much more easily tradable than the 
assets underlying them. But as we know, in the crisis, a sizeable proportion of these 
assets turned out to be complex, opaque and exposed to tail risk – so under stress, 
these markets broke down catastrophically and have yet to fully recover. This has 
prompted the regulatory authorities to develop new criteria around securitisation that, 
among other things, may bolster their liquidity in the future. 
ETFs are another form of financial engineering that have grown rapidly over the past 
decade or so – from a small base in the early 2000s to more than US$2 trillion today. 
Equity funds still comprise the majority of ETFs. But the share of fixed income ETFs, 
in  which  the  underlying  assets  are  much  less  liquid,  has  grown  substantially  –  in 
Europe, from around 5% in the early 2000s to around 25% today. ETFs are exchange 
traded, they offer investors liquidity. Prices of ETFs are usually kept in line with the 
assets  they  track  by  market  participants  being  willing  and  able  to  transact  in  the 
shares they issue and the underlying securities. But in times of stress not only can 
their liquidity characteristics revert back to that of their underlying assets, they can 
also trade at a discount to the value of these assets. We saw some of this effect in 
the  market  turmoil  last  summer.  We  need  to  understand  better  why  these  effects 
happened and the circumstances in which they could reoccur. 
And market making itself is another example. Market making means the temporary 
transfer of risk to intermediaries to smooth out imbalances of supply and demand. But 
market makers have to be able to bear the risks. Pre-crisis, market makers funded 
their inventory with short-term borrowing and very small amounts of loss absorbing 
capital.  As  a  result,  when  exposed  to  a  severe  stress,  market  makers  simply 
disappeared from the scene. 
2. 
3. 
So liquidity is a good thing. It does play a key role in the functioning of effective markets. And 
financial market intermediation and engineering can help ensure the price is as low as possible, 
consistent ultimately with an asset’s underlying characteristics. But taken too far, these can 
create the illusion of liquidity rather than liquidity itself and expose the system to risk when the 
illusion disappears. We should not in particular refer to metrics of the pre-crisis period to see 
what  some  “good”  level  of  liquidity  looks  like.  Some  markets  may  indeed  not  function  as 
smoothly or cheaply as they did in the run up to this crisis. But that may well be the counterpart 
of less poorly priced liquidity risk in the system. 
Promoting true liquidity 
That is not to say that nothing can be done in this area. 
First, we should ensure that regulatory changes are coherent. Regulators have dealt with the 
under-pricing of liquidity risk in part by remedying inadequate capital requirements. 
But,  as  I  said  earlier,  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  given  the  range  and  speed  of  regulatory 
reforms, there are parts of the framework that might not work in the way we intended. As I 
mentioned, the Open Forum on 11 November will be another opportunity to assess this issue. 
The aim is to bring stakeholders together from across financial markets to discuss how we 
build markets for the public good. 
Second,  changes  in  market  structure  and  the  ability  of  technology  to  connect  buyers  and 
sellers may increase liquidity. There are a number of suggestions that with the growth of assets 
under management asset managers and institutional investors may in future need to deal more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   directly with each other and might be better placed to take on some of their risks. Technological 
change would certainly make this increasingly feasible. It remains for me, however, an open 
question whether such liquidity would be resilient in times of stress. Automated markets may 
have driven down costs, but are possibly less resilient. Dealer-intermediated markets, on the 
other hand, may have become more costly, but possibly more resilient. 
In a forthcoming speech, my colleague Minouche Shafik will discuss the changes in market 
structure  that  we  have  seen  since  the  financial  crisis  and  what  they  mean  for  market 
functioning. 
And, of course, the higher costs of assets with poor liquidity characteristics may have changed 
the economics for issuers of liabilities such as corporate treasurers which may encourage more 
standardisation of terms to improve liquidity and reduce costs. 
It  is,  however,  important  to  look  not  only  at  how  to  improve  the  resilience  of  markets  to 
imbalances between sellers and buyers at times of stress. We need also to look at whether 
and how the features of financial markets can amplify these imbalances by creating selling 
pressure. Correlated trading is one example. Such trades arise when the demand for an asset 
ceases to fall materially as prices rise, and vice versa. They turn the law of supply and demand 
on  its  head. This  may  be  caused  by  the  prevalence  of algorithmic  momentum traders  in  a 
market or the use of industry standards and benchmarks that influence asset allocation and 
peer assessment. 
Consensus trades are another example. They occur when investors take positions on the basis 
of prevailing market norms as opposed to conviction in their view of the future path of economic 
fundamentals. Consequently, these positions may be particularly susceptible and adversely 
affected by comparatively little bad news. 
Investment funds and asset managers 
Finally, I want to look briefly at the potential role of investment funds and asset managers in 
creating selling pressure in markets at times of stress. 
To state the obvious, investment funds and asset managers are not banks. They do not offer 
the promise that you will get your money back. And they are typically much less leveraged. But 
increasingly they do offer a liquidity promise – that the investors can redeem the value of their 
investment at very short notice. In this way they can create liquidity mismatches when investors 
in funds are offered a greater degree of access to investment than is consistent with the ease 
with which the assets in which they are invested can be sold without a big impact on price. 
A  particular  concern  occupying  both  the  FPC  and  authorities  internationally  is  that 
simultaneous redemptions from open-ended funds offering short-term redemptions could test 
the resilience of market liquidity, with wider adverse effects through mark-to-market pricing and 
collateral calls. 
This  risk  has  increased  due  to  the  growing  importance  of  open  ended  mutual  funds.  As 
described in the FPC’s July 2015 Financial Stability Report, global assets under management 
have grown significantly over the past decade, to around US$70 trillion. Within that, the share 
of funds typically offering investors near-term redemptions such as open ended mutual funds 
has increased, from just below 40% a decade ago to approaching half. This could give rise to 
particular risks where a liquidity promise offered by a fund gets too out of line with the liquidity 
characteristics of the assets the fund holds. 
Corporate bond funds could be relevant here. These funds have more than doubled in size 
over the last 10 years, from US$2.7 trillion to almost US$7 trillion AUM. This growth has been 
faster than growth in the global stock of bonds outstanding over a similar period, which grew 
from roughly US$66 trillion to $100 trillion over 2005 – 2012. 
While funds typically have a number of tools available to them to manage liquidity risk, some 
investors may not fully appreciate that their ability to redeem, at or close to, current market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   prices could be compromised by large simultaneous withdrawals by other investors. In a recent 
survey, the Bank and Financial Conduct Authority found that, in aggregate funds assumed 
that, over a one-day horizon, they could liquidate corporate bonds of a value equivalent to 2.9 
times average daily US corporate bond trading volume. 
A great deal of thought internationally and in the UK is now being given to these issues, and 
to understanding whether or how systemic risk could arise from these channels. To the extent 
that  it  can,  there  will  need  to  be  much  more  work  on  policy  options.  A  more  system  wide 
approach to stress testing could be one promising avenue for development. This would be in 
line with the Financial Stability Board’s advice last month encouraging the appropriate use of 
stress testing by funds to assess their ability individually and collectively to meet redemptions 
under difficult market liquidity conditions. A second avenue worth exploring is better data on 
funds, including the development of more comprehensive metrics that capture the degree of 
any mismatch of the liquidity of underlying assets and the liquidity offering. 
Conclusion 
We are well advanced in the programme of regulatory reforms to manage systemic risk in the 
banking system. We are only now beginning to think about macroprudential risks from market-
based financing. This should not be surprising. With the exception of some types of market 
based financing activity, such as money market mutual funds, which have been addressed, 
asset managers and investment funds were not a source of instability in the financial crisis. 
But the past is not always a guide to the future. It is important to try to understand risks from 
market based financing and how they could materialise in a world in which market liquidity 
might be lower than before the crisis. 
And to return to where I started, it is important that we complete the implementation of the 
programme of reform of the banking system. Oscar Wilde also once said ‘When bankers get 
together for dinner, they discuss Art. When artists get together for dinner, they discuss Money’. 
I suspect over the last few years the dinner topic for members of the banking industry has been 
much more about regulation and the future of your industry and much less about art. I think it 
will be a long time before art is the only topic of conversation over dinner. There is a great 
amount of implementation work to be done. Risks have not gone away and we will need to 
consider them carefully as the financial cycle moves through a more normal phase. But I hope 
that increasingly there will be other things as well as regulation to talk about. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
