  Peter Praet: The transmission of recent non-standard measures 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Joint  BoE,  ECB,  CEPR  and  CFM  Conference  on  “Credit  Dynamics  and  the 
Macroeconomy”, London, 11 December 2015. 
I would like to thank Carlo Altavilla for his contribution to this speech. 
 Since June 2014 the ECB has adopted a series of new monetary policy measures, with the 
aim to both enhance the transmission of policy and to reinforce the accommodative policy 
stance to counter growing risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. Those measures 
have  included  reducing  key  policy  rates  to  levels  below  zero,  introducing  a  credit  easing 
package  –  specifically  our  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTROs)  –  and 
expanding our Asset Purchase Programme (APP). They were decided against the backdrop 
of  credit  dynamics  that  were  at  the  weaker  end  of  what  can  typically  be  observed  in  the 
aftermath of banking crises, and, from summer of 2014 onwards, heightened downside risks 
to the inflation outlook and a concrete threat to the stability of inflation expectations. 
This complex package of policy measures has led to a significant easing in borrowing rates 
for the broad economy and should thereby continue to contribute to the recovery of the euro 
area  economy  and  the  return  of  inflation  rates  in  the  medium term  to  levels  closer  to  2%. 
Early evidence confirms that the current policy  measures are delivering tangible results, in 
particular  by  improving  financing  conditions  faced  by  firms  –  including  small  and  medium-
sized ones – and households, thereby stimulating credit demand and spending. 
Starting  with  the  cost  of  bank  credit,  this  has  fallen  sharply  across  euro  area  Member 
States  as  banks’  funding  conditions  have  eased  and  competition  among  lenders  has 
accelerated in the wake of our policy measures. Before the launch of the June 2014 credit 
easing  package  the  bulk  of  the  reduction  in  ECB  key  policy  rates  –  a  cumulative  125bps 
between September 2011 and June 2014 – had not been transmitted to the borrowing costs 
faced  by  households  and  firms  in  many  vulnerable  Member  States.  From  May  last  year 
(when  markets  started  to  anticipate  the  credit  easing  package)  until  October  this  year, 
however,  bank  lending  rates  for  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs)  fell  strongly,  by 
approximately 80bps for the euro area in aggregate. 
To  put  that  in  perspective,  ECB  staff  estimates  suggest  that  a  reduction  of  the  standard 
policy rates by around 100bps in June 2014 would have been required to achieve a similar 
effect on the rates banks apply to corporate loans. Moreover, lending rates to NFCs fell by 
some 110–140bps in major vulnerable Member States, suggesting that the pass-through of 
the ECB’s policy stance has become stronger in those countries that were hit hardest by the 
crisis and where economic slack was concentrated. 
This  decline  in  fragmentation  can  be  in  part  explained  by  the  effects  of  the  TLTROs. 
Evidence  from  the  bidding  behaviour  of  banks  confirms  that  TLTROs  participation  is 
frequently  followed  by  a  compression  in  lending  rates.  That  is  linked  to  TLTRO  borrowers 
scaling  back  their  recourse  to  more  expensive  wholesale  funding,  in  particular  unsecured, 
which  has  created  scope  for  banks  to  reduce  lending  rates.  The  transmission  of  the 
improvement  in  banks’  funding  conditions  to  lower  bank  lending  rates  has  been  further 
empowered by an increase in lender competition for good credit spurred by our measures. 
The  APP  has  reinforced  this  fall  in  bank  lending  rates,  too,  by  putting  strong  downward 
pressure on sovereign yields and thereby reducing the attractiveness of sovereign securities 
holdings relative to loans. Indeed, alongside the direct impact of TLTROs on bank lending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  conditions,  staff  analysis  finds  that  the  APP  has  had  an  indirect  effect  on  bank  lending 
conditions  through  its  marked  effect  on  long-term  government  bond  yields.1  This  indirect 
effect has been further reinforced by the beneficial impact of lower long-term yields on the 
macroeconomic outlook and hence on the credit component embedded in lending rates. 
With bank lending rates lower, the volume of loans to NFCs is now recovering in the euro 
area  as  a  whole  as  well.  In  May  last  year,  before  the  announcement  of  the  credit  easing 
measures, loans to NFCs contracted at an annual rate of 2.9% in the euro area as a whole. 
Since July 2015, however, the year-on-year contraction has stopped and loans have started 
to grow at a very modest rate just above zero. As a result, fewer small and medium-sized 
companies (SMEs) report that credit has been a limiting factor for their businesses. 
In  fact,  the  last  results  of  the  Survey  on  the  Access  to  Finance  of  Enterprises  (SAFE), 
conducted  in  April  this  year,  show  that  “access  to  finance“,  which  was  considered  the 
dominant concern of SMEs in 2012, is now considered the least important problem. “Finding 
customers” is instead still a primary source of concern for SMEs. 
These results mask some heterogeneity: in the major vulnerable Member States loans are 
still contracting compared to a year ago. But the pace of contraction has slowed considerably 
in these economies. This reflects both improved funding conditions for banks thanks to the 
TLTROs and APP, and strengthening demand for loans amid an improving economic outlook 
and lower lending rates. Loan supply can be expected to benefit further from the staggered 
impact of TLTROs. 
The APP should also continue to support credit growth going forward. Banks gain additional 
liquidity  from  the  APP  either  through  selling  marketable  assets  or  through  rising  customer 
deposits, which they can in turn use for refinancing, purchasing assets or granting loans. In 
their responses to the October 2015 Bank Lending Survey, most euro area banks indicated 
that they had used the additional liquidity from the APP for the latter – granting loans (about 
30%) – and over the coming six months, this pattern can be expected to continue. 
Banks  also  indicated  a net  easing  impact from the  APP  on their  credit standards  over  the 
past six months (loans to enterprises: –4%, housing loans: –2%, consumer credit and other 
lending to households: –1%). And over the next six months, banks expect a continued easing 
impact on credit standards for loans to enterprises (–2%), while the effect on credit standards 
on housing loans and consumer credit is expected to remain broadly unchanged. 
                                                
1  Altavilla C., G. Carboni, R. Motto (2015) Asset purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons from the 
euro area, ECB Working Paper No. 1864. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 1  
Use of additional liquidity and impact  
of the APP on bank lending 
   
Notes: The net percentages are defined as the difference between the sum of the 
percentages for “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the sum of 
the  percentages  for  “eased  somewhat”  and  “eased  considerably”.  The  results 
shown are calculated as a percentage of the number of banks which did not reply 
“not applicable”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The effects of APP appear to be stronger still when looking at the impact on credit terms and 
conditions  (loans  to  enterprises:  –29%,  housing  loans:  –13%,  consumer  credit  and  other 
lending  to  households:  –22%;  see  Chart  24b),  and  the  reported  easing  in  terms  and 
conditions for enterprises is generally larger than reported in the previous survey round. This 
favourable impact is also expected to continue over the next six months. 
One  should  keep  in  mind,  however,  that  these  positive  expectations  may  not  immediately 
translate into higher loan growth. That is a process that takes time to materialise, not only 
owing  to  operational  considerations  but  also  because  the  reaction  of  loan  demand  to 
improved  supply  conditions  involves  lags.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  the  first  stage  of 
rebalancing  will  affect  mainly  the  liability  side  of  banks’  balance  sheets  –  i.e.  funding 
substitution – before banks move on to the deployment of asset expansion strategies to off-
load the reserves received. 
Summing up, there is substantial evidence that our monetary policy measures are having the 
effects  intended.  But  in  a  context  of  increasing  downside  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook, 
especially driven by continued declines in oil prices and a large output gap, and downside 
risks  to  the  global  economy  and  a  still  fragile  domestic  recovery,  the  Governing  Council 
decided that the calibration of those measures needed to be adjusted. 
At its December 2015 meeting, the Governing Council therefore decided to lower the interest 
rate on the deposit facility by 10 basis points to –0.30% and to extend the intentional end-
date for APP by 6 months to March 2017, although subject to an on-going verification of the 
prospects for inflation to normalise within a meaningful horizon. The monthly purchases of 
€60 billion under the APP are now intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if 
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  aim  of  achieving  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2% 
over  the  medium  term.  Importantly,  the  Governing  Council  also  decided  to  reinvest  the 
principal payments on the securities purchased under the APP as they mature, for as long as 
necessary. 
This  recalibration  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  the  ECB  balance  sheet  and  on  excess 
liquidity.  Overall,  the  extension  of  the  asset  purchases  to  at  least  March  2017  and  the 
decision to re-invest the principal payments on maturing securities for as long as necessary 
will inject an additional EUR 680 billion – about 6.5% of the euro area GDP – in liquidity to 
the  system  by  2019.  This  will  strengthen  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates,  ensure 
accommodative financial conditions and further strengthen the substantial easing impact of 
the measures we have taken since June 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
