  Andreas Dombret: The glass is half full – seven years of regulatory 
reform in the financial sector 
Keynote address by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Euromoney Conference “The Public Sector Financing Forum”, Frankfurt 
am Main, 30 September 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at today’s Public Sector Financing Forum. It is a great 
pleasure to be here. The focal point you have chosen for this forum – the low-interest-rate 
environment – is indeed highly topical, and has been keeping us all very busy lately. A case 
in  point  is  the  survey  that  the  Bundesbank  and BaFin  recently  conducted  among  German 
banks on the challenges posed by low interest rates – more on that later. 
As  you  all  know,  the  financial  sector  still  faces  a  truly  challenging  environment. While  the 
worst  aspects  of  the  crisis  and  its  consequences  have  been  weathered  successfully, 
circumstances remain difficult. In my speech today, I will be discussing these circumstances 
and also shedding some light on what we have to do to complete the post-crisis regulatory 
reforms.  I  will  argue  that  we  have  come  a  long  way  but  that  we  are  not  done  yet. 
Nevertheless, since we have accomplished the majority of reforms, my message is this: the 
glass is half full, not half empty. 
A truly challenging environment 
2. 
Before  I  talk  about  regulation,  let  me  sketch  the  truly  challenging  environment  that  now 
exists,  and  let  me  emphasise  four  factors.  First,  after  the  crisis,  banks  faced  substantial 
deleveraging pressure. Adjusting risk taking and funding strategies was necessary in order to 
survive  and  meet  new  regulatory  demands.  As  the  process  of  phasing  in  the  regulatory 
reforms will continue until 2019, many institutions still need to deleverage further. 
Second,  all  financial  institutions  ‒  but  banks  in  particular  ‒  need  to  adapt  to  new 
technological  demands 
for  renewal.  Digitalisation  offers  substantial  challenges  and 
opportunities  at  the  same  time.  In  any  event,  it  has  the  potential  to  reshape  the  banking 
sector. 
The  third  factor  is  the  high  degree  of  investment  uncertainty.  Unfortunately,  in  the  current 
economic setting, there remains a high degree of uncertainty about the economic trajectory. 
What regulators can do, however, is pave the way for a sustainable recovery in the financial 
sector  within  a  strong  framework  of  rules  –  and  combine  this  with  reasonable  phasing-in 
horizons. 
The fourth factor in the difficult environment is the low interest rate setting in which you all 
have  to  do  business.  The  recently  released  results  of  the  joint  BaFin-Bundesbank  survey 
indicate  that  the  persistence  of  low  interest  rates  over  a  medium  to  long-term  horizon  will 
pose a challenge to the interest-driven business models of many German credit institutions. 
This is because such a persistently low interest rate environment leads to a structural erosion 
of  interest  income  as  higher-yielding  exposures  taken  on  in  the  past  mature  and  are 
increasingly replaced by new positions that generate a lower rate of return. 
The roughly 1,500 participating credit institutions on average expect pre-tax profits to fall by 
around 25% by 2019. This would amount to about 2 billion euros each year. In comparison: 
in 2014, the participating banks realised profits before tax of about 10 billion euros. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Should  the  period  of  low  interest  rates  persist,  profits  would  fall  by  as  much  as  50%  – 
assuming that the banks leave their balance sheets unchanged. If the level of interest rates 
went  down  by  another  100  basis  points,  profits  would  fall  by  60%  –  provided  the  banks 
adjusted  their  balance  sheets.  If  interest  rates  increased,  profits  would  stabilise  at  a  level 
slightly lower than the level realised in 2014. 
Given  this  rather  bleak  outlook,  banks  have  to  act  now.  They  must,  for  instance,  try  to 
increase  the  share  of  non-interest  income.  I  have  already  mentioned  digitalisation  as  a 
means  of  benefiting  from  new  business  opportunities.  The  adaptation  of  business  models 
can generate new customers and streams of income. At the same time, banks should try to 
reduce costs. Again, digitalisation and the innovation of IT systems can allow significant cost 
reductions. Another issue on the cost side are the large branch networks of German banks. 
Here, consolidation might be a promising strategy. 
What’s next in financial regulation? 
3. 
Against  this  challenging  backdrop,  some  may  argue  that  further  regulatory  reform  is  a 
problem,  and  that  it  will  choke  the  just  recently  restarted  engine  of  growth.  But  let  me  be 
clear:  all  macroeconomic  studies  on  the  impact  of  regulatory  reforms  are  consistent  in 
stressing that the overall economic benefits by far outweigh the costs. And that means that 
there is no way around fully implementing the reforms that have already been initiated and 
finalising their outstanding elements. 
Having  said  that,  policymakers  are  very  mindful  not  to  impose  inefficient  regulation  and 
unnecessary  costs.  In  that  spirit,  regulators  took  great  care  in  designing  the  reforms  that 
have already been implemented. And the same is true for those regulatory projects that are 
still in the pipeline. Some of them are currently under construction, and others are still on the 
drawing board. Let me outline to you the most important initiatives. 
Let’s begin with the completion of Basel III, which the Basel Committee is currently in the 
process  of  finalising.  The  new  Basel  framework  marked  a  milestone  in  the  regulation  of 
banks. No sooner had it been put in place than the Basel Committee set about tackling the 
variability  of  risk-weighted  assets  in  portfolios  with  essentially  similar  risk  profiles.  This 
variability makes it more difficult for investors to compare one bank with another. That is why 
the Basel Committee is currently overhauling the standardised approaches for credit, market 
and operational risks. It is also planning to introduce capital floors for internal models based 
on the standardised approaches. Together with enhanced disclosure formats, this will make 
it much easier for investors to compare and monitor banks and their risk profiles. 
Another fundamental change to the regulatory framework for banks, as I see it, is a revision 
of the privileged treatment of sovereign bonds. This is another item currently on the Basel 
Committee’s  agenda.  There  is  no  regulatory  or  economic  justification  for  such  preferential 
treatment. The sovereign debt crisis that swept across the euro area made it crystal clear just 
how  risky  the  nexus  between  sovereigns  and  national  banks  can  be.  That  is  why  the 
Bundesbank is pushing for government bonds to be backed with a risk-appropriate amount of 
capital and for large exposure limits, just as they exist for claims on private debtors. We also 
need to make sure that adequate rules are introduced in the area of liquidity requirements. 
While I’m certain that tough “political” negotiations still lie ahead, I’m nonetheless confident 
that the preferential regulatory treatment afforded to sovereign debt will be revised in future. 
And this will realign incentives and risk premiums to prudent levels. 
A third new element is the recovery and resolution regime that has been agreed globally and 
implemented across Europe. It was created to solve the problem of “too big to fail” banks and 
to keep taxpayers from having to bear the brunt in a crisis. This new core element of the 
banking regulation and supervisory framework is currently being finalised on the basis of the 
guiding principles issued by the international Financial Stability Board, or FSB for short. This 
resolution regime is a vital step forward in learning one of the key lessons of the financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
crisis: the much discussed issue of moral hazard – a problem that arises because institutions 
that up to now were “too big to fail” could not be held accountable for their actions. 
Looking ahead, there won’t just be recovery and resolution plans for credit institutions; clearly 
defined liability cascades will be established, too, so as to ensure that the taxpayer really is 
last in line to foot the bill – that is to say, after shareholders and creditors have been bailed 
in, and then only in absolutely exceptional cases. But, to put this theoretical resolution model 
into practice, institutions will need to hold a certain amount of additional debt which, should 
the need arise, will be transformed into loss-absorbing capital. 
For  global  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  this  will  be  achieved  by  way  of  the 
TLAC standard, which the FSB will finalise this autumn. The same principle applies to the 
European  institutions,  but  implementation  here  is  based  on  what  is  known  as  the  MREL 
standard, which differs in some respects from the TLAC requirement. One difference is that 
all  institutions  will  be  required  to  satisfy  the  MREL  requirements,  not  just  the  systemically 
important ones. Another is that the minimum requirements will be set individually for each 
institution by the competent resolution authority. 
These new standards will have a transformative impact on the market for loss-absorbing debt 
capital.  They  will  introduce  attractive  new  instruments  that  offer  high  returns for  investors, 
particularly  for  those  outside  the  banking  sector.  And  the  disclosure  requirements  under 
these  standards  will  give  investors  the  transparency  they  need  to  make  well-founded 
decisions. 
These  reforms  together  with  those  that  have  already  been  accomplished  will  strengthen 
institutions’ stability and systemic resilience. Nevertheless, when speaking about regulatory 
reforms, we have to bear in mind that most of those which I have mentioned only affect the 
regulated banking sector. In the context of low interest rates and tougher regulation, there 
are  incentives  for  regulatory  arbitrage  through  the  shifting  of  assets  from  the  regulated 
banking sector to somewhere outside the regulatory perimeter. And we are seeing significant 
movement in this direction. 
That is why the G20 has agreed on a roadmap for regulating the shadow banking sector. 
Work is being conducted simultaneously by the FSB, the Basel Committee and IOSCO. The 
objective is to ensure that shadow bank-like risks to financial stability emerging outside the 
regular  banking  system  are  subject  to  appropriate  oversight  and  regulation.  Yet,  we  are 
careful not to inhibit sustainable market-based financing models that do not pose such risks. 
One  good  example  of  a  well-designed  instrument  is  the  Basel  Committee’s  standard  for 
measuring and controlling large exposures. While Europe had similar rules in place before 
the  Basel  framework  was  published  in  April  2014,  this  new  standard  provides  a  global 
approach to regulate relations between banks and other financial institutions. The framework 
was designed to protect banks from significant losses caused by the sudden default of an 
individual counterparty. By extending the scope of coverage beyond banks to exposures to 
funds,  securitisation  structures  and  collective  investment  undertakings,  the  framework  has 
also become a useful tool in helping to strengthen the oversight and regulation of the shadow 
banking system. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  unfortunately  all  of  us  here  will  have  to  work  in  this  challenging 
environment for some time to come – ultra-low interest rates, digitalisation, deleveraging, and 
a high degree of investment uncertainty will continue to frame our decisions. 
Yet, as I have outlined, we are seeing a considerable improvement in the condition of the 
banking and financial sector. Such developments and the regulatory reforms around Basel III 
have made the financial system more stable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Nevertheless,  further  reform  efforts  are  needed,  and  the  momentum  for  reform  cannot  be 
lost. A resilient resolution regime with sufficient bail-in capital, prudent regulatory treatment of 
sovereign exposures, and the regulation of shadow banking activities are necessary to make 
the financial system more resilient. 
I think this is good news for investors, because it promises to boost transparency, enhance 
stability, and generate new investment products. 
My talking a lot about outstanding regulatory reforms might give you the impression that most 
of  the  work  lies  ahead  of  us.  Nevertheless,  as  the  title  of  my  speech  suggests,  we  have 
already achieved a great deal – more than is still ahead of us. As a supervisor, I am happy to 
say that, while we still have a lot of work to do, the glass is half full, not half empty! 
Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes my speech – thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
