  Ben Broadbent: Compositional shifts in the labour market 
Speech by Mr Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at  the  “Understanding  the  Great  Recession:  from  micro  to  macro”  Conference,  Bank  of 
England, London, 23 September 2015. 
 Accompanying charts and table can be found at the end of the speech. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Will  Abel  and  Rebecca  Burnham  for  research  assistance  and  I  am  grateful  for  helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
I want to begin by thanking the organisers for putting together this excellent conference and 
for asking me to come along. I’m honoured to be in such distinguished company. Up front, I 
also want to thank Bank economists – especially Matt Corder and Alina Barnett – for their 
help. If this were a working paper it would have multiple authors.  
Today’s  tagline  –  “from  micro  to  macro”  –  is  a  sobering  one  for  macroeconomists.  We’re 
used  to  describing  the  economy  in  broad,  sweeping  terms,  using  numbers  on  aggregate 
output, total employment, average wages.  
Yet, in practice, the modern economy is hugely diverse and, underneath the surface, highly 
dynamic.  New  ideas  replace  old,  businesses  fail  and  are  formed  and,  even  when  the  net 
change in employment is small, and the labour market in aggregate looks stable, the gross 
flows in the labour market can be huge.  
This fact, highlighted many years ago by Steve Davis and John Haltiwanger in the US, was 
no less apparent during the great recession in the UK. Employment fell by over half a million 
between  2008  and  2010.  But  even  over  that  period  there were  over  nine  million  new  jobs 
created, over ten million if you include job-to-job flows. On average, over the past 10 years, 
gross  inflows  and  outflows  into  and  out  of  employment  have  run  at  an  annualised  rate  of 
around one sixth of the stock (Chart 1). 
As  I  say,  this  has  been  long  understood.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that,  whatever  the 
complicated  texture  underneath,  the  aggregate  economic  data  still  exhibit  significant 
empirical  regularities  over  the  business  cycle.  Chart  2  is  one  example.  Using  annual  data 
during the inflation targeting period, the black line plots annual growth in average earnings, 
less inflation expectations, against the rate of unemployment. At least until the past couple of 
years,  when  AWE  growth  appeared  unusually  weak,  the  fit  was  pretty  good.  Higher 
unemployment  has  gone  hand-in-hand  with  lower  real  wage  growth.  Uncannily,  the 
regression line was pretty much exactly the same as that identified by A.W. Phillips, using 
data from the classical gold standard period (1870–1913), in the 1958 paper that gave the 
relationship its name (that regression line is in blue).  
Yet, from time to time, what happens under the surface has material effects and can distort 
these  aggregate  relationships.  Today  I  want  to  describe  one  such  example,  involving 
compositional  shifts  in  the  labour  market.  In  recent  years,  these  have  been  significant: 
specifically,  both  the  jobs  lost  in  the  2008–09  downturn,  and  those  regained  during  the 
recovery, have been skewed towards the lower-paid end of the spectrum. This has imparted 
a bias to average pay and productivity growth – upwards in the recession, downwards in the 
past couple of years – over that period. 
Chart 3 plots these estimated “compositional effects” on average wage growth against the 
change  in  unemployment.  They  went  up  during  the  recession,  boosting  average  earnings 
growth, and fell back sharply in the recovery, when unemployment declined. Last year, on 
these estimates, the skew towards low-paid job creation knocked 0.3% off average wages, 
relative to those of the median. This compares with a pre-recession average of +0.7% per 
year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  One key point I want to make today is that, directionally at least, this isn’t at all unusual. It’s 
true  everywhere  that  employment  tends  to  be  more  cyclical  for  the  young,  the  less 
experienced  and  those  with  fewer  qualifications.  Chart  4,  for  example,  illustrates  a  similar 
phenomenon in the United States: those without degrees experience much larger swings in 
employment  than  college-educated  people.  As  a  result,  measures  of  average  earnings 
growth  in  the  US  are  biased  upwards  in  recessions  (relative  to  the  experience  of  people 
continuously  in  employment)  and  downwards  in  recoveries.  That’s  why  many  people  pay 
more  attention  to  the  Employment  Cost  Index1  of  US  wages,  which  adjusts  for  these 
compositional effects, than to the (unadjusted) headline earnings series.  
What is a bit different about the recent UK experience, however, is the scale of the effects. 
Compared  with  the  cycle  of  the  1990s,  they  appear  to  have  been  less  positive  during  the 
recession  –  in  the  more  recent  downturn  job  losses  weren’t  as  skewed  towards  the  lower 
paid – but more negative during the recovery (the skew in net job creation has been bigger). 
Overall, taking the 2008–14 period as a whole, the compositional effects added around 3% 
less to average wages than in the equivalent six years in the early 1990s. If anything, Chart 3 
hints at a break in the series long before the Great Recession, sometime in the late 1990s.  
It’s not clear why this occurred (I’ll later offer some slightly speculative suggestions). But the 
recent drag from compositional effects might help to explain a couple of recent puzzles in the 
aggregate data. 
One is low productivity growth. As we know, output per employee has been particularly weak 
in  recent  years.  It  fell  steeply  during  the  recession  and  its  rate  of  growth  has  been  pretty 
insipid since. Chart 5, plotting three-year growth rates for output and employment, is one way 
of expressing that. What this work on compositional effects suggests – somewhat tentatively, 
and only if you’re prepared to interpret it in this rather crude fashion – is that this may partly 
reflect  a  slower  rate  of  improvement  in  the  average  “quality”  of  the  employed  workforce. 
“Human  capital”,  to  use  the  economists’  terminology,  has  been  growing  at  a  slower  rate, 
particularly compared with the first half of the 1990s.  
Note the word “partly”. I don’t think this can really be seen as the main, or even a major, part 
of the productivity puzzle. Even if you’re prepared to view these compositional shifts as some 
independent phenomenon, unrelated to other things that have depressed productivity growth 
– and that is questionable – their scale isn’t really big enough to make that much of a dent. 
That  3%  figure,  which  is  probably  a  ceiling  on  the  true  contribution2,  compares  with  a 
productivity shortfall of over 10% since the recession. 
The  results offer  clearer  help  with  a  second  puzzle,  namely  the  apparent  ease  with  which 
real average earnings have adapted to lower productivity growth. The two must match each 
other in the end3. But, in the past, it’s been hard for the labour market to absorb negative 
                                                 
1   The Employment Cost Index (ECI) measures the change in the cost of labour by excluding the influence of 
employment shifts among occupations and industries. More information about the ECI can be found here In 
the UK, the ONS has an experimental series – the “Quality-Adjusted Labour Input” – which makes a similar 
adjustment: the latest release can be found here.  
2   Some  of  the  factors  that  might  have  reduced  productivity  growth  might  also  have  affected  the  skill  mix  of 
employment, so it’s not clear whether this can legitimately be seen as independent effect: in the limit, saying 
productivity  growth  is  weak  “because”  the  economy  has  created  more  low  productivity  jobs  has  a  slightly 
circular flavour to it. Note too that, at least in the short run, a given compositional effect on wages should not 
be translated one-for-one into productivity space – you’d expect the latter to be smaller (I explain this point in 
footnote  10).  So  the  3%  figure  should  be  viewed  as  a  ceiling  for  the  estimated  impact  of  these  shifts  on 
productivity over the 2008–14 period.  
3   Real wages can diverge from productivity either because average profit margins are changing or because the 
relative price of what firms produce diverges from the price of what consumers buy. In an open economy, for 
example, an improvement in the terms of trade will raise real incomes relative to productivity; the upward trend 
in profit margins in the US has depressed wages relative to national income. There has been no such trend in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the  unfortunate  devices  of  higher 
shocks  to  real  take-home  pay  –  whether  from  lower  productivity,  higher  taxes  or  rises  in 
import  prices  –  without 
inflation  and/or  higher 
unemployment. In other words, such shocks tend to put upward pressure on the NAIRU (at 
least initially, they move you rightwards along the Phillips curve in Chart 2, not downwards4). 
Yet, for much of the past two years, pay growth was weak even as unemployment declined 
sharply. I commented on the striking flexibility of real wages in a speech last summer, from 
which Chart 2 is taken.  
Suppose, however, that the drop in productivity has had nothing to do with existing jobs but 
instead reflects the skew in the creation of new jobs towards relatively less productive, less 
well-paid roles. To that extent, there’s no real-wage resistance, among existing employees, 
to  overcome,  and  the  arithmetic  impacts  on  average  pay  and  average  productivity  are 
necessarily immediate and coincident.  
This would also help to explain why pay surveys, which track wages of the median employee 
(rather than the average), appeared to over-predict wage growth in 2013 and 2014 (Chart 6): 
they failed to take account of changes in the mix of employment. You can see from Chart 6 
that when the compositional effects were positive, during the recession, the surveys under-
measured AWE growth.  
Finally, these shifts can also shed light on the most recent trends in the aggregate data. The 
latest  estimates  show  that  the  compositional  effects  have  risen  during  the  first  half  of  this 
year  –  the  skew  towards  lower-paid  jobs  has  diminished.  This  might  account  for  the 
acceleration we’ve seen in average productivity and wages; it could also explain why there’s 
been a narrowing of the gap between AWE growth and the surveys.  
So having summarised the main points let me describe in a little more detail where the data 
comes  from  and  how  these  effects  have  been  estimated.  I’ll  then  say  something,  if  only 
tentatively, about why they might have differed from the last cycle – why, in particular, the 
compositional effects have been more negative during the recovery, and perhaps before that 
as well (my hands will be waving slightly at that point). A short final section concludes with 
some remarks about policy.  
Generating the estimates 
To understand the results it helps to know something about where the data come from and 
how they’re constructed. The first and most important point is that the headline measure of 
wages in the UK, the AWE, is what it says it is – an average. Employers are asked simply to 
divide their total wage bill by the number of employees. So if – say – a responding firm were 
to  substitute  a  less  experienced,  less  well-paid  person  for  someone  better  paid,  its 
submission  to  the  AWE  would  fall  even  if  no  individual’s  wage  had  changed.  It  is  these 
“compositional effects” that we are trying to measure and account for. 
We do so using data from a different source – the Labour Force Survey – which is sent out to 
households. The main questions in the LFS are about employment status: do you have a job 
and, if not, are you looking for one? (If your answer to the second question is “yes” you are 
counted as unemployed, if “no”, economically “inactive”.) As well as these headline numbers, 
                                                                                                                                                      
the UK and the terms of trade have been broadly constant in recent years. Thus the only source of real wage 
growth, over time, is productivity growth. 
4   The  inverse  relationship  between  the  NAIRU  and  productivity  growth  has  been  noted  in  many  countries 
(Staiger et al (2001), Slacacek (2005)) nor is real wage resistance the only possible reason for the link. More 
micro-founded  approaches  to  the  labour  market,  based  on  the  costs  of  job  search,  also  predict  a  negative 
relationship between trend productivity growth and the natural rate of unemployment. In that setting, in which 
employers trade off the cost of search against the prospective surplus from a new job, lower expected growth 
in  productivity  reduces the present value  of that surplus and  lowers the  rate of  job creation. The canonical 
description of this “capitalisation” effect is due to Pissarides (2000). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the ONS’s monthly labour market release publishes standard summary statistics about the 
duration of unemployment and the reasons for inactivity.  
But,  at  least  since  1994,  the  LFS  has  also  included  a  host  of  questions  about  the 
characteristics  of  employees  and  their  jobs.  These  are  listed  in  Table  1.  Some  are  easy 
enough to answer – your age, where in the country you work and long you’ve been in your 
job. Others, those related to respondents’ qualifications, or the sector they work in, offer a 
long list of potential answers. There are over eighty sectors from which to choose, hundreds 
of detailed occupational descriptions. Table 1 
People  are  also  asked  about  their  pay.  And,  unsurprisingly,  there  are  clear  correlations 
between  wages  and  characteristics.  Pay  is  higher  in  some  sectors  and  occupations  than 
others; it’s also higher, at the level of the individual, for people who have better qualifications 
and more experience, in terms both of age and job tenure. Overall, if you take the post-1994 
sample as a whole, the spread of individuals’ characteristics statistically explains around one 
half of the variation in their pay.  
This distribution can also change over time. Individuals’ characteristics can evolve – people 
become more experienced, in principle they can also switch occupations or become better 
educated. The distribution will also shift if there are differences between the characteristics of 
those  entering  and  leaving  employment.  We’ve  already  seen  how  large  those  gross  flows 
can be. So even a relatively modest contrast between the two groups can lead to significant 
changes at the aggregate level. The compositional effects, which are simply the fitted values 
of a regression of pay on characteristics, attempt to track the effects of these shifts from one 
quarter to the next. In aggregate, the estimated effects amount to a “hedonic” adjustment for 
labour quality. Chart 7, summarising the results, is a version of a graph we published in the 
last two Inflation Reports. 
Note that, over time, the effects have tended to be positive. The average age and experience 
of the workforce has grown; more people have gone into higher education and higher-paid 
occupations.  
But on top of that underlying trend, we’ve seen sharp movements, in both directions, during 
the  recent  cycle.  Both  the  drop  in  job  creation  during  the  Great  Recession,  and  the 
corresponding pick-up during the recovery, were skewed towards the less skilled, less well 
paid end of the jobs market. Chart 8, which plots the differences in job creation across three 
classes  of  occupational  characteristics,  depicts  one  aspect  of  that  pattern5.  You  can  see 
similar differences in rates of job creation between young and old, less and more educated. 
And as I outlined in the introduction, the effect of these swings was to add materially to the 
growth of average earnings during the downturn and to subtract from it in 2013 and 2014.  
Unskilled employment generally more cyclical 
Before asking why this has happened let me make a few points about the estimates.  
First,  there  are  some  approximations  involved.  One  involves  the  mix  of  surveys:  we’re 
estimating the impact of compositional changes on LFS pay data and  assuming the effect 
simply  carries  over  to  the  AWE.  That’s  the  most  reasonable  assumption,  but  it’s  an 
assumption nonetheless. Also, because of the way we’ve done this regression – for the sake 
of simplicity it’s been estimated in one go, using the entire 20-year sample – we’re implicitly 
                                                 
5   As I said, there are potentially hundreds  of detailed  occupational descriptions from  which LFS respondents 
can choose. The ONS’s standard scheme then makes high-level classifications – “high skill” occupations, for 
example,  whose  job  creation  rates  are  plotted  in  blue  in  Chart  7,  are  defined  as  “managers,  directors, 
professional, associate professional and technical”; “low skill” refers to sales and “customer services, process 
and plant operatives, elementary”.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
assuming that changes in each of the characteristics have constant effects over time6. But 
there’s a substantial economic literature explicitly devoted to explaining changes in some of 
these  coefficients,  notably  the  labour-market  returns  to  better  qualifications  (the  “skill 
premium”). I’ll come back to this point later.  
Second, the estimated compositional effects have been driven mainly by changes in the mix 
of  people,  and  their  individual  characteristics,  not  by  shifts  in  employment  across  sectors. 
Pay  clearly  differs  across  industries,  even  controlling  for  those  characteristics.  And  on 
occasion sectoral shifts can matter for average earnings. In Chart 7 the marginal contribution 
of  changes  in  employment  across  industries  is  in  red.  Thanks  mainly  to  disproportionately 
large  job  losses  in  the  financial  sector,  where  pay  is  higher  than  average,  these  were 
negative  in  2003  and  2009.  But  in  the  rest  of  the  sample,  they  don’t  do  much:  the 
compositional effects have been predominantly within, not across, sectors. During 2014, for 
example,  it’s  the  fact  that  new  jobs  went  to  people  with  below-average  qualifications  and 
experience, and in lower-paid occupations, that depressed average pay growth7. 
Third, as I emphasised in the introduction, this cyclical pattern is entirely typical. The fact that 
new hires have low job tenure – and that the average experience of the workforce therefore 
declines  when  unemployment  falls  rapidly  –  is  hardly  surprising.  That  average  skill  levels 
should  be  counter-cyclical  is,  perhaps,  less  obvious.  But  it  is  a  widely  and  long  observed 
empirical  fact:  it’s  true  in  all  countries  that  employment  rates  are  lower  and  more  cyclical 
among the young and unskilled.  
Why  should  low  skilled  employment  be  more  cyclical?  Economists  have  come  up  with  a 
number  of  possible  explanations.  One  likely  factor  is  that  skilled  jobs  tend  to  be  more 
specialised. That means they’re also more likely to be retained, or “hoarded”, in a downturn: 
the costlier it is to replace someone the more reluctant will be the employer to let him or her 
go.  
Another possibility is that low-skilled workers are more easily substituted by new capital and 
new  technologies.  So  when  firms  are  relatively  thinly  capitalised,  early  on  in  an  economic 
expansion, they tend to hire more unskilled people. Later on, as the recovery matures and 
investment in new capacity starts to take hold, it’s the demand for skilled employment that 
starts to grow faster. 
These are both things that would tend to boost the relative  demand for high-skilled labour 
during a downturn. Differences in labour supply might also play a part. For example, some 
have argued that those with low wages have less to lose from exiting employment. Their pay 
is lower relative to unemployment benefit, especially during downturns. They may also have 
fewer  options:  when  vacancies  are  scarce,  skilled  people  have  the  capacity  to  move  into 
lower-paid jobs while searching for new opportunities (Nickell (1979), Chassamboulli (2011)). 
Why have compositional effects been less positive during this cycle?  
These  factors  can  help  to  explain  why  employment  is  more  variable  for  the  low  paid.  It’s 
possible the same factors have been at work in the most recent cycle in the UK. But the last 
7  
                                                 
6   The  regression  also  includes  time  dummies  so  allows  for  arbitrary  variation  of  pay  growth  net  of  the 
compositional effects.  
In  principle,  demand-side  factors  could  still  matter.  Perhaps,  for  example,  the  problems  of  the  financial 
industry,  whose  employees  are  better  qualified  than  average,  have  pushed  employment  towards  other 
industries. To that extent, the regression could be picking up effects whose origins are demand-led – a shift in 
output across sectors – but attributing them to changes in individuals’ characteristics. But this seems unlikely: 
in truth, shifts in sectoral employment haven’t been big enough to generate such effects. Even if you exclude 
individual characteristics from our regression – the shifts in qualifications and occupations that do most of the 
empirical work – variations in sectoral employment shares don’t do a good statistical job of explaining wage 
growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  few  years  do  look  distinct,  at  least  compared  with  the  early  1990s  cycle  –  overall,  the 
compositional effects have been adding less to wage growth. They were less positive during 
the  downturn,  but  have  been  more  marked,  in  a  negative  direction,  during  the  recovery. 
Overall, the “quality” of the workforce looks to have been growing at a somewhat slower rate 
since  the  onset  of  the  2008  recession  –  worth  around  ½%  point  a  year  on  average  wage 
growth – than it did during the equivalent period in the 1990s.  
Why  might  this  have  occurred?  I  can  think  of  two  possibilities,  though  there  are  no  doubt 
others as well. One is that the financial crisis has depressed the relative demand for high-
skilled employees. I mentioned earlier that economists believe high-skilled jobs are probably 
complements, rather than substitutes, for capital and new computer technology. This is the 
most  common  explanation  for  the  marked  rise  in  the  “skill  premium”,  in  the  US  and 
elsewhere,  during  the  1980s  and  1990s:  new  technologies  favoured  skilled  jobs  and  their 
wages rose faster than those of the unskilled8. So if the incentives to invest in new physical 
capital have been depressed since the Great Recession, by things like higher rise premia or 
problems in the banking system, perhaps the same applies to investment in human capital.  
It’s also possible the relative supply of low-skilled labour has risen. We know, for example, 
that migration flows have risen significantly over the past fifteen years, and that immigrants 
are more likely to take low-skilled jobs than UK-born workers (see, for example, the Report of 
the  Migration  Advisory  Committee  (2014)).  So  if  easier  immigration  has  made  the  overall 
supply  of  labour  more  responsive  to  economic  conditions  in  this  country  –  if,  as  if  often 
argued, it’s flattened the Phillips curve (Bean (2006), Bentolila (2008)) – it’s probably done so 
to a greater extent for low-skilled than high-skilled workers. So when the UK economy grows 
faster than its neighbours, as has been the case over the past couple of years, you’d expect 
to see greater inward migration and a disproportionate rise in the supply of low-skilled labour 
in particular. 
I  came  across  a  possible  example  of  this  on  a  recent  Agency  visit.  The  head  of  a  small 
business told me his firm had been looking to hire an accountant. They’d originally wanted 
someone very experienced who might in time fill the shoes of the finance director. However, 
they soon realised that the only way they could get someone like that was to bid them from 
an  existing  job  within  the  UK  –  apparently  a  costly  and  lengthy  process.  So  they  decided 
instead to employ two much more junior and less well trained people. One worked for them 
already; the other, from outside the UK, they found in relatively short order after advertising 
on an EU-wide basis. The firm would end up being less productive than it might have been 
(two people are now doing the work of one). But there’d be a compensating fall in its average 
wage and, given the relative availability of less experienced employees, it made sense for 
them to go down this route.  
What I’m suggesting has more to do with relative quantities, not relative wages, and more to 
do  with  the  short  than  the  longer  run:  at  a  time  when  the  UK  has  been  outgrowing  its 
neighbours, you’d expect easier immigration to amplify the rise in the relative supply of low-
skilled employment. 
Some concluding remarks 
Let me sum up and, in doing so, say something about the implications for monetary policy.  
As  macroeconomists,  monetary  policymakers  like  to  deal  in  simple  aggregates  and 
averages.  Output  is  doing  this,  employment  that  and  wages  the  other.  We  know  that  the 
                                                 
8   More  recently,  economists  have  argued  that  computer  technology  substitutes  most  directly  for  the  low-to-
medium  skill  tasks.  This  would  help  to  explain  why  the  changes  in  the  distribution  of  pay  have  had  a  “U” 
shape,  with  positive  effects  not  just  on  high-skill  pay  but  that  at  the  low  end  as  well  (Goos  and  Manning 
(2003), Autor et al. (2006)).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  is 
that,  although 
experiences of individual firms and households are extremely diverse but like to think we can 
nonetheless lump them all together and treat them as homogenous wholes.  
Much of the time that’s a reasonable thing to do. But sometimes it matters what’s happening 
underneath. As we’ve seen, there was a distinct skew in recent job creation towards the less 
well paid in 2013 and 2014, one that has subsided in the first half of this year. While not the 
only factor – narrowing slack in the labour market has probably been more important – this 
helps to explain why growth of average wages was weak in those two years and has since 
picked up a bit.  
At least at the margin, these shifts will have had similar effects on productivity. So, in and of 
themselves,  they  have  no  direct  bearing  on  impact  on  inflationary  pressure9.  Indeed, 
because the compositional effects are highly counter-cyclical, and tend to go up and down 
with unemployment, perhaps it doesn’t matter much if you never took them into account and 
stuck with Phillips curves estimated on unadjusted wage data.  
The  problem 
the 
compositional  effects  do  appear  to  vary  in  scale.  This  means  it’s  worth  allowing  for  them: 
changes in the mix of employment may not affect inflationary pressure but they can have an 
impact  on  the  aggregates  we  normally  use  to  assess  that  pressure.  Thus,  in  general,  our 
estimated  Phillips  curves  fit  better  when  you  use  AWE  growth  adjusted  for  compositional 
effects. In the past two to three years in particular, the extent of the skew towards low skilled 
employment helps to explain some of the weakness of average productivity and pay.  
That  skew  might  reflect  the  particular  circumstances  of  today’s  recovery.  Perhaps  easier 
immigration has made low-skilled labour easier to come by, especially at a time when other 
European  economies  haven’t  been  growing  as  quickly  as  the  UK.  Maybe  deterrents  to 
investment in physical capital, and new technologies, have also reduced the relative demand 
for  high-skilled  labour.  If  so,  then  you  might  expect  the  compositional  effects  to  improve 
further  over  time:  a  strengthening  of  the  recovery  in  the  rest  of  Europe  would  reduce  the 
relative supply of low-skilled labour and a fall in risk premia on new investment, in human as 
well as physical capital, would raise the demand for high skills.  
I guess we shall see.  
Thank you! 
they’re  qualitatively  similar 
in  different  cycles, 
References 
Autor,  D.,  L.  Katz  and  M.  Kearney,  2006,  “The  polarisation  of  the  U.S.  labour  market”, 
NBER Working Paper no. 11986. 
Bean, C., 2006, “Globalisation and Inflation”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2006 Q4. 
Bentolila, S., D, Juan J. and J. F. Jimeno, 2008, “Does immigration affect the Phillips curve? 
Some  evidence 
for  Spain“  European  Economic  Review,  Elsevier,  vol.  52(8), 
pages 1398-1423, November. 
                                                 
9   For the economists amongst you let me be more a little more precise: one would expect an impact on average 
unit labour costs but not on the marginal costs that matter for inflation. Suppose workers are paid wages equal 
to their marginal revenue products. In that case, all else equal, an extra job will have no impact on the ratio of 
the  two  (marginal  costs).  It  will  also  have  the  same  impact  on  aggregate  output,  in  levels  terms,  as  on 
aggregate wages. But because output is bigger than wages – GDP also includes gross capital income – the 
proportionate effect on output will be smaller, by a factor equal to the capital share of income (around a third). 
So when the compositional effects are positive – say they add 1% to average wages – you’d expect a slightly 
smaller proportionate rise in average productivity (around 2/3%) and a small rise, of around 1/3%, in the ratio 
of wages to productivity (average unit labour costs).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
Bernanke, Ben S. and Powell, L. James, 1986, “The Cyclical Behavior of Industrial Labor 
Markets:  A  Comparison  of  the  Prewar  and  Postwar  Ears.”  in:  R.J.  Gordon,  ed.,  The 
American Business Cycle, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 
Chassamboulli, A., 2011, “Cyclical Upgrading of Labor and Employment Differences across 
Skill Groups”, B E Journal of Macroeconomics 
Goos, M. and A. Manning, 2007, “Lousy and lovely jobs: the rising polarisation of work in 
Britain”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 
Nickell,  S.,  1979.  “Education  and  Lifetime  Patterns  of  Unemployment,”  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 87(5), pages S117–31, October. 
Phillips  A.  W.,1958,  “The  Relation  Between  Unemployment  and  the  Rate  of  Change  of 
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957”, Economica. 
Pissarides,  C.,  2000,  “Equilibrium  Unemployment  Theory”,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology, 2nd edition 
Slacalek,  J.,  2005,  “Productivity  and  the  Natural  Rate  of  Unemployment”,  Department  of 
Macro Analysis and Forecasting, DIW Berlin  
Solon, G, R. Barsky, and J.Parker, 1995, “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real Wages: How 
Important is Composition Bias?” Q. J. E. 109 (1994), pp. 3–25. 
Staiger, D., J. H. Stock and M. W. Watson, 2001, “Prices, Wages and the U.S. NAIRU in 
the 1990s”, NBER Working Paper no. 8320. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 1: Large flows into and out of 
employment 
Chart 2: Growth of average wages weak in 
2013, 2014 despite low unemployment 
Source: Labour Force Survey and own calculations 
 
 
 
Chart 3: Compositional effects currently 
weak, generally counter-cyclical 
Source: ONS, Bank of England, NIESR and Hills, Thomas, 
Dimsdale (2010) 
Note: AEI until 2010 and AWE since; inflation expectations as 
implied by indexed gilt market; 2014 diamond is for H1. 
Chart 4: Low skilled employment more 
cyclical in the US 
Source: ONS, Labour Force Survey and own calculations 
 
 
 Source: U.S. Bureau of Labour Statistics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  Chart 5: Productivity growth very weak 
in recent years 
Chart 6: Pay surveys better match for AWE 
ex compositional effects 
Source: ONS, CBI and BCC 
Source: ONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Detailed questions in the Labour Force Survey 
Characteristics 
LFS Question 
Age 
Occupation  
Tenure 
Education 
Sector/ Industry 
How old are you? 
What was your (main) job in the week ending Sunday the [date]? 
In which year did you start working continuously for your current employer? And which month 
was that? 
This next section is about qualifications gained in the UK. Please think about ALL qualifications 
you have ever gained [in the UK], even if it was a long time ago or you are not using them now 
(please exclude expired qualifications).  
What did the firm/organisation you worked for mainly make or do (at the place where you 
worked)? Enter a title for the industry  
Source: Labour Force Survey (user guidance) 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 7: Compositional effects driven by 
characteristics of employees, not sectors  
Chart 8: Job creation fell further, and has 
since recovered faster, for low skilled 
Source: Labour Force Survey 
 
 
Chart 9: Over longer sample, shifts in 
average qualifications driven compositional 
effects 
Source: Labour Force Survey  
 Source: Labour Force Survey 
We  can’t  demonstrate  this  with  the  detailed 
LFS dataset from 1994, as it includes only one 
proper cycle.  But  the  positive  relationship  with 
unemployment  exists  even  during  the  Great 
Stability  (1994–2008).  And,  at  the  cost  of  a 
smaller set of variables – the survey didn’t ask 
people  about  their  occupation  and  sectors 
before  1994  –  we’ve  managed  to  extend  the 
estimates back a few years, to the late 1980s. 
The  aggregate  series  you’ve  already  seen  in 
Chart  310.  The  more  detailed  breakdown  is  in 
Chart 9. You can see clearly the same cyclical 
pattern  during  the  last-but-one  cycle:  steeper 
falls  in  employment  for  the  less  well  qualified 
during  the  recession,  resulting  in  a  positive 
compositional effect, the opposite pattern in the 
upswing.  
                                                 
10   The longer series simply splices on the pre-1994 estimates, based on the narrower sample, to the existing 
post-1994  series.  One  might  ask  how  similar  the  two  sets  of  estimates  are  in  the  overlapping  post-1994 
period, and the answer is that they’re close. This is partly because the information about sectors doesn’t do 
much  in  explaining  variations  in  pay  growth  (given  the  other  characteristics).  It’s  also  because  occupations 
and  qualifications  are  well  correlated,  so  when  you’ve  got  only  one  of  them  it  picks  up  quite  a  bit  of  the 
variation in the other.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  
Chart 10: Rise in employees with degree, 
slight fall in degree premium 
%
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Employees with a degree (lhs)
Degree premium (rhs)
% 
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1995-2007 2008-2012 2013-2015
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
   One  shouldn’t  exaggerate  the  labour-market 
consequences of easier immigration. Whatever 
its impact on the supply of low-skilled labour in 
the short term, it’s not been enough over time 
to have a noticeable impact on relative rates of 
pay. Chart 10 plots an estimate of the UK skill 
premium,  specifically  the  marginal  effect  on 
wages of having a degree. We’ve derived this 
by  running  the  same  regression  of  pay  on 
employee characteristics, but on a  
year-by-year  basis  rather  than  across  the 
sample  as  a  whole.  Perhaps  because  the 
supply  of  graduates  has  steadily  risen,  the 
estimated  degree  premium  has  actually  fallen 
slightly over the past twenty years11.  
                                                 
11   It’s  also  important  to  note  that,  although  immigrants  are  disproportionately  represented  in  low-skilled 
occupations, they are not, on average, any less well qualified than UK-born people (to the extent domestic and 
foreign  qualifications  are  comparable).  In  fact,  according  to  the  Migration  Advisory  Committee,  one  reason 
some employers have preferred immigrants for low-skilled jobs is that they “have higher level qualifications 
than their low-skill job requires”.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Chart 11: Real pay growth more variable 
when adjusted for compositional effects 
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
  To  be  sure,  you’d  tend  to  under-estimate  the 
cyclicality  of  “underlying”  wage  growth12  and 
the  true  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve.  Over  the 
past  few  years,  as  in  earlier  cycles,  real  pay 
growth  for  people  who  stayed  in  their  jobs13 
has  been  more  variable  than  the  average 
(Chart 11). But if it’s a really regular thing – if 
the  compositional  effects  always  move  in  lock 
step with unemployment – then a Phillips curve 
estimated on an unadjusted AWE series would 
still take them into account, only implicitly so. 
                                                 
12   This point was made by Bernanke (1987) and, in a well-known paper, by Solon et al (1995).  
13   To  be  precise,  the  red  line  is  pay  growth  for  someone  with  fixed  characteristics  –  fixed  educational 
qualifications  and  occupation,  unchanging  experience.  Since  any  individual’s  experience  is  bound  to  grow 
over time (if only by virtue of getting older) there is no such person in real life! A more accurate description of 
the red line is average wage growth for people continuously in employment, adjusted for any the impact of 
changes in average age and experience across the workforce.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
