  Patrick Njoroge: The role of banks and the securities markets in curbing 
the movement of illicit financial flows 
Remarks by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 2nd Annual 
General  Meeting  and  Conference  of  African  Organization  of  Public  Account  Committees 
(AFROPAC), Nairobi, 30 August 2016. 
 It  is  a  privilege  for  me  to  join  this  panel  to  discuss  the  role  of  banks  and  the  securities 
markets in curbing the movement of illicit financial flows. I would like to take this opportunity 
to thank the African Organization for Public Account Committees (AFROPAC) for inviting me 
to speak on this topical issue. I would also like to recognize and appreciate AFROPAC’s role 
in promoting transparency and accountability in the governance of public resources. 
It  is  apt  to  note  that  the  topic  of  illicit  financial  flows  was  recently  highlighted  at  the  14th 
Session  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD)  that 
recently convened in Nairobi about a month ago, a meeting that brought together Heads of 
States and Governments, and key stakeholders from the business world and civil society. 
The  damaging  effects  of  illicit  financial  flows  on  the  African  continent  are  now  well-
documented and it is only fitting that AFROPAC has brought the issue to the fore. 
Stemming  illicit  financial  flows  from  developing  countries  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  key 
issues  shaping  the  global  development  agenda.  As  you  are  aware,  Goal  No.  16  of  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  under  the  United  Nations  2030  Agenda  for 
Sustainable  Development,  commits  to  “significantly  reduce  illicit  financial  and  arms  flows, 
strengthen  the  recovery  and  return  of  stolen  assets  and  combat  all  forms  of  organised 
crime”1. There are good reasons for this: 
• 
First, the amounts involved are massive. With assistance from the IMF and the 
World Bank, the advocacy group Global Financial Integrity (GFI) has estimated that 
Africa  loses  about  US$50  billion  annually  to  illicit  financial  flows2.  Additionally, 
According to the Report of the High Level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows, between 
1970 and 2008, Africa lost an estimated US$854 billion in illicit financial flows.3 This 
amount is equivalent to the development assistance received by the continent over 
the same period. 
Second,  illicit  financial  flows  have  far-reaching  effects,  particularly  on  the 
African continent. These flows and the activities that support them have been shown 
to lead to increasing inequality in the source countries, in addition to undermining 
the  economic  and  social  institutions,  discouraging  transparency,  and  undermining 
international development cooperation. 
Third,  all  countries  are  involved  in this fight,  and  there  are  no  winners  if  illicit 
financial flows are not dealt with. 
  It is noteworthy that the financial sector is the most common conduit for illicit financial flows. 
This is largely attributed to the interconnection between national and international financial 
                                                
1  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (September  2015).  Available  at:  https://sustainable 
development.un.org/?menu=1300. 
2  Global  Financial  Integrity  (2010)  Illicit  Financial  Flows  From  Africa  Hidden  Resource  for  Development. 
Available at http://www.gfintegrity.org/storage/gfip/documents/reports/gfi_africareport_web.pdf. 
3  Stop it! Track it! Get it! Report of the High Level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows From Africa (2015). Available 
at http://www.uneca.org/sites/default/files/PublicationFiles/iff_main_report_26feb_en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  systems, which can thereby provide a wider geographical reach through which illicit financial 
assets are moved and laundered. The financial sector, therefore, has to be at the forefront of 
the agenda to stem illicit financial flows. 
Nevertheless, in order to develop and implement policies that would appropriately address 
the  issue  of  illicit  financial  flows  it  is  important  to  appreciate  the  vulnerabilities  of  African 
financial  systems.  More  importantly,  to  understand  how  they  enable  or  facilitate  the 
movement of illicit financial flows. 
Most of our economies are characterized by the presence of informal financial systems that 
are primarily cash based. However, significant gains have been made in increasing the level 
of financial inclusion, most notably in Sub-Saharan Africa, where countries like Kenya and 
Tanzania have embraced mobile and financial products and services. But the overall level of 
financial inclusion in Africa remains low. Only a small percentage of the population has bank 
accounts,  and  the  percentage  of  those  owning  insurance  policies  and  securities  is  even 
lower. This is relevant given that it serves to hamper efforts to trace illicit financial flows from 
the continent. 
Weak  banking  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  has  largely  hindered  the  effective 
implementation  of  initiatives  aimed  at  reducing  illicit  financial  flows  from  Africa.  This  is 
reflected  at  the  national  level,  given  that  most  African  countries  are  yet  to  fully  adopt  and 
implement the 2012 Financial Action Taskforce (FATF) recommendations, the international 
standards  on  combating  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorism.  The  FATF 
standards are a comprehensive framework of preventive measures that financial institutions 
are required to implement to address threats to the financial system including illicit financial 
flows. 
Recent assessments of several African countries Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the 
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) regimes conducted by the Eastern and Southern Africa 
Anti-Money  Laundering  Group  (ESAAMLG),  a  FATF  regional  body,  revealed  that  most 
countries  generally  exhibit  a  low  level  of  compliance  with  preventive  measures.4  The 
implementation of the customer due diligence, in particular the identification and verification 
of beneficial owners of corporate entities remains a significant challenge. Closer international 
cooperation is also needed. 
The  lack  of  institutional,  technical  and  human  capacity  also  hampers  financial  sector 
regulators’ ability to curtail the movement of illicit financial outflows from financial institutions 
in Africa. The necessary infrastructure that would support regulators efforts to combat illicit 
financial flows such as Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs), beneficial ownership registries or 
asset  recovery  units  are  either  non-existent  or  in  the  early  stages  of  development.  As  a 
result,  the  requisite  skills  required  for  tracking  illicit  financial  flows,  including  the  ability  to 
profile money laundering risks and analyse suspicious transactions, are severely lacking and 
in short supply within the continent. New technologies can help but could also facilitate illicit 
financial flows. 
I  cannot  overemphasise  the  need  for  African  countries  to  develop  mechanisms  that  will 
facilitate  transparency.  Adoption  of  mechanisms  such  as  the  Kimberley  Process  for 
diamonds or the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) would help. In addition, 
lifting the veil of secrecy and determining who ultimately owns and controls corporate entities 
that have established business relationships with financial institutions exposes wrong doing 
and disrupts a key vehicle for illicit financial flows. In this regard, I would therefore urge the 
continent’s  legislatures  to  consider  implementing  changes  to  our  national  laws  that  would 
                                                
4  Massa  I.  (2014)  ‘Capital  Flight  and  the  Financial  System’  Overseas  Development  Institute  (ODI)  Working 
Paper 413 Available at: https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9392.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   enhance  our  national  registries,  particularly  as  relates  to  the  obtaining  and  sharing  of 
beneficial ownership information. 
I would be remiss if I did not mention the Kenyan experience and initiatives that the Central 
Bank of Kenya(CBK)has adopted in order to foster transparency within the Kenyan financial 
system. In the past year, CBK has adopted the following measures: 
• 
Stepped up close collaboration with the Financial Reporting Centre (FRC) – Kenya’s 
financial  intelligence  unit  (FIU)  –  to  foster  a  culture  of  compliance  in  the  banking 
sector.  Emphasis  has  been  placed  on  the  preventive  measures  outlined  in  the 
Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act(POCAMLA),  Kenya’s  primary 
anti-money laundering legislation. 
Provided  additional  clarity  on  reporting  obligations  under  POCAMLA  including  the 
issuance of guidelines on large transactions in January 2016, intended to provide a 
clear trail of large cash transactions conducted over the counter in banks. 
Enhanced AML/CFT on-site inspections. CBK is currently developing a risk based 
AML/CFT  supervisory  framework  with  assistance  from  the  International  Monetary 
Fund (IMF). 
Required  greater  transparency  on  the  part  of  banks  to  ensure  public  confidence. 
Transparency extends to disclosures by banks on their corporate governance and 
risk management structures. In this regard, CBK has enhanced the disclosures by 
banks on their significant shareholders. Banks are now required to disclose on their 
websites details of significant shareholders who own 5percentor more shareholding. 
Let me take the few remaining minutes to share with you some of our key lessons relating to 
money laundering, particularly with respect to illicit financial flows: 
i) 
  Kenya’s financial sector is very vulnerable given its strategic position in the region, 
facilitated  by  easy  access  through  sea  ports,  airports  and  land.  Kenya  is  a  fast 
growing economy with high potential especially in the financial sector. It is therefore 
attractive to both well-intentioned and ill-intentioned investors. 
Inter-agency cooperation between the financial sector regulators, law enforcement 
agencies  and  the  financial  institutions  has  had  a  positive  effect  in  stemming  illicit 
financial flows. 
The  perpetrators  of  money  laundering  are  very  smart  and  sophisticated,  ready  to 
take advantage of any existing loopholes in the law and weaknesses in the internal 
controls of financial institutions. 
Regular  interaction  with  international  bodies  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of 
preventing money laundering is key in shaping or improving a country’s institutional, 
legal and regulatory framework in combating illicit financial flows. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
In conclusion, the battle against illicit financial flows in Africa cannot be won singlehandedly. 
Governments, legislatures, the judiciary and the private sector must come together. Tackling 
the underlying sources of illicit financial flows is imperative. For the African financial sector, 
investment must be made in strengthening preventive measures. Surveillance, detection and 
recovery  procedures  must  be  enhanced. With  this  comprehensive  approach,  Africa  will  be 
well armed to combat the scourge of illicit financial flows. 
I look forward to benefiting from your thoughts and diverse experiences. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
