  François Villeroy de Galhau: Addressing Brexit, and unlocking Europe’s 
investment potential 
Welcome address by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
Paris Europlace International Financial Forum, Paris, 6 July 2016. 
 Welcome  to  Paris!  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today,  and  to  share  with  you  our 
responses to the new disruptive challenges facing Europe. Brexit is certainly a new one: the 
decision  has  serious  consequences,  especially  for  the  United  Kingdom.  And  obviously, 
Europe is at a crossroads. But let me just stress that this is nothing new. I’ve said it before, 
notably in a joint article with Jens Weidmann last February. Brexit is not a game-changer, but 
it does highlight the need to give renewed impetus to the European project. It also reminds 
us what finance is for: achieving the best balance between savings and investment. How this 
is done is still more important than where it is done; but there is clearly a link between the 
two. Before I share my views on the way forward for unlocking Europe’s investment potential, 
let me add a few more words on Brexit. 
 Addressing the consequences of Brexit 
1)  
Obviously, Brexit is bad news, first and foremost for the United Kingdom. The priority right 
now  is  to  deal  with  the  fallout  as  smoothly  as  possible.  For  economic  and  monetary 
authorities, this means reducing uncertainty and fostering confidence, in at least three ways: 
First,  by  managing  the  financial  shock.  Financial  markets  experienced  sharp 
– 
corrections,  with  a  significant  drop  of  the  Pound,  but  they  did  not  freeze. 
Cooperation between central banks to cope with the Brexit vote has been effective. 
We, on the ECB Governing Council, remain fully mobilised and determined. 
Second, by maintaining the proper functioning of the euro area – a collective asset 
belonging to 340 million people. More than two-thirds of euro area citizens support 
the single currency, according to the Eurobarometer survey.  Of course, Brexit  will 
have an impact on the euro area economy, but this impact will be more modest than 
in the UK. Brexit does not change our economic projections for this year in France: 
we still expect growth of at least 1.4%. But it is important to reduce the uncertainty 
over Britain: the quicker, the better. 
Third, by preparing the new trade deal between the UK and the EU in a swift, orderly 
and  consistent  manner.  We  can’t  make  any  assumptions  at  this  stage  as  to  the 
outcome of the negotiations. What is clear, however, is that there can be no cherry-
picking  and  no  free-riding.  For  the  UK  to  maintain  access  to  the  single  financial 
market, all the usual EU rules should be strictly respected. 
 Building on our strengths to raise investment and growth 
2)  
Despite the gradual economic upturn seen in 2015–2016, our main European challenge is 
still how to increase growth. To achieve this, the priority is to boost business investment – in 
France it is currently forecast at +3.4% for 2016. This depends on economic levers, to be 
strengthened through structural reforms. But it also depends on financial levers – the core 
challenge  being  equity  financing,  which  is  key  for  innovation.  In  this  respect,  Europe  is 
lagging far behind the US: the equity share of corporate financing in the euro area is 52% of 
GDP compared with 121% in the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   
 
France and Europe do have substantial strengths to meet this investment challenge. Let 
me focus on two of them today: 
– 
First, savings are abundant. In France, the household saving rate is high: 14.1% of 
gross disposable income in 2015, second only to Germany (17.4%) among the main 
European economies. In the euro area, the current account surplus is substantial: 
more than 3% of GDP in April 2016 – meaning that savings exceed investment by 
nearly EUR 330 billion. This gap needs to be closed by fostering investment rather 
than by reducing savings. 
Second, our financial system is solid. The regulatory and supervisory frameworks 
have been considerably strengthened since the crisis, both at the international and 
European  levels.  Today,  the  French  banking  system  is  one  of  the  soundest  in 
Europe and in advanced economies: between 2008 and 2015, the CET1 solvency 
ratio  of  France’s  major  banking  groups  more  than  doubled,  from  5.8%  to  12.6%, 
which  is  EUR  +143  billion  of  core  capital.  Moreover,  their  liquidity  ratio  has 
exceeded 100%, three years ahead of the Basel III deadline. The French insurance 
sector too is robust, and has swiftly adapted to Solvency II. New assessments are 
under  way,  but  using  the  previous  standards,  France’s  major  insurance  groups 
cover their own funds requirement by around 230%. Clearly, financial stability is a 
priority for us; and by the way that is why financial regulators – including Banque de 
France  and  ACPR  –  pay  close  attention  to  the  proposed  merger  between  the 
London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse. 
 Let me draw a parallel to illustrate the situation. In France and in Europe, we have the raw 
materials  –  savings.  We  have  the  processing  industry  –  the  financial  sector.  But  we  are 
missing two links in the economic chain: downstream, we need to open up new opportunities 
in productive investments via a broader range of processed savings products; and upstream, 
we need stable and legible rules to allow the industry to conduct its business. Therefore, I 
see two ways forward. 
First, better channel our abundant savings towards productive investment.  As  I  said, 
the core challenge for increasing innovative investment is to boost equity financing, both in 
France and in Europe: 
– 
In France, this means new savings products and an appropriate trade-off between 
risk and return. Indeed, the share of households wealth invested in risky assets is 
more than three times lower in France than in the US: 77% of GDP versus 241% of 
GDP. But French and European savers are more attached to security – or capital 
protection  –  than  to  liquidity.  Therefore  professionals  should  offer  them  savings 
products that are less liquid, with some long-term capital guarantee, and that offer 
the best equity performance over time. A crucial point is to avoid any tax distortions 
that might penalise these products more than liquid and risk-free investments. Low 
interest  rates  are  not  the  disease,  but  the  symptom  of  an  imbalance  between 
savings and investment; and low interest rates are probably an opportunity to speed 
up the cure towards productive investment. 
At  the  European  level,  we  need  to  build  an  ambitious  “Financing  and  Investment 
Union”  (FIU)  bringing  together  existing  initiatives  –  namely  the  Juncker  plan,  the 
Capital Markets Union and the banking union – which currently work in isolation and 
therefore do not bring sufficient results. We definitely need to put the pieces of the 
puzzle together to create a multiplier effect towards private risk-sharing in Europe: 
with more equity financing and more cross-border flows. 
 The second way forward for raising investment and growth in Europe is to rapidly stabilise 
the  regulatory  environment  for  banks,  eight  years  after  the  financial  crisis.  However,  in 
finalising the Basel III reforms we need to avoid two pitfalls. First, as has been stressed by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
the GHOS and the G20, the completion of reforms should not result in a “significant increase 
in overall capital requirements”. As they stand, the current technical proposals put forward for 
consultation by the Basel Committee do not respect this commitment: they must therefore be 
revisited.  Second,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  oversimplify  the  regulatory  framework  and 
loose the risk sensitivity. Adjustments to the internal models approach should not amount to 
imposing  the  standard  approach  on  all,  either  explicitly,  or  implicitly  by  applying  poorly 
calibrated “output floors”. 
 Let  me  conclude  with  some  words  on  the  strengths  of  the  Paris  financial  centre  itself: 
robust  banks  and  insurance  companies,  a  dynamic  asset  management  industry,  strong 
financial  market  infrastructures,  a  highly  skilled  labour  force.  And  you  can  be  assured  of 
three points: 
1. 
First, French authorities, including the Banque de France, attach utmost importance 
to making sure Paris is one of Europe’s strongest financial centres. This is crucial for 
employment, for investment, as well as for the strength of the euro area economy as 
a whole. 
In  addition,  we  are  already  making  every  effort  to  build  an  innovation  ecosystem: 
through the recent and efficient ACPR-AMF cooperation on FinTechs; through our 
support for the development of new tools – such as ESNI on securitization and Euro 
GC+  on  repos,  or  our  upcoming  project  to  test  interbanking  information  sharing 
processes based on blockchain technology; and also through our partnerships with 
many  French  universities  renowned  for  their  excellence  and  their  Masters  in 
Finance. 
And lastly, we will do more in the future to enhance the attractiveness of the Paris 
financial centre: the Government will do its part – the Prime Minister will talk about 
this  later  –;  the  Ile-de-France  region  and  the  Paris  City  too;  and  the  ACPR  will 
examine  in  a  prompt  way  all  applications  in  its  remit  coming  from  financial 
institutions that are already licensed in another EU member state. Of course, Paris 
is not the only financial centre in the euro area, but it has everything it needs to be 
one of the best. It depends on us, on all of us. Therefore, now more than ever, the 
time has come for Paris Europlace to take center stage. 
2. 
3. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
