   Fernando Restoy: The organisation of financial supervision 
Speech by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, participating in the 
presentation  of the  “Guide  to  the  Spanish  Financial  System”  (Guía  del  Sistema  Financiero 
Español), compiled by AFI (Analistas Financieros Internacionales) and sponsored by Funcas 
(Fundación de las Cajas de Ahorros), Madrid, 18 January 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good  afternoon.  I  should  like  to  thank  Emilio  Ontiveros  for  his  invitation  to  participate  in 
the  presentation  of  the  seventh  edition  of  the  Guide  to  the  Spanish  Financial  System, 
compiled  by AFI  and  sponsored by Funcas. Thank you,  also, Emilio, for  your  kind  and, as 
ever,  overly  generous  introductory  words.  The  new  version  of  the  guide  accurately  details 
the  numerous  changes  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  essentially  owing  to  the  start-up  of  the 
banking union in Europe and to the considerable reinforcement of regulatory requirements. 
As  a  result,  the  guide  firmly  stakes  its  claim  as  a  reference  that  has  proven  extraordinary 
useful  for  helping  to  understand  the  complex  mesh  of  Spanish  and  European  rules  and 
institutions that make up the regulatory and supervisory framework of our financial system. 
This presentation also affords me an excellent opportunity to reflect on the different  models 
for the institutional organisation  of financial  supervision and, in particular, on the  possibility 
of making further adjustments to the supervisory structure currently prevalent in  Spain. 
That  will  be  the  focal  point  of  my  address.  In  this  connection,  I  shall  begin  by  discussing 
how  supervisory  structures  have  developed  in  the  main  European  countries;  next,  I  shall 
refer  to  the  changes  brought  on  by  the  banking  union;  and  finally,  I  shall  conclude  with 
some comments on the Spanish supervisory model. 
the  conduct  of 
The organisation of supervision in the European countries 
Financial  supervision  pursues  numerous  aims,  encompassing  the  safeguarding  of  financial 
stability,  the  proper  functioning  of  securities  markets  and  investor  protection.  These  aims 
are  linked  to  specific  functions  such  as  oversight  of  the  solvency  position  and  liquidity  of 
banks,  insurance  companies  and  other  leveraged  institutions  whose  activity  involves  risk 
transformation;  and  monitoring  of 
institutions,  intermediaries  and  other 
participants in the markets for financial products and services. 
Recently  added  to  these  functions  are  the  so-called  macroprudential  policies,  geared  to 
the  containment  of  macro-financial  risks,  and  the  management  of  orderly  resolution 
procedures for systemically important institutions. 
The  adoption  of  a  model  of  supervisory  organisation  involves  defining  a  certain  number  of 
supervisory  agencies  and  assigning  to  each  of  them  a  specific  scope  of  action,  clearly 
defined objectives and the instruments needed to achieve them. 
Historically, the models chosen have been the result of the assessment by the authorities  of 
elements  such  as  the  structure  of  the  supervised  sector,  the  need  to  ensure  a  sufficient 
institutional  efficiency,  harnessing  the  synergies  between  different  supervisory  tasks,  or 
the need to forestall the emergence of potential conflicts between the objectives assigned  to 
a single agency. The experience accrued during periods of crisis and the changes that  have 
taken  place  in  the  financial  industry  have  conditioned  the  authorities’  preferences  over 
time. 
For  instance,  until  the  end  of  the  last  century,  the  prevalent  worldwide  model  was  one  of 
allocation of supervisory responsibilities by sector (banking, insurance and securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   markets).  This  model  typically  included  a  supervisor  –  normally  the  central  bank  –  which 
was  charged  with  ensuring  that  credit  institutions  complied  with  the  sectoral  regulations 
on  solvency  and  conduct;  a  second  supervisor,  with  similar  competencies  for  insurance 
companies;  and a  third  supervisor,  which  oversaw  the behaviour  of  securities market 
participants. 
This model responded well to an industry structure in which the various types of institutions 
primarily pursued their activity in a single sector – whether banking, insurance  or securities 
markets – and to the absence of widespread concern over the existence of possible conflicts 
between  the  surveillance  of  institutions’  solvency  soundness  and  the  monitoring of their 
behaviour with customers and investors. 
In  the mid-1990s,  this  sectoral  model  began  to  be  replaced  in  many  countries  by  a  single 
supervisory  authority  model  (following the  paradigm  of  the  reform  implemented  in  the 
United Kingdom in 1997) in which the oversight of banks, markets and insurance companies, 
in  terms  of  both  solvency  and  conduct,  was  assigned  to  a  single  supervisory  agency 
separate from the central bank. 
It  was  sought  thereby  to  acknowledge  the  growing  presence  of  institutions  operating  in 
the  different  realms  of  financial  activity,  and  the  increase  in  large  financial  conglomerates, 
which blurred the old sectoral boundaries. Moreover, the single supervisory authority  model 
enabled  the  synergies  existing  in  the  supervision  –  whether  prudential  or  conduct-  related 
–  of  different  types  of  institutions  to  be  harnessed.  Finally,  this  model  sought  to  prevent 
potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  monetary  policy,  which  remained  in  the  hands of 
the central bank, and financial supervision, which was entirely the responsibility  of a separate 
agency. 
More recently, especially in the wake of the crisis that broke in 2008, the twin peaks model 
has become more widespread in Europe. Under this model supervision is structured  around 
two  agencies:  the  first,  set  up  within  the  realm  of  the  central  bank,  is  entrusted  with  the 
prudential  oversight  of  all  institutions  capable  of  generating  systemic  risk  (be  these 
deposit-taking  institutions,  insurance  companies  or  market  intermediaries);  the  second 
agency  is  tasked  with  monitoring  the  conduct  of  all  types  of  intermediaries  and  with 
pursuing  the  protection of  investors  in  or consumers of  all financial  products  and services. 
Compared  with  the  single  supervisory  authority  model,  the  twin  peaks  model  seeks  to 
protect the system from potential conflicts of interest between the monitoring of financial 
institutions’ solvency and the oversight of rules of conduct and of market integrity. At the 
same time, with  the integration of prudential  supervision  into  the central bank, the twin 
peaks model strengthens the capacity to preserve the stability of the financial system by 
promoting the necessary coordination between the management of the banking sector’s 
liquidity (a function which corresponds to  the central bank) and the monitoring of credit 
institutions’ solvency soundness (which prudential supervision looks after). 
The  predominance  of  the  twin  peaks  model  in  the  various  national  jurisdictions  of  the  EU 
has  scarcely  been  affected  by  the  emergence  of  two  new  supervisory  functions:  the 
management of the resolution of non-viable institutions and the adoption of  macroprudential 
policies to prevent the emergence of potential macro-financial imbalances and mitigate their 
destabilising effects. 
As a general rule, the orderly resolution function has been allocated within the realm of the 
prudential supervisor. In the case of macroprudential policy, there is broad consensus that  it 
is  the  central  bank  that  should  exercise  leadership  of  macro-financial  stability  committees 
where government representatives and other supervisors may also  participate. 
Hence, in those EU  countries where the twin peaks model has been adopted (such as the 
United  Kingdom,  France,  Italy,  the  Netherlands  and  Belgium),  the  central  bank  not  only 
acts as the prudential supervisor of all types of financial institutions, but in addition,  depending 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   on the case, and by means of special committees and inserting Chinese walls  between the 
different functions, it also manages or leads resolution and macroprudential  policy measures. 
Banking union 
The development of the banking union has had an appreciable impact on the organisation  of 
supervision in Europe. 
In  particular,  national  supervisors  have  relinquished competencies to  European  authorities, 
although  solely  in  the  area  of  prudential  oversight  and  resolution  policy  for  deposit-taking 
institutions.  Competencies  relating  to  oversight  of  the  solvency  of  other  intermediaries  – 
such as  insurance companies  or  investment firms – and  of compliance  with rules  of conduct 
by  all financial  institutions  remain  under the stewardship of the national authorities. These, 
as  is  moreover  appropriately  reflected  in  the  report  presented  today,  actively contribute to 
the supervisory and resolution functions exercised  in respect of significant banking institutions 
at the European level, and they retain their jurisdiction over  less significant institutions. 
Accordingly, the relinquishing of sovereignty entailed by the banking union has not generally 
altered the organisation of financial supervision at the national level, although it  has required 
the  establishment  of  new  European  agencies  that  have  assumed  the  competencies 
transferred from national jurisdictions. 
Indeed, the organisation of the banking union adheres to a model involving a significantly 
stricter  separation  of  functions  than  that  prevailing  in  national  jurisdictions.  Thus,  two 
independent  authorities  have  been  created:  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  which 
turns on the ECB, and the Single Resolution Mechanism, which does so on the Board of 
the same name. Moreover, although the ECB’s supervisory decisions are formally adopted 
by its Governing Council – which also defines monetary policy – these are prepared and 
pre-agreed  by an independent Supervisory Board, meaning  that  the Governing  Council 
acts only under the principle of non-objection. 
Hence,  when  defining  the  institutional  model  of the  banking  union,  the  European  legislator 
has  set  great  store  by  preventing  conflicts  of  interest  between  micro-and  macroprudential 
supervision  and  monetary  policy,  on  one  hand,  and  between  supervision  and  bank 
resolution,  on  the  other.  The  aim  is  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  monetary  policy,  geared  to 
maintaining  price  stability,  being  tainted  by  considerations  relating  to  financial  stability, 
and  to  separate  as  far  as  possible  the  policies  aimed  at  preventing  solvency  crises,  which 
are  pursued  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  from  those  geared  to  managing  such 
crises, which are the remit of the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
The  appropriate 
the  principle  of  separation, 
nevertheless  requires  the  intense  cooperation  and  coordination  of  the  different  authorities 
involved. 
In  the  case  of  the  interaction  between  monetary  and  prudential  policies,  the  necessary 
cooperation  arises  from  the  complementarity,  at  least  in  the  medium  term,  between 
macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  stability  and,  above  all,  from  the  potential  impact  of 
the  instruments  available  in  one  area  on  the  objective  pursued  in  the  other.  Consider,  for 
instance, the influence that the level of interest rates, which is decided by the central bank, 
has  on  variables  so  closely  related  to  financial  stability  as  the  desire  of  banks  and  other 
agents to  assume risk, or changes in financial  asset  prices.  Alternatively,  bear  in mind the 
effect of the bank prudential requirements on the supply of credit for financing the  economy 
and, therefore, on activity and prices. Therefore, given the evident  interaction  between  the 
realms  of  monetary  policy  and  of  prudential  policy,  it  is  essential  that  the  principle  of 
separation between them should be applied with the appropriate measures of  flexibility and 
pragmatism. 
In  the  case  of  the  relationship  between  prudential  oversight  and  resolution  measures,  the 
need  for  coordination  is  even  more  marked.  The  Regulation  governing  the  creation  of  the 
this  model,  based  on 
functioning  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Single  Resolution  Mechanism  confers  on  the  latter  not  only  the  management  of  orderly 
resolution processes for ailing institutions, but also the prerogative to initiate the process  by 
declaring an institution non-viable (a competence it shares with the supervisor) and, to  this 
end,  it  empowers  it  to  gather  all  the  information  it  needs  and  to  conduct  its  own 
inspections. That is to  say, without  appropriate coordination, there  is  a risk that  vulnerable 
institutions – which are naturally those that require more attention by the prudential  supervisor 
–  may  be  subjected  to  the  dual  scrutiny  of  the  two  agencies,  and  that  discrepancies and 
frictions may emerge that may complicate the task of maintaining  financial  stability. 
Fortunately, so far, there is patent goodwill to reach an understanding between the European 
authorities  responsible  for  the  Single  Resolution  and  Supervision  Mechanisms,  which  will 
shortly take the form of a memorandum of understanding between the two that  will contribute 
to attaining the required coordination. 
is  still 
lacking  a  macroprudential  committee  or 
What has still to be done in Spain? 
The institutional  framework  of supervision  in  Spain  has  evolved  so  as  to  adapt  to  the new 
European and global regulatory framework, and to the establishment of the banking union. 
That said, the task is not yet complete. 
In  respect  of  macroprudential  policies,  the  Banco  de  España  has,  as  a  result  of  the  new 
regulations  on  capital  requirements,  assumed 
the  competencies  over  the  potential 
activation  of  macroprudential  instruments  that  involve  actions  related  to  credit  institutions. 
Indeed, last December, the central bank adopted the first decisions in this respect  entailing 
the  identification  of  institutions  considered  systemic  at  the  domestic  level,  the  determining 
of  the  additional  regulatory  capital  required  of  each  of  them  and  the  setting  of 
the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  envisaged  under  the  regulations.  Given  the  current  cyclical 
position of  the  Spanish  economy  following  the  sharp  contraction  in GDP  and  credit levels 
since 2008, the buffer was initially set at a level equal to zero. 
However,  Spain 
forum,  on  which 
government  authorities  and  financial  supervisors  are  represented,  that  can  assess  macro- 
financial  conditions  from  a  broad  perspective  and  that  has  the  capacity  to  formulate 
recommendations  on  public  policies  that  may  affect  financial  stability.  Such  committees 
have been set up in practically all EU Member States, normally under the leadership of the 
central bank, following the recommendation made by the European Systemic Risk Board,  on 
which all EU regulatory and supervisory authorities and central banks are represented. 
With  regard  to  resolution  functions,  Spain  has  already  adapted  to  European  regulatory 
requirements.  In  this  connection  it  has  adopted  a  structure  in  which  the  resolution 
preparation  and  planning  tasks  are  assigned  to  the  sectoral  supervisors  [the  Banco  de 
España  for  banks  and  the  CNMV  (National  Securities  Market  Commission)  for  investment 
firms], and those relating to the implementation of resolution measures are assigned to the 
FROB (Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector). As you know, the FROB is 
also responsible for the management and ultimate divestment of the stakes the State holds 
in the capital of banks subject to restructuring plans as a result of State aid granted  during 
the crisis. 
These  arrangements  are  admittedly  more  complex  than  those  adopted  in  most  Member 
States, which have placed all resolution functions – preventive and executive alike – under 
the remit of the national prudential supervisor. In Spain, coordination between the resolution 
authorities and between these and the prudential supervisor is so far functioning  smoothly. In 
any  event,  the  preamble  to  Law  11/2015  establishes  that  these  arrangements  for  the 
allocation of functions should be assessed once – within two years – the  implementation of 
the restructuring  plans currently under way has been completed, in light  of the experience 
acquired, with a view to achieving greater efficiency. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   investment 
(such  as 
companies),  and 
fund  management 
All told, as regards the organisation of the traditional supervisory functions, namely  solvency, 
conduct  and  investor  protection,  Spain  retains  a  sectoral  approach  which,  as  indicated 
earlier, was abandoned some time back by our peers. 
Hence,  the  Banco  de  España  retains  supervisory  competencies  for  the  solvency  of  credit 
institutions  and  also  for  their  conduct,  as  regards  the  marketing  and  selling  of  loan  and 
deposit  products.  The  CNMV,  meanwhile,  in  addition  to overseeing the  functioning of 
markets, supervises the solvency and conduct of investment firms and other capital  market 
intermediaries 
the 
commercialization  of  financial  products  classified  as  securities.  Finally,  the  Directorate 
General for Insurance and Pension Funds oversees the solvency and conduct of companies 
in  the  insurance  sector, along  with  the operations of  pension funds  and their  management 
companies. These authorities also manage enquiries and claims services in  their respective 
areas and are empowered to issue reports on disputes between the  different  institutions  and 
their  customers,  although,  as  you  know,  such  reports  are  not  binding. 
This sectoral supervisory model, which – I insist – is an oddity in the European arena, does 
not  take  on  board  the  key  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  as  regards  the  most  suitable 
means  of preventing potential conflicts of interest and of ensuring that the synergies  existing 
between  the  different  oversight  functions  are  harnessed.  Moreover,  it  establishes  different 
supervisory regimes – entailing  investor  protection arrangements  that are  not uniform –  as 
regards  the  marketing  and  selling  of  financial  products,  based  on  categories  that classify 
them, sometimes somewhat artificially, as a  security, banking product  or  insurance  product. 
Finally,  the  institutional  framework  in  place  in  Spain  has  always  kept  a  segment  of  the 
financial  system  –  that  comprising  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  –  under  the 
surveillance of an agency reporting directly to the Government of the day, contrary to what  is 
predicated  by  supervisory  standards  and  best  international  practices.  The  situation  is 
somewhat similar regarding audit firms, which also play a key role in the proper functioning 
of  the  financial  system  and  capital  markets,  and  whose  supervision  has,  historically,  also 
been  exercised  by  an  agency  that  is  not  independent  from  the  Government. 
The  need  to  modernise  the  organisation  of  supervision,  in  order  to  adjust  it  to  the  twin 
peaks model prevailing in Europe, was at that time widely defended by the public authorities. 
For  example,  for  the  2008  general  elections,  the  two  main  political  parties  advocated in 
their  respective  electoral  programmes  very  similar  plans  to  reform  the  supervisory  model 
along  the  lines  indicated  above.  Under  these  plans,  competencies  in  respect  of  financial 
stability  and  the  prudential  oversight  of  all  types  of  financial  intermediaries  (banks, 
investment  firms  and  insurance  companies)  would  be  under the roof  of a single authority, 
integrated into the Banco  de España;  and responsibility for the  oversight of markets and the 
supervision of the conduct of financial intermediaries would  be assigned to a second agency 
established drawing on the current CNMV. 
The outbreak of the financial  crisis shortly afterwards and the need to manage the delicate 
situation  of  the  banking  system,  up  until  very  recently,  advised  against  implementing  at 
that  time  an  institutional  reform  which,  undoubtedly,  would  have  involved  a  considerable 
organisational challenge. 
At  present,  following  the  completion  of  the  intense  process  of  restructuring  and  reform  of 
the  banking  system,  the  circumstances  for  resuming  reflection  on  an  ambitious  reform  of 
the  institutional  model  for  supervision  are  admittedly  more  favourable.  I  thus  believe  it 
would  be  worth  considering  again  plans  to  reform  the  supervisory  framework,  taking  as  a 
reference, as was envisaged in 2008, the twin peaks model prevailing in Europe. 
In any event, the new  supervisory model should be adjusted to  accommodate, as it  has in 
other  countries,  the  setting  up  of  a  macroprudential  committee  (on  which  government 
authorities and supervisors would sit) coordinated by the Banco de España. Further, so as  to 
reinforce  the  investor  protection  function,  we  should  also  explore 
the  possibility  of 
incorporating  into  the  new  framework  a  reinforced  system  for  resolving  conflicts  between 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   financial institutions and their customers – the current claims systems – that would provide 
for the issuing of binding rulings for the institutions concerned. 
Final remarks 
Ultimately and unquestionably, notable steps have been taken to adjust the organisation of 
financial  supervision  in  Spain  to  the  new  demands  of  the  regulatory  and  institutional 
environment in Europe. 
That said, drawing on the reforms successfully applied in other jurisdictions akin  to ours, it 
would  be  worth  reflecting  on  additional  changes 
the 
preservation  of  financial  stability,  suitably  protecting  investors  in  and  users  of  all  types  of 
financial services, ensuring the proper functioning of markets and providing for the  effective 
management  of  financial  crises  with  the  minimum  possible  cost  to  taxpayers.  In 
that 
connection, the right choice must be made in assigning specific objectives and  instruments 
to  the  different  agencies  so  that  potential  conflicts  of  interest  may  be  mitigated  while 
maintaining  an  appropriate  level  of  institutional  efficiency  and  ensuring  the  functional  and 
economic independence of the supervisory  bodies.  I believe that  the  costly  financial  crisis 
we  have  just  experienced  is  the  best  possible  motivation  for  undertaking this reform when 
circumstances so allow it. 
that  contribute  to 
facilitating 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
