   François Villeroy de Galhau: What can monetary policy do? 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the House of 
Finance Days of Paris-Dauphine University, Paris, 14 March 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  first  edition  of  the  House  of  Finance 
Days  of  Paris-Dauphine  University.  In  order  to  “[imagine]  the  finance  of  tomorrow”  –  to 
quote  the  theme  of  this  event  –  it  is  essential  to  understand  all  facets,  and  in  particular 
to be able to decipher the prevailing environment. Through its three main tasks, the Banque 
de France plays a key role as, firstly, it  implements  monetary  strategy,  as  a  member  of 
the  Eurosystem  alongside  the  European  Central  Bank  in  Frankfurt;  secondly,  it  ensures 
financial  stability,  by  supervising  the  banks,  insurance  firms  and,  more  generally,  the 
financial  system;  and,  lastly,  it  provides  an  economic  service  to  households  and 
SMEs/VSEs. 
 
Today I will focus on the monetary policy that we conduct in the framework of the Eurosystem. 
Monetary  policy  has  long  been  considered  a  technical  or  even  an  austere  subject.  But, 
since 2008, it has been far more widely discussed: central banks in different countries have 
played  a  major  role,  and  a  role  largely  hailed  as  positive,  in  exiting  the  crisis.  Today, 
however,  their  actions  to  address  the  persistence  of  very  low  inflation  are  subject  to 
debate.  I  would  first  like  to  talk  about  our  objective,  then  our  instruments  and  their 
effectiveness. 
First, the question of the objectives. 
This  question,  which  really  covers  two  questions,  has  generated  much  thought  and 
debate. Indeed, central banks examine their actions, with a lot more modesty  than is often 
credited: 
1. 
2. 
What is the objective, the “mandate”, of the central bank? 
What are, with regard to this objective, the current challenges? 
1) Let us start by the mandate. 
a)  In the United States, the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of price stability  and  full 
employment.  In  the  euro  area,  under  the  Maastricht  Treaty  –  approved  democratically in 
each country, and in France by referendum in September 1992–  the  objectives  are  clearly 
set  out  in  a  hierarchical  order:  the Eurosystem is dedicated to price stability,  which  is 
its primary objective;  ensuring  a  high  level  of  employment  and  sustainable  growth  is 
secondary  to  its  price  stability  objective.  This  difference  has  often  been  discussed;  with 
hindsight,  it  does  not seem that important. When the ECB fights too low inflation, this also 
contributes  to  supporting  activity.  And  among  the  indicators  that  we  monitor,  the  output 
gap-  the  difference  between the  actual  output  of  an  economy  and  its  potential  output,  still 
negative in France and the euro area – is a key element. 
b) In concrete terms, our primary objective – maintaining price stability – means  achieving 
inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Most  central  banks  in 
advanced economies share this medium-term 2% objective, including the United States and 
Japan. This has been the ECB’s objective since  2003, when it was proposed by the German 
former chief  economist,  Otmar  Issing.  It  may  appear  paradoxical  that  price  stability  is 
not  zero,  but  there  are  good  reasons  for  this.  First,  the  “Boskin effect”,  named  after  the 
US  commission  that  showed  in  1996  that  the  price  indices  used  to  measure  inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   tended  to  overstate  inflation,  by  underestimating  the  substitution  towards  products  whose 
prices  increase  less  quickly,  and  product  innovation.  Therefore,  the  inflation  objective  can 
never be too strictly observed since it is necessary to keep enough  leeway  to  ensure  that 
the  economy  doesn’t  sink  into  deflation  in  the  event  of  negative  shocks.  Also,  low 
inflation  facilitates  structural  adjustments  in  an  economy  where  there  are  downward 
nominal  rigidities  of  certain  prices,  in particular wages. 
c) In the euro area, however, like in most advanced economies, inflation remains too low, 
despite the historically low interest rates: the harmonised index  of  consumer   prices   (HICP)  
indeed   returned   to   negative   territory,   standing  at  -0.2%  in  February  2016,  and 
underlying  inflation,  i.e.  excluding  energy  and  food,  is  only  0.7%.  Does  this  mean  the 
Eurosystem  can  no  longer  achieve  its  price  stability  mandate,  or  will  have  to  change 
its  objective?  I  don’t  think  so.  Current  challenges  do  not  call  into  question  our  mandate, 
but  they  change  the  way  in  which  we  fulfil  it.  For  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy,  this 
objective  must  be  maintained:  this  2%  target  is  a  medium-term  “anchor”,  at  a  time  when 
there is  so much volatility and short-termism affecting the economy. 
2) What are, with regard to this objective, the challenges central banks are facing? 
Today, the Eurosystem is faced with two main challenges: deflationary pressures on the one 
hand, and the risk of an unanchoring of expectations, on the other.  
a) First, a certain number of factors are currently contributing to low inflation. Primarily, 
the  euro  area  is  faced  with  deflationary  pressures  associated  with  a  series  of  economic 
shocks:  firstly,  the  fall  in  oil  prices,  from  over  EUR 80  per  barrel  in  mid-2014  to  EUR 34 
in  early  March  2016,  or  more  than  2.5  times  lower,  as  well  as  the  decline  in  commodity 
prices;  secondly,  the  slowdown  in  growth in emerging economies and chiefly China; and, 
lastly,  inadequate  growth  in  the  euro  area  with  persistently  high  unemployment,  which 
curbs  wage  rises and weakens demand and price growth. Moreover, structural factors, such 
as  the  ageing  population,  are  likely  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  “natural”  interest 
rate, a term coined by the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell over a century ago.  This  rate 
can  be  defined  as  the  interest  rate  consistent  with  the  full  employment  of  the  factors  of 
production.  In  this  case,  in  order  to  achieve  the  right  balance  between  savings  and 
investment, markets rates must come down too. 
In normal times, central banks cut their key rates, and this passes through to the yield curve. 
However,  in  order  to  deal  with  the  financial  crisis, the  ECB  like  other  central  banks  have 
brought  their  key  interest  rates  to  very  low  levels,  around  zero. This means that our 
traditional monetary policy tools had to  be  supplemented  by  other  instruments,  known  as 
non-standard  instruments, in order  to reach our prices stability objective. I will return to this 
point later. 
b) The second challenge, which stems from the first, is the risk of an unanchoring of 
expectations, which would make it harder for us to achieve our  2% target again. Indeed, if 
inflation stayed too low for too long, economic agents may  revise  downwards  their  inflation 
expectations,  which  would  create  second  round  effects.  Lower  inflation  expectations 
influence economic agents’ price- and wage-setting behaviour,  which in turn keeps  inflation 
low.  It can  even  raise the  risk of deflation, defined as a cumulative process of falling prices, 
including  those  of  assets,  or  even  wages  and  production,  as  the  world  economy 
experienced  in  the  1930s  or  Japan  partially  underwent  in  the  1990s.  Such  deflationary 
dynamics  are  not  at  play  today;  but  that  is  why  our  inflation  target  is  symmetrical.  We 
consider too low inflation to be just as costly as too high inflation. And, therefore,  it is more 
risky  for  central  banks  to  act  too  late  than  too  early.  Since  the  start  of  the year, we have 
observed  that  market-based  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  fallen.  Nevertheless, 
the latest forecasts provided by the ECB last Thursday  continue  to  point  to  a  gradual  rise 
in  inflation  over  the  coming  years:  0.1%  in  2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 II. 
  This  brings me to  my  second  point:  how  effective  are  our  non-standard 
measures? 
1)  Since  the  summer  of 2014, we have  implemented  a  series  of  monetary policy 
measures,  dubbed  “non-standard”,  to  complement  cuts  to  key  interest  rates, 
which  now  stand  at  0.00%  for  main  refinancing  operations  and-0.40%  for  the 
deposit facility. These measures include:  
2)  Targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  conditional  on  the  provision  of  bank 
lending to the real economy. The new series of TLTROs that we decided  to  launch 
on  10  March  -  TLTRO  2  -  will  allow  banks  to  borrow  at highly favourable rates, 
depending on the amount of new credit they provide;  
3)  Purchases  of  private  and  public  sector  securities,  to  further  ease  monetary  and 
financial conditions in the euro area. The Eurosystem buys asset-backed  securities, 
covered  bonds  and  investment  grade  bonds  issued  by  euro  area  sovereigns, 
agencies and institutions. On 10 March we decided to expand this programme further 
by  including  corporate  bonds  among  eligible  assets,  and increasing   the   amount   
of   monthly   purchases   to   EUR 80   billion   from EUR 60 billion previously; 
4)   Indications on the future path of key interest rates – or “forward guidance” – in  order 
to  influence  agents’  expectations.  On  10  March,  we  gave  the  following  indications: 
“key  ECB  interest  rates  [will]  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended 
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset  purchases”, which means 
extending well beyond March 2017. 
Turning  now  to  the  comprehensive  package  that  has  just  been  introduced,  it  sends out 
two clear messages: 
a) 
Our  decisions  are guided  by  our mandate  which is to bring  inflation  back  towards 
our  target  of  2%  over  the  medium  term.  We  are  firmly  set  on  this  objective,  and  have  a 
broad  range of  instruments with  which to  achieve  it.  In  addition  to  negative  interest  rates, 
which  naturally  have  their  limits,  we  are  also  acting  both  on  bank  lending  –  via  credit  
easing  with  the  new  TLTRO  –  and  on  market  financing  -  via  the  extended  QE  asset 
purchase  programme  –  and  are  guaranteeing  that  we  shall  continue  to  do  so  for  as  long 
as necessary - via forward guidance. 
b) 
Our  priority  is  to  promote  the  financing  of  the  real  economy.  The  goal  of TLTRO 
2  is  not,  as  some  have  claimed,  to  offset  the  impact  of  negative  rates on banks. It is to 
encourage banks to lend to corporations, SMEs and  households  alike;  similarly,  extending 
the  asset  purchase  programme  to  corporate  bonds  will  be  of  particular  benefit  to  large 
French corporations. In other  words,  we  are  securing  the  provision  of  credit  to  businesses 
and  households, and protecting it from tensions linked to market volatility. 
2)  These  non-standard  measures  have  been  effective.   
They  have  translated  into  a  substantial  easing  in  borrowing  conditions  for  euro  area 
companies. Since June  2014,  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  businesses  has  fallen  by  80  basis 
points.  Without  non-standard  measures,  we  estimate  that  we  would  have  had  to  lower 
key  rates  by  around  100  basis  points  in  June  2014  to  achieve  a  similar  effect  on  bank 
interest  rates.  This  has  also  helped  to  stimulate  lending  to  the  real  economy:  in  the  euro 
area,  outstanding  loans to  businesses  have gone  from  a contraction of -2.5% in June 2014 
to growth of 0.6% in January 2016. The impact  is  even  more  marked  in  France,  where 
outstanding  business  lending  grew  by  4.8%  year-on-year  in  the  first  month  of  2016 -  the 
highest pace of growth in the euro area and, what’s more, with the lowest rates of interest. 
Convergent  estimates  from  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  indicate  that,  all  other  things 
being  equal,  the  measures  introduced  since  June  2014  should  add  1  percentage  point  to 
inflation over the period 2015-2017, with a similar impact on growth. In France,  they  helped 
to  boost  2015  growth  by  0.3  percentage  point,  and  estimates  from  INSEE  even  put  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   impact  slightly  higher  at  +0.4  pp.  That  represents  about  80,000  additional  jobs  for  the 
economy  -  although  only  structural  reforms  can  generate  lasting  gains  for  a  country’s 
growth and employment. To conclude on this estimate of effectiveness, the IMF – regarded 
as  an  objective  judge  of  the  relevance  of  economic  policies  –  was  unequivocal  in  its 
assessment  at  the  last  G20  meeting  in  Shanghai  at the  end of  February,  saying,  “The  
ECB’s asset  purchase  programme  has  supported  the  recovery  by  improving  confidence 
and  financial conditions [and] monetary policy should remain accommodative”. 
 
3)  What  about  the  risks?   
I  talked  earlier  about  the  risks  of  doing  nothing:  we  need to take action in order to bring 
inflation  back  up  towards  2%.  That  said,  we  also  need  to  keep  a  close  eye  out  for  any 
possible  negative side-effects of our monetary policy, notably for financial stability. We 
are actively monitoring the  financial  cycle,  including  in  France  where  the  task  falls  to  the 
Haut  Conseil  de  Stabilité Financière (High Council for Financial Stability), set up in 2013: I 
will  be  taking part  in  its  8th  meeting at  the  Finance  Ministry  tomorrow. For the  time  being, 
there  are  no  signs  of  any  bubbles  forming  in  the  main  financing  markets:  on  the  whole, 
developments  in  the  equity  markets  appear  in  line  with  corporate  profit  forecasts,  while 
evolutions  in  bond  yields  also  seem  consistent  with  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  growth. 
Nor are there any signs of excessive credit growth in the financial system. Nevertheless, we 
remain vigilant over all aspects of the current  macroeconomic and financial environment. In 
the last HCSF communiqué in  December 2015, for example, we indicated, on the subject of 
the property market,  that  “the  price  adjustment  in  the  residential  market  since  2012 
appears  appropriate,  whereas  commercial  real  estate  prices  remain  high”.  We  are  ready, 
when  needed,  to take  action  with  macroprudential  measures,  to  prevent  and  mitigate  any 
systemic risks that might arise. 
Monetary policy is thus doing a great deal to counter weak  inflation and support  economic 
activity  –  it  is  our  duty  and  we  will  continue  to  do  so  with  steadfast  resolve: we  are 
consistent in our objective, ready to act with the right instruments, and  alert  to  any  possible 
risks. However, I would also like to stress that “monetary policy cannot be the only game 
in  town”.  Other  economic  policies  also  have  a  role  to  play.  This  is  precisely  what  the 
members of the G20 reiterated  in Shanghai on 27 February: “Monetary policies will continue 
to  support  economic  activity  and  ensure  price  stability,  consistent  with  central  banks’ 
mandates,  but  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  lead  to  balanced  growth”.  Where  there  is 
sufficient  margin to do so, fiscal policy must support demand – this is not currently the case 
in  France,  but  it  is  in  other  countries  in  Europe.  Moreover,  structural  reforms  remain 
absolutely  vital  in  France,  to  encourage  creations  of  jobs  and  of  businesses  and  thus 
bring the economy back to full potential. Our country can’t wait any longer; its unemployed, 
its  young  people  –  such  as  yourselves  –  can’t  wait  any  longer.  At  European  level,  we  
need  to  move  finally  towards  a  true economic  union,  in  addition  to  the  monetary  union 
embodied  in the  Eurosystem. 
Only  by  optimising  the  governance  of  the  euro  area  can  we  optimise  growth.  The  current 
extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  creates  the  ideal  conditions  for  carrying 
out  much-needed  reforms. It should  not  be  used  instead as an excuse for putting them off: 
Europe and France urgently need to make the  most of this opportunity, right now. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
