 Barry Whiteside: The Fiji economy 
  Speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the DFK Australia New 
Zealand Annual Partners Conference, Suva, 26 May 2016. 
 The Chairman, DFK Australia New Zealand, Mr Stephen Bushell 
Vice President DFK Asia Pacific, Mr Navin Patel  
Delegates 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula vinaka and warm greetings to you all! It is my pleasure this morning to share with you 
some recent developments and our outlook for the Fiji economy. 
But before I do so, I would like to especially thank you for choosing our beautiful country as 
the venue for your annual meeting! You are part of a growing MICE market, the niche tourism 
speak for “Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events”, which never ceases to amaze me 
in terms of its growth. What could be better than mixing a little business with a lot of fun and 
relaxation!  
I have noted from your program that you have set aside some down- time to sample what we 
have to offer, which is excellent! If you want your golf game to be really challenged then you 
should try the Natadola course! I assure you that you would need to travel far to find better 
scenery. Whatever you do, spend as much as you can!! 
That’s my little spiel for tourism, now to the business at hand. 
Introduction 
Every month the Reserve Bank reviews the performance and prospects of the Fiji economy to 
assess what impact recent developments would have on our key monetary policy objectives 
of maintaining low inflation and adequate foreign reserves. These developments may or may 
not  warrant  changes  in  policy  depending  on  our  outlook  for  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  at  the time. Given  Fiji’s  small  size  and associated  vulnerabilities  as  a  small  island 
developing  state,  as  well  as  its  dependence  on  the  world  economy1,  our  economic 
performance is impacted by developments both domestically and globally, particularly in our 
major trading partner economies. 
Our latest assessments, as you would expect, have considered the economic impacts from 
the recent natural disasters, the consequential reconstruction and rebuilding activities post-
disaster, as well as the ongoing slowdown in the global economy. External risks to our growth 
outlook are largely associated with a bumpy transition in China’s economy, financial market 
turbulence  and  sharp  movements  in  asset  and  commodity  prices  which,  if  realized,  would 
impact us mainly indirectly through our trading partners, including Australia and New Zealand.  
Domestic  risks  are  mostly  related  to  our  susceptibility  to  natural  catastrophes  and  climate 
change  which,  apart  from  damaging  infrastructure  and  basic  utilities  and  eroding  years  of 
development  in  a  few  hours,  can  significantly  affect  domestic  production,  exports  and  our 
services and tourism sector.  
Nevertheless, a notable upside risk to our growth outlook is the still relatively low international 
fuel prices which have resulted in windfall gains for Fiji through lower import costs and lower 
                                                
1   Total gross trade as share of GDP = 80% (average for 2012–14) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   inflation. This  is  particularly  pertinent  when  you  consider  mineral  fuels  make  up  almost  30 
percent of our total imports bill. 
Recent developments in the Fiji economy 
Ladies and gentlemen, despite the sizeable devastation from the category 5 Tropical Cyclone 
(TC) Winston packing winds in excess of 300 kmph in February and the floods associated with 
TC Zena in April, I am pleased to say that the Fiji economy is still poised to grow this year, by 
2.4 percent, our seventh straight year of growth (something which we have not enjoyed since 
the early 1970’s). This growth reflects robust activity in our tourism-related industries, including 
the  transport,  wholesale,  retail,  accommodation  &  food  services  industries,  which  were 
relatively unscathed by TC Winston. Moreover, this growth also assumes a strong expansion 
in the construction sector due to post cyclone reconstruction activity, which will also boost retail 
activity.  
However, on the downside, a significant decline is expected in agricultural output this year, 
particularly for sugar, which had earlier also been impacted by El-Nino drought conditions. 
Furthermore, the extreme devastation to many household dwellings and livelihoods especially 
in the maritime areas, damage to schools and health facilities, water supply and power supply 
disruptions which to date have not been fully restored, have exacerbated the situation. 
Nevertheless,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  quick  response  and  immediate  and  tremendous 
assistance by our development partners – including Australia and New Zealand, the business 
community  and  family  members  and  friends  of  Fiji  both  locally  and  abroad,  are  making  a 
tremendous difference in helping our people get back on their feet through inflows of grants-
in-aid and kind. Government efforts were nothing short of swift in facilitating access to the worst 
affected areas and also in implementing measures to assist financially stricken businesses and 
households.  Some  of  these  initiatives  include  the  “Help  for  Homes”  and  “Adopt  a  School” 
campaigns. We know that the many military and civilian personnel from your countries who 
came in immediately after TC Winston played a huge role in turning the lives of many of our 
people around and indeed they have made friends for life here. 
Financial institutions also came on board to assist in the recovery efforts through the special 
member withdrawals from the Fiji National Provident Fund and special loan arrangements and 
payment holidays offered by banks and other financial institutions. The Reserve Bank also 
contributed  through  its  natural  disaster  and  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME) 
funding facilities.  
These measures are expected to benefit growth this year through higher consumption and 
investment by businesses and government, although a pick-up in imports associated with the 
higher domestic demand is likely to dent our foreign reserves a little.  
Our official reserves are currently around $2.0 billion, enough to pay for 5.6 months of retained 
imports, a level which is considered comfortable. While inflation spiked in April to 3.8 percent 
on the back of price hikes in agricultural market items following the cyclones, this effect will be 
temporary, as we expect inflation to remain subdued in the near term due to the low world 
commodity prices. End of year forecasts for both these key macro-indicators (for which the 
Reserve Bank is responsible) remain favorable at this time.  
The  medium  term  outlook  for  the  Fiji  economy  is  also  expected  to  remain  positive, 
notwithstanding any further adverse shocks, with higher growth forecasts of 3.6 percent and 
3.2 percent for 2017 and 2018, respectively. The major impetus for future growth is expected 
to result from ongoing rebuilding efforts (similar, but on a smaller scale to what New Zealand 
has  experienced  with  the  Christchurch  rebuild),  as  well  as  the  faster  pace  of  government 
capital spending and strong tourist numbers and remittance inflows.   
Ladies and gentlemen, Government has in recent years been targeting its capital share of total 
spending at around 40 percent, which is a notable increase from just 28 percent in 2013 and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   well above the levels of a decade ago. The benefits of this higher capital spending are now 
clearly seen in our improved roads and other infrastructure.  
Tourism receipts and inward remittances, our number one and number two foreign exchange 
earners at $1.5 billion and $492 million respectively in 2015 (both new records) are expected 
to continue their positive growth trajectory.  
As I alluded to in my opening, the Tourism sector is, and has been, key to our overall economic 
performance for many years now and I thought I should say a little more about the industry. It 
makes  up  around  34  percent  of GDP  and contributes  significantly  to  employment. In  2015 
visitor arrivals totaled a record 754,835 with Australians and New Zealanders accounting for 
49 and 18 percent respectively. Despite the recent visits by TCs Winston and Zena, visitor 
arrivals in the first four months of this year were still up by 6.8 percent on the same period last 
year, a testimony to the untiring efforts of the industry and all those who support it. Efforts are 
continually  being  made  to  grow  our  share  of  visitors.  Niche  markets  targeted  now  include 
MICE,  weddings,  sports,  eco  and  adrenaline  (surfing,  sky  diving,  shark diving,  white  water 
rafting etc) tourism. Plans are also in the pipeline to attract investors in medical “tourism” and 
offshoot segments such as retirement villages. So people will hopefully soon be able to plan 
their medical operations and cosmetic surgery with a recuperation package out in the islands!  
While Australia and New Zealand epitomize the importance of short haul travel, our national 
airline, Fiji Airways, has been steadily increasing its footprint into the longer haul markets like 
Hong Kong/China, the USA west coast and just last month to Singapore. In June, they will 
open with twice weekly flights into San Francisco to add to the daily Los Angeles flights. The 
airline has invested in four brand new Airbus 330’s in what has been an effective and efficient 
transition to grow our market. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  monetary,  financial  and  fiscal  policies  will  continue  to  target 
macroeconomic and financial stability while further structural reforms by the Government and 
its  agencies  are  set  to  raise  potential  growth  and  make  it  more  inclusive.  Specifically,  the 
Reserve Bank’s own policies aim at ensuring a low interest rate environment that is conducive 
for private investment, maintaining a strong and sound financial system and supporting the 
development of key sectors in the economy that may need a little assistance. One such sector 
is the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.  
In support of the positive growth in the economy over the past 6 years, (growth which averaged 
above  3.5  percent  over this  period), the  Reserve  Bank  has  maintained its  overnight  policy 
interest rate at 0.5 percent. Consistent with this, lending rates of banks have remained low 
while  money  and  credit  conditions  have  stayed  favorable.  This  accommodative  monetary 
policy stance has resulted in the recovery in credit to the private sector. Average growth in 
private sector credit increased from a little under 4 percent in 2011 to over 14 percent in 2015, 
and was a little above 13 percent for the first 4 months of this year. Expansion in bank lending 
continues to reflect the robust consumption and strong investment in the economy. Cumulative 
data for the first 4 months, showed an average growth in new lending by banks of above 60 
percent  over  the  last  5  years.  In  fact,  this  masks  much  higher  3-digit  growth  rates  in  both 
consumption  and  investment  related  lending  especially  to  the  wholesale  &  retail,  private 
individuals, real estate and building and construction sectors. 
Aggregate demand in Fiji, as noted in the recent trends in the various partial indicators for 
consumption and investment, remain positive. On the consumption side, vehicle registrations 
continued to exhibit strength through the March quarter. Improved incomes from low taxes, 
government financial  support  and remittance  inflows  from  Fijians  abroad  continue  to  boost 
consumer spending. Prospects for consumption growth also remain encouraging. The latest 
RBF Retail Sales survey showed positive sentiments by retailers for higher sales expected in 
2016. This  is  supported  by  the  number  of  newly  registered  members  with  the  Fiji  National 
Provident Fund and the number of job advertisements which have continued to grow.  
In  terms  of  investment  and  in  line  with  the  strong  construction  activity  expected  this  year, 
domestic cement sales are recording double digit growth. Investment imports are forecast to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   pick up as the domestic economy strengthens and the reconstruction efforts post-cyclones 
continue.  The  timely  implementation  of  both  public  and  private  sector  projects  is  critical  to 
raising our investment levels and strengthening the platform for further growth. Foreign direct 
investment totaled just over $700 million in 2015 and is anticipated to rise further this year. In 
the first four months to April new project registrations with Investment Fiji from abroad have 
risen 194 percent in value terms, the bulk being in the tourism and services sectors. In regard 
to investment, I must admit that in the past Fiji had been hit with concerns on the ease of doing 
business here. A lot of this was to do with excess red tape and the multiple approvals required 
from multiple authorities, which inevitably took time. While we haven’t qute got there yet, it is 
pleasing to note the recent efforts by Government and the relevant authorities to address the 
issues and turn this around. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the strength and soundness of our financial institutions and markets is 
an  important  ingredient  for  growth  in  the  economy.  As  such,  our  Reserve  Bank  policies 
continue to aim at further developing the financial sector to ensure the effective intermediation 
of  funds  towards  growing  priority  sectors  while  maintaining  financial  stability.  The  latest 
quarterly assessment by the Reserve Bank showed the overall condition of banks trading in 
Fiji remains satisfactory as capital and liquidity positions along with earnings and asset quality 
remain acceptable. This is critical given the reliance on bank financing by domestic borrowers.  
Moreover, the financial sector continues to grow with the entry of Bred Bank (a subsidiary of 
Banque Populaire, France’s 2nd largest bank) in 2012, the licensing of Kontiki Finance Limited 
in 2015, and the recent listing of Vision Investments Limited (VIL) on our South Pacific Stock 
Exchange. In  particular,  Vision’s  entry  into the stock  market  last  February  notably  boosted 
market  capitalization  and  augurs  well  for  improved  optimism  and  participation  by  potential 
investors. We now have 17 companies listed on the SPSE with market capitalization of just 
over  $1  billion.  A  key  reform  in  the  pipeline  is  the  implementation  of  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Plan 2016-25 which will bring together all key stakeholders to further develop 
and deepen the sector.  
Closing 
Ladies and gentlemen, just a few final comments before I close. 
In  our  role,  the  Reserve  Bank  coordinates  closely  with  other  stakeholders  including  the 
Government,  its  agencies  and  the  private  sector,  to  ensure  that  macroeconomic  policy 
considerations  are  consistent  and  aim  towards  achieving  macroeconomic  stability  and 
inclusive growth. At the same time we will ensure that our financial sector remains strong and 
stable.  
Fiji’s favorable macroeconomic performance in recent years has bode well for Fiji’s country 
rating  by  both  Standard  &  Poors  and  Moody’s,  which  recently  affirmed  a  “B+”  and  stable 
outlook and a “B1” and positive outlook, respectively.  
I thank you for listening and wish you the very best for the remainder of your annual conference 
and encourage you to get out in the sun and see what Fiji has to offer. 
Vinaka vaka-levu. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
