   Benoît Cœuré: The importance of independent fiscal councils 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the workshop on “Fiscal councils, central banks and sound public finances”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 27 January 2016. 
 Summary 
Setting the stage for a workshop at the ECB on fiscal councils, central banks and sound public 
finances, Benoît Cœuré underlines in his opening remarks that sound public finances in all 
euro area member countries is a precondition for completing Economic and Monetary Union. 
Even if these days “there is no appetite for moving towards a ‘United States of Europe’”, he 
says, “there is a common understanding” that euro area member countries need to further 
integrate their fiscal and economic policies. Benoît Cœuré focuses on the requirements that 
need to be met for national fiscal councils and the European Fiscal Board (EFB) to be fully 
effective. “Independence” is the key word at both national and European levels. The EFB is 
also charged with the important task of coordinating fiscal policy in the euro area to avoid pro-
cyclical fiscal policies. “At this juncture using fiscal space would speed up the euro area’s return 
to growth and support the ECB’s objective of medium-term price stability”, says Benoît Cœuré. 
“But, in many countries, such fiscal space simply does not exist, because rules have not been 
enforced  in  the  past.  Setting  up  independent  institutions  such  as  the  fiscal  councils  at  the 
national level and the EFB at the European level could prove to be a decisive step in this 
direction.” 
 Dear guests from the Network of EU Independent Fiscal Institutions, 
Dear colleagues from the European System of Central Banks, 
Ladies and gentlemen,1 
It is a great pleasure for me to open this high-level workshop. 
The European sovereign debt crisis has reminded us painfully that sound public finances in all 
euro area Member States are an indispensable prerequisite for the smooth functioning of the 
European monetary union. 
This has, of course, been well understood for a long time. For example, the Delors Report of 
1989 stressed that “uncoordinated and divergent national budgetary policies would undermine 
monetary  stability  and  generate  imbalances  in  the  real  and  financial  sectors  of  the 
Community.”2 
To address these concerns the Maastricht Treaty introduced a number of safeguards: the no-
bail-out clause, the excessive deficit procedure and the monetary-financing prohibition. Yet, 
for well-known political reasons, the Maastricht Treaty stopped short of assigning responsibility 
for fiscal and economic policies to the central level. Member States retained responsibility for 
these policy fields. At the same time, the Treaty called on governments to treat such policies 
as a matter of common concern. It also entrusted the task of ensuring appropriate coordination 
of national policies to the European Commission. 
                                                
1  
I would like to thank Maximilian Freier for his assistance in preparing this remark. All views expressed herein 
remain mine. 
2   Delors, Jacques (1989), Report on Economic and Monetary Union in the European Community, Committee for 
the Study of Economic and Monetary Union, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
In the monetary field, a new, fully independent body was created, namely the European Central 
Bank. The responsibility for the conduct of euro area monetary policy was delegated to the 
ECB’s Governing Council. At the same time the independence of national central banks was 
strengthened considerably in many countries. The institutional set-up for monetary policy was 
thus starkly different from that for fiscal and economic policies. 
The crisis exposed the flaws in the set-up governing fiscal and economic policies. Over the 
past  six  years  there  have  been  numerous  initiatives  to  rethink  the  fiscal  and  economic 
governance framework. The political reality is that there is no appetite for moving towards a 
“United States of Europe”, as foreseen by Victor Hugo and Winston Churchill, and envisaged 
by  Jean  Monnet  at  the  beginning  of  the  1950s,  when  the  precursor  of  the  European 
Commission was created (the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community).3 
However, there is a common understanding that euro area Member States need to further 
integrate their fiscal and economic policies if the euro area and its member countries are to 
prosper in the future. This point is made forcefully in the Five Presidents’ Report which was 
published in June last year.4 
The Five Presidents’ Report proposed a multi-stage process towards genuine Economic and 
Monetary  Union  (EMU).  The  first  step  is  to  revive  economic  convergence  among  Member 
States. This requires Member States to put their public finances on a sound footing. It also 
requires  Member  States  to  undertake  the  necessary  structural  reforms  to  strengthen  their 
growth potential and resilience to shocks. Making determined progress in these fields is an 
economic and political precondition for moving on to the second stage, for which a joint shock-
absorption mechanism could be envisaged.5 
In this respect, I am convinced that national independent fiscal institutions and the European 
Fiscal Board can make decisive contributions to the success of stage one when it comes to 
ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
Of course, there are important differences between monetary and fiscal policies in terms of the 
potential for delegation to technocrats. Monetary policy is a technical task aimed at minimising 
market distortions and undesirable economic fluctuations. In order to overcome commitment 
problems, central banks were made independent and provided with a price stability mandate. 
By contrast, fiscal policy has strong allocation and redistribution dimensions, which need to 
reflect  national  political  preferences.  Accordingly,  fiscal  policy  has  remained  the  innate 
prerogative of democratically elected governments. This is supported by the findings of the 
political-economy  literature,  which  points  to  the  need  for  limits  on  the  delegation  of  these 
policies  to  independent  experts.6  Proposals  have  been  made  to  set  up  independent  fiscal 
agencies with a clearly defined and limited role, such as deciding on the overall fiscal balance, 
and then leaving it to the political system to decide on taxes and expenditures7, but they have 
not gained much traction. 
                                                
3   See Monnet, Jean (1952), “The United States of Europe”, in  The  United  States  of  Europe  has  begun:  The 
European Coal and Steel Community ‒ Speeches and Addresses 1952–1954, pp. 58–60. 
4   See Juncker, Jean-Claude, Tusk, Donald, Dijsselbloem, Jeroen, Draghi, Mario and Schulz, Martin (2015), The 
Five Presidents’ Report: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, June. 
5   On convergence in the euro area, see Cœuré, Benoît (2016), Rebalancing in the euro area: are we nearly there 
yet?, speech at the Danish Economic Society, Kolding, 15 January. 
6   Alesina, Alberto and Tabellini, Guido (2007), “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single Policy Task”, American 
Economic Review, Vol. 97(1), pp. 169–179; and Maskin, Eric and Tirole, Jean (2004), “The Politician and the 
Judge: Accountability in Government”, American Economic Review, Vol. 94(4), pp. 1034–1054. Both papers 
point to the conclusion that, albeit technical, fiscal policies are intrinsically redistributive and should therefore be 
made by elected representatives. 
7   Wyplosz,  Charles  (2005),  “Fiscal  Policy:  Institutions  versus  Rules”,  National  Institute  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 191(1), January, pp. 64–78. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In any case, there is general agreement that independent fiscal councils can play an important 
role in overcoming the commitment problems which often prevent governments from pursuing 
sound fiscal policies in a time-consistent manner.8 Importantly, this argument holds true both 
when the commitment problems arise from policy rules and when they result from discretionary 
decisions.  Therefore,  fiscal  councils  are  likely  to  play  a  key  role  in  any  evolution  in  the 
institutional set-up of the euro area, including moving from rules-based to institutions-based 
fiscal decision-making. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I would like to focus on the general requirements that need to 
be met for national fiscal councils and the European Fiscal Board to be fully effective. 
The key role of national independent fiscal institutions 
The European Union fiscal governance framework was strengthened with the “six-pack” and 
the “two-pack” legislation. The two-pack introduced a requirement for euro area countries to 
set  up  an  independent  body,  such  as  a  fiscal  council,  that  is  responsible  for  monitoring 
compliance  with  numerical  fiscal  rules.  Moreover,  it  also  required  that  macroeconomic 
projections should be produced or endorsed by an independent body. 
In  doing  so,  fiscal  councils  can  ensure  transparency  on  rules  and  their  implementation. 
Moreover,  fiscal  councils  can  foster  national  ownership  of  the  governance  framework  and 
increase the reputational cost to governments when they violate the fiscal rules.9 Unfortunately, 
regulation  that  is  jointly  agreed  at  the  European  level  is  often  portrayed  as  having  been 
imposed by “Brussels”. Members of national fiscal councils – particularly if they build up a good 
reputation  –  can  counter  this  argument  by  explaining  the  economic  virtues  of  a  stability-
oriented fiscal policy framework. 
To  effectively  deliver  on  their  tasks,  fiscal  councils  need  to  build  and  maintain  strong 
institutional credibility. This requires insulation from political interference, and it is here that the 
experience of independent central banks can provide important lessons. 
First, similar to central banks, fiscal councils require institutional independence. That is, they 
should have a legal identity which is separate from other bodies of government. At the same 
time, it should be ensured that fiscal councils have broad and timely access to information, 
particularly detailed budgetary data. 
Second, fiscal councils should be functionally independent. They should be free to choose how 
to assess and communicate on fiscal policies. Importantly, fiscal councils need to be able to 
communicate  publically  in  order  to  effectively  mobilise  public  opinion  and,  if  necessary,  to 
counteract political incentives for unsound fiscal policies. 
Third, decision-makers in national fiscal councils require personal independence. They should 
be appointed on the basis of their professional qualifications for a fixed term. They should be 
relieved of their duties only in exceptional circumstances, for example if they no longer fulfil 
the conditions required for the performance of their duties or if they have been found guilty of 
serious misconduct. 
Fourth, fiscal councils require financial independence. That is, they require sufficient resources 
to deliver on their mandate. To this end, the financing of independent fiscal institutions should 
be  outside  of  the  government’s  immediate  discretion.  They  could,  for  example,  be  funded 
directly by parliament rather than from the government budget. 
                                                
8   Calmfors, Lars (2015), “The Roles of Fiscal Rules, Fiscal Councils, and Fiscal Union in EU Integration”, in Harald 
Badinger  and  Volker  Nitsch  (eds.),  The  Routledge  Handbook  of  the  Economics  of  European  Integration, 
Routledge. 
9   See Calmfors (2015), op. cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Evidence suggests that, where these principles of independence are met, fiscal councils can 
improve budgetary discipline.10 
Complementing national independent fiscal institutions with the European Fiscal 
Board 
Ensuring  sound  public  finances  in  Europe  will  also  require  changes  to  the  EU’s  fiscal 
governance framework. European legislators should make it a priority to reduce the excessive 
complexity  of the  rules. A  lack  of transparency can make fiscal  rules  appear  arbitrary  and 
undermine their legitimacy. A review of the fiscal rules should add clarity and facilitate the 
assessment  of  compliance  with  them,  while  preserving  their  stability-oriented  nature.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  has  made  such  proposals  in  the  past.11  The  European 
Commission  has  announced  that  it  will  come  up  with  proposals  to  simplify  the  framework 
soon.12 
It can be argued that complexity results from a lack of trust in the institutions in charge of 
enforcing  the  rules,  preventing  full  delegation  and  making  it  necessary  to  write  an  all-
encompassing contract that covers all possible states of the world. The institutional set-up 
therefore needs to be strengthened. 
In October last year the European Commission published a decision setting up a European 
Fiscal Board (EFB).13 In line with the recommendations of the Five Presidents’ Report, the EFB 
should provide an independent assessment of the Commission and the Council’s application 
of the Stability and Growth Pact. While the European Commission should continue to enforce 
these rules, it should provide a justification where it deviates from the views of the EFB. This 
will help to increase the transparency and consistency of fiscal surveillance at the European 
level. 
Beyond fiscal surveillance, the EFB can also play an important role in fiscal policy coordination 
in the euro area. The sum of national budget balances should lead to an appropriate fiscal 
stance at the level of the euro area as a whole. While effectively steering the euro area’s fiscal 
stance will be challenging as long as there is no central fiscal capacity, coordinating national 
fiscal  policies  is  key  to  avoiding  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies  and  facilitating  the  smooth 
functioning of EMU. 
When defining the role of the EFB, we have to acknowledge that there may be a trade-off 
between the breadth of its mandate and the effectiveness of its actions. This should be taken 
into account when thinking about the allocation of tasks between the EFB and national fiscal 
councils. 
You will have the opportunity for an in-depth discussion on the EFB’s set-up and its mandate 
in one of the sessions. In my view, the following questions are of particular interest: Is the EFB 
sufficiently independent to fulfil its tasks? Are there conflicts between the main elements of the 
                                                
10   See ECB (2014), “Fiscal councils in EU countries”, Box 8 in the Monthly Bulletin, June, pp. 96–100; Nerlich, 
Carolin and Reuter, Wolf Heinrich (2013), “The design of national fiscal frameworks and their budgetary impact”, 
ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1588;  Debrun,  Xavier,  Hauner,  David  and  Kumar,  Manmohan  S. (2009), 
“Independent  Fiscal  Agencies”,  Journal  of  Economic  Surveys,  Vol.  23(1),  pp.  44–81;  and  ECB  (2009), 
“Experience with government debt reduction in euro area countries”, Box 10 in the Monthly Bulletin, September, 
pp. 84–86. 
11   Andrle, Michal, Bluedorn, John, Eyraud, Luc, Kinda, Tidiane, Brooks, Petya Koeva, Schwartz, Gerd and Weber, 
Anke (2015), “Reforming Fiscal Governance in the European Union”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/15/09. 
12   See European Commission (2015), On steps towards Completing Economic and Monetary Union, COM(2015) 
600 final, 21 October. 
13   See Commission Decision (EU) 2015/1937 of 21 October 2015 establishing an independent advisory European 
Fiscal Board, OJ L 282, 28.10.2015, p. 37–40. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
EFB’s mandate? How can we ensure that the EFB complements and reinforces the role of 
national independent fiscal institutions? 
Overall, we are all hoping that the European Fiscal Board will contribute to better compliance 
with  the  common fiscal rules,  a more  informed public  debate  and  stronger  coordination of 
national fiscal policies. 
To achieve these objectives, the EFB should not fall short of the principles established in the 
context of the creation of independent fiscal councils at the national level. Looking ahead the 
mandate and institutional independence of the EFB should be clarified and strengthened to 
ensure that it can play a key role in increasing transparency and improving compliance with 
the fiscal rules.14 
Conclusions and outlook 
Let me conclude. 
I  have  argued  that,  in  the  light  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  persistent 
sustainability  concerns,  it  is  more  important  than  ever  to  make  a  credible  commitment  to 
stability-oriented fiscal policies. This is a necessary condition for fiscal policy to be in a position 
to support and complement the ECB’s monetary policy.15 We can see today how much a lack 
of  compliance  with  the  rules  has  hampered  the  euro  area’s  ability  to  deliver  an  efficient 
macroeconomic policy stance. At this juncture using fiscal space would speed up the euro 
area’s return to growth and support the ECB’s objective of medium-term price stability. But, in 
many countries, such fiscal space simply does not exist, because rules have not been enforced 
in the past. Setting up independent institutions such as the fiscal councils at the national level 
and the EFB at the European level could prove to be a decisive step in this direction. While 
achieving  credibly  sustainable  public  finances  is  an  important  goal  in  itself,  it  is  also  the 
precondition for completing EMU. 
In today’s workshop, you will discuss in much more detail some of the critical issues that I 
touched  upon  in  my  opening  remarks:  Where  do  we  stand  with  the  establishment  of 
independent fiscal institutions in European countries? What experience do we have in terms 
of  the  effectiveness  of  fiscal  councils  in  European  countries?  How  should  fiscal  rules  be 
designed in order to make them transparent and enforceable? How should the responsibility 
for fiscal policies be divided between the national and the European levels? 
I  am  looking  forward  to  hearing  some  fruitful  discussion.  Thank  you  very  much  for  your 
attention. 
                                                
14   See  ECB (2015), “The creation of a  European  Fiscal  Board”,  Box  5 in the Economic  Bulletin, Issue 7, 
pp. 28–31. 
15   See Commission Decision (EU) 2015/1937 of 21 October 2015 establishing an independent advisory European 
Fiscal Board, OJ L 282, 28.10.2015, p. 37–40. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
