  Juyeol Lee: Challenges faced by small open economies and the 
appropriate monetary policy responses 
Opening address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the BOK-KIEP-PIIE 
Conference, jointly hosted by the Bank of Korea, Korea Institute for International Economic 
Policy, and the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Seoul, 19 July 2016. 
 Good morning, 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen! 
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  all  today  to  this  conference,  jointly  hosted  by  the  Bank  of 
Korea,  Korea  Institute  for  International  Economic  Policy,  and  Peterson  Institute  for 
International Economics. Let me begin by expressing my special thanks to our conference 
co-hosts,  President  Adam  Posen  of  the  Peterson  Institute for  International  Economics  and 
President Jung Taik Hyun of the Korea Institute for International Economic Policy; and to the 
panelists, Swiss National Bank Governor Thomas Jordan and Bank of Israel Governor Karnit 
Flug; and to Professor Olivier Blanchard. I would also like to express my sincere appreciation 
to  all  of  the  session  speakers,  moderators,  and  discussants  for  their  contributions  to  this 
conference. 
As the global economy has become more integrated, the external effects of changes in the 
economic  conditions  and  monetary  policies  of  major  countries  have  become  greater  than 
ever before. These effects are greater particularly in small open economies like Korea. And 
so I am very pleased that this conference, co-hosted by two outstanding think tanks in the 
area of international economics, provides an opportunity to discuss the challenges faced by 
small open economies and the appropriate monetary policy responses. 
In  the  years  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  major  economies  have  been  implementing 
accommodative macroeconomic policy to cope with their economic sluggishness. However, 
most  of  them  have  failed  to  emerge  from  their  low  growth  trends,  due  mainly  to  structural 
factors. In addition, the international financial markets are showing higher volatility, owing to 
uncertainty surrounding monetary policy normalization by the US Federal Reserve and the 
possibility of a recurrence of financial and economic unrest in emerging countries, combined 
with the UK’s Brexit decision. 
Small open economies are influenced greatly by the economic situations of major countries 
and  international  financial  market  conditions.  In  terms  of  their  real  economies  they  are 
experiencing economic slowdowns in line with sluggish exports. On the financial side, they 
are seeing high volatility in capital flows and price variables, such as exchange rates. 
All of this makes for a complicated policy environment for the central banks of small open 
economies. They have to support economic recovery, while at the same time responding to 
mounting uncertainties in the financial markets stemming from external shocks. So with this 
background in mind, allow me to share my views on the policy tasks small open economies 
have to deal with. 
First, in our conduct of monetary policy we should pay special attention to financial stability 
risks,  while  supporting  the  recovery  of  economic  growth.  We  should  maintain  our 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stances  to  ensure  that  the  trend  of  low  growth  does  not 
become  entrenched.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  we  must  ensure  that  this  does  not  undermine 
financial stability. Especially in the case of small open economies, we need to bear in mind 
that, if the degree of monetary easing is excessive, the risk that external shocks would trigger 
sudden capital outflows and currency depreciation is relatively higher. 
Second, we should strengthen our efforts to reduce the negative impacts of overseas factors 
on domestic financial stability and economic growth. Since the global financial crisis, many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
countries have taken various steps to enhance their capacities to cope with external risks, for 
example  by  strengthening  macroprudential  policies, improving  exchange  rate  flexibility  and 
increasing  their  foreign  reserves.  At  an  international  level,  they  have  implemented  the 
Basel III  framework  and  strengthened  regulations  on  G-SIFIs,  in  an  effort  to  heighten  the 
resilience  of  financial  institutions  to  external  shocks  and  improve  the  shock  absorption 
capacities of their financial systems. Through this conference, I hope that we can share what 
we have achieved with these policies and what we have learned from them. I also hope that 
we can come up with new supplementary measures. 
Third,  we  need  to  continue  to  pursue  international  cooperation  to  expand  financial  safety 
nets.  They  have  been  steadily  improved  at  both  the  global  and  regional  levels,  with  the 
establishment  of  the  IMF’s  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow,  the  conclusion  of  US  dollar 
currency swap arrangements between major countries, and the increase in the Chiang Mai 
Initiative  Multilateralisation(CMIM)  fund.  Going  forward,  we  should  continue  our  efforts  on 
international  cooperation  for  stronger  global  financial  safety  nets.  To  this  end,  we  need  to 
promote  cooperation  between  the  IMF  and  regional  financial  arrangements  such  as  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  and  CMIM,  and  expand  international  currency  swap 
arrangements. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  necessity  of  structural  reform.  During  the  global 
financial crisis, and even after the crisis, we have witnessed numerous instances in which 
countries with strong economic fundamentals rapidly overcame external shocks. A great deal 
of  research  shows  that  structural  reform  involves  difficulties  in  the  short  term,  but  in  the 
medium and long term, it enhances the efficiency of resource allocation and accordingly has 
positive  impacts  on  employment  and  economic  growth.  And  if  economic  resilience  is 
strengthened by structural reform, we can avoid excessively accommodative macroeconomic 
policy and thereby minimize its negative side effects. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  have  talked  about  the  challenges  and  policy  tasks  that  small  open  economies  currently 
face.  It  seems  that  monetary  policy  measures  alone  cannot  resolve  these  multi-faceted 
difficulties. 
to  pursue  efficient  mixes  of  monetary, 
macroprudential and structural reform policies, as well as strive for international cooperation. 
I hope that today’s conference serves as an excellent venue for lively discussion and the free 
exchange of ideas regarding how to address these challenges. 
Thank you. 
I  would  stress 
that  we  need 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
