   Kerstin af Jochnick: Unusual measures in unusual times – experiences 
with the Riksbank’s unconventional monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to SACO 
(Swedish Confederation of Professional Associations), Stockholm, 29 January 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Carl-Johan Belfrage, Hanna Köhler and Cecilia Roos-Isaksson for helping me with this speech. 
The start of a new year – particularly after such an eventful year as 2015 – can be a good time 
to look back and try to learn a few lessons from the past year’s experiences. I will therefore 
focus today on the reasons for the new monetary policy ground broken by the Riksbank in 
2015. This includes our introduction of a negative repo rate and our initiation of government 
bond purchases as a complement to repo rate cuts to further boost demand in the economy 
and increase inflation. 
The inflation target is worth defending. This is why we have taken to unusual measures under 
unusual circumstances and these measures seem to have contributed towards good growth 
and a rising inflation trend. At the same time, there is reason to remember that the low level of 
interest rates is leading housing prices and mortgages to develop in a dangerous direction. I 
also intend to present a few preliminary reflections on the recently published assessment of 
the Riksbank’s monetary policy.  
Why is the inflation target so important? 
Understanding the Riksbank’s actions first requires understanding why we think the inflation 
target is so important. We introduced inflation targeting in Sweden in 1993 after we were forced 
to  abandon  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  We  used  academic  research  to  support  this 
decision, along with the good example provided by forerunners such as Canada and New 
Zealand.1 A well-implemented inflationary targeting policy benefits economic development by 
making  inflation  lower,  more  stable  and  more  predictable.  Sweden’s  experiences  in  the 
decades before and after the introduction of the inflation target provide a rough idea of the 
significance of inflation targeting for the development of prices and wages – severe fluctuations 
in the 1970s and 1980s were followed by very stable development after the introduction of 
inflation targeting (see Figure 1). 
It has benefited economic development in Sweden. This is because more predictable price 
developments make borrowers and savers feel more secure in how inflation will develop and 
create  good  conditions  for  economic  decisions.  This  lowers  borrowing  costs  and  thereby 
benefits investments. Investments and new recruitments are facilitated by companies’ ability 
to make a reasonably good prediction of price and wage cost increases over the lifetime of an 
investment. The less uncertainty there is over future price developments, the easier it also 
becomes  to  agree  on  conditions  for  various  contracts,  not  least  the  wage  agreements 
negotiated by the labour market parties. All in all, it is thus not unreasonable to consider that 
inflation targeting has contributed towards the higher average growth we have experienced 
over the two decades since targeting was introduced, as compared with the preceding period. 
                                                 
1   The Swedish inflation target was announced in January 1993 and started to be applied in 1995. For a more in-
depth review of the relationship with academic research and countries that had previously adopted inflation 
targeting, see Berg, C., “Experience of inflation targeting in 20 countries”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 
2005:1, Sveriges Riksbank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   It is important that inflation expectations are not too low 
There is consequently a lot to be gained from having low, stable and predictable inflation. But 
it is also important that expectations of future inflation are not too low.  
One reason for this is that inflation allows wages to develop more weakly in certain areas 
without requiring nominal wages to be cut. This means that unemployment can be avoided 
when  changes  occur  that  reduce  the  demand  for  certain  types  of  knowledge,  skill  and 
experience.  
However, inflation expectations also affect the strength of the Riksbank’s primary monetary 
policy weapon – the repo rate – and thereby the Riksbank’s ability to stabilise the Swedish 
economy and lead it out of crises.  
This is a product of the way inflation expectations affect real interest rates. In the same way as 
the figures for GDP growth we usually discuss refer to real growth, which is to say growth 
adjusted for inflation, there is namely reason to adjust interest rates in the economy for inflation 
– in particular, to determine how much stimulus monetary policy is supplying. There are good 
reasons to subtract the effects of inflation on debts and saving. For example, a loan for an 
investment becomes less burdensome to repay the more the price of the goods the borrower 
is  selling  has  increased  over  the  period  in  question.  And  the  lender,  correspondingly,  has 
reason to consider how much the money is worth when the loan is eventually repaid. Another 
way of putting it is that those borrowing and lending must consider how much of the amount 
lent they expect to be ‘eaten up’ by inflation. The economically-significant real interest rate is 
therefore the usual nominal rate with a deduction for expected inflation: 
Real interest rate = nominal interest rate – expected inflation 
How expansionary the interest rate policy is, which is to say how low the real interest rate level 
is, is thus determined both by the nominal interest rate level and by expected inflation. This 
also  means  that  how  expansionary  the  level  of  interest  rates  can  be  made  is  not  just 
determined by how far the nominal interest rate can be cut but also by how high inflation is 
expected to be. When inflation is expected to be high, the real interest rate can be made very 
low, but this also means that, as inflation expectations fall, the scope for cutting the real interest 
rate also decreases. 
The fact that inflation expectations were anchored around the target of two per cent meant that 
the  low  nominal  interest  rates  of  2009  and  2010  (see  Figure  2)  gave  households  and 
companies very low real interest rates and supported the recovery of the Swedish economy. 
With lower inflation expectations, the same interest rate policy would have had a less powerful 
stimulatory  effect  and  that  would  probably  have  meant  lower  employment  and  even  lower 
inflation in recent years.  
Inflation expectations are thus of vital importance for how expansionary monetary policy is and 
how expansionary it can be made when the Swedish economy is subjected to new severe 
stresses. The stimulus provided by a really low real interest rate can make it possible to avoid 
more prolonged low interest rate periods with the drawbacks in the form of rising indebtedness 
and exaggerated risk-taking that we are now concerned about. But if inflation expectations are 
too low, not even the lowest possible repo rate may be enough to push the real interest rate 
down to the desired level. 
To sum up, it is thus of great benefit to the Swedish economy if households and companies, 
savers and investors, expect a future rate of inflation that is on a reasonably low level and that 
their  expectations  more  or  less  correspond.  The  key  to  such  jointly-agreed  inflation 
expectations is that the inflation target of two per cent is seen as credible, which is to say that 
all parties expect that the Riksbank will be able to hold inflation close to the target in the period 
ahead.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Inflation expectations were losing their stable footing at two per cent 
Unfortunately, one of the unusual circumstances prevailing at the start of 2015 was that long-
term inflation expectations were losing their stable footing around the target of two per cent. 
Of course, there are no perfect measures of inflation expectations and it is not obvious whose 
expectations  are  most  important,  but  we  carefully  monitor  the  survey-based  measures  of 
expectations provided by Prospera. The decrease in inflation expectations five years ahead 
that took place in the period up to the end of 2014 was worrying (see Figure 3). Pricing on the 
bond market gave the same view of falling long-term inflation expectations.  
If this meant that doubts were now starting to arise about the two per cent target, this was 
perhaps not so strange, considering that inflation at this point had been low for an extended 
period of time. There was certainly reason to believe that this was at least partly the result of 
temporary factors. The Riksbank’s own analyses pointed to the strengthening of the krona 
exchange rate between 2009 and 2013, the weak level of economic activity abroad and falling 
energy  prices.  We  also  noted  an  unusually  low  interest  among  companies  in  raising  their 
prices,  despite  rising  costs.  Conceivable  explanations  for  this  included  decreasing  inflation 
expectations  and  perceived  uncertainty  over  the  economic  outlook,  as  reported  by  the 
companies in our Business Surveys.2  
The  unusually  low  inflation  in  recent  years  is  something  we  have  shared  with  many  other 
countries. This may have strengthened the perception that there are forces in motion making 
it  impossible  for  the  Riksbank  to  reach  the  inflation  target.  There  has  been,  not  least,  an 
emphasis on the effects of globalisation and digitisation on costs and competition. However, 
as my colleague in the Executive Board, Martin Flodén, pointed out in a speech last autumn, 
it is difficult to see why this should have persistent effects on the rate of inflation in particular 
and why it has not prevented higher inflation in countries like Norway, Canada and Australia.3 
In addition, these factors were relevant when Sweden had a higher rate of inflation, just a few 
years ago. 
Regardless  of  the  underlying  reasons,  it  would  be  very  unfortunate  if  long-term  inflation 
expectations were to drift away from the inflation target. We would then start to lose everything 
we gained by having an inflation target.  
Inflation prospects are influenced by international developments 
At the same time, at the start of 2015, the European Central Bank (the ECB) had announced 
bond purchases in an amount of EUR 60 billion per month to make its monetary policy more 
expansionary. Of course, these measures will eventually have positive effects on inflation in 
Sweden as they provide welcome stimulus for an important Swedish export market. But, by 
weakening the euro, the ECB’s measures risked exerting price pressure on a significant portion 
of Swedish imports over the short term. 
In  addition,  the  price  of  oil  had  fallen  sharply  in  2014  and  continued  to  fall  in  2015.  The 
international development of the price of oil directly influences inflation in Sweden via the price 
of fuel oil and, not least, the price of petrol. Over time, it can also have effects on other prices, 
as it affects companies’ energy and transportation costs. It is true that, in normal cases, a fall 
in the price of oil has a brief effect on the actual inflation figures. But as the price of petrol in 
particular is so very visible for so many people, it may have a disproportionately high impact 
on how inflation is perceived and thereby possibly also on inflation expectations.  
                                                 
2   See, for example Andersson, B., Corbo, V. and Löf, M., “Why has inflation been so low?”, Sveriges Riksbank 
Economic Review 2015:3, Sveriges Riksbank. 
3   “Sweden needs its inflation target”, published 13 October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   We have also had a year characterised by a large degree of uncertainty over international 
developments in general. Greece’s membership of the single currency and possibly, therefore, 
the entire European monetary union was, at moments, on the ropes. The conflict in Ukraine 
and  the  sanctions  levied  on  Russia  had  consequences  for  the  Russian  economy  but  also 
created unease over the political and economic development of eastern and central Europe in 
general. We saw drastically reduced demand from the global growth engine of recent years, 
China. This gave new fuel to concerns over an imminent hard landing of the economy there. 
The severe conflicts in the Middle East started to make themselves increasingly felt via a heavy 
increase in the numbers of people seeking safety in Europe. The possible effects of the central 
banks acting out of step – after a number of years of crisis policies – also led to a degree of 
concern. 
There is always uncertainty but, nevertheless, my impression is that it has been unusually high 
over the past year. Uncertainty in itself can cause problems as it can lead households and 
companies to hold off consumption and investment, and can reduce companies’ willingness to 
raise their prices. Everything else being equal, a higher degree of uncertainty therefore argues 
for a more expansionary monetary policy. In addition, greater uncertainty over international 
developments also entails a greater risk that the Swedish economy will be exposed to such 
strong negative pressure that we will end up in a really serious situation with persistently falling 
prices and employment. A desire to lower the chances of such a situation may, in itself, argue 
for a more expansionary monetary policy. 
A more expansionary monetary policy 
At  the  start  of  2015,  we  thus  found  ourselves  in  an  unusual  situation  with  a  series  of 
circumstances that suggested that monetary policy needed to be more expansionary: declining 
confidence in the inflation target, the measures adopted by the ECB to weaken the euro, the 
risk that the falling oil price would put further pressure on inflation expectations and increased 
uncertainty over international developments. 
Consequently, there was a need to strengthen confidence in the inflation target through clear 
signals of the Riksbank’s ability and willingness to bring inflation back to the two per cent target 
in a controlled form. We needed to clarify and practically demonstrate that monetary policy had 
more to give. 
The repo rate was already at a historically-low zero per cent and even the interest rates we 
sometimes  call  the  final  interest  rates  –  that  is,  those  actually  paid  by  households  and 
companies – were at historically low levels. But interest rates needed to be even lower and we 
needed to counteract the increasingly rapid appreciation of the krona. 
Negative interest rate? 
The most obvious measure was to cut the repo rate further, that is to make it negative – to 
introduce what, in everyday parlance, was starting to be called a negative interest rate. When 
we cut the repo rate to zero per cent, we did not observe any major problems. But would 
making the repo rate negative and quite simply forcing the banks – and, ultimately, perhaps 
their customers – to pay to keep money in an account really have the same impact on final 
interest  rates  for  households  and  companies  and,  if  so,  could  it  be  implemented  without 
causing problems elsewhere in the system? One objection towards negative interest rates is 
that people will choose the alternative of keeping cash in their mattresses. As this would be 
troublesome and not entirely risk-free, it can be imagined that most people would want to hold 
off stuffing their mattresses with cash as long as interest rates stay only slightly negative, but 
it is, of course, difficult to gain clarity as to exactly where such a boundary would lie. If the 
banks were unwilling to introduce negative deposit rates, would they then attempt to maintain 
their earnings by not cutting their lending rates either, in the eventuality that the repo rate was 
cut to below zero per cent? There are some international experiences, albeit short-lived, of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   negative interest rates that can be looked at – from the euro area, Denmark and Switzerland 
– but how would the Swedish system react?  
Purchasing government bonds? 
Another measure with the potential to push interest rates down and counteract the excessively 
rapid  appreciation  of  the  krona  was  the  purchasing  of  government  bonds.  There  were 
significantly more comprehensive historical and international experiences of this than there 
were of negative interest rates.  
The bond purchases made by a number of central banks in the wake of the global financial 
crisis were aimed at pushing down yields on longer maturities. Put simply, the idea is that, if 
the central bank purchases part of the available debt securities, anybody wishing to have these 
in their portfolios will be forced to compete for a smaller supply. This will push up the prices for 
debt securities so that yields will decrease. 
Of course, assessments of the effects of central banks’ bond purchases vary between different 
analyses, but there is a lot to suggest that three major central banks (the Federal Reserve, 
ECB and Bank of England) have succeeded, to some degree, in pushing down long-term yields 
and weakening their exchange rates.4 But there has, of course, been some uncertainty over 
what  the  effects  would  be  in  Sweden’s  case.  There  have  also  been  risks  to  consider,  for 
example that the functionality of the Swedish bond market may start to become impaired if the 
Riksbank were to purchase a large portion of the supply.  
There are also other measures on the menu. One of these is lending to companies via the 
banks to reduce the differences between the final interest rates for companies and the yields 
on government securities with corresponding maturities. Another possible measure, justified 
by  the  great  significance  of  the  krona  exchange  rate  for  the  development  of  inflation,  is 
conducting currency interventions. 
A cautious combination of a negative repo rate and bond purchases 
So how have we chosen to act, and what have the results been, so far? Up to this point, we 
have kept to changes to the repo rate and repo rate path, and purchases of government bonds. 
As it has not been completely certain how these would function in practice, there has been 
reason to proceed cautiously. We have combined several measures over the past year to make 
the combined effect sufficiently great. Over a number of stages, we have cut the repo rate 
and/or  the  repo  rate  path,  at  the  same  time  as  we  have  announced  and  initiated  bond 
purchases in amounts that have been increased in several stages (see Figure 4 and Figure 
5). In addition, in our communication, we have emphasised our preparedness, if necessary, to 
also rapidly increase monetary policy stimulus between the ordinary monetary policy meetings 
held every second month. In March 2015, we did exactly this – we took a decision on new 
monetary policy stimulus between two ordinary meetings. 
The repo rate cuts have largely worked  
As regards the repo rate cuts, so far we have been able to observe that lending rates followed 
to a normal extent, while deposit rates have stopped at zero for everybody except some larger 
companies. 
                                                 
4   For a review of current studies and an analysis of the effects in Sweden, see De Rezende, R. B., Kjellberg, D. 
and  Tysklind,  O.,  “Effects  of  the  Riksbank’s  government  bond  purchases  on  financial  prices”,  Economic 
Commentary no. 13, 2015, Sveriges Riksbank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   The bond purchases have had the intended effect on interest rates 
To get an idea of the effects of the bond purchases, staff at the Riksbank have studied the 
financial  markets’  immediate  reactions  to  the  announcement  of  the  decisions.5  On  those 
occasions on which the decisions were deemed unexpected, yields fell over the days on which 
the decisions were announced. In addition, they fell in comparison to corresponding yields 
abroad, for example in Germany. It therefore seems reasonable to conclude that the bond 
purchases  have  pushed  interest  rates  in  the  economy  down  –  Swedish  government  bond 
yields are now probably lower than they would have been without the purchases. These effects 
are in line with those observed in studies of the Federal Reserve’s bond purchases in the 
United States. 
Our analyses of the financial market’s reactions to the monetary policy decisions have also 
concluded that the decisions have entailed a weakening of the krona exchange rate. 
It thus seems to be the case that the additional monetary policy measures that we introduced 
over  the  past  year  have  given  us  lower  interest  rates  and  a  weaker  krona  than  we  would 
otherwise have. This means that the measures have probably achieved and are continuing to 
achieve greater demand for domestically-produced goods and services, higher employment 
and  thus,  ultimately,  greater  cost  and  price  increases  than  we  otherwise  would  have 
experienced. 
The monetary policy conducted last year can therefore be said to have contributed towards 
turning the development of inflation and inflation expectations around (see Figures 3 and 7). 
The positive effect of last year’s measures on inflation expectations is also suggested by the 
slight increase in what is known as inflation compensation – that is, the difference between the 
yields for nominal and real government bonds – in conjunction with the announcements of repo 
rate cuts and bond purchases that came as surprises. 
Standing prepared to make monetary policy more expansionary 
Inflation and inflation expectations are now higher than they were one year ago. But, over the 
autumn, the development of inflation was weaker than we predicted and the rise in inflation is 
still largely due to the krona being weak. If the rise in inflation is broken, confidence in the 
inflation target may be weakened. We are therefore prepared to do even more if it proves 
necessary to safeguard the inflation target. 
We still have many possible measures in our toolbox. Experiences from the past year suggest 
that  cuts  to  the  repo  rate  and  repo  rate  path  also  work  below  zero  and  that  purchases  of 
securities form a good complement. We can do more in this style if we deem that inflation 
prospects are changing. Loans to companies via the banks are another possibility that I have 
already mentioned. In addition, the Riksbank is prepared to carry out currency interventions if 
the exchange rate develops in a way that is not compatible with a rise in inflation to two per 
cent. The aim of this would not be to influence the long-run krona rate, but to counteract an 
overly rapid strengthening before inflation has stabilised around 2 per cent. 
I hope that my comments so far have made clear that confidence in the inflation target has 
been  given  the  highest  priority  by  the  Riksbank  and  that  monetary  policy  has  contributed 
towards the favourable development of the real economy. At the same time, since 2012, we 
have been careful to point out that a situation with low interest rates over a long period of time 
may create imbalances on the financial markets and on the housing market. We have therefore 
clearly  communicated  to  the  Government  and  other  authorities  that  it  is  important  to  use 
various measures to limit risk-taking in the economy. My assessment so far is that significantly 
                                                 
5   De Rezende, R. B., Kjellberg, D. and Tysklind, O., “Effects of the Riksbank’s government bond purchases on 
financial prices”, Economic Commentary no. 13, 2015, Sveriges Riksbank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   more commitment will be required to obtain a functioning housing market in Sweden and to 
reduce  the  risks  of  household  indebtedness.  The  risk  otherwise  is  that  we  will  create  new 
problems that may lead to low growth further on and new difficulties for monetary policy to 
reach  the  inflation  target.  I  am  concerned  about  Sweden’s  position  as one  of  a  handful  of 
countries in Europe that has not succeeded in getting a functioning macroprudential policy into 
place. With such a large financial system and the obvious major vulnerabilities present in the 
Swedish economy, our focus should be on urgently adopting measures. 
Valuable evaluation of monetary policy  
We thus have an unusual time behind us that has required unusual measures over the past 
year. Under such circumstances, it is natural to wonder, for example, how well the inflation 
target is functioning and which areas monetary policy should be responsible for. It therefore 
seems  appropriate  that  the  Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance  has  just  published  its  latest 
assessment  of  monetary  policy.6  First  and  foremost,  I  would  like  to  say  that  it  has  been  a 
privilege to have my work reviewed and assessed by people with such impressive academic 
and  practical  credentials  in  the  area  of  monetary  policy  as  those  possessed  by  Messrs. 
Goodfriend  and  King.  Assessments  are  a  key  ingredient  in  every  kind  of  work  to  improve 
operations  and  this  assessment  contains  many  reasonable  opinions  and  suggestions  for 
discussion and further work. We will do this over the spring, before submitting our consultation 
response in April. Today, I will just express my own initial reactions to a few of the elements in 
the assessment that come closest to the theme of today’s address. 
First and foremost, I cannot, of course, avoid noting that Goodfriend and King also consider 
that Swedish monetary policy since the introduction of inflation targeting has been an overall 
success. Neither is there any doubt that they support an inflation target as the starting point 
for monetary policy. 
However, they would like to switch target variable to the CPIF, that is the CPI with a fixed 
mortgage rate. It would not be difficult for us to make such a change, as we already focus most 
of our analysis and communication on the CPIF. At the same time, I think that there may be 
reason  to  evaluate  several  possible  measures,  for  example  the  internationally-comparable 
measure  HICP,  as  my  colleague  on  the  Executive  Board  Per  Jansson  has  previously 
discussed in a speech.7 
I appreciate how much Goodfriend and King have endeavoured to base their assessment on 
the information and experience available at the time of each individual decision, rather than 
proceeding on the basis of everything we know today about how developments turned out. As 
they note, we have been through a difficult period with major challenges and difficult decisions. 
One consequence of this is that it has been particularly difficult to make a good forecast of the 
repo rate and to take into consideration the repo rate expectations reflected at that moment by 
pricing on the financial markets. However, speaking for myself, I have always seen the repo 
rate path as a component of our ambition to be transparent as it shows which repo rate we 
include in our forecasts. And we always emphasise that the repo rate path itself is a forecast 
and not a promise.  
One  important  source  of  the  difficulties  that  Goodfriend  and  King  point  out  is  the  unclear 
allocation of roles, responsibilities and instruments for managing the work of financial stability 
and macroprudential policy in Sweden. As I have already mentioned, I consider sorting this 
matter  out  to  be  a  matter  of  great  urgency,  considering  that  Sweden  has  one  of  Europe’s 
largest banking systems in relation to GDP.  
                                                 
6   Goodfriend, M. and King, M., “An assessment of Swedish monetary policy 2010–2015”, Riksdag Committee on 
Finance, Sveriges Riksdag, 2016. 
7   “Time to improve the inflation target?”, published 3 December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   This  spring,  Goodfriend  and  King’s  assessment  will  provide  an  excellent  basis  for  the 
discussion of monetary policy and the issues that a modern central bank must manage. These 
unusual times are placing great demands on both monetary policy and macroprudential policy. 
It is important that we are able to meet these challenges in the right way. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Figure 1. Inflation targeting has made inflation lower, more stable and more predictable. 
Note. Annual percentage change. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
Figure 2. Average mortgage rate and corporate rate, and repo rate 
  Note. MFIs’ lending to households for housing purposes and to non-financial companies, new loans and agreements, refers to 
monthly data. Repo rate refers to daily data and date of implementation. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 Figure 3. Inflation expectations 
  Note. Per cent. Money market agents. 
Source: TNS Sifo Prospera 
 
 
Figure 4. The development of the repo rate 
  Note. Per cent. Outcomes are daily rates and the forecasts refer to quarterly averages. 
Source: The Riksbank 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 5. Bond purchases 
  240
200
160
120
80
40
0
135
45
50
30
10
July
80–90
40–50
30
10
April
Policy meeting
40
30
10
10
10
February
March
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
200
65
45
50
30
10
October
Note. SEK billion. Government bond purchases will continue until the end of June 2016. 
Source: The Riksbank 
 
Figure 6. Development of interest rates under a negative repo rate 
  Note. Per cent. Interest rate to households, lending rate refers to loans for housing purposes. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 Figure 7. Inflation has turned up 
  CPIF
CPIF excluding energy
4
3
2
1
0
-1
07
09
11
13
15
Note. Annual percentage change. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 
 
 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
