  Haruhiko Kuroda: Answers to Frequently Asked Questions on 
“Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative 
Interest Rate” 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Yomiuri International Economic Society, Tokyo, 7 March 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to this meeting hosted by the Yomiuri International Economic 
Society today. 
At the end of January, the Bank of Japan decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate,” which added the new dimension of “a 
negative interest rate” to the existing policy of QQE. Specifically, the Bank applies a negative 
interest  rate  of minus  0.1  percent to  current  accounts that financial  institutions  hold  at the 
Bank.  This  measure  enables  the  Bank  to  now  pursue  additional  monetary  easing  by 
providing  the  new  option  of  “a  negative  interest  rate”  in  addition  to  the  “quantitative”  and 
“qualitative”  measures  used  so  far.  Some  market  participants  had  voiced  doubts  that  a 
further expansion of QQE would be possible, arguing that QQE had reached its limit, but I 
think such views have been completely dispelled. 
“QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  will  have  an  impact  on  financial  institutions, financial 
markets, and, more broadly, people’s lives in general. Moreover, as the term itself, “negative 
interest rate,” sounds somewhat shocking, the measure has been the focus of attention in 
the newspapers and on TV day after day. Given the wide impact – on financial markets, the 
management of financial institutions, and people’s everyday lives – it will have, the measure 
has  given  rise  to  a  variety  of  questions  and  concerns.  Today,  I  would  like  to  explain  the 
Bank’s thinking with regard to this policy and respond to frequently asked questions. 
I. 
Benefits for households and firms 
Are there benefits for households and firms? 
To start with, I would like to explain the benefits of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” for 
households  and  firms.  The  media  has  been  reporting  that  while  interest  rates  on  housing 
loans have declined, deposit interest rates have also declined, asking whether the net impact 
of the policy for households is negative or positive. The answer is very clear. Individuals and 
firms as a whole  will definitely benefit from this policy (Chart 1). Deposit interest rates are 
declining,  but  the  extent  of  the  decline  is  minimal,  since  rates  already  were  close  to 
0 percent.  For  example,  interest  rates  on  deposits  in  ordinary  accounts  (the  Japanese 
equivalent  to  checking accounts for  retail  customers)  at  mega-banks  decreased from  two-
hundredths of a percent to a thousandth of a percent. In other words, the interest earned on 
depositing 1 million yen for a year declines by 190 yen – from 200 yen to 10 yen. On the 
other  hand,  the  extent  of  the  decline  in  lending  rates  is  much  larger.  Lending  rates  for 
10-year fixed-rate housing loans provided by mega-banks have declined by 0.25 percentage 
point, and the Tokyo Inter-Bank Offered Rate (TIBOR), a benchmark rate for lending to firms, 
has  also  fallen,  with  the  3-month  TIBOR,  for  example,  declining  by  slightly  less  than 
0.1 percentage point. 
While it is true that the interest earned from depositing 1 million yen will be only 10 yen, we 
need to consider since when and why deposit interest rates have become so low. The first 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
time interest rates on deposits in ordinary accounts fell to units of hundredths of a percent 
was in 1999, when Japan was falling into deflation. Under deflation, prices decline across the 
board  and  nominal  interest  rates  fall  accordingly.  This  situation  persisted  in  Japan  for  a 
prolonged  period.  In  order  to  increase  deposit  interest  rates,  we  have  to  revitalize  the 
economy and overcome deflation. 
Another concern is that the Bank’s negative interest rate policy will have a negative impact 
on  financial  institutions’  business,  making  them  more  reluctant  to  lend  or  leading  them  to 
demand  higher  lending  rates.  It  is  certainly  the  case  that  in  the  prolonged  environment  of 
extremely  low  interest  rates,  financial  institutions’  net  interest  income  from  their  core 
business of taking deposits and making loans has been on a declining trend. Under these 
circumstances there is a strong concern that the introduction of a negative interest rate will 
make the situation even worse. From a theoretical perspective, financial institutions may not 
tolerate  the  costs  imposed  by  a  negative  interest  rate  and  instead  pass  on  these  costs 
through an increase in lending rates. In Europe, where negative interest rate policies were 
adopted  before  Japan,  it  has  been  debated  whether  such  policies  are  having  a  negative 
effect  on  financial  institutions’  business  and  the  stability  of  financial  system,  and  whether 
such negative effects might put a limit on negative interest rate policies. 
However, the situation in Japan is quite different from that in Europe. First, Japan’s financial 
institutions  have  a  sufficient  capital  buffer  and  remain  very  sound,  since  they  were  not 
severely affected by the subprime mortgage problems  in the United States and the global 
financial  crisis.  Second,  even  though  their  net  interest  income  has  fallen,  the  profits  of 
financial institutions in Japan have remained high due mainly to lower credit costs reflecting 
Japan’s  economic  recovery.  In  fact,  in  fiscal  2014,  major  and  regional  banks’  net  income 
reached about 3.3 trillion yen – close to a record high. Therefore, it is entirely inconceivable 
that in Japan the functioning of financial intermediation will weaken due to strains by negative 
interest  rates  on  financial  institutions’  business.  In  fact,  given  the  fierce  competition  in 
Japan’s lending market, banks are unlikely to increase lending rates to offset the rise in costs 
through the negative interest rate policy. Instead, financial institutions should consider why 
they  cannot  make  sufficient  profit  from  their  core  business  –  taking  deposits  and  making 
loans.  The  reason  is  deflation.  Under  deflation,  the  difference  between  deposit  rates  and 
short-term  money  market  rates  (deposit  spreads)  as  well  as  the  gap  between  long-  and 
short-term  interest  rates  have  been  shrinking.  This  means  that  the  only  way  to  drastically 
improve financial institutions’ profit is to revitalize the economy and overcome deflation. 
“QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” aims at overcoming deflation completely and achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent. Let me explain how the policy seeks to achieve this. 
II. 
Background to the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
Why was the policy implemented? 
To begin, I would like to touch on the background to the introduction of the negative interest 
rate policy. Since the turn of the year, global financial markets have been volatile against the 
backdrop  of  the  further  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  uncertainty  such  as  over  future 
developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  particularly  the  Chinese 
economy  (Chart  2).  Crude  oil  prices  have  dropped  to  around  30  U.S. dollars. The  drop  is 
positive  for  Japan,  which  is  an  importer  of  crude  oil,  but  has  a  negative  impact  on 
commodity-exporting economies including Russia, Brazil, and countries in the Middle East, 
creating uncertainty for the global economy. 
Furthermore,  Chinese  stock  prices  have  declined  considerably,  resuming  the  slide  that 
started last summer. However, although the Chinese economy has embarked on a process 
of  deceleration,  it  has  not  deteriorated  suddenly.  The  reasons  for  the  slowdown  in  the 
Chinese economy appear to be the adjustment of excess investment by manufacturers and 
restraint in public investment by municipal governments under the tightening of discipline. As 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
a  result,  fixed  asset  investment  decelerated  but  has  now  leveled  off  as  municipal 
governments have resumed with public construction orders from the second half of 2015. In 
contrast, private consumption and automobile sales have remained firm, reflecting progress 
in the transformation of China’s economic structure from one centered on manufacturing to 
one centered on nonmanufacturing. 
Instead  of  signaling  a  sudden  deterioration  in  China’s  fundamentals,  the  decline  in  stock 
prices can be seen as the correction of a bubble as well as a reaction to movements in the 
exchange rate of the yuan. The yuan is being sold on speculation of a devaluation, resulting 
in  a  decline  in  China’s  foreign  currency  reserves.  This  has  led  to  instability  in  markets. 
Consequently,  stock  prices  have  declined  globally  and  markets  have  become  more 
pessimistic,  with  investors  switching  to  a  risk-off  mode.  In  the  foreign  exchange  markets, 
demand for the yen, which is regarded as a safe haven currency, has increased, leading to 
an appreciation of the yen. 
Although markets have become more volatile, Japan’s economic fundamentals remain sound 
(Chart  3).  Japan’s  economy  has  improved  significantly  from  three  years  ago.  Corporate 
profits  are  at  historically  high  levels  and  the  unemployment  rate  is  3.2  percent,  which 
essentially  represents  full  employment.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer 
price index excluding fresh food and energy has increased from minus 0.8 percent in March 
2013 to above 1 percent most recently. Japan’s economy is likely to grow moderately and 
inflation is likely to increase toward 2 percent. This baseline scenario remains unaffected by 
the recent volatility. Nevertheless, in light of their record profits, firms’ investment in physical 
and human capital has remained rather subdued. Under these circumstances, the volatility in 
global markets entails the  risk that it may lead to a deterioration in firms’ sentiment and  a 
setback  in  the  conversion  of  people’s  deflationary  mindset,  which  had  been  underway.  In 
fact, price perceptions by firms have recently deteriorated. Thus, the reason why the Bank 
introduced  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  is  that  it  judged  it  necessary  in  order  to 
preempt the manifestation of these risks and to maintain the momentum toward achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent. 
III. 
Effects of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
What effects will the negative interest rate policy have? 
Next, I would like to explain the effects the policy will have. The key aim of this policy is to 
drive down real interest rates, which is the main transmission channel of QQE. The fact that 
over the past three years Japan’s economy has significantly improved and we are no longer 
in deflationary situation is proof that a fall in real interest rates has a positive impact on the 
economy and inflation. 
Let  me  explain  the  transmission  mechanisms  of  QQE  in  more  detail.  First,  QQE  raises 
inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving the price 
stability  target  of  2 percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time  and through  large-scale  monetary 
easing  to  underpin  the  commitment.  Second,  QQE  puts  strong  downward  pressure  on 
nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive purchases of Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs). These two channels result in a decline in real interest rates. The 
decline  in  real  interest  rates  boosts  business  fixed  investment  and  housing  investment 
through a decline in interest rates on business and housing loans. In financial markets, QQE 
underpins  stock  prices  and  helps  to  weaken  the  yen,  which  in  turn  pushes  up  corporate 
profits, thereby improving employment and wages. The boost in economic activity improves 
the output gap – that is, the balance of aggregate supply and demand – which together with 
rising inflation expectations, lifts prices. Developments since the introduction of QQE exactly 
conform to the anticipated transmission mechanisms. 
“QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  represent  a  framework  in  which  these  transmission 
channels are further enhanced. The negative interest rate lowers short-term interest rates, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
while the massive purchases of long-term JGBs lower long-term yields. These two elements 
together exert strong downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve. The 
important aspect here is that the effect on the yield curve is stronger when the two elements 
are  implemented  in  tandem  than  when  carried  out  independently.  The  introduction  of  the 
negative interest rate on current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank reduces 
their incentive to sell JGBs in exchange for current accounts at the Bank. The reason is that 
JGBs with a positive interest rate become more valuable for financial institutions that attach 
great importance to interest income. As a result, purchases of long-term JGBs by the Bank 
will have stronger effects. Under normal circumstances, when short-term yields are lowered, 
long-term  interest  rates  do  not  decline  to  the  same  extent.  However,  with  the  Bank’s 
introduction of the negative interest rate, a large part of the yield curve has declined by about 
0.2 percentage points, which is close to the decline in short-term yields, or more (Chart 4). 
This  means  that  the  extent  of  the  decline  in  interest  rates  brought  about  by  the  negative 
interest rate policy is quite substantial. Going forward, the Bank will assess how the effects of 
the decline in interest rates permeate and spread through the real economy. 
Doubt over firms’ willingness to invest even with a decline in interest rates 
Some argue that a decline in real interest rates will not produce the intended effects if firms 
are  unwilling  to  borrow  and  invest.  This  is  possible  in  the  short  term,  while  people  are 
pessimistic.  Over  a  longer  period  of  time,  however,  the  decline  in  real  interest  rates  will 
surely  boost  economic  activity  and  inflation  through  the  impact  on  financial  institutions’ 
behavior  and  financial  markets.  In  fact,  bank  lending,  which  had  been  declining,  has 
increased over the past three years at  an annual rate of  about 2 percent  (Chart 5). Stock 
prices  have  risen  as  well,  and  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen  has  been  corrected. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  such  improvement  in  capital  markets,  economic  growth  and  the 
underlying trend in inflation have increased. 
A  decline  in  real  interest  rates  will  have  no  effect  only  when  the  expected  growth  rate,  or 
natural  rate  of  interest,  is  at  such  a  low  level  that  the  central  bank  cannot  produce  a  real 
interest  rate  that  is  lower  than  that.  While  this  extreme  case  cannot  be  ruled  out  as  a 
theoretical possibility, I am convinced it does not apply to Japan. Let me point out a couple of 
reasons.  First,  in  the  past  three  years,  the  decline  in  real  interest  rates  has,  as  I  just 
mentioned, produced actual effects. And second, looking at Japan’s economy and Japanese 
firms, I do not think the situation is as dire as that, given Japan’s economic strengths such as 
its technological prowess and the skill-level of the labor force. It is implausible that the natural 
interest rate is so low that monetary policy would be ineffective. 
Does volatility in global financial markets render monetary policy ineffective? 
The volatility recently observed in global financial markets certainly makes it more difficult to 
clearly see the effects of the negative interest rate policy. Immediately after the introduction 
of the negative interest rate policy, stock prices rose, with the Nikkei index adding 800 points 
in two days, while the yen fell to 121 yen against the U.S. dollar. Since then, however, the 
global decline in stock prices and the appreciation of the yen have continued, triggered by 
pessimistic  views  on  the  U.S.  economy  and  concern  about  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system in Europe. These developments have led to newspaper headlines claiming that the 
effects of the negative interest rate policy have been cancelled out. 
This is not an accurate assessment. Since the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate,”  interest  rates  across  the  board  have  clearly  declined.  This  is  exactly  what  we 
intended.  The  decline  in  yen  interest  rates  and  the  fact  that  further  monetary  easing  is 
possible – all else being equal – have a positive impact on asset prices. In other words, the 
policy works in the direction of raising stock prices and lowering the value of the yen. At the 
moment, these effects are being outweighed by the excessive risk aversion among investors 
around the globe. However, given that the fundamentals of Japan’s economy and Japanese 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
firms  remain  strong  and  that  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  will  have  powerful  effect, 
financial markets will turn positive as investor confidence returns. 
Adverse effects on financial institutions’ earnings and financial markets 
IV. 
Next, I would like to discuss possible costs associated with the negative interest rate policy. 
Any  policy  comes  with  costs.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  free  lunch.  In 
deciding on policy action, it is essential to weigh its expected costs against the need for such 
policy action and to try to reduce costs wherever possible. 
How to mitigate the adverse effect on financial institutions’ earnings 
Regarding  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  the  potential  adverse  effects  on  financial 
institutions’  earnings  and  their  functioning  as  financial  intermediaries  are  of  utmost 
importance.  For  example,  financial  institutions  might  pass  on  the  costs  resulting  from  the 
negative interest rate policy to borrowers by raising lending rates for firms and homeowners. 
In order to avoid such unintended consequences, the Bank has adopted a multi-tier system 
in  which  current  accounts  held  by  financial  institutions  at  the  Bank  are  divided  into  three 
separate tiers. Multi-tier systems have been in place for some time in European countries. 
Under the multi-tier system in Japan, a zero interest rate and a positive interest rate apply to 
financial institutions’ current account balances at the Bank of Japan up to certain thresholds 
(Chart 6). 
Let  me  explain  how  the  Bank’s  three-tier  system  works.  First,  the  same  interest  rate  as 
before – a positive rate of 0.1 percent – is applied to financial institutions’ current account 
balances  already  held  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy. 
Specifically, such balances are calculated as the average amount outstanding on financial 
institutions’  current  account  during  2015  –  which  are  referred  to  as  financial  institutions’ 
“Basic Balances” – minus required reserves. The total of “Basic Balances” minus required 
reserves  for  all  financial  institutions  that  have  a  current  account  at  the  Bank  is  about 
210 trillion  yen  or  about  80  percent  of  the  aggregate  amount  outstanding  of  financial 
institutions’  current  accounts.  Second,  a  zero  interest  rate  continues  to  be  applied  to  the 
required reserves held by financial institutions subject to the Reserve Requirement System; a 
zero interest rate is also applied to the amount of current account balances that corresponds 
to the outstanding amount of borrowing from the Bank of Japan through the special facilities 
(the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility,  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility,  and  the 
Funds-Supplying Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas affected by the 
Great East Japan Earthquake). The sum of these items is called financial institutions’ “Macro 
Add-on Balance.” The sum of such “Macro Add-on Balances” of all financial institutions at the 
start of the negative interest rate policy amounted to about 40 trillion yen. And third, financial 
institutions’ remaining current account balance is called the “Policy-Rate Balance,” to which 
the  negative  interest  rate  is  applied.  At  the  start  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  the 
aggregate amount of “Policy-Rate Balances” for all financial institutions that have a current 
account at the Bank was about 10 trillion yen on a net basis. 
Since the Bank will continue to purchase JGBs at an annual rate of about 80 trillion yen and 
the proceeds of such purchases will be paid into financial institutions’ current account at the 
Bank,  financial  institutions’  current  account  balances  will  increase.  Therefore,  if  the 
thresholds remain unchanged, the balances to which the negative interest rate is applied will 
increase over time. In light of this, the Bank will raise the amount of current account balances 
to which a zero interest rate is applied (“Macro Add-on Balances”) at certain intervals – for 
example, once every three months – in an incremental manner in order to keep the amount 
of  current  account  balances  to  which  a  negative  interest  rate  is  applied  (“Policy-Rate 
Balances”) more or less unchanged. By doing so, the amount of current account balances on 
which financial institutions incur negative interest will be kept to the minimum necessary to 
achieve the objectives of the negative interest rate policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Given that a negative interest rate applies to only part of financial institutions’ current account 
balances,  you  may  wonder  whether  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  will  fully  exert  its 
intended effects. We believe it will. Let me give you an example. If one bank sells JGBs to 
another, the proceeds will be transferred into the selling banks’ current account with the Bank 
of  Japan.  This  transaction  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  selling  banks’  current  account 
balance, raising the amount on which the negative interest rate is imposed. This means that 
prices in financial markets – such as interest rates, stock prices, and exchange rates – will be 
determined under the premise that a negative interest rate is applied to a marginal increase 
in financial institutions’ current account balances. As the proverb says, seeing is believing. All 
you  have  to  do  is  look  at  changes  in  the  yield  curve.  Interest  rates  have  indeed  clearly 
dropped  across  all  maturities  since  the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy 
(Chart 4). 
Japan’s three-tier system is designed to minimize the direct impact on financial institutions’ 
earnings while maximizing the positive effects of the negative interest rate policy. The system 
works as intended. 
Despite the carefully calibrated design of the multi-tier system, the decline in market interest 
rates will inevitably have adverse effects on financial institutions’ profits. For example, it is 
virtually impossible for banks to cut interest rates on their customers’ deposits into negative 
territory,  because  they  want  to  maintain  their  long-term  relationships  with  customers.  In 
addition, if a negative interest rate is imposed on customers’ deposit, this would prompt their 
customers to withdraw cash from bank accounts and hoard cash in vaults. In fact, financial 
institutions’  retail  deposit  interest  rates  have  never  turned  negative  even  in  European 
countries where the central bank has cut its deposit rate to as low as minus 1 percent. On 
the  other  hand,  banks’  interest  income  will  decrease  reflecting  the  decline  in  JGB  yields. 
Moreover, lending rates on housing and corporate loans will decline to some extent. As a 
result, banks’ earnings will be negatively affected. 
However, it should be noted that monetary easing has been pursued with a view to exerting 
positive  effects  on  the  economic  activities  of  firms  and  households  –  both  of  which  are 
financial  institutions’  customers.  These  positive  effects  on  the  economy  and  the  negative 
impact on financial institutions’ profits are two sides of the same coin. As mentioned before, 
the decline in the yield curve itself is the starting point of the transmission of policy effects. 
Reducing the impact of this is not something that can be achieved by changing the design of 
the policy. 
It  is  more  productive  to  consider  why  this  adverse  interest  rate  environment,  which  is 
responsible for the decline in financial institutions’ profits from their core business – taking 
deposits  and  making  loans  –  has  been  so  protracted.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the 
improvements  in  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  have  had  a  positive  impact  on 
financial institutions’ business, for example through the reduction in credit costs. Moreover, 
bank lending has been increasing, albeit moderately. However, as financial institutions’ profit 
margin  has  not  improved,  financial  institutions’  profits  remain  under  strong  downward 
pressure. The fundamental cause is the protracted deflation in Japan. In an environment of 
deflation and low interest rates in which short-term interest rates  are close to zero, profits 
from deposit spreads disappear, while those from maturity transformation shrink because of 
the narrower differential between long- and short-term interest rates due to the flattening of 
the yield curve. In addition, since Japanese firms have restrained fixed investment and have 
instead hoarded cash and deposits, banks’ loan-to-deposit ratios have substantially declined. 
Further, reflecting severe competition among banks, lending margins continue to narrow. In 
order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  escape  from  this  trap,  the  economy  needs  to  overcome 
deflation completely. If deflation was to return to Japan and the low interest-rate environment 
to continue, this would cause more serious problems for banks’ profitability. Once deflation is 
overcome  completely,  firms  will  become  more  proactive  in  making  investments,  which  will 
lead to an increase in loan demand. Under these circumstances, as short-term interest rates 
become positive, banks will be able to profit again from deposit spreads. As the yield curve 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
become  steeper,  interest-rate margins  will  improve  due  to  a  larger  interest-rate  differential 
between long- and short-term rates. Therefore, overcoming deflation is essential not only for 
the recovery of Japan’s economy but also for the full-fledged recovery of financial institutions’ 
profitability through an improvement in their profit margins. 
How to mitigate any adverse effects on financial markets 
Another  important  point  that  we  had  to  take  into  consideration  when  introducing  negative 
interest rates is the potential adverse effect on the functioning of financial markets. Another 
purpose  of  the  three-tier  system  therefore  is  to  ensure  that  transactions  continue  to  take 
place in the short-term money market. Under the three-tier system, some financial institutions 
will hold current account balances to which the negative interest rate is applied, while other 
financial institutions will have unused allowances in tiers to which a zero or positive interest 
rate  is  applied.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  the  aggregate  amount  of  policy-rate  balances  to 
which the negative interest rate is applied was initially about 10 trillion yen on a net basis for 
all financial institutions that hold a current account at the Bank. In fact, looking at the January 
2016  reserve  maintenance  period,  if  we  sum  up  the  amounts  outstanding  of  policy-rate 
balances of financial institutions that have a positive policy-rate balance, the sum was about 
20  trillion  yen.  However,  given  that  some  financial  institutions  have  unused  allowances  in 
tiers to which a zero or positive interest rate is applied, these financial institutions can raise 
funds from financial institutions that have a positive policy-rate balance at a rate that is still 
negative but higher (i.e., less negative) than minus 0.1 percent. These transactions will be 
profitable for both sides. If these arbitrage transactions take place in full, the net amount of 
negative-rate balances will be about 10 trillion yen. In other words, this suggests that there 
are  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  engage  in  transactions  in  the  interbank  money 
market.  In  Switzerland,  money-market  transactions  are  taking  place  at  negative  rates.  In 
these cases, private banks, which have large negative-rate balances, are lenders, and major 
banks, which have unused zero interest rate tier allowances, are borrowers. Going forward, 
we expect that these arbitrage transactions in the money market will gradually increase in 
Japan as well. 
Looking at developments in the money market since February 16, when the negative interest 
rate  started 
transactions  with  a  negative 
uncollateralized overnight call rate on that day,  there have been uncollateralized overnight 
call transactions with a negative interest rate since February 17, and the weighted average 
rate  has  been  negative.  Meanwhile,  the  volume  of  transactions  in  call  markets  decreased 
from  the  previous  reserve  maintenance  period.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  as  financial 
institutions proceed with updating  their computer systems and operations, and as markets 
become  more  accustomed  to  negative  interest  rates,  transactions  in  call  markets  will 
increase.  In  fact,  as  mentioned,  in  Switzerland  and  Denmark,  which  adopted  negative 
interest rates earlier, transactions between financial institutions with negative rate balances – 
which  have  become  lenders  –  and  those  with  unused  zero  or  positive  interest  rate  tier 
allowances – which have become borrowers – have taken place at negative interest rates. 
The volume of money market transactions in the two countries is quite substantial. The Bank 
will continue to carefully monitor developments in the money market, including how financial 
institutions adjust their computer systems and operations to cope with negative interest rate 
transactions. 
to  be  applied,  although 
there  were  no 
Concluding remarks 
We cannot deny that “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” has an adverse effect on financial 
institutions’  earnings.  That  said,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  aim  of  the  policy  is  to  benefit 
households and firms and ultimately to fully overcome deflation. The policy seeks to further 
reduce  real  interest  rates  and  strengthen  the  effects  of  QQE,  which  has  proven  to  be 
effective  over  the  past  three  years.  By  making  full  use  of  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest 
Rate,” the Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Deflation  will  not  return  to  Japan.  Price  stability  with  2  percent  inflation  will  definitely  be 
achieved. 
Thank you. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
