  Sam Woods: Embarking on a new voyage? Solvency II in context 
Text of The Insurance Institute of London Lecture by Mr Sam Woods, Executive Director of 
Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  Lloyd’s  of  London,  London,  27  January 
2016. 
 I  am  grateful  to  Kayleigh  Guinan  and  Mark  Cornelius  for  their  assistance  in  preparing  this  speech.  I  am  also 
grateful to Norma Cohen (Bank of England), Dr Adrian Leonard (Cambridge), Professor Philip Rawlings (Queen 
Mary) and Robert Thoyts (FCA) for their views and input. 
Good afternoon. 
The good ship Solvency II is now afloat. It has taken a long time to make it seaworthy. Some 
might question whether we need this newly improved vessel. Indeed, some might challenge 
whether we should have a ship at all. But that is largely academic, given we are now under 
way and in light of the gargantuan efforts insurance firms and regulators have put into getting 
us to this point. 
In my speech today, I would like to look at this development in the wider context of insurance 
history. First, I would like to offer a brief view on why, looked at through the lens of today, we 
regulate insurance companies at all. 
Second, we will take a very whirlwind tour of 5,000 years of insurance activity, for the single 
purpose of pointing out that for at least four-and-a-half of those five millennia there was very 
little regulation of insurance, if any. 
Third,  I  will  examine  how  the  British  state  has  involved  itself  in  the  affairs  of  insurance 
companies over the past 500 years. 
Finally, I will ask what – if anything – we can learn from this as we enter the Solvency II era. 
My main conclusion, which may make me unpopular with many colleagues and members of 
the  insurance  industry,  is  a  simple  one:  Solvency  II  is  a  big  and  important  change,  but  – 
when viewed in the context of history – we are still sailing the same ship, in broadly the same 
direction. 
Why do we regulate insurers? 
Individuals and institutions give money to insurance companies to transfer the cost of risks 
they could not otherwise bear. In doing so, they trust that the insurer will make good on its 
promise in the event that the insured risk crystallises. Indeed, the word policy comes from the 
Italian  “polizza”,  which  meant  a  promise  or  an  undertaking.  Like  banks,  insurers  invest 
policyholder funds directly onto their balance sheet thereby exposing customers directly to 
the risk inherent in those balance sheets. Our job at the PRA is to make sure that insurance 
companies keep their promises to pay policyholders and do not let them down, often when 
they need that money the most. 
Insurance companies undertake an activity that matters, often critically – for the corporates 
that rely  on  protection  of  insurance for  the  day-to-day  running  of their  businesses,  and for 
individuals  who  invest  a  significant  portion  of  their  wealth  in  insurers  over  their  lifetime,  or 
who  rely  on  insurers  to  protect  them  against  financial  disasters.  It  is  for  these  very  basic 
reasons that we are interested in insurance as a matter of public policy. 
However, we cannot justify regulation of an industry just because its activity is important. The 
aim of regulation is always to correct some sort of market failure. The insurance industry has 
many characteristics that could lead to the market producing a sub-optimal outcome, if left 
alone.  First,  the  insurance  business  model  is  unusual  in  that  it  has  an  inverse  production 
cycle – insurers typically receive premia upfront for a service that may or may not have to be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  rendered in future (claims), the cost of which is difficult to calculate. Policyholders rely on the 
insurance  company  to  set  aside  appropriate  provisions  to  satisfy  future  claims,  but  the 
market may not always be a reliable mechanism for ensuring that insurance companies do 
not grow excessively by taking on too much risk. 
Insurance  obligations  are  often  long-term  and  so  policyholders  trust  insurance  companies 
with  their  money  for  considerable  periods  of  time.  It  is  possible  that  the  behaviour  and 
incentives  of  an  insurance  company  evolve  in  a  way  that  does  not  take  account  of  the 
interests  of  policyholders,  not  least  because  the  best  interests  of  the  shareholder  and  the 
policyholder are not perfectly aligned. 
The receipt of premia before claims have to be paid can  introduce perverse incentives for 
struggling insurers in particular. For instance, faced with the prospect of failure, there is a risk 
that insurers begin to invest in high-return but riskier assets, or rely on unsustainably priced 
new  business  to  ride  the  tide,  without  being  called  to  account  by  the  market1.  This  looks 
dangerously  like  a  “gamble  for  resurrection”,  which  might  in  some  circumstances  be  a 
rational strategy for shareholders but is unlikely to serve policyholders well. 
Moreover, the inability of policyholders to transfer their policy or amend the terms of what is 
essentially an infungibile contract limits the extent to which they can maintain the best deal. 
Furthermore, it is difficult for policyholders to assess the true soundness of any one firm. The 
absence  of  a  tough  claimholder  therefore  necessitates  the  existence  of  some  objective 
standard by which insurers can be assessed – in today’s environment, this most often takes 
the form of being authorised by a supervisory authority that subjects firms to legal regulatory 
standards. Of course, this standard will always be imperfect – but I think it is far better than 
nothing. 
The role of the PRA is to make sure that the risks for which insurance companies provide 
protection  do  not  revert  to  the  customer  when  bad  outcomes  happen.  It  would  be  grossly 
unfair if you had paid somebody to take your risks away, only to find that you had unwittingly 
acquired a huge credit risk by giving your money to a financially unsound company. Our main 
job  at  the  PRA  is  to  ensure  that  firms  are  safe  and  sound,  and  contribute  to  policyholder 
protection. That way, the shareholder can reap the rewards if the risks pay off, but will bear 
the cost if the firm loses money. 
This  public  policy  case  is  well  established  in  many  countries,  such  that  the  approach  of 
different  regulators  is  often  founded  in  commonly  agreed  principles.  For  instance,  in  the 
1970s,  the  introduction  of  Solvency  I  codified  these  principles  into  a  set  of  requirements 
across the EU. 
The birthplace of insurance 
However, looked at across the sweep of insurance history, this public policy case is a new-
fangled set of ideas. I have tried to find out what, if anything, public authorities have thought 
about  insurance through  time. In my quest  to find  the  answer  to  this question, I  ended  up 
going back further than anticipated – to around 3000 B.C. – and came across the curiously-
named  practice  of  “bottomry”  in  the  era  of  Babylon.  Bottomry,  it  turns  out,  was  a  type  of 
contract  whereby  a  lender  would,  for  a  fee,  put  up  money  (either  in  the  form  of  a  loan  or 
sometimes a joint stake in the stock) for the purpose of advancing trade. This was on the 
understanding that “the borrower should, in consideration of a high rate of interest, be freed 
from liability in the event of certain accidents happening, e.g. failure of goods to arrive at their 
intended  destination”2.  This  looks  to  me  rather  like  a  Babylonian  version  of  today’s 
catastrophe bond. 
                                                
1  Plantin and Rochet (2007). See also Thoyts (2010). 
2  Clayton (1971). See also, Bernstein (1996). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The practice of bottomry flourished due to the proximity of another group of great traders – 
the Phoenicians, who adapted the basic concept to support trade expansion on the Greek 
coastline  during  the  10th  and  9th  centuries  B.C.,  and  to  the  increasing  domination  in  the 
Aegean Sea after 800 B.C. of Greek traders who needed indemnity against their cargo. 
Hop  westward  across  the  Mediterranean  Sea  to  ancient  Rome,  and  citizens  were  paying 
subscriptions  to  so-called  “burial  societies”  to  cover  the  cost  of  expenses  associated  with 
their  death  –  a  kind  of  latter-day  funeral  insurance.  This  activity  evolved  such  that  by  the 
second century A.D. it became common practice instead to pay the relatives of the deceased 
person a lump sum (the funeraticium), provided their subscription was not in arrears and the 
deceased had not committed suicide3. Despite not being labelled as such, this arrangement 
seems  in  some  way  similar  to  a  modern-day  life  insurance  policy.  And  yet  back  then, 
perhaps  unsurprisingly,  the  subscriptions  paid  by  members  were  not  subject  to  any 
protections  or  oversight  –  indeed,  when  a  burial  society  did  run  out  of  money,  it  was 
commonplace simply to issue a notice to convey the demise of the society and the fact that 
funeral expenses would no longer be met. There is also evidence that soldiers in the Roman 
army were paid a lump sum at retirement, despite the fact that contributions were not made 
throughout the soldier’s lifetime. 
By medieval times, the Church had become one of the largest employers and had started 
occasionally to issue pensions to clergymen. One such example involved Nicholas Thorne, a 
former abbot of St Augustine’s monastery, who was living in difficult circumstances. Thorne 
had  voluntarily  retired,  apparently  stricken  by  a  guilty  conscience  after  he  acquired  some 
documentation on behalf of the abbey through bribery at the Court of Rome. The scandal led 
him to retire to an ordinary monastery in Yorkshire, but when his old comrades heard of his 
infirmity and weakness, they awarded him an ex gratia pension of 10 marks a year4. It seems 
unlikely  that  the  Church  extended  such  gestures  on  a  regular  basis,  but  from  this  point 
onwards  we  can  see  evidence  of  pension  provision  via  employers  (the  Church  and  King), 
particularly  for  notable  individuals  in  society  where  reliance  on  charity  alone  would  not 
suffice. 
Such examples are not representative of the modern day insurance companies established 
since the 19th century. But I include them to illustrate that the principles of insurance were 
very much alive as far back as our earliest civilisations – and mostly without any controls or 
regulation around them. So what changed? 
Enter the state 
This  brings  us  to  my  main  theme  today:  the  interest  of  the  British  state  in  the  affairs  of 
insurance companies. My aim is not to do full justice to this field of history given the rich body 
of academic literature available, but – in order to see Solvency II in context – to give a flavour 
of  the  sorts  of  philosophies  and  motivations  that  seem  to  me  to  have  guided  the  British 
state’s involvement through time. 
Most textbooks will reference marine risk as one of the earliest forms of insurance in the UK. 
But  evidence  of  one  of  the  first  genuine  insurance  policies  suggests  that  whilst  the  first 
marine contract may well have been written in nearby Lombard Street, the risk was not taken 
on by British underwriters – instead, it was underwritten by Italian counterparts temporarily 
resident in London5. Indeed, throughout this period, there are several mentions of insurance 
interactions between London and the Italian regions of Lombardy and Tuscany6 – hence the 
                                                
3  Lewin (2003). 
4 
5 
6 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  development of policy wordings according to the customs of what would become known as 
Lombard Street. 
The  contracts  written  around  this  time  –  which  de-coupled  the  insurance  risk  from  the 
financing of voyages such that there was a genuine insurance element – related to popular, 
often expensive, commodities like woollens, iron and grain. So it is little surprise that disputes 
arose when adverse events took hold, particularly when risks were written across borders. In 
addition,  it  became  easy  to  enter  into  dishonest  practices,  for  example  by  finding  multiple 
brokers  to  write  the  same  risk  and  then  cashing  in  several  policies  for  the  same  insured 
event. 
This brings us to the first, to my knowledge, serious participation of the British state in the 
affairs of insurers: disputes. These disputes led to the involvement of the judicial system, with 
high volumes of cases referred to the Privy Council. When this situation became untenable, 
the Privy Council established a tribunal (later known as the Court of Assurances) to which 
seven merchants (along with a Judge of the Admiralty and one civil and one common lawyer) 
would  report  twice  a  week  (Monday  and  Thursday)  to  resolve  disputes.  This  group  had 
authority  from  Parliament  to  commit  underwriters  to  prison  if  they  failed  to  meet  their 
obligations7. In 1575, the Privy Council ordered the Lord Mayor to compile some rules since 
no body of law existed to determine the resolution of insurance disputes. Around the same 
time, Queen Elizabeth granted a monopoly on the writing of assurance policies to Richard 
Candeler, who led the newly-created Office of Assurances. The Office introduced a system 
of fees – with the Office receiving a fixed percentage per £100 insured8 – for the production 
of physical written policies. 
Both through the creation of the Office and Court of Assurances, and the receipt of customs 
duties from insurers, the Privy Council in the 16th century – as approved by the monarch – 
cemented the role of the state in exercising a judicial function and creating an environment of 
policy registration and anti-fraud conducive to commerce. So, as I see it, this first phase of 
engagement  between  the  British  state  and  the  insurance  sector  was  effectively  a  trade: 
dispute  resolution  services  were  provided  by  the  state,  and  insurers  contributed  some 
revenue  to  it  in  return.  Indeed,  in  the  early  stages  this  revenue  went  directly  to  Candeler 
himself. 
Despite the tight state controls around who could write insurance, the nature of risks being 
underwritten  was  granted  little  oversight  –  so  much  so  that,  for  many,  the  practice  of 
insurance became synonymous with gambling in the 18th century. Perhaps – and I say this 
with  some  trepidation  here  at  Lloyd’s  –  some  of  the  most  egregious  examples  of  such 
behaviour were evident in the marine market. By this point, London had emerged as a centre 
of excellence in marine risks, due partly to its strategic location on famous shipping routes. 
Marine insurance had become a necessity for trade – without protection, a bad storm could 
overturn the entire fortunes of merchants. But a lack of safeguards paved the way for abuse. 
One  particularly  spectacular  example  involved  John  McDougall,  a  Glaswegian  merchant, 
who arranged to have a ship called Friends (whose cargo was valued at £1000) deliberately 
shipwrecked off the coast of Denmark – but not before insuring his own stake in the voyage 
in  five  separate  policies  for  £3,475  and  insuring  the  ship  and  other  goods  for  £1,660  in  a 
further three  policies. In  total,  he  obtained  eight  policies  on  the  same  risk  –  spreading  the 
deceit  between  unsuspecting  underwriters  across  Glasgow,  Dundee,  Hull  and  London.  In 
doing so, McDougall (and others like him), introduced a speculative spirit that threatened the 
more sober motives crucial to indemnification contracts9. 
                                                
7  4 Statutes of the Realm 978 (1547-1624). 
8  Lewin (2003). 
9  Clark (2004). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Practices such as those described above ultimately led Parliament to take action. This first 
took the form of the Marine Insurance Act 1745, which rendered void marine policies made 
without an insurable interest. A similar provision was subsequently applied in relation to life 
insurance under the Life Assurance Act 1774. These Acts did leave a gap – namely, non-
marine indemnity policies. However this was filled when gambling contracts were rendered 
void by the Gambling Act 1845, as the existence of an insurable interest served to distinguish 
insurance contracts from gambling contracts. 
This was not the first time that Parliament had concerned itself with the affairs of insurance 
companies,  however.  In  1739,  Britain  entered  into  a  war  with  Spain.  As  a  consequence, 
trade with Spain ceased but – perhaps surprisingly – the underwriting of Spanish ships by 
British underwriters continued unabated. This led to a somewhat perverse situation in which 
British insurers compensated enemy merchants for shipping losses suffered at the hands of 
British  privateers  and  squadrons  of  the  Royal  Navy.  The  value  of  insurance  trade  was,  it 
seems,  considered  by  many  to  be  too  valuable  to  forfeit  voluntarily10  as  Britain  entered  a 
period of sustained warfare with Spain and then France. 
By 1748, attitudes had changed and Parliament passed an Act which banned the insurance 
of enemy ships by British insurers. Yet the Act was expired just a few months later (after the 
Seven Years War ended) such that insurers did, in fact, enjoy considerable discretion over 
which  risks  to  underwrite,  including  foreign  enemy  ships.  I  think  that  what  this  example 
ultimately demonstrates is the importance of trade and competitiveness in shaping the British 
state’s  involvement  in  the  affairs  of  insurers.  The  protection  of  enemy  ships  was  at  direct 
odds  with  Britain’s  foreign  policy  –  but  trade  was  ultimately  considered  strategically  more 
important.  In  common  with  the  environment  in  which  our  eighteenth-century  forebears 
worked, trade and competitiveness remain important contextual factors in the debate about 
how  we  should  regulate  insurers today.  Indeed,  it  is  useful to  remind  ourselves  that these 
debates  about  competitiveness  have  been  a  feature  of  the  state-business  nexus  around 
insurance for several hundred years. 
So, I think that we can see in this phase the emergence of a more complex set of interests 
and  motivations  for  the  British  state  in  dealing  with  the  insurance  sector  –  heightened 
concern  about  reckless  or  dishonest  practices  by  policyholders,  and  debates  about 
competitiveness and the importance of the industry to London and the Exchequer. But back 
in the 18th century, the aversion of Governments to getting involved in the affairs of insurers 
led to the development of a “freedom with publicity” approach. In practice, this meant self-
regulation  with  some  element  of  disclosure  in  order  to  encourage  market  discipline.  A 
burgeoning  insurance  press  emerged  in  the  1840s;  initially  funded  by  the  revenue  from 
insurance  advertisements,  these  newspapers  quickly  emerged  as  guides  to  help  the 
consumer  and,  indeed,  many  became  increasingly  critical  as  new  companies  began  to  go 
bust11. 
It wasn’t until the Bubble Act was repealed in 1825 that insurers were able to organise freely 
as  regular  joint  stock  companies,  outside  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Assurances.  As  a 
consequence,  the  number  of  insurance  companies  skyrocketed;  following  a  flurry  of 
formations in the 1820s, more than four hundred insurers were established over the next four 
decades12,  ranging  from  small  (often  fraudulent)  companies  to  some  names  still  around 
today. Somewhat startlingly, of the 219 insurers established between 1843-1870, 170 were 
discontinued by 187013 – so over three out of every four new companies failed. 
Ibid. 
                                                
10 
11  Alborn (2009). 
12 
13  Borscheid and Hauter (2012). 
Ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In 1869, the Albert Life Assurance Company failed, in part due to an over-ambitious takeover 
strategy14  but  also  to  having  racked  up  excessive  expenses,  inadequate  premia  and  an 
unexpectedly high surrender rate. Despite a suspicion that the Albert had been insolvent for 
several years, the company only failed when it ran out of liquid assets to pay current claims – 
thus revealing the limited oversight of insurers more generally and, in this case, the lack of 
legal means available to prevent the company from trading any earlier. 
The  Albert  is  therefore  often  cited  as  the  catalyst15  for  a  piece  of  legislation  passed  the 
following year – the Life Assurance Companies Act 1870 – which attempted to address such 
problems and establish a scheme of regulation specifically tailored to insurers. This in part 
reflected  the  view  of  the  insurance  industry  by  Parliament  –  described  by  the  Select 
Committee  of  1853  as  “those  useful  institutions”  –  as  playing  an  important  role  in  the 
economy. It is noteworthy that even back in the 19th century, many were outraged by the 
introduction  of  the  Act  which  to  them  represented  ‘the  mephitic  influence  of  red-tape 
regulations’16  –  a  sentiment  that  has  surely  been  uttered  in  more  recent  times  too.  But 
ultimately,  it  was  considered  too  costly  for  the  state to  rely  on  the  effectiveness  of  market 
discipline at a time when the reputation of the industry was so sour it was being satirised in 
novels  by  Dickens.  Indeed,  for  these  reasons  the  1870  Act  was  widely  welcomed  by 
professional bodies like the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries17. 
The  1870  Act  introduced  a  number  of  elements  aimed  at  regaining  the  confidence  of 
policyholders in the insurance sector. First, insurers now had to stump up £20,000 (roughly 
£2m in today’s money) as security before they reached a certain size, which curbed the influx 
of new companies that, up to this point, had been entering the market at very rapid rates. In 
addition,  accounts  and  balance  sheets  had  to  be  published  in  a  prescribed  form,  thereby 
introducing a degree of consistency and comparability between different firms. Importantly, 
firms now had to publish an actuarial report on their financial condition every five years and 
insurers had to take into account prospective liabilities under existing policies; in other words, 
they had to look forward. 
The  1870  Act  was  clearly  a  major  evolution  of  the  state’s  approach  to  insurance  and 
established many of the building blocks that still underpin the regulation of insurers today – 
the  importance  of  solvency,  the  role  of  the  actuary,  the  interests  of  current  and  future 
policyholders, and a role for financial disclosure. Despite contemporary opinion at the time 
suggesting that a delicate balance needed to be struck between the role of the state and the 
activity  of  the  market,  the  willingness  of  the  state  to  legislate  on  these  matters  was  a 
significant step in that it acknowledged more explicitly than before a legitimate public interest 
in insurance18. Despite this, many thought that the Act was not robustly implemented, nor did 
it deliver results overnight. Indeed, the 1870 Act was relatively non-interventionist compared 
to how insurance regulation would evolve throughout the 20th century. 
But before we come to developments in the nearer term, it is worth noting that it wasn’t just 
the  private  sector  that  was  mobilising  itself  in  the  insurance  industry  at  this  time.  In  1865, 
Parliament  passed  the  Government  Annuities  Act,  which  empowered  the  Postmaster-
General to conduct life assurance business on behalf of the state. A year earlier, Gladstone 
(then Chancellor) delivered a speech to the House of Commons in which he was particularly 
scathing  of  the  high  lapse  rates  and  expense  ratios  which  it  was  felt  were  giving 
                                                
14  Clayton (1971). See also, Alborn (2009). 
15  Rawlings (2015). 
16  Alborn (2009). 
17  Council of The Institute of Actuaries, Minute Book II: January 1854 – May 1866, see minutes of 9 March 1854 
and 1 August 1857. 
18  Rawlings (2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  policyholders  a  raw  deal.  His  remedy  was  for  the  state  to  compete  directly  with  these 
companies in the mass market in a bid to raise standards or drive them out of business19. 
The insurance sector today is no doubt relieved that such a strategy is not being adopted by 
the  PRA.  And,  in  fact,  the  scheme  was  not  very  successful  in  the  end,  largely  because  it 
abandoned  the  collection  of  weekly  premia  by  doorstop  agents  which  ultimately  increased 
lapse risk. 
The  state  would  later  dabble  in  annuities  once  more  but  motivated  by  a  different  set  of 
reasons this time – the funding of war. During the early part of the 20th century, I am told the 
Government extended annuity provision as a way to access funding for World War. Indeed, 
there is evidence that states have used the provision of insurance as a way to self-fund going 
as far back as the 15th Century; in 1425, the city-state of Florence introduced a specialised 
social insurance system, the so-called ‘Dowry Fund’, which enabled fathers to make regular 
deposits on behalf of their daughters to accumulate a dowry that would be payable upon their 
marriage20 – all for the purpose of financing the state purse. 
Over the course of the 20th century, regulation evolved further but the concept of supervision 
had not yet surfaced, at least not in the UK; the UK Board of Investment appointed its first 
actuary  in  1917,  but  by  this  point  the  New  York  State  Insurance  Department  was  already 
employing  179  (supervision)  staff.  By  the  1970s,  an  era  of  supervision  –  as  distinct  from 
regulation – had begun in the UK. The more recent history of insurance regulation over the 
last century is a major topic in its own right, so I only propose to outline a few points. 
In  1923,  the  Industrial  Assurance  Act  introduced  a  Commissioner  to  discharge  statutory 
powers  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  with  the  idea  of  specific  regulatory  bodies 
introduced21. By 1946, the regulatory framework had expanded to include motor, aviation and 
transit insurance and, significantly, the deposit system was replaced by a more sophisticated 
solvency margin which specified that a particular margin of assets over liabilities should be 
maintained.22. 
A string of high-profile failures in the 1960s and 1970s – including the failure of Fire, Auto 
and Marine which left 400,000 (mostly motor) policyholders uninsured, and an even bigger 
failure  in  1971  when  Vehicle  &  General,  with  1.2  million  policyholders,  collapsed  –  led  to 
demands for further reform23 at a time when a wave of consumer protection laws beyond the 
insurance sector had put regulation firmly on the agenda in any event. 
Relatively  speaking,  up  until  the  1970s,  individuals  running  insurance  companies  attracted 
scarce regulatory attention. This all changed in the 1970s when conditions around the fitness 
and  propriety  of  senior  individuals  were  introduced.  In  practice,  however,  the  professional 
conduct  of  individuals  –  as  well  as  the  organisation  and  culture  of  insurance  firms  –  has 
always mattered, particularly in earlier periods when reputation was the only means by which 
policyholders could assess the safety and soundness of insurers. 
The  failure  of  Equitable  Life  in  2000  –  driven  by  an  over-extension  on  the  part  of  the 
company in offering guaranteed annuity rates on their products with insufficient reserves to 
pay out – reinforced the importance of a sound regulatory and supervisory framework and, 
once again, the case was reform was alive. 
But  perhaps  the  single  largest  factor  in  determining  the  nature  of  state  involvement  in  the 
insurance  sector  towards  the  end  of  the  20th  century  was  the  UK’s  membership  of  the 
                                                
19  Clayton (1971). 
20  Fratianni, and Spinelli (2006). 
21  Thoyts (2010). 
22  Ibid. 
23  Ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  European  Economic  Community.  Not  only  did  it  require  the  UK  to  enact  a  package  of 
European directives (colloquially known as Solvency I), but it has had a significant impact on 
the  British  state’s  involvement  in  the  affairs  of  insurance  companies  ever  since.  Whilst 
Solvency  I  allowed  the  state  to  introduce  further  UK-specific  initiatives  for  the  insurance 
sector – such as the Individual Capital Adequacy Standards (ICAS) regime – insurers and 
regulators  alike  are  now  bound  by  European-wide  maximum-harmonising  requirements, 
most notably of course through the recent implementation of Solvency II. 
  Conclusion 
What  can  we  learn  from  this?  As  with  all  history,  one  can  take  different  views  on  what 
happened  in  the  past,  why  it  happened  and  whether  it  has  any  significance  for  us  today. 
Personally, I take three things from it: 
• 
First, there is a sound public policy case for the regulation of insurance. But looked 
at in the very long context of insurance history, the state’s involvement in the direct 
regulation of insurance activity is a relatively recent phenomenon. 
Second,  coming  to  the  UK,  a  tidy-minded  historian  could  easily  identify  some 
common  themes  which  appear  present  in  different  phases  of  the  British  state’s 
involvement in insurance, and perhaps weave them into a coherent narrative. I am 
less  convinced.  With  the  exception  of  a  consistent  interest  in  being  able  to  raise 
revenue  from  insurance  activity,  the  motivations  and  philosophies  which  have 
guided  the  British  state’s  involvement  in  insurance  matters  seem  to  me  to  have 
varied very widely through time. The earliest phase of dispute resolution, the later 
phase of freedom with publicity, and our current phase of quite intensive prudential 
and conduct supervision seem to me to be very different. 
Third,  although  there  are  important  technical  differences  between  ICAS  and 
Solvency  II,  the  basic  philosophy  remains  similar:  market-consistent  capital 
regulation  coupled  with  supervision.  I  do  not  wish  to  underplay  the  huge  efforts 
made  by  many  people  across  the  insurance  sector  in  bringing  in  Solvency  II,  but 
compared  to  previous  shifts  in  philosophy,  the  change  appears  quite  modest.  To 
return  to  my  marine  analogy,  the  good  ship  Solvency  II  has  more  up-to-date  and 
useful  features  than  the  old  one.  But  it  is  an  evolution,  not  a  revolution,  in  ship 
design.  It  still  has  cabins,  a  bow,  and  propellers.  More  importantly,  we  may  have 
tuned up the engine a bit and altered course by a few degrees, but we have clearly 
not changed our course or our destination. 
Thank you. 
References 
Adams, J. The impact of changing regulation on the insurance regulation on the insurance 
industry, speech delivered at the Nicholas Barbon Lecture, London, 2012. 
Alborn,  T.  Regulated  Lives:  Life  Insurance  and  British  Society  1800-1914,  Toronto, 
University of Toronto Press, 2009. 
Andromachi,  G.  and  Goldby,  M.  (eds),  Systemic  Risk  and  the  Future  of  Insurance 
Regulation, London, Informa Law, 2015. 
Bailey, A. The evolution of insurance regulation: a shifting scope and new frontiers, speech 
delivered at the Nicholas Barbon Lecture, London, 2013. 
Bernstein, Peter. L. Against the Gods: the remarkable story of risk, New York, Wiley, 1996. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Black, M.A., ‘Chronological and Statistical Chart of the Life Associations Established in the 
United  Kingdom  from  1706  to  1863  Showing  Where  They  Are,  When  &  How  They 
Disappeared,. Published by Edward Stanford, 1864. 
Borscheid, P. and Haueter, Niels-Viggo. World Insurance: The Evolution of a Global Risk 
Network, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2012. 
Clark, G. ‘Insurance as an Instrument of War in the 18th Century’, The Geneva Papers on 
Risk and Insurance, Vol. 29, No. 2, (April 2004), pp. 247–257. 
Clayton, G. British Insurance, London, Elek, 1971. 
Debbage, S. and Dickinson, S. ‘The rationale for the prudential regulation and supervision 
of insurers’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q3 2013. 
Finsinger,  J.  and  Pauly,  M.  (eds),  The  economics  of  insurance  regulation,  London, 
Macmillan, 1986. 
HeinOnline, Citation: 4 Statutes of the Realm 978, 1547–1624. 
Leonard, A. ‘Contingent commitment: The development of English marine insurance in the 
context of New Insitutional Economic, 1577-1720’, in Coffman, D’Maris, Leonard, A.B. and 
Neal,  Larry  (eds):  Questioning  ‘credible  commitment’:  perspectives  on  the  rise  of  financial 
capitalism, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
Lewin, C.G. Pensions and Insurance Before 1800: A Social History, East Lothian, Tuckwell, 
2003. 
Persaud, A. ‘How Not to Regulate Insurance Markets: The Risks and Dangers of Solvency 
II’, Peterson Institute for International Economics, PB15-5, April 2015. 
Pearson,  R.  and  Lonnborg,  M.  ‘Regulatory  Regimes  and  Multinational  Insurers  before 
1914’, The Business History Review, Vol. 82, No. 1, (Spring 2008), pp. 59–86. 
Plantin, G. and Rochet, JC. When insurers go bust, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 
2007. 
Raynes, H. A History of British Insurance, London, Pitman, 1968. 
Rawlings, P. ‘What can history tell us about insurance regulation?’ in Andromachi, G. and 
Goldby,  M. (eds), Systemic Risk and the Future of Insurance Regulation, London, Informa 
Law, 2015. 
Thoyts, R. Insurance Theory and Practice, Oxford, Routledge, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
