  Indrajit Coomaraswamy: Inaugural speech 
Inaugural speech by Dr Indrajit Coomaraswamy, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 
Colombo, 4 July 2016. 
 Deputy Governors, Mrs. Ramanathan, Senior Management, colleagues, it is a great privilege 
and honour to be here with you as the Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka is one of the great institutions in this country and I am acutely 
aware that a primary responsibility, arguably the primary responsibility of the Governor is to 
uphold its reputation and credibility. And I can assure you that I will do my utmost to do so at 
all times. Of course, I can’t do this on my own. I need the cooperation of each and every one 
of you to maintain this as one of the great institutions in the country. 
You know my parents went abroad when I was about eleven years old so I had much of my 
secondary and university education abroad. But as I was doing my degree and thinking of 
what I should do in the future – of course I had been abroad for many years, but I did come 
back every year for my summer holidays so I kept in touch with Sri Lanka – and there was no 
doubt in my mind as to what my career should be and that was to be as a staff member of 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. The Central Bank had such an awesome reputation. This was 
in the 70s. If you think of the iconic figures who have been on the Central Bank staff, they 
were legendary figures in this country. I don’t want to mention any names because I might 
miss some out but you just look back through the history of the Central Bank and you see 
some  great  names,  people  who  have  made  massive  contributions  to  this  country.  So  I 
wanted to be part of that narrative and so I came back and started life as a probationary staff 
officer of the Central Bank. And I must tell you, when I was working for the Commonwealth 
Secretariat,  almost  for  twenty  years  as  Dr.  Nandalal  said,  obviously  one  travels  around. 
There  are  54  members  of  the  Commonwealth  and  I  have  been  to  many  countries.  And 
invariably there are various occasions when you are introduced. I was always introduced by 
saying I started my career in the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and that was a great source of 
pride, to be able to say that I started my working life in this institution, and I continue to be 
enormously proud that I was part of this staff of this great institution for fifteen years. So in a 
way, it is coming the full cycle. It’s like coming back home after a long absence. It is a great 
pleasure, privilege and an honour to be able to come back. 
Of course, I am deeply indebted to His Excellency the President for appointing me as the 
Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. I am also indebted to the Hon. Prime Minister and 
the Hon. Finance Minister for supporting my appointment and I very much hope that I will be 
able to fulfill the trust they have reposed in me. When I met the President, he just told me 
one thing, he said “Do your work in a straight way and do not fear anybody in discharging 
your duties.” Now my intention is to follow his direction. 
When I met the Honourable Prime Minister, he laid out his vision for where he wants to take 
this country and there is a big role for the Central Bank. And in many ways, if we are not able 
to  fulfill  our  functions  in  the  way  it  should  be  fulfilled  –  in-terms  of  creating  a  platform  for 
macroeconomic  stability  with  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  having  financial  sector 
stability so there is confidence right through the system – nothing else is possible. That is the 
first step, to get strong macroeconomic fundamentals, to have the financial sector which is 
the  lifeblood  of  the  country  stable,  and  people  within  the  country  and  outside  having 
confidence in it. 
So that is our responsibility. And as I said, because I genuinely believe that nothing else will 
really take off, unless we are able to do our job well, to fulfill our functions well. So we have a 
big responsibility, and I look to all of you for assistance and cooperation in doing this. As the 
Deputy Governor mentioned, I did play a little bit of sport in my youth and one of the lessons 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
that I learnt, the key lesson probably, from playing sport, is that a captain is only as good as 
his team. You know, however smart or clever the captain is, unless his team has talent and 
there is teamwork, it’s not going to work. 
Having been through the process myself, I know how the Central Bank recruits its people. It 
is able to draw on the best people in the country. So in front of me I know there is enormous 
talent.  And  the  important  thing  though,  is  that  talent  alone  is  not  enough. We  need  to  be 
absolutely  together  for  that  talent  to  bear  fruit.  To  contribute  to  the  development  of  this 
country, we need to work as one. We need to have common objectives. 
Not all of us are going to be fond of each other. That is human nature. But we need to be 
professional enough to put those things aside and to achieve our common objectives. And 
now  there  are  a  number  of  important  things  that  need  to  be  done,  which  we,  once  I’ve 
spoken  to  the  senior  management  –  it  is  only  forty  eight  hours  since  I  knew  about  this 
appointment which was a bit of surprise as well – so I am not as well-prepared as would like 
to  have  been  before  I  came  before  you,  but  I  certainly  will  be  talking  to  the  Deputy 
Governors, the senior management and eventually to the Monetary Board to work out what 
we need to do. And then maybe at that point I will speak to you again, to share with you what 
we have to do in, say, the next three months, next year, the next three – five years, we need 
to think through, because as I said, the Central Bank has to really set the tone, to set the 
framework for everything else to happen. 
I don’t want to go on for too long and I just really want to leave three thoughts with you as to 
what the Central Bank, in my view, should be imbued with, what its culture should be. One is 
clearly, integrity. Two is technical excellence and three is professionalism. I would like 
those three concepts to be the guiding principles for all of us as we go forward. 
And if any of you think that I’m not living up to those principles, please find a way of getting 
that message to the fifteenth floor, that I personally am not living up to those three principles. 
Because, that, in-terms of leadership, that is important. I need to be able to set an example, 
and I am going to do my best to do so and you have ever any shortcomings as I said, I would 
like to hear. 
I want to encourage a culture of discussion, of debate, of openness, so please help me to do 
that. It should never be personal if somebody has a different opinion to you. We need to put 
our heads together. We will have different views, we need to throw it out in the open, discuss 
and then eventually, find the best way forward. 
And you know there is always concern about the balance between politics and economics. In 
my view for much of our post independent years – I’m not putting this on one party or the 
other party, or one government or the other – but if you look back from 1948, for most of the 
time,  politics  has  trumped  economics.  It  is  our  job  to  convince  our  politicians  that  good 
economics is good politics. We need to, as a central bank, to get away from this cycle of stop 
– go policies, of creating artificial booms through misaligned policies. We need to set a good 
framework,  as I  said, for  the  economy. We  have  a  representative  democracy. The  people 
elected by the people – the Government – of course have sovereignty reposed in them. 
However, the Monetary Law Act sets about some very specific responsibilities for the Central 
Bank. And it is up to us to fulfill those responsibilities in a very technocratic, objective and 
free way. That is not to say that we should be criticizing the Government of the day. That is 
not our business. But there are channels through which we can give independent advice to 
the Government discretely. I am very keen and I have spoken to our leaders too about this, 
that  the  Central  Bank  does  its  work  independently  and  in  a  technical  way  and  discretely 
advices the Government about what we think is the best way forward for those segments of 
policy  and  practice  for  which  the  Central  Bank  has  responsibility.  So,  I  need  your 
cooperation. 
Thank you, thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
