   
John Iannis Mourmouras: The EU crisis – EMU, Brexit, the migrant crisis, 
and Greece 
Intervention by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, 
at a Panel Discussion with former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker on the euro crisis, organized by 
OMFIF, Washington DC, 18 April 2016. 
 Views expressed here are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Greece. 
Let me begin by saying how delighted and honoured I am to participate in such a gathering of 
distinguished central bankers and policymakers here at the Metropolitan Club in Washington 
DC, most pre-eminently among them, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Paul Volcker, 
a giant in the world of central banking and public affairs over the last forty years. For this, I 
would like to thank David Marsh and the OMFIF Advisory Board for inviting me.  
A. 
On Europe  
On the incomplete architecture of EMU 
1.  
I will restrict my comments today to the incomplete architecture of EMU, Brexit and the migrant 
crisis and I will refrain from remarks on current European monetary policy since the ECB’s 
quiet period – as I was told last week – applies to deputy governors too; and coming Thursday 
(21/4/2016) the ECB Governing Council meets in Frankfurt.  
Partly as a result of the crisis in the euro area and Europe’s relative global decline, the EU is 
currently finding it difficult to manage events even in its own neighbourhood (see the unfolding 
migrant crisis). The fog of uncertainty has become thicker on the other side of the little pond, 
also  due  to  the  migrant crisis  and  the  British  referendum. The time  has now  come  for the 
European Union to take bold action.  
A plethora of policies and reports have been put forward to propose solutions to the euro crisis, 
from the Europe 2020 Strategy, the European Semester, the Six-Pack, the recently established 
“Structural Reform Support Service” specialised in technical assistance for Member States to 
assist  them  with  implementing  growth-enhancing  administrative  and  structural  reforms,  the 
introduction of national Competitiveness Boards or even an advisory European Fiscal Board 
and,  last  but  not  least, the  Five  Presidents’  Report for  completing  Europe’s  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union.  Of  course,  these  are  all  very  nice  acronyms  and  welcome  ideas  and 
proposals, but have yet to be tested in practice.  
All these initiatives reflect a shift towards more burden-sharing and this is undoubtedly very 
important and welcome news to me as a pro-European. The question of course remains how 
quickly Europe will complete its Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) – before it is really too 
late – and move, for instance, towards a common Deposit Guarantee Scheme, some form of 
sovereign debt mutualisation, or indeed put in place a Capital Markets Union. I would also like 
to see the ESM mutated to a truly European Monetary Fund in charge, among other things, of 
future debt restructurings in eurozone member countries.  
There is not much time left. The time has come for change, and I mean the full completion of 
EMU. “Nothing endures but change” to quote Heraclitus, a 4th century BC Greek philosopher. 
As long as Europe adapts, it will survive. There is an old saying in Brussels that the European 
project only advances in times of crisis, and Europe’s leaders have a tried-and-tested method 
of coming up with policy fixes only when asked to cope with emergency situations. I am pretty 
confident that this generalised crisis will not lead to Europe’s unbundling, but will inspire it to 
introduce long-term changes to the foundations of the European integration project.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   On Brexit and the migrant crisis  
2.  
A very brief comment on the migrant crisis and Brexit – the two hot topics in Europe today – 
that both have been addressed separately by panellists earlier. In my intervention I will explain 
how these two issues could be linked to create a real nightmare scenario. The migrant crisis 
has triggered a debate about security that may reshape the European Union. Following last 
month’s terrorist attacks at Brussels airport which have hit the main arteries of the capital of 
the European Union (its airport and metro system), we see that the security threat is real if the 
integration  of  refugees  and  immigrants  in  the  Western  societies  which  host  them  is  not 
successful. There are now mounting concerns and growing scepticism in host countries about 
the  global  terrorism  threat  (human  shields)  and  how  far  this  could  go.  For  instance,  an 
unexpected event might tilt the vote in the British referendum towards the ‘Leave’ camp, turning 
it into a single-issue referendum (that of security) and possibly leading to Brexit. Two shocks 
of  this  scale  would  be  unbearable  indeed.  Coming  at  a  time  like  this,  Brexit  could  have 
disastrous effects for the European construction.  
B.  
On Greece  
On what went wrong in Greece  
1.  
Taking  over  from  Athanasios  Orphanides  and  his  earlier  remarks  on  what  went  wrong  in 
Greece, I would like to say a few words on that myself.  
The dramatic rise in the unemployment ratio, which almost tripled from 9% in 2008 to 26% 
today, due to the free-fall in output (more than 25% loss of GDP, comparable only to the US 
Great Depression of 1929), the dramatic fall in living standards and valuations of assets (real 
and financial), the accumulation of another mountain of debt (private debt of €200 billion in just 
5 years), the ongoing exclusion from the international capital markets and hence the need for 
a  3rd  Memorandum  –  currently  under  way  –  makes  it  evident  even  to  the  layman  that 
adjustment programmes in the case of Greece have failed, at least so far (Ireland, Cyprus, 
Portugal all needed only one MoU and recently successfully exited from it).  
There are several reasons for that and I am quite certain that dozens of PhD dissertations will 
be written in future about the causes of Greece’s Great Recession. I name a few: the initial-
point argument (a huge deficit that required a bold adjustment effort); errors in the design of 
the  programme  that  include  the  mix  of  adjustment  measures  (a  greater  reliance  on  tax 
increases  than  public  spending  cuts),  the  value  of  fiscal  multipliers,  etc.;  the  slow  pace  of 
implementation of structural reforms (due to a lack of programme ownership on behalf of Greek 
authorities, and this is our European lenders’ view); the fact that Greece is a relatively closed 
economy and, hence, internal devaluation may contribute negatively, in net terms, to economic 
activity; and finally, the fact that debt restructuring in 2012 should have occurred much sooner, 
i.e. at the beginning of the first MoU in 2010 (the IMF view), etc.  
On top of the above five reasons which are more or less commonly accepted, I would add a 
couple of extra – rather technical and more subtle – reasons on what went wrong in Greece. 
Firstly, as we know, fiscal consolidation took place through the targeting of a nominal variable, 
that  of  the  overall  fiscal  deficit  which  is  cyclical.  Taking  permanent  austerity  measures  to 
reduce  the  cyclical  deficit  only  deepens  and  prolongs  a  recession,  it  results  in  excessive 
austerity  and  over-taxation  which  is  self-defeating  (it  raises  less  government  revenues). 
Instead, the structural deficit should be the appropriate target variable, and the cyclical deficit 
would correct itself through the economy’s automatic fiscal stabilisers, provided that growth-
enhancing measures supplement fiscal  consolidation {this  is  my  FT  article, January  2012}. 
Secondly, there is a certain misperception in the MoUs about how reforms would work in the 
economy. I  identify three grey  areas  here:  Firstly,  reforms  take time to unlock  their growth 
potential  and  their  results  are  also  country-specific.  A  recent  study  by  the  OECD  (2014) 
indicates that the above time period may extend to five years or more. Secondly, structural 
reforms work better and quicker when there is investment to take advantage of them and, more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   generally, demand in the economy, because the more the recession lingers on, the harder it is 
to get positive results by implementing structural reforms {see my WSJ article, March 2012}. 
An  illustrative  example  from the  recent Greek  experience  is  the  liberalisation  in  the  freight 
transport industry in 2012. Despite the opening of the market which resulted in reduced freight 
transport charges, the industry did not grow as analysts had expected because of the recession 
and lack of demand in the economy. By contrast, the removal of cabotage restrictions in 2013 
had a particularly positive impact on cruise-ship tourism in following years, because of strong 
foreign  demand  in  this  particular  sector.  Last  but  not  least,  as  regards  the  sequencing  of 
reforms, the appropriate strategy is: product market reforms come first and are then followed 
by labour market reforms (whereas in the case of Greek MoUs the exact opposite took place). 
{In my latest two-volume book “The Double Sovereign Debt – Banking Crisis”, 2015) I explain 
all the above in more detail.}  
On how to revive the Greek economy  
2.  
In response to Paul Volcker’s earlier remark that Greece is a relatively small country and it 
wouldn’t be difficult to achieve a turnaround of its economy, I would like to say a few words. 
Indeed, Greece is a small country, only accounting for 1.76% of the euro area’s GDP [and just 
0.38% of the world’s GDP]. My own personal view on how to revive the Greek economy from 
its current stalemate is the following:  
Firstly, it is imperative to stabilise expectations as soon as possible. Given the directionless 
economic governance of last year and the resultant huge cost of the economy’s backtracking 
(capital controls, etc.), this could be achieved through the timely completion of the first review 
of the 3rd MoU, if possible yesterday! Then this could pave the way for the following benign 
steps, a sort of roadmap:  
• 
Reinstatement of the waiver: that will release at least €5 billion from the current ELA 
programme (at 1.5% interest rate) to be channelled towards standard monetary policy 
operations (MRO) with zero interest charge, contributing to Greek banks’ profitability.  
Debt relief negotiations from either of the two options on the table: the ESM plan or 
the IMF plan. 
The country then will be getting the “certificate” of the DSA, which will open the door 
to  credit  rating  upgrades  for  Greek  sovereign  bonds,  bringing  closer  the  date  of 
Greece’s inclusion into the ECB’s QE programme which will help towards a lowering 
of spreads for GGBs and the gradual return to international capital markets.  
  Secondly, an equal focus should be given to short- and medium-term growth prospects of the 
economy because there is evidence that by now recession in Greece has the characteristics 
of hysteresis, namely a persistent and long-lasting recession (and this is the long-run downside 
risk for the Greek economy). Let me explain. The initial, non-permanent (cyclical) effects of the 
recession have shifted into permanent, structural problems (lack of new physical capital due 
to disinvestment, depreciation of human capital due to both the skills deterioration of the long-
term unemployed and the brain drain). To give you only one figure: in 2007, investment was 
27% of GDP, whereas last year it was 12% of GDP, the lowest level since 1960. So very few 
would disagree that right now the country needs an investment shock within a new growth 
paradigm  centred  around  the  expansion  of  its  export-oriented  output  base,  aiming  at 
internationally tradable goods and services with high value added.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
