  Benoît Cœuré: Having confidence in Europe 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  a  conference  organised  by  the  Istituto  Affari  Internazionali,  Rome, 
26 September 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Stephanie  Bergbauer and  Florian Walch  for  their  assistance  in preparing this  speech.  All 
views expressed herein remain mine. 
The European Union is going through a difficult phase. 
The economic crisis, the threat of terrorism and the arrival of an unprecedented number of 
migrants are posing challenges to Europeans. The EU’s responses to these challenges have 
not removed doubts about its ability to act coherently and effectively when common solutions 
are needed. 
Following  the  UK’s  referendum  on  EU  membership,  Europe  has  become  embroiled  in  a 
wide-ranging  discussion  about  its  raison  d’être.  This  discussion  will  however  not  be 
successful if it is merely a diplomatic exercise: if Europe is about bringing Europeans closer 
together, it needs to relate to its citizens and listen to civil society. In other words, the res 
publica  needs  to  be  discussed  in the  various  parts  of  the  forum,  not just the  Curia,  where 
senators met here in Rome, but also the Comitium, where citizens could openly debate the 
matters of the time. I am thus grateful for your invitation and the opportunity to speak here at 
the Istituto Affari Internazionali today and to engage in a discussion with you. 
What I will present are observations and assessments from the perspective of a European 
central  banker  who  can  analyse  and  provide  suggestions.  But,  as  you  will  see,  quite  a 
number of the issues that I will discuss today lie outside the realm of central banking and can 
in fact only come about through political debate and ultimately political leadership. 
In my view, the European Union today lacks confidence in two important ways: 
First,  there  is  a  lack  of confidence  in  Europe; that  is,  in the  ability  of  European  policies  to 
address today’s challenges, reap the benefits of globalisation while controlling its costs, and 
increase Europe’s economic potential. This lack of confidence is reflected in the low levels of 
public trust in EU institutions, in the rising support for Eurosceptic parties, and was evident in 
the outcome of the UK referendum in June this year. 
Second,  there  is  also  a  lack  of  confidence  between  Europeans. This  is  compounded  by  a 
perceived  lack  of  a  strong  unifying  bond  or  joint  identity  as  EU  citizens.  The  divergence 
between national public discourses on economic governance has reached disturbingly high 
levels in the euro area. Sometimes, there is not even a common analysis on what has gone 
wrong. Policymakers are increasingly speaking about each other and not with each other. 
Let’s  therefore  set  aside  the  preconceptions  and  ask  ourselves  how  we  can  restore 
confidence in Europe and between Europeans. 
First, I will argue, there is need for resolute actions at national level. Second, there is need 
to provide clarity and ensure consistency in European integration. And, third, to overcome 
political  fragmentation,  there  is  need  to  reinforce  common  fora  for  debating  the  future  of 
Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  There are good reasons to have confidence in Europe 
First, I believe that there are in fact good reasons to have confidence in Europe and I want to 
mention some of them1. 
Alongside  the  United  States  and  China,  the  European  Union  is  currently  one  of  the  three 
biggest economic blocs in the world, each of roughly equal size in terms of purchasing power 
parity.  Europe  protects  its  citizens  from  external  economic  disruption  and  offers  them  a 
unique social model. A social model that we can be proud of and that can inspire the world, 
provided we can make it sustainable. 
Furthermore, we have managed to largely mitigate the recent financial and economic crisis, 
which for many countries in the EU was the most serious crisis since the Second World War. 
It  was  only  four  years  ago  that  the  euro  area  looked  into  the  abyss.  But  today,  we  find 
ourselves in a significantly better environment. In summer 2012, financial fragmentation was 
at  its  peak  but  has  since  then  strongly  receded.  Five  Member  States  were  in  economic 
adjustment  programmes,  four  of  them  are  now  again  standing  on  their  own  feet. 
Unemployment, although still unacceptably high in some countries, declined in 2016 for the 
third  consecutive  year,  and  employment  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  beaten  our 
expectations. 
The euro, despite the deficiencies in its architecture, has tangible benefits for the people of 
Europe.  It  is  the  second  most  important  currency  in  the  world,  and  it  has  delivered 
measurable  economic  benefits  for  Europeans  since  its  introduction2.  Investment  and 
competition  have  likewise  benefited  from  the  reduction  of  currency  risks  and  transaction 
costs.  The  euro  protected  the  Single  Market  by  eliminating  the  possibility  of  competitive 
exchange  rate  devaluations.  And  without  the  euro,  it  is  unlikely  that  our  small  or  medium-
sized economies would have better weathered the global financial turmoil. 
During the crisis, the euro was arguably the greatest bond holding Europeans together: the 
commitment to protect the single currency and the integrity of the euro area determined key 
decisions taken by European institutions and Member States. Its force as a common bond is 
also reflected in public opinion: popular support for the euro has remained high throughout 
the crisis. In spring 2016, support for the single currency stood at 68% in the euro area3 with 
a majority of citizens in favour of the euro in all euro area Member States. 
The ECB as the institution tasked with safeguarding the price stability of the euro has proven 
that it is able to act decisively within its mandate, even in very difficult situations, and to adapt 
its policy tools to a changing economic environment. We estimate that all other things being 
equal the measures we have taken since 2014 will raise the inflation rate by more than half a 
percentage  point,  on  average,  in  2016  and  2017.  And  they  will  help  to  increase  real  euro 
area GDP growth more than one and a half percentage points cumulated over 2015–2018. 
Finally,  the  establishment  of  European  banking  supervision  has  brought  some  important 
improvements  to  the  financial  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  For 
almost  two  years  the  ECB  has  now  been  supervising  around  130  of  the  most  significant 
banks  of  the  euro  area  and  indirectly  supervising  all  other  banks.  And  banks  have 
substantially strengthened their capital positions in that time: since 2012, the CET1 ratio for 
significant banks, for instance, has moved up from 9% to more than 13% today. Moreover, 
                                                
1  See  also  Cœuré,  B.,  “The  future  of  Europe:  building on  our  strengths”,  introductory  remarks at  the  plenary 
session on “The Future of Europe” during the fifth German Economic Forum in Frankfurt, 6 December 2013. 
2  Consider  trade,  for  example:  some  estimate  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  led  to  a  rise  in  trade  of 
around  50%.  See  Glick  R.  and  Andrew  K.  Rose,  “How  Much  Does  the  EMU  Benefit  Trade?”,  FRBSF 
Economic Letter, 21 March 2016. 
3  Standard Eurobarometer No 85, conducted in 28 Member States from 21 to 31 May 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ECB  Banking  Supervision  is  operating  at  arm’s  length  from  banks  and  enforcing  a  level 
playing field in the euro area by harmonising supervisory practices. 
In  summary,  the  EU’s  economic  potential,  the  euro  as  our  single  currency  backed  by  a 
single, credible and effective institution and the establishment of the single supervisor are all 
very good reasons to have confidence in Europe. 
Nevertheless, I won’t deny that we need to do much better in a number of areas. 
As mentioned previously, monetary policy has been very effective in supporting output and 
inflation.  But  as  I  have  said  elsewhere4,  our  monetary  policy  measures were  taken  on  the 
implicit  assumption  that  they  would  be  transient:  on  the  one  hand,  because  monetary 
stimulus would ultimately help counter the cyclical forces depressing the real equilibrium rate 
and  on  the  other  hand  because  other  economic  and  fiscal  policies  would  provide  cyclical 
support and tackle the more structural drivers of low real rates. 
But if fiscal and economic policies do not in fact play this role, we risk being trapped in a low 
growth, low interest rate equilibrium. Moving from interest rates being “low for long” to being 
“low forever” would severely limit the room for manoeuvre for conventional monetary policy 
tools, but even more worryingly, it would threaten the contract between generations as well 
as  risk  tearing  up  our  social  fabric.  Today,  building  confidence  in  Europe  also  means 
showing that together with national governments, it can steer us away from that outcome. 
There are two ways in which we need to improve economic and fiscal policies. On the one 
hand national governments need to live up to their responsibilities for these policy areas. On 
the other hand, we need to strengthen economic and fiscal policy tools at European level. Let 
me explain this in more detail. 
National governments need to live up to their responsibilities 
The solution to this situation must start at national level. One important cornerstone of the 
current set-up is the principle that responsibility for economic and fiscal policies lies largely 
with  national  governments.  There  are  coordination  tools  at  European  level,  but  ultimately, 
decisions  are  made  by  the  elected  representatives  at  national  level.  Therefore,  national 
governments need to live up to this responsibility: economic and fiscal policies need to be 
used  more  decisively  so  as  to  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  potential  output 
growth in the euro area5. 
Italy has taken key steps in these areas. A comprehensive reform of the labour market was 
carried out last year. The new rules on open-ended contracts and the subsidy for new hires 
seem to  be  having  an  initial  positive  impact  on the  creation  of  permanent  jobs.6  Important 
measures  have  also  been  taken  to  address  the  challenges  of  the  banking  sector  and  to 
reduce the administrative burden on firms and households. 
However, more structural reforms are necessary  in Italy as in all euro  area countries. The 
focus  should  be  on  actions  to  raise  productivity  and  improve  the  business  environment, 
including the provision of adequate public infrastructure, all of which are vital in increasing 
investment  and  boosting  job  creation.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the  economic 
recovery in a sustainable way. There is room everywhere to focus public expenditure more 
on items which will raise productivity. Those countries that have fiscal room for manoeuvre 
                                                
4  See Cœuré, B., “The ECB’s operational framework in post-crisis times”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium in Jackson Hole, 27 August 2016. 
5  See  Cœuré,  B.,  “Structural  reforms:  learning  the  right  lessons  from  the  crisis”,  speech  at  the  Economic 
conference organised by Latvijas Banka in Riga, 17 October 2014. 
6  See Sestito, P. and Viviano. E. (2016), “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the impact of 
the 2015 policies on the Italian Labour Market”, Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper 325. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  should use it  wisely; but others that don’t have  such room should not bend the commonly 
agreed rules– that is in their own interest as well as in the interest of Europe. Stretching rules 
to  the  point  where  they  lose  credibility  will  not  pave  the  way  for  a  stronger  and  safer 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
Clarity and consistency in integration 
This leads me my second point: we need to strengthen economic and fiscal policy tools at 
European level by pursuing clarity and consistency in European integration. 
Clarity in integration is about making it easy to understand who is responsible for what. In the 
current  set-up,  loose  coordination  of  economic  policies  at  European  level  and  ad  hoc 
intergovernmental  arrangements  may  give  the  impression  that  a  competence  has  been 
passed to the European level, when in fact it continues to be exercised largely by Member 
States. This opens the door to shifting the blame for unpopular measures to the EU when in 
fact  it  does  not  effectively  have  the  power  to  adopt  policies.  In  addition,  a  clearer 
demarcation of competences between the European and national levels would allow the EU 
to prove to national audiences that Europe is part of the solution and not part of the problem. 
Clarity is also about pointing out which institution takes which decisions at European level. 
This is why I support the establishment of a euro area finance ministry, accountable to the 
European  Parliament.7  This  body  could  be  responsible  for  preventing  economic  and  fiscal 
imbalances,  managing  crises  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  representing  euro  area 
governments in international economic and financial institutions. 
Consistency  in  integration  means  assigning  the  competences  for  strongly  complementary 
policy  areas  to  the  same  level  of  government.  We  cannot  partially  disempower  national 
states without creating – at Union level – the capacity to provide at least as much security to 
citizens as before. 
Let  me  illustrate.  The  Single  Market  is  a  point  in  case:  it  requires  not  only  the  opening  of 
borders  but  also  joint  rules  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  a  level  playing  field  with  fair 
competition.  And  joint  rule-setting  requires  enforcement  and  judicial  review,  that  is, 
supranational sovereignty sharing and political procedures that lead to common decisions. 
And there are some good recent examples where the EU has exercised its power in this area 
for the benefit of European citizens. Take the recent state aid decisions by the Commission 
on  some  national tax  schemes  or the  progressive  abolition  of roaming  charges  across  the 
EU. 
Consistency  in  integration  is  equally  important  –  if  not  more  so  –  for  the  half-finished 
construction of EMU. I understand very well, as a European citizen, why political attention is 
today focused on security and addressing the challenges of migration. But Europe will not 
build the resources needed to protect itself and manage migration flows without a strong and 
sustainable  economy.  Making  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  strong  and  sustainable 
requires a complete banking union and elements of a fiscal and economic union. None of us 
want to live in a half-built house because it will get very uncomfortable as soon as the next 
storm hits. We need to work on completing EMU also after Brexit.8 
Today,  there  are  clear  disagreements  on  the  balance  between  private  and  public  risk-
sharing,  on  the  mix  of  national  and  EMU-wide  responsibilities,  and  on  the  speed  towards 
                                                
7  See  B.  Cœuré,  “Drawing  lessons  from  the  crisis  for  the  future  of  the  euro  area”,  speech  at  “Ambassadors 
Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. 
8  See the Five Presidents’ Report and, more recently, Enderlein, H., Letta, E. et al. (2016). “Repair and Prepare: 
Growth  and  the  Euro  after  Brexit”,  Gütersloh,  Berlin,  Paris:  Bertelsmann  Stiftung,  Jacques  Delors  Institut 
Berlin and Institut Jacques Delors in Paris. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  possible  new  arrangements.  This  discussion  will  take  time.  In  my  view,  it  should  be 
embedded  more  broadly  in  a  new  convergence  process,  as  suggested  in  the  Five 
Presidents’  Report.  Significant  progress  towards  common  convergence  criteria  would  be 
regularly monitored and would be a condition for members to benefit from further risk-sharing 
instruments.  This  way  the  convergence  process  would  set  a  clear  incentive  structure  for 
Member  States  to  overcome  the  current  deadlock  and  would  establish  full  transparency 
about the design of EMU. 
However, for new projects and further integration steps there must be a consensus that joint 
action is truly necessary and linked to people’s needs. And we know from surveys9 that there 
are areas where citizens would like the EU to become more active than at present. 
On that note, I want return very briefly to an aspect that is really for another speech or maybe 
even another speaker – someone not from the central banking world – to address. It is the 
lack of confidence between Europeans. 
Common fora for debate 
As I have said before, we need to be honest with ourselves: the Single Market and Economic 
and Monetary Union are not technocratic mechanisms but inherently political undertakings. 
And  as  political  undertakings  they  require  support  and  acceptance  beyond  the  legitimacy 
gained  via  elected  national  governments  or  even  through  the  provision  of  effective  and 
efficient  solutions.  As  laid  down  in  the  Treaty,  supranational  law  and  supranational 
institutions assume that we are not only nationals of our respective countries but also citizens 
of Europe. Being European citizens is in turn linked to a feeling of common identity. 
The late President Ciampi embraced this principle emphatically: 
Our common historical legacy, the awareness of possessing a European identity, 
our  membership  of  a  single  value  system,  the  principle  of  shared  sovereignty 
mark out European citizenship and identify the European Union; they underpin its 
institutional, political and economic scaffolding.10 
A common identity allows us to accept that the political undertakings we pursue together can 
temporarily produce losers and winners. It enables the minority to accept the decisions taken 
by  the  majority.  When  such  an  acceptance  is  not  there  but  only  national  interests  and 
national perspectives prevail, then confidence between Europeans is seriously undermined. 
One way of strengthening these conceptual underpinnings of Europe in my view would be to 
create more space for common debates on European issues. 
Let me be clear: having common debates should not be understood as having the same view 
at all times. It is absolutely normal to disagree and it is entirely natural considering that the 
people  of  Europe  have  different  histories,  have  grown  up  in  different  circumstances  and 
express a wide variety of preferences. However, the problem starts when we are having 28 
or  19  different  discussions  without  channelling  them  into  a  common  debate.  Too  often, 
domestic media and political actors take a national perspective in these debates. Too often 
the  debtor-creditor  dichotomy  overshadows  the  debate  of  how  we  want  to  organise  the 
economic governance of the euro area in the future. 
The  result  is  a  fragmentation  of  the  democratic  debate  on  Europe.  This  fragmentation  is 
heightened  by  intergovernmental  decision-making  that  involves  endless  negotiations  and 
highlights  the  differences  between  the  positions  of  various  Member  States.  And  such  a 
fragmentation  of  our  discourse  sets  a  trap:  the  more  divided  we  become  over  common 
solutions, the less effort we put into implementing them. As a result, Europe cannot deliver 
                                                
9  Special Eurobarometer of the European Parliament, conducted in 28 Member States from 9 to 18 April 2016. 
10  See C.A. Ciampi, “The Identity and the Unity of Europe”, Lecture at the University of Leiden, 5 March 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  effectively and European policies, once again, appear ineffective. This only adds to people’s 
impatience  and  dissatisfaction  with  Europe,  making  it  even  more  difficult  to  find  effective 
European solutions. 
To  overcome  this  fragmentation  we  need  to  reinforce  our  common  fora  for  debate.  The 
European  Parliament  is  an  important  element,  but  we  should  foster  dialogues  between 
Europeans also outside of existing institutional structures.11 The result should be a positive 
“politicisation”  of the  EU12,  on  which  I  understand  analytical  work  is  also  being  carried  out 
here at the institute. 
Conclusions 
Confidence in Europe and among Europeans is low. And there are clearly areas where we 
need  to  do  much  better.  National  governments  need  to  live  up  to  their  responsibilities  for 
fiscal and economic policies, and we need a clear and consistent path of integration to avoid 
half-built houses and allow Europe to deliver. A new convergence process can offer such a 
path to break the deadlock. And achieving this goal will be much easier if we strengthen our 
common fora for debate and decision-making. 
This requires political leadership. But it also will help to meet citizens’ demands for a more 
effective  Europe.  We  should  have  confidence  in  Europe.  As  Winston  Churchill  once  said, 
“For myself, I am an optimist – it does not seem to be much use being anything else”. I now 
look forward to your questions and our discussion. 
                                                
11  See Cœuré, B., “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary 
Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe” in Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
12  See  Pirozzi,  N.  and  Tortola,  P.  D.  (2016),  “Negotiating  the  European  Union’s  Dilemmas:  Proposals  on 
Governing Europe. Istituto Affari Internazionali Working Paper 16/24. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
