  Kevin Stiroh: The theory and practice of supervision 
Remarks by Mr Kevin Stiroh, Executive Vice President of the Financial Institution Supervision 
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  SIFMA  Internal  Auditors  Society 
Education Luncheon, Harvard Club, New York City, 11 April 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I’m Kevin Stiroh, the head of the Supervision Group at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. I’d like to thank SIFMA for the opportunity to speak today about the theory 
and practice of supervision. 
By way of background, I took over my current role in October of 2015, after spending time in 
the New York Fed’s Research, Markets and Integrated Policy Analysis Groups, as well as 
earlier positions within Supervision. I am an economist by training and I spent much of my 
career studying the performance and function of financial institutions in the U.S., the critical 
role of bank capital, and the potential link with financial stability. 
I’d  like  to  cover  three  topics  today  related  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  supervision.  First, 
what  is  supervision?  Second,  why  is  it  necessary?  Third,  what  are  some  of  the  emerging 
issues in the execution of supervision? 
Before  beginning,  let  me  emphasize  that  my  comments  today  are  my  own  and  do  not 
necessarily  represent  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
What is supervision? 
The Federal Reserve has many responsibilities, most closely linked to the execution of U.S. 
monetary policy and the regulation and supervision of the U.S. financial system. In fact, the 
official  title  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  includes  the  phrase  “to  establish  a  more  effective 
supervision of banking in the United States,” so supervision has been a core responsibility of 
the Federal Reserve from the beginning. 
But  what  does  “a  more  effective  supervision  of  banking”  mean?  At  the  highest  level,  the 
Federal Reserve’s mission for supervision and regulation is to promote a safe, sound, and 
stable  banking  and  financial  system  that  supports  the  growth  and  stability  of  the  U.S. 
economy and a fair and transparent consumer financial services market. That’s a lot, so it is 
useful to drill down a little; I can do that by describing what we do on an ongoing basis at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
At  the  New  York  Fed,  we  operate  under  delegated  authority  to  supervise  the  financial 
institutions in the Second Federal Reserve District, which encompasses New York, parts of 
New Jersey and Connecticut, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
This  area  includes  enormous  diversity  in  institutions  from  state  member  banks  with  total 
assets of less than $100 million operating in a local community to bank holding companies 
with trillions of dollars of assets operating on a global scale. 
Our staff assesses the safety and soundness of domestic banking institutions and operations 
of foreign banking organizations in the district through onsite evaluations and offsite financial 
analysis  and  surveillance.  One  of  our  fundamental  responsibilities  is  to  ensure  that  each 
institution has in place the appropriate risk identification and risk management processes that 
are  necessary for  prudent  banking. We also  analyze  issues  and  industry  developments to 
identify  emerging risks and  to contribute to the  development  of  domestic  and  international 
supervisory policy. I’ll return to a discussion of emerging risks later in my talk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The Supervision Group at the New York Fed works with our colleagues around the Federal 
Reserve  System  to  develop  and  implement  the  System’s  supervisory  programs.  This 
includes  working  through  governance  structures  like  the  Large  Institution  Supervision 
Coordinating Committee (LISCC) that oversees supervision for the largest, most systemically 
important institutions in the U.S. We are also involved in similar System-wide committees for 
other  types  of  institutions  such  as  community  banks,  regional  banks,  foreign  banks,  and 
other large banking institutions, as well as consumer protection. I’ll speak mostly today about 
our supervisory responsibilities for the largest firms, but will note that we recently hosted a 
conference at the New York Fed focusing on the role of community banks. 
For the largest firms, we actively participate in System-wide horizontal examinations such as 
the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR, which is the annual process for 
evaluating  capital  adequacy  of  the  largest  firms  that  began  last  week.  We  are  actively 
involved  in  other  horizontal  programs  such  as  the  Comprehensive  Liquidity  Analysis  and 
Review (CLAR), and the Supervisory Assessment of Recovery and Resolution Preparedness 
(SRP).  CLAR  is  the  Federal  Reserve’s  annual,  horizontal,  forward-looking  program  to 
evaluate the liquidity position and liquidity risk management practices of LISCC firms. SRP is 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  annual  horizontal  review  of  the  LISCC  firms’  options  to  support 
recovery and progress in removing impediments to orderly resolution. These three programs 
form the foundation for the horizontal aspects of the System’s supervisory program for the 
largest firms. The Supervision Group at the New York Fed plays a strong role in developing 
and executing these initiatives. 
In parallel to the horizontal work for the largest firms, the Federal Reserve has a dedicated 
supervisory team for each of the largest firms. These teams execute supervisory strategies 
for each firm that align with Federal Reserve System priorities. Through the execution of firm-
specific  supervision,  these  dedicated  supervisory  teams  play  a  critical  role  in  helping  to 
achieve these objectives. Given the location of the headquarters of many of the largest firms 
in  New  York,  the  Supervision  Group  at  the  New  York  Fed  plays  a  central  role  within  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  in  the  execution  of  supervisory  activities  through  the  dedicated 
supervisory teams. 
To conclude this section, I’ll note that my colleagues in the Research Group at the New York 
Fed recently hosted a conference entitled “Supervising Large Complex Financial Institutions: 
Defining  Objectives  and  Measuring  Effectiveness.”1  This  conference  brought  together 
academic  economists,  policymakers  and  senior  supervisors  to  talk  about  the  goals  and 
objectives  of  supervision  and  different  approaches  to  assessing  supervisory  success  and 
effectiveness.  While  this  conference  focused  on  the  largest  institutions,  the  main  themes 
apply more broadly to the objectives of supervision. 
One important theme of the conference was the conceptual distinction between regulation 
and  supervision.  Both  are  designed  to  help  the  Fed  achieve  its  objectives  and  they  are 
mutually reinforcing, complementary efforts. Broadly speaking, regulation involves writing the 
rules  that  govern  what  financial  institutions  can  and  cannot  do.  Supervision  focuses  on 
monitoring,  oversight  and  enforcing  compliance with  law,  and  supervisory  expectations for 
firms’ governance, internal processes and controls, and financial condition. 
Why is supervision necessary? 
I think it is useful to take a step back and talk about what motivates the need for public sector 
intervention  in  the  form  of  ongoing  supervision.  Why  doesn’t  the  market  provide  sufficient 
discipline  on  financial  intermediaries  as  is  presumed  for  some  other  industries?  In  the 
language of an economist, what are the frictions that lead to a market failure so that financial 
                                                
1   Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: Defining Objectives and Measuring Effectiveness. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
institutions, left to their own incentives and choices, won’t necessarily make optimal choices 
from a societal perspective? 
I’ll talk about two types of market frictions that create the need for public sector intervention. 
The  first  is  asymmetric  information  –  the  difference  in  what  the  borrower  knows  about  an 
investment opportunity and what the lender or funder of that investment knows. The second 
is externalities – the ability of one firm’s decisions or actions to affect other unrelated market 
participants. Both of these forces can drive a wedge between private and socially – desired 
outcomes  and  motivate  the  need  for  public  sector  intervention.  Conceptually,  either 
supervision or regulation can help solve these problems and their relative efficacy depends, 
in part, on the type of information being assessed or the problem being solved. 
• 
Asymmetric Information 
There  is  considerable  academic  research  describing  how  asymmetric  information 
can create a special role for financial intermediaries. The basic issue is that lending 
requires the production of private information about things like the probability of a 
successful  investment  outcome,  but  this  can  be  difficult  to  convey  to  third  parties 
who might be providing the funding. This creates a role for a financial institution to 
bridge the gap between borrowers and savers. 
Moreover,  these  information  asymmetries  create  the  scope  for  two  problems 
endemic to credit markets: adverse selection where the riskiest borrowers are the 
most likely to seek credit and moral hazard where borrowers pursue riskier behavior 
after credit has been extended because their own funds are not invested. In both 
cases, mitigation requires costly screening and monitoring, which creates a role for 
a specialized financial intermediary. 
Asymmetric information also creates issues on the liability side of a bank’s balance 
sheet.  The  banks’  creditors  –  depositors  or  providers  of  funding  –  don’t  have  as 
much information about the health of the institution as insiders do. This asymmetry 
makes banks opaque and inherently fragile, which can subject them to runs. This 
type of “run risk” has been largely mitigated, at least in the case of retail depositors, 
by deposit insurance, access to lender of last resort facilities, and other elements of 
the  bank  safety  net.  Importantly,  however,  a  broad  safety  net  weakens  market 
discipline  of  banks  and  can  create  incentives  for  excessive  risk-taking.  This 
contributes to the need for risk-sensitive regulation and supervision. 
Regulations  can  control  risk-taking  through  a  variety  of  means  such  as  setting 
minimum  requirements  for  capital  and  liquidity  positions,  while  supervision  can 
identify and constrain activities that are not well-captured through regulation but still 
affect  a  firm’s  risk  management,  governance  and  control  infrastructure.  One 
common  objective  is  to  counter  the  incentive  for  excessive  risk-taking  by 
intermediaries. 
Externalities 
A  second  and  distinct  type  of  market failure  that  creates  a  need for  public  sector 
intervention  stems  from  the  externalities  that  the  failure  of  a  large,  systemically 
important bank failure can have on the rest of the financial sector or the economy as 
whole. For example, the financial crisis vividly demonstrated how the distress of a 
large  financial  firm  can  destabilize  broader  financial  markets  and  impact  other 
financial firms. These effects can be seen through direct linkages via counterparty 
exposures. They can also be seen through less direct linkages such as confidence-
related behaviors that are manifest in higher haircuts and margins or reluctance to 
do business with certain firms or types of firms, uncertainty about the true health of a 
firm, or the impact of fire sales on the valuation of a broad class of assets held by a 
broad range of investors. The fact that these costs are external to a given financial 
firm can lead to excess risk-taking. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The realization of these externalities during the financial crisis has had a profound 
impact  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  approach  to  supervision.  Most  specifically,  they 
provided  the  practical  experience  to  support  the  conceptual  case  for  tightened 
prudential requirements for the largest, most systemically important institutions. This 
focus is seen in the mandate from the Dodd-Frank Act for the Federal Reserve to 
implement  enhanced  prudential  standards,  including  higher  capital  standards,  to 
mitigate  the  risks  posed  to  financial  stability  by  systemically  important  financial 
institutions. 
For  example,  both the Basel  Committee for  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Federal 
Reserve System have identified factors that contribute to a financial firm’s systemic 
importance through these types of externalities. These mechanisms are proxied for 
by  observable  metrics  such  as  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet,  interconnectedness 
between  firms,  complexity  of  the  business,  cross-jurisdictional  activity,  short-term 
wholesale  funding,  and  substitutability  of  certain  activities.  These  metrics  then 
determine the capital surcharge for systemically important banks as outlined in the 
Federal Reserve rule and white paper from July 2015.2  
More  generally,  these  types  of  differences  across  firms  provide  one  of  the 
conceptual  underpinnings  for  differentiating  supervisory  expectations  for  different 
types  of financial  institutions.  This  concept  –  often  referred  to  as  “tailoring”  –  has 
long been part of the supervisory approach, and has received considerable attention 
recently.  It  is  reflected  in  our  organizational  structure  as  seen  in  things  like  the 
LISCC and in application of supervisory guidance across different types of firms. 
As a specific example, the Federal Reserve issued two Supervisory and Regulation 
letters in December of 2015 that consolidate previously-issued guidance on capital 
planning and more clearly differentiate supervisory expectations between financial 
institutions with more complex operations and those with less complex operations. 
This  tailoring  of  guidance  applies  to  capital  planning  expectations  related  to 
governance, risk management, internal controls, capital policy, scenario design and 
projection methods. This guidance further clarifies how capital planning expectations 
are moderated for firms that pose more limited risk to financial stability. 
Key issues 
I’ve discussed some of the conceptual underpinning of supervision and I’ll now turn to some 
of the practical implications and issues that I’m thinking about. 
We  continue  to  strive  to  provide  clarity  and  transparency  on  our  supervisory  expectations 
and  concerns.  This  can  be  seen  through  a  variety  of  mechanisms,  including  public 
discussion  and  private  communications  with  supervised  firms.  I’ve  mentioned  some  of  the 
most useful sources of information such as Supervision and Regulation letters that provide 
public  guidance  on  specific topics  to  supervised  firms,  rules  and  white  papers  that  outline 
and implement the underlying conceptual thinking on key issues such as the surcharge for 
systemically  important  banks  or  the  expectations  around  CCAR,  and  public  speeches  by 
policymakers. 
Of course, we engage regularly in private communications with supervised firms. This is both 
to  provide  feedback  on  a  firm’s  progress  relative  to  supervisory  expectations  and  to  gain 
information  about  the  developments  in  the  financial  industry  and  the  efficacy  or  our 
supervisory programs. We do this on a regular and continuous basis through both formal and 
informal channels, and this is a key part of the supervisory program for firms of all sizes. 
                                                
2   Calibrating the GSIB Surcharge, July 20, 2015, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I also want to highlight three specific developments that are relevant for us as we execute 
our  supervisory  responsibilities.  I  expect  these  topics  –  cybersecurity,  fintech  and 
reputational risk – will be familiar and I’ll provide a supervisory perspective on each. 
• 
Cybersecurity 
The Federal Reserve, in its supervisory role, collaborates with the Federal Financial 
Institutions  Examination  Council  (FFIEC) 
to  coordinate  work  on  enhancing 
cybersecurity  supervisory  programs.  We  are  also  interested  in  working  with  the 
industry on a coordinated approach for cybersecurity to strengthen the resiliency of 
the financial services sector against cyberattacks. 
Internally, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  organized  a  supervisory  program  on 
cybersecurity  that  consists  of  subject  matter  experts  from  across  the  Federal 
Reserve System. Work is underway to enhance the analysis of IT examination data 
in  conjunction  with  threat  information  to  enhance  risk-focused  reviews  during 
examinations. 
Through our discovery work with financial institutions, we have found that the state 
of cybersecurity readiness varies across firms. Supervisors are seeking to develop 
common  principles  to  address  cybersecurity  issues  and  will  work  with  other 
agencies to ensure that firms are dedicating resources and taking the appropriate 
actions  to  defend  the  operations  that  are  critical  to  the  financial  services  sector 
against cyber threats. This is particularly true for those risks that could be channeled 
through interconnected organizations and that could potentially have an impact on 
other firms and more broadly across the sector. 
Fintech 
The  financial  sector,  like  the  broader  U.S.  economy  and  society,  is  becoming 
increasingly digital and there is considerable discussion of “fintech” – defined simply 
as  the  intersection  between  financial  services  and  new  technologies.  A  recent 
industry study, for example, reports that investment in fintech companies grew from 
$1.8 billion in 2010 to $19 billion in 2015.3 It is unclear, however, whether fintech will 
enhance or fundamentally disrupt the financial service and payments industries, or 
perhaps it is some combination of both. In any of these cases, however, supervisors 
will have a keen interest in monitoring the impact on the business models and risks 
of financial institutions and the way financial intermediation is done. 
We  observe  financial firms  engaging  in  a  variety  of  ways  with  fintech  companies. 
This  can  be  through  the  development  of  in-house  projects  such  as  setting  up 
innovation  labs  or  encouraging  developers  to  code  on  open  application  program 
interfaces (APIs). This can also be through collaboration with industry consortiums 
to  come  up  with  unified  industry  standards  that  enhance  operability  and  enable 
future technological advancements, or it can be through partnering with or investing 
directly in fintech companies. 
Some of the interesting questions for supervision revolve around things like: what 
new  benefits  might  these  new  technologies  bring?  Will  they  enhance  existing 
processes  or  bring  about  entirely  new  solutions  to  existing  financial  sector 
problems?  Will  they  create  risk,  mitigate  risk,  or  simply  reallocate  existing  risks? 
How should the current supervisory framework evolve to incorporate these types of 
developments? 
The  New  York  Fed  is  assessing  the  implications  of fintech  developments  through 
participation  in  a  wide  range  of  Federal  Reserve  System,  interagency,  and 
                                                 
3   “Digital Disruption: How Fintech is Forcing Banking to a Tipping Point,” March 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
 
international  efforts.  In  addition,  we  meet  regularly  with  supervised  firms,  fintech 
companies,  and  industry  groups  to  follow  these  developments.  Our  supervisory 
program will continue to evolve with the underlying technologies. 
Reputation risk 
Over  the  past  few  years,  the  New  York  Fed  has  been  challenging  the  financial 
industry  to consider the  many factors  that  have  contributed to recent, widespread 
misconduct and the perceived lack of trust in the financial sector. 
The  various  forms  of  misconduct  impose  direct  costs  such  as  fines,  legal  fees  in 
investigating allegations and defending lawsuits, and internal monitoring costs that 
should matter to firms. In this view, a principal benefit to a financial firm of having a 
strong culture that builds trustworthiness is the avoidance of the bad behavior that 
can  carry  significant  monetary  costs  and  can  inflict  destructive  damage  to  the 
organization’s  reputation.  Firms  should  have  every  incentive  to  manage  and 
internalize those potential costs. 
More broadly, there may be additional adverse effects on other firms or the financial 
sector as a whole if there is a widespread lack of trust in financial services. Similarly, 
my colleague Michael Strine has argued that the financial industry exists, in part, to 
enhance the public good and thus faces a higher degree of social responsibility due 
to its role in supporting the broader economy.4 Both of these effects suggest a role 
for the public sector in facilitating appropriate behavior and conduct in the financial 
services  industry.  Supervision  can  contribute  to  this  through  support  for  the 
development  of  effective  internal  governance  regimes,  prudent  risk  management 
policies,  and  strong  compliance  and  control  structures,  all  within  a  framework  of 
effective oversight from the Board of Directors. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I’ve spoken today about the conceptual rationale for public sector intervention 
through supervision and some practical issues related to how we execute on our supervisory 
responsibilities  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  Our  goal  is  to  promote  a  safe, 
sound, and stable banking and financial system that supports the growth and stability of the 
U.S. economy, and we will continue to strive to meet these responsibilities. 
Thank you very much for your attention this afternoon. I’d be happy to take some questions. 
                                                
4   Forming  the  Next  Generation  of  Bankers:  The  Future  of  Business  Education  and  Ethics,  Michael  Strine, 
March 22, 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
