  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Great significance and consequences 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 2016 Awards Ceremony and Appreciation Lunch for 
BSP Stakeholders with theme “Sustained Partnership, Sustained Economic Growth”, Manila, 
13 July 2016. 
 I am particularly pleased to welcome all of you to this 2016 Annual Awards Ceremony and 
Appreciation Lunch for BSP Stakeholders. This is the 13th year we are hosting this annual 
gathering. 
Our objective is simple, but to us, quite significant. Ladies and gentlemen, we want to thank 
all our partners and stakeholders who support and work with us in the pursuit of the BSP’s 
mandate, policies, and programs. 
We want to celebrate and strengthen our partnerships that have resulted in the formulation of 
appropriate  monetary  and  banking  policies;  the  dissemination  of  information  that  protects 
and empowers our people; and the implementation of financial inclusion programs across the 
country  that  support  good  money  habits  and  spur  economic  activities  for  more  inclusive 
growth. 
This month marks the 23rd anniversary of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. In other words, 
our Annual Awards Ceremony and Appreciation Lunch for BSP Stakeholders is a highlight of 
the BSP’s anniversary celebration. Indeed, the BSP values its stakeholders and partners. 
In 2004, we started this ceremony with 10 awards. Today, we are giving 35 awards in the 
National Capital Region alone; a total of 93 awards will be given in other parts of the country. 
This is because support for the BSP continues to expand and deepen across the country. 
Thus,  even  as  we  face  national  and  global  challenges,  we  continue  to  move  forward, 
traverse uncertainties, and achieve positive results. For this year’s celebration, our theme is 
“Sustained  Partnership,  Sustained  Economic  Growth.” We  want  to  underscore  that  mutual 
commitment  to  our  continuing  partnership  helps  us  sustain  economic  growth;  growth  that 
generates jobs and improves the lives of Filipinos. 
As you know, our partnership comes in various forms. Among others, the submission by our 
survey  respondents  of  timely,  accurate  and  complete  information  helps  the  BSP  craft  and 
calibrate effective monetary and financial policy decisions. These are important as they affect 
our economic fundamentals. 
More  specifically,  our  partners  who  provide  information  keep  us  abreast  of  perceptions  on 
price movements, help us monitor the country’s transactions with the rest of world, assist us 
in  evaluating  emerging  economic  trends,  and  help  us  assess  our  vulnerability  to  external 
shocks. 
And  it  is  our  collaboration  with  banks  that  help  us  operate  an  efficient  payments  and 
settlements system that keep our financial system stable and facilitates the safe transfer of 
billions of remittances from overseas Filipinos across the globe. 
But more than providing valuable support, our partners give us feedback on the effectiveness 
of our policy actions. This is an important facet of our partnership. 
Thus,  the  BSP  invests  resources  in  engaging  our  stakeholders  in  policy  formulation  and 
regular consultation. We know that if we do not listen, we can lose our grounding and in the 
process, our policy actions may lose potency. It is important therefore that we sustain and 
continue  to  nurture  our  partnership.  We  count  on  this  as  one  of  the  anchors  that  provide 
guidance and credibility to our decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Moreover, our common vision of making lives better through our partnership have led us to 
cooperate in pushing for advocacies that matter. 
For  instance,  our  campaign  to  protect  our  people  against  counterfeit  banknotes  led  us  to 
introduce New Generation Banknotes that have many new security features. We thank all of 
you  therefore  for  helping  spread  information  on  these  new  security  features  and  the 
demonitization of our old-design banknotes. As scheduled, our people have until December 
this year to exchange old-design banknotes with banks or the BSP. 
By 2017, old-design banknotes will no longer be accepted by banks; an exception to this rule 
are Overseas Filipinos who have up to next year to exchange their old-design banknotes. In 
particular we thank the banks, malls, stores, public offices and transport groups for helping 
us  spread  the  message  of  demonitization  and  the  security  features  of  our  new  banknotes 
across the country. 
Another  advocacy  we  are  giving  priority  to  is  the  development  of  an  inclusive  financial 
system.  In  particular,  we  have  leveraged  on  our  initial  gains  in  microfinance  and  financial 
inclusion  to  develop  and  implement  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  in 
partnership with other government agencies, the banks, the private sector, the academe and 
the NGO community. 
We are heartened by our continuing progress in scaling up our efforts to bring more Filipinos 
into the financial mainstream – where sound financial management is developed, where the 
cost of money is more affordable, where savings are encouraged and protected, and where 
investment products provide opportunities for growth. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, through our collaboration, we have become agents of 
stability and of positive change – change that improves the system to be more accessible, 
safer, more equitable and more beneficial to every Filipino. 
Indeed, the Philippines has registered uninterrupted economic growth for 69 quarters now. 
Real GDP growth averaged five percent since 1999 and there are indications that growth is 
getting  more  broad-based.  This  gives  us  a  level  of  confidence  that  we  can  address 
challenges that lie ahead. 
In this connection, I wish to share the report released yesterday by the IMF mission to the 
Philippines.  It  said  strong  macro  fundamentals  and  improved  governance  provide  a  solid 
foundation  to  meet  remaining  challenges.  Such  challenges  include  addressing  poverty, 
underemployment  and  ensuring  that  economic  growth  benefits  the  broader  population. 
According  to  the  IMF,  the  Philippines  continued  to  register  solid  growth  in  2016,  despite 
external  headwinds,  due  in  part  to  fiscal  stimulus  and  supportive  monetary  conditions.  It 
added that our initiatives to strengthen systemic risk monitoring in the financial sector have 
helped maintain financial stability in a challenging global environment. 
Ladies and gentlemen. This is a credible third party assessment of the gains we have made 
together. In addition, the BSP continues to receive awards and recognition in the pursuit of 
its mandate to ensure low and stable inflation, maintain a sound and stable financial system, 
and operate an efficient payments and settlements system. 
As partners and stakeholders of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, you rightfully share credit 
for this as well. Thank you for your continuing support and confidence in the BSP! 
Moving  forward,  we  see  potential  risks  that  can  elevate  volatility  and  challenge  our 
policymaking. Nevertheless, our domestic sources of resilience will help us manage possible 
spillovers  from  global  challenges  such  as  weak  and  fragile  growth,  geo-political  tensions, 
continuing uncertainty over US Fed interest rates and Brexit. 
And  our  economy  remains  on  track  as  the  new  Administration  under  President  Rodrigo 
Duterte sets its priorities to achieve growth and a better life for our people. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Let  us  therefore  continue  to  collaborate  and  work  together  so  we  can  help  overcome 
roadblocks to growth and prosperity in our country. 
On behalf of my colleagues at the Monetary Board and the BSP family, I thank all of you and 
look  forward  to  making  our  partnership  grow  and  our  collaborations  deeper  and  more 
meaningful. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  African-American  poet  and  Pulitzer  Prize  winner  Gwendolyn 
Brooks  once  wrote…  and  I  quote:  “We  are  each  other’s  harvest;  we  are  each  other’s 
business; and finally… we are each other’s magnitude and bond.” End of quote. 
And so today, let us commit together to be the best we can be in the service of our country 
and  our  people.  Congratulations  to  all  our  awardees  and  thank  you  once  again  to  all  our 
partners and stakeholders. 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
Marami pong salamat! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
