Christopher Kent: After the boom
Speech  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia, at the Bloomberg Breakfast, Sydney, 13 September 2016.
Introduction
 Today  I  want  to  talk  about  some  important  developments  shaping  the  Australian  economy,
focusing on the sharp fall in commodity prices over the past few years.
In  2012,  just  after  taking  on  my  current  role,  some  colleagues  and  I  were  looking  at  how  the
Australian economy had been adjusting to the unprecedented boom in commodity prices.  By
the time I presented that work, prices of Australia’s key commodities had begun to turn down and
2
mining investment had just peaked at a record level.
1
Since then, commodity prices have fallen much further and so Australia’s terms of trade (the
price of our exports relative to imports) have fallen significantly. The fall was more than we, and
most others, had expected. More recently, though, commodity prices have risen. And more than
three-quarters of the anticipated decline in mining investment is now behind us.
The adjustment of the economy to the decline in the terms of trade and the large fall in mining
investment has been a drawn out process, adversely affecting a range of industries and regions.
But growth in the economy overall has been close to trend, and while the unemployment rate
rose, it reached only a little above 6 per cent in 2015.  More recently, inflation has declined.
3
Before talking about the period after the boom, I want to set the scene. First, I’ll briefly review the
boom years. Second, I’ll describe what we anticipated four years ago would be likely to happen
after the boom.
The Boom Years
The rapid industrialisation and urbanisation of the Chinese economy underpinned the strong rise
in commodity prices from around the mid 2000s. As global demand for commodities began to
outstrip supply, the prices of Australia’s key commodity exports rose dramatically.
Australia’s terms of trade rose by 85 per cent from the average of the early 2000s to the peak in
late 2011 (Graph 1). That implied a significant boost to the real purchasing power of domestic
production. Some of those gains were retained by foreign owners of mining assets, but a share
of the gains stayed at home in the form of higher wages, tax revenues and profits for Australian
owners of mines and of firms supporting mining activity.
 1 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The rise in Australia’s terms of trade was associated with a large appreciation of the nominal
exchange  rate  (see  Table  1  in  the  Appendix).  While  this  lowered  the  returns  to  Australian
commodity exporters (and Australian exporters more broadly), it allowed real income gains to
flow to the rest of the economy via the associated decline in the prices of imports.
The resource sector here  and  abroad  responded  to  the  commodity  price  boom  by  expanding
productive  capacity.  This  occurred  gradually,  reflecting  both  the  unforeseen  magnitude  of  the
boom, its unexpected persistence, and the time required to plan for, approve and then complete
large resource projects. In mid 2012, investment in the Australian resource sector had peaked at
just under 8 per cent of GDP, compared with its average of around 2 per cent prior to the boom.
In the lead-up to that investment peak, growth in output, employment and wages in the resource
sector (broadly defined to include those industries servicing it) was relatively strong. The boom in
those  industries  led  to  strong  economic  conditions  in  the  resource-rich  states  of  Western
Australia and Queensland.
The significant appreciation of the exchange rate provided a signal for labour and capital to be
redistributed from the ‘other tradable’ sector towards the resource sector. As a result, the growth
in investment, output, employment and wages was weak in the ‘other tradable’ sector.
The large nominal exchange rate appreciation also helped to contain inflationary pressures in an
environment of strong growth in domestic demand and a decline in the unemployment rate to
relatively low levels. Notwithstanding that assistance, overall inflation picked up to be a little above
4
 2 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
4
its inflation-targeting average.  Non-tradable inflation was elevated during the boom  years  and
growth in nominal unit labour costs was relatively strong for most of this period. In response to
these inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank raised the cash rate to be above its (inflation-
targeting) average.
After the Boom – What We Had Thought Might Happen
In  our  previous  analysis,  we  noted  that  during  the  commodity  price  boom  the  economy  had
behaved, in many respects, as theory suggested. We also discussed how the economy might
adjust as the terms of trade declined.
It  was  clear  that  mining  investment  would  fall,  but  at  the  same  time,  resource  exports  would
increase as additional productive capacity came on line. However, overall demand for labour in
the mining sector (and in mining-related activity) would decline because the investment phase in
5
that sector is relatively more labour intensive than the production phase.
With the global supply of commodities catching up to global demand, we thought that commodity
prices and, therefore, Australia’s terms of trade would decline (but remain higher than their pre-
boom levels). That would normally be associated with a depreciation of the Australian dollar.
We anticipated that demand in the non-mining sectors would pick up and that labour and capital
would be drawn back to that part of the economy. Any depreciation of the nominal exchange rate
would facilitate that transition by improving the competitiveness of the ‘other tradable’ sector. The
movement  of  labour  would  also  be  facilitated  by  some  decline  in  wage  growth,  as  the  labour
shed by companies that had undertaken the mining investment looked to move back into the non-
mining  sectors.  In  other  words,  we  thought  that  the  requisite  real  exchange  rate  depreciation
would occur largely via the nominal exchange rate, but might also be assisted by a decline in
domestic cost pressures.
These developments were expected, at least in part, to reverse some of the effects on consumer
price inflation seen during the investment phase of the boom. In particular, a gradual depreciation
of the exchange rate would put upward pressure on tradable inflation for a time, while a reduction
in  wage  growth  and  domestic  costs  more  generally  would  put  downward  pressure  on  non-
tradable  inflation.  These  opposing  effects  could  potentially  result  in  little  net  change  to  overall
inflation,  but  given  that  inflation  had  been  above  average  during  the  boom,  it  would  not  be
surprising to see inflation below average after the boom.
But having made some predictions about the direction of some key variables, we also noted the
considerable degree of uncertainty, including that related to the global economic outlook.
After the Boom – What Actually Happened?
Many  of  our  predictions  have  been  borne  out.  Mining  investment  declined  significantly  and
resource exports grew strongly. Mining investment has further to fall, although the largest drag on
GDP growth from that source is likely to have come and gone over the financial year just passed.
The decline in mining investment from 2012 led to lower growth in overall mining activity (mining
investment plus resource exports; Graph 2). More recently, growth of mining activity has picked
up. Mining activity is set to continue to grow for a time as the drag from mining investment wanes
and production of liquefied natural gas continues to ramp up.
 3 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
 As had been anticipated, mining-related employment has contracted and wage growth in those
6
industries has declined to be noticeably below that of other sectors.
In the non-mining sector, growth in activity and employment (more recently) have picked up. The
reduction  in  interest  rates  over  the  past  few  years  has  been  assisting  in  rebalancing  activity
towards the non-mining economy, which is currently growing at around its long-run average rate
(Graph 3). The depreciation of the nominal exchange rate since early 2013 has also supported
activity in the ‘other tradable’ sector. Net service exports have made a noticeable contribution to
GDP growth over the past few years, with tourism, education and business service exports all
expanding.
 4 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Overall, inflation has declined, driven by lower inflation of non-tradable items and consistent with
a significant decline in the growth of labour costs. At the same time, inflation of tradable items
has increased following the exchange rate depreciation.
In  short,  the patterns  of  behaviour  of  these  key  macroeconomic  variables  have  been  quite
consistent with what we had initially thought might happen. However, the magnitudes and speed
of some of the adjustments have surprised us. In part, this reflects external developments, most
notably:
the larger-than-expected decline in commodity prices and the terms of trade; and
the  extent  and  persistence  of  low  growth  and  low  inflation  in  much  of  the  world  and  the
associated easy monetary policies of the major central banks.
Despite these challenges, the Australian economy has displayed a degree of flexibility that has
helped the process of adjustment.
Commodity Prices and the Terms of Trade
Australia’s terms of trade declined by more than had been expected a few years ago (Graph 4).
Around the time of our previous analysis, we were forecasting a further decline in the terms of
trade  over  the  coming  years.  But  then  from  2012  to  2015,  we  repeatedly  revised  down  our
forecasts.
 5 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The  larger-than-expected  decline  in  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  reflected  both  demand-  and
supply-side factors. Growth in the demand for commodities from Asia, and China in particular,
declined noticeably. In large part, this was in response to excess capacity in manufacturing as
well  as  a  decline  in  real  estate  investment  in  China. Among  other  things,  this  has  seen  the
growth in global steel production stall, and hence lower growth in the demand for iron ore and
coking coal.
On the supply side, commodity producers have been able to reduce their costs by more than
initially  thought  possible,  and  some  higher-cost  suppliers  sustained  their  production  levels  for
7
longer than anticipated.
The  larger-than-expected  decline  in  the  terms  of  trade  has  weighed  on  growth  in  economic
activity, employment, profits, wages and fiscal revenues, as well as on inflation. The effect has
been largest in the mining sector and the key mining states, but it has been evident across the
economy more broadly.
The Exchange Rate
The  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  over  recent  years  has  improved  Australia’s
competiveness  and  thereby  supported  production  in  the  tradable  sector.  However,  the
depreciation didn’t start in earnest until 18 months after the terms of trade had peaked. And while
it is hard to be precise, our modelling suggests that the exchange rate (the real trade weighted
 6 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
index,  or  real  TWI)  has  not  depreciated  by  quite  as  much  as  might  have  been  expected  in
response  to  the  actual  decline  in  the  terms  of  trade  (and  the  reductions  in  domestic  interest
rates) (Graph 5). At least in part, this reflects lower-than-expected global growth and inflation,
which  has  led  to  a  prolonged  period  of  very  low  interest  rates  and  unconventional  monetary
8
policies in the major economies.
Real GDP
Australia’s real GDP did not increase by quite as much as we had expected back in late 2012.
The GDP forecast in the August 2012 Statement on Monetary Policy was a bit over 1 percentage
point stronger than what came to pass over the year to March 2013 (Graph 6). We subsequently
revised down our forecasts. In the intervening years growth was sometimes a little above our
forecasts,  sometimes  below.  GDP  growth  more  recently  has  been  a  bit  stronger  than  we’d
expected a year ago.
 7 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Much of the early forecast miss for GDP growth owed to mining investment. In late 2012, we had
forecast that mining investment would be likely to rise a little further and stay elevated for a time
(Graph 7). It soon became apparent, however, that mining companies had revised their earlier
plans  in  response  to  lower-than-expected  commodity  prices.  We  revised  down  our  forecasts
accordingly. Since 2013, our liaison efforts have been instrumental in generating quite accurate
forecasts for mining investment. The forecasts for resource exports have also been reasonably
accurate over recent years.
 8 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Since 2012, growth in real non-mining activity has picked up gradually and has generally been a
little stronger than was expected, supported by lower interest rates and the depreciation of the
9
exchange rate.
Nominal GDP
The  weaker  than  earlier  expected  outcome  for  real  GDP  growth  was  not  particularly  large  in
comparison with the usual range of forecast uncertainty, and as I noted, real GDP growth over
the past year has actually been a bit stronger than earlier anticipated. In contrast, the larger-than-
expected decline in the terms of trade over the past few years has meant that nominal outcomes
have been significantly weaker than earlier forecast. From 2013 to 2015, nominal GDP increased
by around 8 per cent, which was half the initial forecast of 17 per cent. That has had important
 9 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
implications for growth in wages, costs and prices.
Labour and Labour Costs
Given  that  real  GDP  growth  was  initially  a  bit  weaker  than  expected,  it’s  not  surprising  that
employment  growth  was  less  than  forecast  and  the  unemployment  rate  higher  than  expected
(Graph 8). More recently, however, the unemployment rate has declined by a bit more than had
been anticipated.
10
Shortly  after  the  fall  in  the  terms  of  trade,  wage  growth  declined  significantly  across  every
industry  and  all  states.  It  is  currently  lowest  in  Western  Australia  and  Queensland,  and  in
industries exposed to the end of the mining investment boom (Graph 9). Some decline in wage
growth  in  response  to  the  decline  in  mining  investment  and  the  terms  of  trade  was  to  be
expected, but the decline in wage growth has been greater than implied by historical relationships
with the unemployment rate. That could reflect several factors:
11
Workers  who  had  been  engaged  in  mining-related  activities  moved  to  lower  paid  jobs
outside  the  resource  sector.  This  compositional  effect  contributed  to  lower  growth  in
average earnings per hour than in the wage price index (at least until very recently).
Compared with earlier periods of high unemployment rates (e.g. in the 1980s and 1990s),
increased  labour  market  flexibility  may  have  provided  firms  with  greater  scope  to  adjust
wages  in  response  to  declines  in  the  growth  of  their  nominal  revenues  (which,  in  turn,
followed from the fall in the terms of trade).
12
 10 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Workers  may  be  less  certain  of  their  employment  prospects,  possibly  because  of  rising
competitive pressures in a more globalised world, leading them to be more willing to accept
lower wage outcomes in exchange for more job security.
The decline in inflation and inflation expectations over recent years may also have influenced
wage negotiations.
It is important to note that low growth in labour costs has, in many respects, helped the economy
adjust  to  the  lower  terms  of  trade.  In  addition  to  the  nominal  exchange  rate  depreciation,  low
growth  in  labour  costs  is  helping  to  improve Australia’s  international  competitiveness  and  has
encouraged more employment growth than would otherwise have occurred. More recently, wage
growth  has  shown  signs  of  stabilisation,  with  growth  in  the  private  sector  wage  price  index
unchanged for the past six quarters, while a broader measure of wage pressures, the growth in
average earnings per hour, has picked up of late.
Other Costs and Margins
Spare capacity in a range of product markets also led to downward pressure on other costs and
margins along the supply chain. This sort of pressure is particularly evident in low inflation of final
retail prices for items sold in supermarkets and for many consumer durable goods.13
 11 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Inflation
Lower growth in labour and other costs, as well as lower margins, have contributed to lower-
than-expected  outcomes  for  inflation  of  both  non-tradable  and  tradable  items.  Compared  with
earlier  forecasts  for  2013–2015,  inflation  in  underlying  terms  has  only  been  a  little  below
expectations (7.1 per cent versus 7.8 per cent cumulated over that period). However, inflation
has  also  been  lower  than  expected  more  recently;  our  forecasts  for  2016  have  been  revised
down from a bit above 2 per cent to about 1½ per cent between February and August of this
year.
Interest Rates
The initial misses on GDP and unemployment, and more recently on wage growth and inflation,
owed significantly to the effects of the larger-than-expected decline in the terms of trade on the
mining sector and the economy more broadly.
In response to the evolving outlook, the Reserve Bank Board has reduced the cash rate to low
levels to improve the prospects for sustainable growth in the economy, with inflation rising to be
consistent with the medium-term target.
The low level of interest rates and the depreciation of the exchange rate have underpinned a rise
in  the  growth  of  non-mining  activity,  which  is  currently  running  around  its  long-run  average.
Western Australia and Queensland  have  been  most  directly  affected  by  the  fall  in  commodity
prices  and  mining  investment,  and  so  economic  conditions  there  are  still  relatively  weak
(Graph  10).  However,  New  South  Wales  and  Victoria  have  been  less  affected  by  those
pressures and so low interest rates and the lower exchange rate have led to an improvement in
economic conditions in those states.
 12 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Conclusion
The  pattern  of  adjustment  of  the Australian  economy  to  the  decline  in  the  terms  of  trade  and
mining investment is generally consistent with what we had anticipated. However, the decline in
the terms of trade was larger than expected. In response, there has been significant adjustment
in  a  range  of  market  ‘prices’  –  including  wages  and  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  although  the
exchange rate has depreciated a little less than otherwise given global developments. Monetary
policy has also responded, with interest rates reduced to low levels. So while mining investment
and nominal GDP growth have both been weaker than the forecasts of a few years ago and,
more recently, inflation has been a bit weaker than expected, growth in the non-mining economy
has picked up and been a bit better than earlier anticipated. Indeed, of late, real GDP growth has
been a bit stronger and the unemployment rate a little lower than earlier forecast.
In many respects, the adjustment to the decline in mining investment and the terms of trade has
proceeded relatively smoothly. The Australian economy has performed well compared to other
advanced  economies  (Graph  11).  Moreover,  the  drag  on  growth  from  declining  mining
investment  is  now  waning  and  the  terms  of  trade  are  forecast  to  remain  around  their  current
levels.
 13 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Of course our forecasts are subject to the usual range of uncertainty. But, given that commodity
prices have increased substantially over the course of this year, some stability in the terms of
trade from here on seems more plausible than it has for some time. Developments in China are
likely to continue to have an important influence on commodity prices, given China’s role as both
a  major  producer  and  consumer  of  many  commodities.  For  this  reason  the  outlook  for  the
Chinese economy is a key source of uncertainty for the Australian economy.
If commodity prices were to stabilise around current levels, that would be a marked change from
recent years. Also, the end of the fall in mining investment is coming into view. The abatement of
those  two  substantial  headwinds  suggests  that  there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  of  sustaining
growth in economic activity, which would support a further gradual decline in the unemployment
rate. There is also a good prospect that the growth in wages and the rate of inflation will gradually
lift over the period ahead. That’s what’s implied by our central forecasts.
Thank you. I’d be happy to take a few questions.
 14 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Appendix
 15 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
This was published in early 2013. See Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), ‘Implications for the Australian
Economy of Strong Growth in Asia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03.
Speech  delivered  to  the  joint  IMF/Treasury/RBA  conference  on  ‘Structural  Change  and  the  Rise  of  Asia’,
Canberra, 2012. For other work done on this topic by RBA staff, see: Jääskelä J and P Smith (2013), ‘Terms of
Trade  Shocks:  What Are  They  and  What  Do  They  Do?’, Economic Record  89,  pp  145–159;  Downes  P,  K
Hanslow  and  P  Tulip  (2014),  ‘The  Effect  of  the  Mining  Boom  on  the Australian  Economy’,  RBA  Research
Discussion Paper No 2014–08; Kulish M and D Rees (2015), ‘Unprecedented Changes in the Terms of Trade’,
RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2015–11; and Manalo, J, D Perera and D Rees (2015), ‘Exchange Rate
Movements and the Australian Economy’, Economic Modelling (47), pp 53–62.
The economic adjustment this time around stands in contrast to previous terms of trade booms in Australia,
which – despite being smaller than the recent boom – tended to end in sharp contractions in economic activity
and large increases in unemployment. See: Battellino R (2010), ‘Mining Booms and the Australian Economy’,
RBA Bulletin,  March,  pp  63–69;  and Atkin  T,  M  Caputo,  T  Robinson  and  H  Wang  (2014),  ‘ Macroeconomic
Consequences of Terms of Trade Episodes, Past and Present’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014–01.
Inflation peaked at 5 per cent in late 2008, but declined as economic conditions moderated during the global
financial crisis. Growth in nominal unit labour costs also eased during the financial crisis, but rebounded to a
peak of around 7 per cent in year-ended terms in early 2011.
Even so, labour demand in the resource sector would still remain somewhat higher than it was prior to the
terms of trade boom, given the operational needs associated with producing more output.
Nevertheless,  as  anticipated,  employment  in  the  resource  sector  remains  higher  than  pre-boom  levels  as
production of resource commodities has increased.
a 
discussion 
For 
see:
<www.rba.gov.au/publications/smp/boxes/2015/feb/a.pdf>.  The  decline  in Australian  producers’  costs  would
have supported their profitability, but the decline in the costs of offshore producers would have allowed them to
keep producing more than otherwise, and this extra supply would have weighed on commodity prices and,
hence, the profits of Australian resource producers.
producing 
costs 
iron 
ore, 
the 
of 
of 
See Hambur J, L Cockerell, C Potter, P Smith and M Wright (2015), ‘Modelling the Australian Dollar’,  RBA
Research Discussion Paper 2015–12.
The improved growth in non-mining activity has occurred despite non-mining business investment remaining
subdued. Weakness in non-mining business investment has been most evident in Western Australia and, to a
lesser extent, Queensland, where the decline in mining investment and commodity prices have contributed to
weak conditions in those states more broadly. More recently, non-mining investment appears to have increased
in New South Wales and Victoria, where economic conditions have been improving.
There has also been some decline in population growth, most notably in Western Australia.
See Jacobs D and A Rush (2015), ‘Why Is Wage Growth So Low?’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 9–18.
For 
<www.rba.gov.au/publications/smp/2016/aug/price-and-wage-developments.html>.
discussion 
differences 
between 
the 
of 
a 
these 
measures, 
see:
See Ballantyne A and S Langcake (2016), ‘Why Has Retail Inflation Been So Low?’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 9–17.
 16 / 16
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
