   François Villeroy de Galhau: Financing of Very Small Enterprises (VSEs) 
Introductory speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
Symposium  on the  Financing  of  Very  Small  Enterprises (VSEs),  organised  by  the  Bank of 
France  in  conjunction  with  the  Federation  of  Approved  Management  Centres,  Paris, 
15 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Welcome  to  the  Banque  de  France  for  this  symposium  on  the  financing  of  very  small 
enterprises or VSEs. It was conceived and organised in conjunction with the Federation of 
Approved Management Centres, and I would like to extend my warmest thanks to them, and 
in particular to their President Yves Marmont. I am very pleased to have developed such a 
close  and  lasting  relationship  with  your  organisation,  which  plays  a  vital  role  in  supporting 
SMEs  and  VSEs.  This  event  would  also  have  been  impossible  without  the  help  of  the 
individuals and organisations who have agreed to take part in our three round tables today, 
and I would like to thank them sincerely for their contribution.  
It is a particular pleasure for me to be able to open this symposium today. As you know, just a 
few months ago, I had the honour of submitting a report to the prime minister on the financing 
of business investment, the first proposed recommendation of which was to “Improve access 
to credit for very small businesses, especially cash loans”. This is our focus today.  
Although my role has changed since then, my belief in the fundamental importance of this 
issue remains the same. Indeed, my conviction has been reinforced by the Banque de France’s 
own commitment to supporting VSEs, both at a central level and through its local presence in 
France’s regions. One of the main advantages of this nationwide network is that it makes it 
easier to listen to and support local businesses, the majority of which are clearly VSEs.  
Through its local branch network, the Banque de France is responsible for dealing with credit 
mediation  applications.  It  provides  valuable  insight  for  economic  and  social  actors  by 
publishing statistics on VSEs, and is the only central bank in the Eurosystem to publish data 
in this level of detail. In addition, the Banque de France conducts studies into VSE finances 
and their positioning in the French economic landscape.  
Clearly, this symposium is not just a one-off event reflecting a passing interest in a subject 
that’s currently in the spotlight. In fact, it is part of an ongoing and enduring initiative, and will 
provide additional impetus to the work already being undertaken at the Bank. I shall come back 
to this in a few minutes.  
 First of all, let me underline the importance of VSEs for growth and employment, and for the 
strength of our regional economic fabric.  
As you know, VSEs are usually defined legally as undertakings with fewer than 10 employees, 
annual turnover or a total balance sheet of under EUR 2 million, and which are not part of a 
group managed by a larger enterprise.  
France’s 2.1 million VSEs account for around 20% of private sector employment and close to 
20%  of  total  enterprise  value  added.  If  we  include  micro-enterprises,  firms  with  very  low 
turnover and which have a special tax and social security status, this segment comprises some 
3 million business.  
This is a lot more than we tend to think. What’s more, companies in this segment are spread 
out across the entire country rather than being concentrated in just a few dynamic industrial 
centres. VSEs are also an important source of investment in France and one that is badly in 
need of stimulus: according to estimates, at least half of all VSEs chose not to invest in 2013 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and 2014. Fostering the expansion of these firms is vital for economic growth and for jobs. But 
to do this, they need to want to invest, and to have sufficient financing to do so.  
 What are the main approaches the Banque de France is taking to encourage the 
financing of VSEs?  
The Banque de France’s actions in this field are guided both by its knowledge of the statistics 
and its vision of the reality on the ground.  
On the whole, French firms do not appear to have any particular difficulty accessing credit. 
Outstanding bank lending to corporates is rising at a faster pace in France than anywhere else 
in Europe: +4.5% year-on-year at end-November 2015, compared with +2.1% in the United 
Kingdom, +1% in Germany and an average of +0.9 % for the euro area as a whole.  
In  fact,  based  on  the  responses  given  by  business  leaders  to  our  surveys,  it  seems  that 
applications for investment loans are generally accepted fairly readily, and the same seems to 
apply, more or less, to cash loans. Although difficult to measure, firms’ willingness to apply for 
loans appears to be strong. Surveys conducted by the ECB show similar results, and rank 
France on a par with Germany in terms of access to credit and willingness to apply for loans, 
well ahead of the other major countries in the euro area. Interest rates on loans are also lower 
in France than anywhere else in the euro area – by around 1 percentage point in the case of 
individual loans of up to EUR 250,000.  
With regard to today’s topic, however, there are a number of important distinctions that need 
to be made.  
Access to credit is markedly more difficult for VSEs than for other SMEs:  
– 
fewer than 60% of applications for cash loans were accepted (i.e. granting of 75% or 
more of the requested amount) in the third quarter of 2015, compared with 74% for 
SMEs. Of course we need to take into account the fact that smaller companies have 
potentially weaker finances, but this is clearly something that needs to be watched 
closely;  
outstanding loans to VSEs were up 2.8% year-on-year at the end of the third quarter 
2015, whereas cash loans only rose by 1.1% over the same period. Equipment loans 
to VSEs also grew by just 1.3%, as facilities in this category are mainly used to buy 
property, which is clearly less likely to enhance productivity or competitiveness.  
 Evidently, things are proving more difficult for VSEs, and the sentiment on the ground seems 
to confirm this. It is in everyone’s interest – both the banks’ and the business community’s – 
that we resolve this contradiction regarding credit: between the banks’ ostensible commercial 
ambitions on the one hand, and the continuing failure to fully meet VSEs’ demand for loans. It 
is therefore important that we improve VSEs’ access to financing. I would like to propose three 
main focuses for action: the first concerns the banks, the second the Banque de France, 
and the third VSEs’ business customers.  
1)  
First of all, it is absolutely vital that –at the very least- the five fitting commitments 
made by banks to improve dialogue with VSEs and SMEs, which were set out at the end of 
the excellent report drafted by the Observatory for Business Financing in the summer of 2014, 
be fully implemented.  
Let me briefly remind you of these:  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     respond  to  all  requests  for  financing  within  15  working  days  of  submission  of  the 
completed application. This commitment appears to have been met in 90% of cases,1 
which  is  commendable;  but  the  remaining  10%  still  amounts  to  100,000  late 
responses per year;  
explain to VSEs why their loan application has been rejected;  
in the event of the rejection or cancellation of a facility, inform the client of all the 
options available for recourse;  
provide better information on short-term financing;  
reduce the turnover of VSE financial advisers.  
– 
– 
I would also like to highlight the valuable contribution of the FBF in producing an explanatory 
guide on VSE financing. A lot of entrepreneurs need to learn and understand the basics of 
finance. The misunderstanding between bankers and businesses often stems from the fact 
that they don’t speak the same language: this makes it harder for VSEs to establish a close 
working relationship with their bank managers and financial advisers. In addition, the Banque 
de France and the High Council of the French Institute of Chartered Accountants have worked 
together to produce a financial guide for VSEs entitled Guide du Routard du Crédit. I would 
also like to single out the efforts made by the Observatory for Business Financing, which has 
put together a forthcoming glossary on loan pricing. All of this is extremely useful, but these 
documents also need to be widely publicised and made available, and this task falls first and 
foremost to the banks. This should in turn encourage them to make their bank fees and charges 
more transparent and explicit.  
Turning now to the Banque de France, we clearly need to provide more help to VSEs 
2)  
before  they  get  into  difficulty.  Credit  mediation  is  a  very  effective  tool  for  resolving  VSEs 
financial problems after the fact, and indeed these make up the majority of cases submitted to 
the mediator. However, it is also important – especially so in my view – that we provide help 
before this stage, and prevent VSEs from getting into trouble in the first place.  
We have therefore decided that, in addition to the legal and operational assistance provided 
via  credit  mediation,  the  Banque  de  France will  contribute to  this  preventive  action  by 
appointing a VSE Correspondent in each of its département branches. The role of these 
correspondents will be to act as a first point of contact for VSEs and listen to their concerns in 
the  capacity  of  a  trusted  third-party.  They  will  be  responsible  for  providing  information  – 
including the documents I’ve just mentioned – and for broadly identifying the VSEs’ needs. If 
necessary, and of course only if the VSEs themselves are in agreement, they will also direct 
them  towards  the  relevant  professional  networks  which  can  provide  appropriate  support: 
approved management centres, institutes of chartered accountants, micro-credit associations, 
etc. All VSEs will be welcome, including, of course, those whose business is expanding and 
who need information tailored to their size.  
The Banque de France shall guarantee complete privacy in these dealings – indeed this is one 
of its fundamental values and skills: VSEs will have the peace of mind of knowing that, if they 
so wish, all discussions will be fully confidential.  
The VSE Correspondents will be appointed in the spring of 2016 and, after a period of specific 
training, will be fully operational by the autumn.  
Also in the autumn of 2016, the Banque de France will provide firms with access to an online 
analysis and simulation tool called OPALE, which enables companies to assess their finances 
while also learning more about the subject.  
                                                
1   Evaluation  de  la  mise  en  oeuvre  des  5  mesures  prises  par  la  FBF  pour  améliorer  les  relations  banques-
TPE/PME, report submitted on 25 November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   3)  
I’d  like  to  turn  now  to  my  last  suggested  focus  for  action,  which  I  believe  is  also 
extremely  important:  reducing  the  amount  of  time  it  takes  for  business  customers  to 
settle  their  invoices.  Again  it  is  difficult  to  provide  accurate  measurements  –  and  at  the 
Banque de France we are well aware of this as we have been helping to look into the issue for 
several years. However, the indications are that overdue payments pose a huge problem for 
businesses in general and in particular for VSEs: at end-2014, outstanding payment claims 
amounted to EUR 600 billion, of which some EUR 420 billion were owed by private sector 
firms…  and  the  remainder  by  the  public  sector.  This  requirement  should  of  course  apply 
equally to the public sector, both at national and local level. Various surveys and qualitative 
assessments show that the situation has stopped improving in the past few months, and that 
payment times are no longer falling, and in some cases may even be increasing again. Long 
payment  times  are  not just  a financial  problem for  VSEs, they  also  place  a  brake  on their 
expansion, as they spend too much time chasing up overdue invoices, time that could better 
be devoted to growing the business and investing.  
The government is acutely aware of this issue and, in conjunction with the Observatory for 
Payment Times, is taking decisive action to resolve it. The Banque de France intends to help 
reduce  these  difficulties  by  drawing  attention  to  all  the  solutions  available  to  help  small 
businesses.  It  will  work  actively  with  the  Observatory  for  Business  Financing,  as  well  as 
through  its  day-to-day  contacts  with  credit  institutions  and  financing  companies,  to  help 
develop financial products that can better reduce this obstacle to VSE growth.  
The determined efforts that the Banque de France intends to undertake or to participate in, will 
of course benefit greatly from your input here today at this symposium. I shall follow your work 
and the results closely, and I hope you enjoy this excellent event.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
