  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Collaboration and challenges of the central bank 
community 
Dinner  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Closing  Dinner,  Shanghai, 
29 February 2016. 
 It is my honour to be invited to speak tonight at this distinguished gathering of Governors. In 
my 35 years as a career Central Banker, it has been my privilege to have been associated 
with the BIS for 20 of those years. The BIS had in the mid-1990s initiated a move to have a 
greater  interface  with  the  emerging  world.  This  translated  into  an  expansion  of  the 
membership  of  the  BIS  in  1996  and  then  again  in  1999  and  2003,  when  several  Central 
Banks in emerging Asia became members of the BIS. Today, almost half the membership of 
the BIS is from the emerging world. 
This initiative by the BIS under the leadership of the late Sir Andrew Crockett has proven to 
be highly prescient given the growth of the emerging world in significance and influence in 
the  global  economy.  The  BIS  has  evolved  to  become  an  international  organisation  that  is 
truly  global.  The  BIS  has  not  only  focussed  on  the  important  issues  on  financial  stability 
emanating from financial systems of the developed world but has also surfaced the issues 
that  are  important  to  the  emerging  world.  Most  important  is  the  engagement  and  the 
opportunity  provided  for  the  emerging  world  to  have  a  voice  on  the  issues  that  have 
fundamental implications on us and on the broader global community. Jamie Caruana and 
the Board of the BIS, thank you for this. 
It was in 1995 when I was first invited to participate in a BIS roundtable meeting and the topic 
then was on capital flows. Today, twenty years hence, this is still a hot topic and remains an 
unresolved issue as the world continues to witness massive shifts in funds across borders. 
Indeed, such financial flows are having serious repercussions on financial markets, notably 
on the money and foreign exchange markets, the capital markets and other asset markets 
across the world. In addressing such challenges and the many others that confront Central 
Banks, we have benefitted immensely from the work by the BIS. Not only has the BIS always 
flagged the issues important to Central Banks through its many excellent reports, research 
works, background notes which have always been of the highest quality and of great benefit 
to the Central Bank community but the BIS has also had a pivotal role in providing a platform 
that facilitates and strengthens engagement and cooperation among Central Banks. My own 
development  has  benefitted  from  the  experience  with  the  BIS  including  its  highly  prolific 
Asian  office.  It  was  also  my  privilege  to  be  perhaps  the  longest  serving  member  of  the 
governance group at the BIS. The knowledge gained from this certainly benefitted the series 
of  organisational  transformation  we  undertook  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  enhance  our 
organisational effectiveness. 
As this BIS meeting is taking place in Asia, allow me to take the opportunity to say something 
about  our  region.  While  Asia  has  not  been  immune  to  the  turbulence  and  the  upheavals 
taking  place  in  the  different  parts  of  the  world,  the  region  has  been  able  to  rise  to  the 
challenge and each time has demonstrated the ability to experience a swift rebound. Factors 
that have contributed to this resilience is not so much what we have done in response to the 
developments  but  it  is  what  we  have  done  previously  that  prepared  us  to  weather  these 
developments. These factors in varying degrees have included undertaking rebalancing and 
structural adjustments of our economies, economic and financial reforms, the development of 
our financial systems, pursuing greater fiscal discipline, building a more extensive policy tool 
kits,  building  buffers  during  the  good  times  and  advancing  regional  integration  and 
cooperation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  For most of the region, following these efforts, our more diversified economies have become 
less vulnerable to economic shocks, our more diversified and developed financial systems 
have been better able to absorb and intermediate the financial turmoil and turbulence, while 
the  financial  reforms  have  also  increased  our  flexibility  and  produced  better  price  and 
exchange rate adjustments. Those with sound macroeconomic fundamentals including more 
sustainable  fiscal  positions  also  had  the  policy  space  to  manage  the  implications  of  these 
challenging  developments.  Thus,  despite  our  vulnerability  to  setbacks,  these  factors 
prepared the ground for Asia to be positioned for a rebound to a more sustainable growth. 
Allow me to take this opportunity to also say something about China, the host country for our 
meetings.  Let  me  first  of  all  thank  the  PBC  and  in  particular,  Governor  Zhou  for  the  very 
warm hospitality that has been extended to us. China has always recognised its important 
role in the region. With its ascension to the WTO in 2001, the increase in intra-regional trade 
has been an important catalyst in driving growth in the Asian region. For many of us, China 
has become our largest trading partner. This trend is reinforced by the two-way foreign direct 
investment flows in the region. The use of the Renminbi to settle these trade and investment 
flows is a further factor that facilitates and strengthens these trade and investment flows. 
In the area of Central Bank cooperation, the PBC has actively participated in all our regional 
groupings  including  that  for  the  ASEAN  economies.  For  Malaysia,  this  cooperation  has 
manifested itself in many ways. The one event that I will always vividly remember is the one 
on 21st July 2005 at 7 o’clock in the evening when both China and Malaysia transitioned to a 
flexible exchange rate regime. For Malaysia, we had seven years earlier fixed our exchange 
rate during the height of the Asian financial crisis. Our transition into the flexible regime with 
China allowed for us to achieve it without being destabilised by the financial markets. Bank 
Negara Malaysia also became one of the first Asian Central Bank to be accorded the QFII 
status  in  2009  as  we  took  steps  to  diversify  our  reserves  into  Chinese  and  other  Asian 
denominated  papers.  While  China  in  the  current  environment  is  being  confronted  with 
challenges as it addresses its areas of vulnerabilities and as it takes steps to rebalance and 
reform its economy and financial system, it is these very actions that will provide the ground 
for a more sustainable China that will in turn become a source of stability for the region and 
for the global economy. 
Looking ahead, there is much to be done by all of us. I have said that the business of Central 
Banking  is  an  unfinished  business.  In  view  of  the  highly  dynamic  environment,  there  will 
always be new challenges on the horizon. For Asia, it is the future challenges that we now 
need to be concerned with. And it is what we do now that will prepare the ground for us for 
the  future.  There  has  been  too  much  focus  on  the  present.  In  Asia,  while  we  have 
successfully  prepared  ourselves  for  the  current  environment,  we  now  need  to  prepare 
ourselves  for  the  future.  Among  the  future  challenges  that  are  likely  to  confront  Asia  is 
whether our prevailing growth model is sustainable given the consequences from erosion of 
our demographic advantage, the rising indebtedness, the rising cost of living in an apparent 
period  of  low  inflation,  the  need  to  meet  the  massive  infrastructure  requirements  and  the 
need to address the rising income disparities and the environmental challenges. 
What  then  are  the  ways  economic  management  can  prepare  us  for  the  future?  This  will 
involve policies and reforms that will reduce leverage that will address the widening income 
disparities, that will effectively manage infrastructure development and urbanisation, that will 
accord  environmental  sustainability  and  finally  that  will  accord  importance  to  governance, 
accountability and integrity in the implementation and execution of the many endeavours to 
achieve a sustainable advancement. 
For most Central Banks in the emerging world, our mandate is broader. Most certainly we 
are  expected  to  have  a  role  in  contributing  to  addressing  many  of  these  challenges  both 
directly and indirectly. Most of all, not only do we have a voice but we also provide support to 
addressing  many  of  these  issues,  whether  it  is  on  financial  inclusion,  financing  of 
infrastructure  or  putting  in  place  financial  and  social  safety  nets  or  on  environmental 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sustainability.  As  much  of  these  efforts  will  involve  interface  with  other  parts  of  the  public 
sector, it has been my experience that the participation of the Central Bank in many of these 
agendas will require careful boundary management and a signing off when it is completed so 
that  it  does  not  remain  permanently  with  the  Central  Bank.  Of  great  importance  in  this 
process is also to carefully safeguard the independence of the Central Bank. 
In conclusion, let me express my deep gratitude and appreciation to my fellow governors for 
all the cooperation and support that has been extended to me and to Bank Negara Malaysia. 
For the friendship and for the collaboration, it has truly been enriching for me. And to the BIS, 
thank you for this privilege to be part of the Central Bank community. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
