  Benoît Cœuré: Interview with France 24 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, with France 24, conducted by Ms Stéphanie Antoine on 8 June 2016, and broadcast 
on 9 June 2016. 
 The pound sterling took a further hit following news that the Brexit camp might win 
the EU referendum. The IMF believes that a Brexit would cause the UK’s GDP to fall 
between  1.5%  and  9.5%.  What  would  be  the  impact  of  a  Brexit  on  the  British  and 
European economies? Have you quantified it? 
It  is  not  the  job  of  the  ECB  to  make  this  kind  of  calculation.  The  IMF  does  that  very  well 
already. I think they have clearly explained the possible mechanisms. We believe that it is in 
the UK’s interest to stay in the European Union and in the EU’s interest to keep the United 
Kingdom in the EU. Together we are stronger, and we will all be stronger, including the UK, if 
it stays in. Of course, it’s now a sovereign choice and the decision of the British people must 
be respected, whatever it may be. 
Are you concerned about a Brexit? 
The competent authorities are preparing for all scenarios, as they should. In this context, the 
ECB’s responsibility is quite limited. It is to provide reassurance on the possible impact of a 
Brexit, if that came about – which we hope not – on the confidence of economic players and 
on the stability of the financial markets. From that perspective, the ECB is preparing itself for 
all eventualities, as it has always done in such circumstances, and preparing to take steps to 
stabilise  the  markets,  notably  by  providing  liquidity,  as  we  have  always  done  in  such 
circumstances. It’s simply what we do. 
So a Brexit could have an impact on the ECB’s monetary policy? 
No, not necessarily on monetary policy, but on the access of economic players to liquidity, 
even if I firmly believe that won’t be necessary, because everything has been well prepared. 
If it did prove necessary, and we will do what we have to, in coordination with other central 
banks, as we have always done in these circumstances. 
Turning  to  Greece,  an  agreement  was  reached  on  24  May  between  Athens  and  its 
creditors,  and  the  tug-of-war  to  release  the  next  tranche  continues.  What  do  the 
Greeks have to do to obtain this new loan? 
No, there is no tug-of-war. There are a number of commitments that were made by the Greek 
government  vis-à-vis  the  Eurogroup,  as  you  pointed  out.  The  Eurogroup  asked  the  Euro 
Working Group and the institutions concerned to verify the implementation of this agreement, 
and we are almost at the end of this process. I am very confident that in the coming days 
they will dot the i’s and cross the t’s of the agreement, which will open the way to disbursing 
this tranche of aid to Greece. This will be the culmination of much hard work on the part of 
the Greek government to comply with the terms of the agreement made in summer 2015. It is 
really significant effort, with very substantial reforms, and I think we can all be pleased that 
we are approaching the end of this phase of the discussions. 
People  are  asking,  and  rightly  so,  if  the  Greeks  are  doing  enough  to  satisfy  their 
creditors... 
We are checking the details. I am not worried about the fact that the decisions can be made 
in the coming days. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As long as there is no growth in Greece, won’t it be very difficult to make reforms? 
Yes, that’s true and that’s what’s making the situation difficult for the Greek government and 
for  the  Greek  people  in  general.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  there’s  no  reform,  there’s  no 
growth. So the reforms are vital – the sooner, the better. That’s why I am glad that we are 
now  very  close  to  an  agreement.  The  faster  the  agreement  is  concluded,  the  sooner 
confidence  can  return  to  the  Greek  economy,  including  depositors’  confidence  in  Greek 
banks, foreign investors’ confidence in the Greek economy. I believe there is a real chance 
now to enter a positive spiral of confidence for the Greek economy. We are very near to it. 
Olivier Blanchard, the IMF’s former chief economist, is calling for a fresh restructuring 
of  Greece’s  debt.  What  does  the  European  Central  Bank,  as  a  very  large  holder  of 
Greek debt, think of this? 
He’s right. To begin with, let’s not forget that Greece’s debt has already been restructured. It 
is sometimes said that Europe waited for too long and that it is now time to start restructuring 
Greece’s debt. Let’s bear in mind that Greece’s debt was already restructured twice in 2012, 
with its private debt cut in half and its public debt undergoing extensive restructuring, with a 
prolongation of maturities and a cut in rates, which already represents an improvement of the 
terms of the debt. 
Therefore  the  question  is:  “Is  a  third  round  of  debt  relief for Greece  necessary?”.  And  the 
answer is: “yes”. Moreover, during the Eurogroup discussions and the discussions that we 
are  having  at  the  moment,  the  ECB  has  approved  an  analysis  of  the  sustainability  of  the 
Greek debt which was carried out with the European Commission and the European Stability 
Mechanism, which shows indeed that there are serious concerns about the sustainability of 
the Greece’s debt, if there are no relief measures. So the ECB agrees with this diagnosis: 
relief measures are needed to reduce Greece’s debt and put it back on a sustainable path. 
The Eurogroup is committed to this and I welcome this decision. 
It’s very new for the ECB to speak out in this way… 
No, we’ve said it, the ECB’s President has said it. It’s new because Greece’s situation has 
changed. And the longer the situation is drawn out, the more urgent the need to alleviate the 
Greek  debt  becomes.  But,  again,  it  is  no  substitute  for  the  reforms  which  are  needed  to 
restore growth and productivity to the Greek economy. It is a supporting measure. What is 
truly needed to put Greece back on a growth trajectory is reform. 
Turning  our  attention  to  France,  is  the  proposed  new  labour  law,  known  as  the  El 
Khomri law, a good reform? 
Let me say that, seeing this from Frankfurt, and from a European point of view, the tone of 
the  French  debate  is  sometimes  a  little  surprising.  This  law  is  described  in  the  French 
debate,  as  an  ultra-liberal  law.  In  fact,  if  you  look  closely,  there  are  elements  of  flexibility, 
elements of decentralised decision-making, and there are also elements of additional rights 
for employees. From a European perspective, it is somewhat surprising that people in France 
are concerned about a labour market reform process which has been conducted elsewhere 
in Europe, by governments of both left and right – I can think of the Italian government as an 
example. The El Khomri law is in keeping with the reform of the labour market in Europe; it’s 
a law that will create jobs; it’s not a law that disadvantages young people, as I think Laurent 
Berger has said; it’s a law that will create jobs, especially for the young. 
So it should be done – is that what you’re saying? 
Yes.  But  it’s  certainly  not  up  to  the  ECB  to  judge  the  details,  the  legal  form,  the  various 
articles...  What  I’m  saying  is  that  there  is  a  dynamic  under  way  in  labour  market  reform 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which, experience has shown, has been a success in other European countries, regardless 
of their political inclination. 
Should  the  public  deficit  be  increased,  just  in  order  to  push  through  a  structural 
reform like this one? 
This is an important debate, but it’s also important to draw a distinction between countries. In 
general, it is true that, from the ECB’s point of view, monetary policy has had a lot to do to 
stimulate growth in recent years; better support by fiscal policy would allow the ECB to do the 
job better. We are convinced about that. Now, the kind of fiscal support necessarily differs 
from country to country depending on their budgetary and economic situation. It has to be 
said that there are very few countries in the euro area that have the fiscal space, that have 
the freedom to increase their deficit... 
Is that the case for France, Mr Cœuré? 
No, I don’t think that is the case for France. France’s public debt has increased very rapidly over 
the past 10–15 years, regardless of the government in power, so, again, this is not a matter of 
politics. French public debt has increased very sharply. Can we really afford today to advise the 
French government, of whatever kind, to increase the debt still further, to incur further debt for 
the French? I think the answer is “no”. Therefore, the remedy differs according to the country. 
In all euro area countries, however, there is significant fiscal space to have a coherent mix of 
fiscal  policy,  i.e.  make  an  effort  to  redress  unproductive  spending,  to  steer  fiscal  policy 
towards promoting growth, i.e. either by cutting taxes when they are too high or by making 
public investments, especially for young people, in research, innovation, or wherever it can 
be put to good use. So this discussion on the quality of public spending is important for all 
countries and it is important for France. 
Aren’t the monetary policies of the central banks – with their very low, even negative, 
interest rates – risky? There is a real debate on this subject... 
I encourage all of our critics to take a few moments, a few seconds, to consider what things 
would be like now if we hadn’t done what we did. If the ECB hadn’t taken the measures it has 
taken in recent years, there would be no growth in the euro area. Inflation, according to our 
calculations, for what they are worth, using models developed by ECB economists, would be 
half a point weaker, i.e. it would be negative, with all the risks of a deflationary spiral that that 
entails. Thus, the alternative scenario is frankly not very attractive. 
Monetary policy has helped to boost growth in the euro area. Of course, it is not enough. You 
need  reforms,  you  need  productivity,  you  need  projects  to  finance.  We  can  make  the 
financing of projects more attractive but then there have to be projects to finance. It’s up to 
firms  and  the  Member  States  to  take  care  of  that.  But  without  the  impetus  provided  by 
monetary policy, growth would not have picked up. Behind your question, there is the issue 
of possible risks to financial stability... 
Yes, the risks of bubbles.... 
Well, we can’t see these bubbles. There are no credit bubbles in the euro area. Moreover, 
the banking sector continues to shrink in the euro area, and for good reason: the size of the 
banks had become excessive. There is no overvaluation of assets, for example, on the stock 
and  property  markets,  on  average,  in  the  euro  area.  There  may  be  small  bubbles,  some 
simmering in certain segments of the markets, but that is for the national authorities to deal 
with. But there is no financial stability problem in the euro area today. We are vigilant, we will 
continue to keep a close eye on developments, but at the moment the assessment is clearly 
positive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
