  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Innovative financial inclusion 
Opening remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Symposium on Innovative Financial Inclusion, Kuala 
Lumpur, 21 September 2016. 
 While  the global  economy  is  still  recovering from  the Global  Financial  Crisis,  the focus  on 
boosting  global  growth  has  never  eclipsed  the  financial  inclusion  agenda.  In  fact, 
policymakers continue to recognise the importance of financial inclusion and have accorded 
it  as  a  global  priority  to  address  the  widening  income  inequality  gap,  to  promote  the 
economic empowerment and protection of low income households and SMEs and to unlock 
the growth potential of the fast-expanding middle class population. Expanded opportunities to 
save  securely,  to  invest  in  productive  activities  and  to  protect  against  unforeseen  shocks, 
would meet the needs of the underserved. This would drive domestic demand, a key engine 
of growth for many economies. Between 2011 and 2014, the World Bank estimates that 500 
million people have gained access to formal financial services for the first time. If our efforts 
continue, we are on our way to assisting the remaining 2 billion adults that remain financially 
excluded. 
A  succession  of  technology  breakthroughs  combined  with  the  ubiquity  of  mobile  devices 
present significant opportunities to scale up financial inclusion to an unprecedented level. 
Beyond the socio-economic demands, there is a moral obligation for us to do more to help 
the millions who are still living in abject poverty and highly vulnerable to financial hardship, 
with no means to change their circumstances. 
This  global  symposium  presents  an  opportunity  for  us  to  explore  solutions  from  different 
perspectives. 
I see this as having “an eye for innovation”. Indeed policy makers are now improving their 
capabilities in technology and innovation, recruiting talent, establishing dedicated team and 
intensifying  partnership  with  the  private  sector,  to  help  them  see  things  a  little  differently. 
While  there  is  no  shortage  of  ideas  on  new  and  innovative  ways  to  increase  financial 
inclusion, the key challenge to my mind is the ability to scale up and achieve sustainability. 
The symposium’s theme refers to “harnessing innovation”, but one needs to truly understand 
innovation  in  order  to  successfully  tap  on  such  innovation  to  attain  the  dual  objectives  of 
scale and sustainability in inclusive finance. 
With  that  in  view,  my  remarks  this  morning  will  focus  on  three  areas  where  an  eye  for 
innovation is needed: 
a. 
First, putting on a new lens to spot the opportunities from existing innovations that 
can be tailored to financial inclusion; 
Second, identifying and working on our blind spots by driving efficiency gains with 
technology-enabled financial inclusion; and 
Third,  having  a  clear  picture  of  the  policymakers’  role  in  promoting  an  enabling 
environment for financial innovation and technology. 
b. 
c. 
Putting on a new lens: Exploiting mainstream innovations with a financial inclusion 
focus 
Today, financial innovations have penetrated, and continue to permeate almost every aspect 
of financial activity. This has been driven by faster computing speed, lower cost of storage 
and faster problem-solving capabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Technology  is  being  used  by  financial  institutions  to  improve  operations  –  from  improving 
customer  experience  to  constructing  better  models  to  manage  risks  more  efficiently  and 
effectively.  In  many  cases,  strategic  partnerships  with  fintech  companies  have  been 
established  to  achieve  similar  outcomes.  The  advent  of  robo-advisers  and  algorithmic 
underwriting are some of the examples. 
These  developments  have  largely  evolved  within  the  mainstream  customer  segments  and 
have proven to be effective. Clearly, opportunities exist to leverage on capabilities that are 
already in place to create specific applications for financial inclusion. With proven application, 
the prospects for achieving greater scalability, faster time to market and increased take-up 
are correspondingly greater. 
For years, financial institutions have invested heavily in technology that has helped improve 
the  collection  and  mining  of  financial  and  non-financial  data  to  gain  richer  insights  into 
customer  preferences  and  behaviours.  These  same  capabilities  create 
immediate 
opportunities  to  identify  specific  barriers  to  financial  inclusion  for  different  target  groups 
whose  needs  are  shaped  by  very  different  priorities,  experiences,  values  and  norms.  For 
example,  cultural  biases  can  be  an  important  factor  that  is  not  fully  appreciated  and 
understood as a factor that limits higher levels of financial inclusion among women. Among 
lower  income  groups,  a  more  granular  level  of  analysis  on  income  patterns  is  needed  to 
structure solutions that address the irregularity in loan repayments. 
Financial  inclusion  for  the  ageing  population  is  another  critical  area  that  requires  more 
understanding.  It  is  important  that  new  products,  delivery  channels  and  technologies  also 
work  well  for  our  senior  citizens  that  are financially  excluded.  Many  financial  products  and 
services offered today have age limits that create barriers to access financial services. This 
ought  to  be  changed  to  ensure  inclusive  financial  systems  for  the  ageing  population 
segment. Technologies that enable better data collection and analytics can support deeper 
research to fill this gap while mitigating the risks to providers of financial solutions. 
Beyond data applications, opportunities exist in other areas. For example, distributed ledger 
technology  eliminates  the  need  for  centralised  transaction  validation  and  shortens  the 
settlement  chain,  effectively  lowering  costs  of  real-time  remittances.  By  incorporating 
adequate Know-Your-Customer (KYC) requirements, distributed ledger has the potential to 
address de-risking. Robo-advisers could potentially be adapted to increase financial literacy 
and  support  customers  in  less  accessible  locations.  The  adoption  of  open  Application 
Interfaces  (API)  facilitates  a  sharing  environment  whereby  improvements  build  on  existing 
innovations could shorten the time to market for more offerings. 
These are just a hint of many more examples that can be examined. What is needed is a 
rethinking of today’s most promising financial innovations for applications and new gains in 
financial inclusion. Or to put it another way, we need to look at not just innovative financial 
inclusion, but inclusive financial innovation! 
Identifying and working on our blind spots: driving efficiency gains to promote 
sustainable financial inclusion 
The  reduction  of  poverty  and  greater  social  empowerment  through  financial  inclusion  has 
been  one  of  most  enduring  achievements  of  our  era.  Building  on  this  momentum,  our 
ambitions to pursue deeper financial inclusion over the next decade must be rooted in a deep 
understanding  of  the  unique  circumstances  faced  by  the  2  billion  people  who  remain 
excluded  from  the  formal  financial  sector.  This  involves  increasing  the  arsenal  of  financial 
inclusion  tools  that  can  overcome  both  the  geographical  and  cultural  barriers  to  deliver 
meaningful financial services to this segment. 
Ultimately,  the  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  underserved  and  unbanked  must  be 
economically  viable  for  providers.  In  this  aspect,  the  smart  usage  of  technology  can  be  a 
game changer in lowering the cost of financial intermediation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This in turn will unlock opportunities to progress from the single, narrowly-focused products 
which  are  typically  offered  by  traditional  financial  institutions  today,  to  a  broader  range  of 
relevant products and services tailored for the underserved segments. The ability to clearly 
demonstrate and consistently track efficiency gains over time can attract more providers into 
this space, while driving continuous efficiency improvements in delivering financial services 
to the underserved. 
Great strides have been made in developing better measures of financial inclusion. We have 
moved beyond measuring access, to including measures of the usage and quality of financial 
inclusion services. We need to go further to include measurement on how efficiently we are 
increasing financial inclusion. Such measures do not exist widely, if at all, and have yet to be 
systematically  propagated.  This  blind  spot  ignores  one  of  the  most  important  aspects  of 
innovative strategies for financial inclusion, which is the potential to drive down the costs of 
delivering  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  A  framework  for  evaluating  financial  inclusion 
efficiency  can  provide  powerful  incentives  to  harness  technology  in  the  most  optimal  way. 
This  should  drive  lower  the  costs  of  delivering  inclusive  financial  services  over  time,  and 
thereby enhance the viability for both Governments and private actors. 
Sustainability also calls for the strengthening of financial institutions that provide services to 
low-income and vulnerable groups. The misconduct or underperformance of such institutions 
can have a disproportionate impact on the poor simply because they have lower buffers. It 
can also significantly set back financial inclusion efforts by further entrenching the mistrust of 
formal financial institutions. It is therefore, critical for such institutions to exemplify strong and 
socially responsible corporate governance, and to have the appropriate technical expertise 
that will enable them to expand product offerings, increase outreach and develop alternative 
delivery  channels.  They  must  also  be  adept  at  identifying  and  managing  financial  and 
operational risks inherent in their business models. This requires investments in systems and 
in the development of talent with deep knowledge within the institutions. 
Only  then,  can  financial  institutions  expect  to  support  the  low  income  and  vulnerable 
segments of our communities as long-term partners to create opportunities that will improve 
lives. 
A clear picture of policymakers’ role in promoting an enabling environment for 
financial innovation and technology 
Finally,  policymakers  can  play  a  meaningful  role  to  promote  an  enabling  environment  for 
innovation to support financial inclusion initiatives. I shall focus on three areas. 
First, regulation should aim to be technology-neutral and outcome-focused, proportionate to 
risks and harmonized across sectors. A technology-neutral approach allows policymakers to 
assess  the  merits  of  innovations  based  on  the  outcomes,  without  fear  or  favour  for  the 
underlying  technology.  Regulation  should  be  proportionate  to  the  risks  that  products  or 
institutions  present  to  the  broader  financial  system.  This  requires  continued  efforts  to 
strengthen  the  capacity  among  national  regulators  and  supervisors  to  assess  the  benefits 
and  cost  of  regulation. Only  then  can  we  really  move  from  proportionality  as  a  concept  to 
practice.  Regulation  between  different  sectors  should  also  be  harmonised  to  focus  on 
activities that should be regulated, rather than the institutions conducting such activities. For 
example,  if  an  e-commerce  platform  collects,  pays  interest  on  and  mobilises  deposits,  a 
banking license may be necessary as public interest is involved. 
Second,  communicating  clear  expectations  to  the  market  while  incorporating  feedbacks 
through engagements with the private sector is important. Countries such as Australia, Hong 
Kong, the UAE, the UK, Singapore, and Malaysia have issued discussion papers, introducing 
a sandbox approach which allows fintech solutions to be tested in a controlled environment, 
with appropriate risk mitigation in place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Dedicated resources have been allocated to collaborate with private sector innovators and 
assess  the  feasibility  of  technology.  Jointly,  these  efforts  serve  to  build  public-private 
consensus on how to deploy financial technology, by: 
a. 
Conveying  national-level  support  for  fintech  innovations  that  place  the  customer 
firmly at the centre; 
Providing clarity to the public on the applicability of regulations to fintech solutions; 
and 
Supporting 
technologies function, as well as the benefits and risks. 
in  understanding  how  underlying 
regulators  and  supervisors 
b. 
c. 
Third,  it  is  important  to  address  the  role  of  Governments  in  national  financial  inclusion 
strategies. This is particularly relevant in encouraging e-payments as a key lever to expand 
the outreach of formal financial services. A clear commitment by Governments can secure 
the  political  capital  needed  to  create  the  infrastructure  and  policies  to  accelerate  financial 
inclusion such as unique identifiers and mandatory electronic G2P payments. Policymakers 
should also seek opportunities to promote the interoperability of supporting infrastructure for 
new  financial  innovations.  This  will  preserve  healthy  competition  and  strong  incentives  for 
providers to continue innovating value-add solutions that meet the real needs of consumers. 
More often than not, small changes lead to major breakthroughs, if approached with an open 
mind and shared interests between providers and policymakers to genuinely serve the best 
interests of the unserved segments of society. In Malaysia, the agent banking initiative was 
an experiment in policymaking and regulation that has proved to be highly successful in both 
protecting  the  integrity  of  financial  transactions,  while  significantly  increasing  financial 
inclusion. The agent banking initiative leveraged on existing high-volume touch points such 
as sundry shops, petrol stations and post offices to reach the rural population and perform 
basic banking transactions on behalf of financial institutions. 
The technology involved was hardly state-of-the-art, relying on POS terminals with real time 
connectivity, to back-end system of banks as well biometric identification, to meet the Know-
Your-Customer  requirements.  Yet,  it  has  enabled  99%  of  Malaysians,  particularly  those  in 
rural  areas,  to  conveniently  access  financial  services,  while  saving  up  to  80%  of  costs  in 
building brick-and-mortar bank branches. 
In  February  2016,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  also  facilitated  the  implementation  of  the 
Investment  Account  Platform  (IAP)  which  expands  opportunities  for  retail  and  institutional 
investors  to  finance  viable  SME  ventures  more  efficiently  in  a  Syariah-compliant  manner. 
Again, this was only possible because of technology. 
the  extraordinary; 
Conclusion 
This  symposium  is  the  inaugural  gathering  of  public  sector  regulators,  private  sector 
innovators and funders that is specifically focused on how financial innovation can support 
financial inclusion. In its own way, this symposium sets out to disrupt the ordinary in order to 
achieve 
the 
conventional to embrace novelty. 
With  open  minds  and  thoughtful  exchanges,  the  next  two  days  present  an  excellent 
opportunity  to  generate  a  critical  mass  of  ideas  that  form  the  foundation  for  new  strategic 
partnerships to be built, and existing ones strengthened. The time is now to deliver on the 
financial inclusion promise to the 2 billion unbanked and vulnerable people who continue to 
live in the most challenging financial circumstances. With an “eye for innovation”, I am certain 
we can spot the opportunities that will deliver that promise. 
inspire  creativity;  and  challenge 
invoke  curiosity 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
