  Luis M Linde: The challenges of the Spanish economy 
Opening remarks by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the XXIII Meeting of 
the Financial Sector, organised by ABC, Deloitte and Sociedad de Tasación, Madrid, 19 April 
2016. 
 Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking Deloitte, Sociedad de Tasación and ABC for their kind invitation to 
deliver the closing address of this first session of the XXIII Financial Sector Meeting, devoted 
to analysing the challenge of profitability in an environment which is most definitely uncertain. 
I would like to address the situation of the Spanish economy and its main challenges. 
The  recovery  of  the  Spanish  economy  over  the  past  three  years  has  been  one  of  the 
highlights  of  recent  developments  in  the  euro  area.  To  explain  it,  we  must  consider  both 
structural or more durable factors, and temporary ones, some of which have been given by 
the international context. 
The structural factors relate to the still-incomplete correction of the main imbalances built up 
during  the  last  cyclical  upturn  and  during  the  crisis,  but  also  to  the  improved  financial 
landscape. 
The  job  creation  observed  since  2013  has  been  a  significant  prop  for  demand  and,  by 
sustaining household disposable income, for the improvement in confidence. 
In the course of 2015 there was further progress in the ongoing deleveraging of households 
and firms, and Spain posted an external surplus or net lending, based largely on the gains in 
competitiveness achieved since the onset of the crisis. 
These  developments  took  place  against  the  background  of  the  normalisation  of  financial 
conditions.  Contributing to  this  process  were  the  domestic  reforms  applied  and  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy measures, together with progress in EMU governance arrangements. 
In the case of monetary policy, the ECB’s deployment of a raft of non-standard measures 
favourably impacted financing conditions, reducing financial fragmentation in the euro area 
and prompting a pick-up in bank lending. In turn, on the back of expectations of a recovery in 
the US economy, the euro area monetary policy enabled a substantial  depreciation of the 
euro in the first half of 2015, which helped European – and Spanish – exporters to increase 
their relative weight in international markets. 
Adding  to  these  factors  underpinning  the  recovery  in  activity  and  employment  were  the 
marked  decline  in  oil  prices  and  fiscal  policy,  which  joined  monetary  policy  in  its 
expansionary stance, in contrast to its restrictiveness in previous years. 
Our  recovery  can  hardly  continue  to  be  based,  to  the  same  extent  as  in  2015,  on  these 
expansionary  factors. The  mix  of stimuli,  both from  demand-side  policies  (monetary  policy 
and fiscal policy) and from the fall in oil prices since 2014, is going to have less of an impact 
on  growth.  Fiscal  policy  will  have  to  be  restrictive  again  until  the  process  of  fiscal 
consolidation  is  complete.  And,  as  to  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  the  most  prudent 
assumption  would  be  that  it  will  not  be  a  significant  additional  stimulus  but  rather 
approximately neutral, at least during 2016. 
On  the  international  front,  global  and  European  GDP  growth  forecasts  have  been  revised 
downwards  in  recent  months.  To  mention  what  appear  to  have  been  the  most  important 
factors, this has been due to the decline in activity in some of the main emerging economies 
and to the sluggishness of world trade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
As a result, for this year and for next year too, we should expect more moderate growth in 
the Spanish economy than in 2015. Indeed, the latest projections published by the Banco de 
España and by various analysts and international institutions are along these lines, with GDP 
growth rates of 2.7% in 2016 and 2.3% in 2017. 
This lower growth will come about when we are still far from having sufficiently corrected the 
serious imbalances that built up in the expansion and in the early years of the crisis. These 
may be listed under four headings: the labour market; fiscal consolidation and public debt; 
private debt and dependence on external funding; and productivity. 
Let us look more closely at each of these four aspects. 
The reduction in unemployment 
1. 
Firstly,  unemployment.  The  main  challenge  facing  the  Spanish  economy  is  to  reduce  the 
unemployment rate, which stood at the end of last year at almost 21%, 6 pp down from its 
peak at the start of 2013, but still far above the average for the European Union and the level 
in almost every other euro area country. 
But the problem is not just the high volume of unemployment; it is also the high proportion of 
long-term unemployment (defined as the number of people out of work for over a year). Our 
rate of long-term unemployment has scarcely dipped from its 2014 peak, which means that it 
is currently three times as high as in 2008. If we only consider persons unemployed for over 
two years, the rate has increased by 44% in 2015, to four times the level in 2008. 
These  levels  of  unemployment  and  long-term  unemployment  indicate  the  difficulty  our 
economy has in matching supply and demand in the labour market and have, among others, 
two consequences that should not be overlooked: they generate inequality (unemployment 
has been and is in Spain, unquestionably, the driving force of greater inequality); and they 
pose difficulties for the public pension system, because the financing of the unfunded system 
obviously depends crucially on employment. 
Our  labour  market  arrangements  have  traditionally  –  and  by  “traditionally”  I  mean  over 
decades  –  suffered  from  two  serious  and  chronic  problems:  first,  the  mismatch,  in  many 
cases,  between  companies’  working  and  wage  conditions  and  their  particular  competitive, 
technical  and  commercial  conditions;  and,  second,  the  highly  marked  duality  between  the 
conditions of temporary employment and of what we call “permanent” employment. 
The  setting  of  working  and  wage  conditions  having  regard  to  general  or  sectoral  criteria, 
without taking into account the specific situation of each company, has been one of the main 
causes  of  our  structural  imbalance  in  terms  of  employment,  and  one  of  the  factors  that 
explains  why  Spain  has  always,  even  at  times  of  greater  economic  activity  and  higher 
growth, had a far higher unemployment rate than the euro area, and indeed the European 
Union, as a  whole. It will not be possible to reduce our structural unemployment rate in a 
collective bargaining framework that does not take into account productive, commercial and 
cost conditions, that is to say each firm’s conditions of competitiveness. 
The  duality  of  our  labour  market  –  whose  adverse  effects  on  productivity,  on  decisions 
regarding  investment  in human  capital  and  on  collective  bargaining  itself  nobody  denies  – 
cannot be scaled back if there continues to be a major imbalance between the labour costs 
(including firing costs) of permanent jobs and of temporary ones. Moreover, it is unlikely that 
we can manage to reduce duality and, in turn, to increase total employment – which must be 
the main priority – simply by raising the labour costs of temporary employment. 
The reduction of public debt 
2. 
Our second challenge is to contain the growth of public debt and, then, to reduce its volume. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Taking the budget deficit observed in 2015, of 5% of GDP, the Spanish general government 
sector has reduced the scale of this imbalance by more than 6 pp, from its peak in 2009. 
However, on the latest European Commission estimates, the structural budget deficit, i.e. the 
non-cyclically adjusted deficit, was over 2.5% of GDP, while the public debt/GDP ratio was 
99.2% in 2015, having stabilised relative to a year earlier but more than 60 pp of GDP above 
its 2007 level. 
Such a high volume of public debt evidently entails considerable refinancing requirements on 
the capital markets. That heightens the vulnerability of our economy, as was patently clear 
during the euro area sovereign debt crisis from 2010. Every year, our general government 
sector  must  obtain  funds  equivalent  to  more  than  20%  of  our  GDP,  involving  major 
dependence on the markets and on expectations about our economic and political situation. 
But the problems posed by such a high level of public debt, even under expectations of its 
gradual reduction, are not confined to the consequent dependence on the capital markets. 
A high level of public debt, even in the current environment of low or very low interest rates, 
involves debt service with considerable interest payments. To offset this expense and obtain 
an equilibrium or surplus that allows debt to be contained and reduced, significant primary 
surpluses  must  be  run;  but  this  may  affect  activity  and  employment  if,  for  example,  fiscal 
policy involves taxation levels or specific taxes that adversely affect growth, or lower levels of 
productive spending. Moreover, a high level of public debt reduces the ability of fiscal policy 
to  play  a  countercyclical  role,  which  is  a  particularly  valuable  lever  to  have  in  a  monetary 
union,  where  exchange  rate  adjustments  vis-à-vis  other  members  of  the  union  cannot  be 
made. 
It  is  vital  to  see  through  fiscal  consolidation  in  order  to  preserve  the  gains  in  credibility 
already achieved, ensuring the fulfilment of fiscal targets by all tiers of government and the 
application  of  the  mechanisms  of  the  Budgetary  Stability  Law.  From  a  medium  and  long- 
term  perspective,  budgetary  and  fiscal  consolidation  requires  taking  into  account  other 
factors,  including  the  composition  of  the  adjustment,  in  an  attempt  to  pave  the  way  for  a 
greater contribution of public finances to growth, making headway in the rationalisation and 
efficiency of spending and, also, of the tax basket. 
We  must  also  take  into  account  the  impact  of  population  ageing  on  public  finances,  in 
particular  through  spending  on  pensions.  The  reforms  since  2011  to  the  public  pension 
system (the progressive raising of the retirement age; the definition of a sustainability factor 
linking  the  initial  pension  to  changes  in  life  expectancy;  the  introduction  of  a  new  pension 
indexation  system;  and  the  segregation  from  the  system  of  specific  non-  contributory 
pensions  that  should  be  financed  through  general  taxes  and  not  through  social  security 
contributions)  have  been  in  the  right  direction  as  far  as  the  sustainability  of  the  system  is 
concerned. 
Apart  from  these  reforms,  there  are  insurance  and  saving  mechanisms  that  can  help 
supplement the unfunded pension system. But, as I said earlier, a key factor for the public 
pension  system  is  the  buoyancy  of  employment.  It  is  in  this  nexus  between  employment, 
pensions and public finances where, I believe, the “hard core” of the difficulties facing our 
economy in the years ahead is concentrated. 
The reduction in private debt and in the net external debit position 
3. 
The  third  challenge  facing  the  Spanish  economy  is  high  private  debt  and  the  heavy 
dependency on external financing. 
The  Spanish  economy’s  net  external  debit  position  stood  at  around  93%  of  GDP  at  end- 
2015, far above the level in other euro area or developed countries in a debit position, not to 
mention core Monetary Union economies such as Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands, 
which run an external credit position. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Our private debt has improved – that is to say it has declined – in recent years, and we are 
now closer to the average for the euro area countries as a whole. Yet even so, despite the 
emergence in the past three years of a substantial external surplus, our external debt is a 
factor  of  vulnerability  that  cannot  be  underestimated  because,  excluding  the  Banco  de 
España,  public  and  private  and  bank  and  non-bank  debt  refinancing  requirements  exceed 
45%  of  our  GDP  each  year.  Of  this  volume,  around  60%  relates  to  liabilities  incurred  by 
financial institutions, slightly more than 20% to general government and marginally less than 
20%  to  non-financial  corporations.  Given  this  heavy  financial  dependence  on  the  external 
sector, a downturn in the economic growth outlook might have a considerable effect on the 
terms of such financing and on the effort required to meet the foreign obligations incurred. 
Improving our external position hinges largely on our competitiveness, that is to say on our 
productivity. Allow me to elaborate on this point. 
The improvement in productivity 
4. 
In the  long run,  economic  growth  is  essentially  determined  by  gains  in productivity.  In  our 
case, total productivity – the variable that seeks to approximate the level of efficiency of the 
economy  and  which  depends,  among  other  factors,  on  the  effects  of  technological 
improvements and on the efficiency of the institutions and the regulations in place within an 
economy – worsened significantly during the years of expansion prior to the crisis, posting 
slightly negative rates as from 2000. Despite some improvement as from 2008, linked to the 
disappearance of unproductive firms, Spain continues to post significantly lower productivity 
growth than the average for the developed economies. 
There are simplistic analyses that would seek to explain these developments by resorting to 
singular  and  even  anecdotal  macroeconomic  aspects;  but  the  factors  that  appear  to  lie 
behind our mediocre productivity performance are varied and complex. Apart from the fact 
that  Spain  has  significantly  lower  levels  of  technological  capital  than  other  developed 
countries, factors are often cited such as the high costs and administrative obstacles facing 
business start-ups, the low level of competition in certain sectors and the small size of our 
companies.  Low  productivity  can  also  be  related  to  some  of  the  labour  market  aspects  I 
referred  to  earlier,  such  as  the  disconnection  between  remuneration  conditions  and  the 
specific situation of each firm, and labour market duality, which hamper the reallocation of 
resources across companies and human capital accumulation decisions. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, allow me first to refer to the situation of the euro area, and then to the Spanish 
economy, on the road to recovery from the crisis. 
The euro area faces a complex macroeconomic scenario, marked by an outlook of moderate 
growth and very low inflation, recently compounded by uncertainties such as those arising 
from  the  assimilation  of  migrant  flows  and  the  referendum  on  the  United  Kingdom’s 
continued membership of the EU. 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  providing  considerable  stimulus  through  the  easing  of 
financing conditions, but it is necessary for other policies to accompany monetary policy if we 
wish to anchor the recovery and improve the medium-term outlook. In this respect, the fiscal 
policy of the member countries and of the EU as a whole should use the room for manoeuvre 
allowed under the Stability and Growth Pact to promote activity and, in parallel, the structural 
reforms aimed at improving our economies’ potential should be deepened. 
Turning to the Spanish economy, it has in the past three years moved back onto a path of 
economic growth, showing greater dynamism than in most of the EU countries. But it has not 
managed to overcome the imbalances I talked about earlier to the extent necessary. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Spain still has an unemployment rate of over 20% and a very high proportion of very long- 
term employment; we have financing maturities arising from our external debt that each year 
exceed 45% of our GDP; and our long-term demographic outlook threatens the sustainability 
of our public pension system. 
A country with such challenges should not and actually – given our euro area membership 
and  the  background  of  market  globalisation  –  cannot  pursue  any  economic  policy  avenue 
other than one which, firstly, provides for and boosts higher employment growth or, on the 
other  side  of  the  same  coin,  brings  about  swifter  and  more  sustainable  gains  in  our 
productivity  and  competitiveness;  and,  secondly,  helps  curb  the  growth  of  our  public  and 
private debt with a view to subsequently reducing it. 
In economic policy, hits and misses only become clearly manifest after some time. Just like 
big vessels which, owing to their great inertia, can only change course or speed slowly, an 
economy such as ours also moves with considerable inertia: correcting mistakes takes time 
and, almost always, entails losses in income and well-being, and social instability. 
Our  experience  –  both  in  the  pre-crisis  expansionary  phase  while  the  imbalances  were 
accumulating and during their correction and the recovery of growth – should help us avoid 
errors, persevere with reforms to safeguard and enhance our competitiveness, and fulfil our 
public finance commitments in the European Union. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
