   Elvira Nabiullina: Review of Russia’s economic and financial 
developments in 2015 
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the plenary meeting of 
the State Duma of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 14 June 2016. 
 Good afternoon, dear colleagues! 
Today we present the latest Annual Report of the Bank of Russia to the 6th State Duma. First 
of all, I would like to thank the deputies for the legislative efforts, which we took together to 
both develop the financial system and protect the rights of financial services consumers, and 
for  the  efficient  cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Russia.  As  many  as  130  laws  affecting  the 
financial sector have been adopted over these three years. 
Now, let’s look at the Bank of Russia’s performance in 2015. 
A sharp deterioration in external environment in late 2014 – early 2015 (oil price drop and 
sanctions)  triggered turbulence  in  the  external  market  and followed  by  a  surge  in  inflation. 
These developments required measures to stabilise the situation and help the economy adjust 
to the worsened conditions. 
The first one is a transition to a floating exchange rate of the ruble. This is a pivotal systemic 
measure. Though this transition was not a smooth one, I would like to stress, should we have 
failed to take this step, according to our estimates, the economic downturn could have been 
deeper. 
Now the floating exchange rate works as an embedded economic stabiliser that mitigates the 
external shocks. This is why inflation did not shoot up and financial stability indicators were 
normal during the new spirals of oil price fall in August-September 2015 and December 2015 
–  January  2016.  The  floating  exchange  rate  also  allowed  us  to  save  gold  and  currency 
reserves, a cushion for the national economy. 
The second one is a moderately tight monetary policy, which allowed us to drag inflation down 
and move  towards  the 4% target  by the  end  of  2017. In  spring  2015,  inflation  came  up  to 
15.0%, stood at 12.9% as of the end of last year, now it is 7.3%, and we expect a 5-6% inflation 
by the year end. 
When deciding on the key rate we always consider the economic environment. Therefore, after 
a dramatic key rate hike to 17% in December 2014, we were cutting it to 11% in the first half 
of 2015 and subsequently suspended the reduction as inflation risks had grown. On 10 June, 
the latest Board meeting decided to cut the key rate to 10.5%. 
Our monetary policy is guided by strategic priorities, consistency and adherence to market 
methods. We relied on conservative forecasts in our decision-making; unfortunately, it was a 
reasonable thing to do during the whole of 2015. 
As a result, we have managed to preserve confidence in the financial system, and the alarming 
assumptions that capital flow can be restricted or the printing press can be launched are no 
longer taken seriously. 
The third one is special measures of temporary or limited nature. We applied them because 
the external conditions throughout 2015 were persistently challenging, even extraordinary, and 
really required the Bank of Russia to take special substandard measures. 
The Bank of Russia used special-purpose refinancing instruments which somewhat backed up 
the real sector in the fields where the market failed: project financing, non-commodity exports, 
and small business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Now, the upcoming transition to structural liquidity surplus is putting the expansion of special-
purpose instruments on hold. The efficiency of these instruments varies, that is why we will 
focus on fine-tuning them. Thereby, we have revised the criteria for driving non-commodity 
exports in order to focus on technological and manufacturing projects. As for project financing, 
we  will  refinance  liabilities  only  for  the  projects  already  selected  by  the  Interdepartmental 
Commission. The use of allocated limits only slightly exceeds 70% or 97 billion rubles. 
To solve the issue of external debt repayments, FX refinancing instruments were used. 
As  a  result,  the  external  debt  shrank  by  $84  billion,  i.e.  by  16%,  in  2015.  The  total  debt 
reduction for  the  two  years  was  30%. It  means that  the  debt  burden for  our  economy  has 
decreased considerably. 
Banks’ demand for foreign currency, provided by the Bank of Russia, was sinking noticeably 
over the past year and we are gradually abandoning these instruments. We expect banks to 
redeem the FX debt by the end of next year. 
We offered banks temporary regulatory easing to support the financial system. It reached the 
target and was curtailed by the end of last year. Thereby, we backed up the capability of the 
banking system to lend to the economy, but avoided risk accumulation triggered by excessive 
regulatory easing. 
We have managed to preserve households’ confidence in financial institutions: instead of a 
bank run we saw ruble deposits growing by 25%. 
What are our current objectives? It is the interest rate policy that will allow us to achieve the 
4% inflation target by the end of 2017. Our inflation targeting principle is that the Bank of Russia 
does  not  curb  inflation  at  all  costs,  but  considers  the  economic  environment  and  financial 
stability issues when taking decisions. I insist that the policy of dragging inflation down to 4% 
is  in  line  with  the  general  economic  policy  designed  to  create  conditions  for  the  economic 
growth. 
Lending will see a transition from structural liquidity deficit to structural liquidity surplus, and 
this is a very important development. So far, the Bank of Russia issued loans to banks which 
reached up to 4 trillion rubles last year. Now, as the budget spends the reserve funds, the Bank 
of Russia will absorb this liquidity (through deposit operations, among other things) to keep the 
interest rates manageable, and we are already preparing a trial issue of Bank of Russia bonds. 
This tuning of monetary policy instruments will ensure manageability of interest rates in the 
money market, in lending and in the economy as a whole. 
On the development of the banking sector. 
The Bank of Russia sought to pursue a balanced policy in developing the banking sector. On 
the one hand, we helped banks adjust to the new conditions and eased banking regulation, on 
the  other  hand,  we  stuck  to  the  policy  of  resolution  of  the  banking  system  and  countering 
fictitious transactions. Our key objective is to have a sustainable, capitalised financial system 
capable of funding the economic growth. 
In 2015, the banking system accumulated capital, household deposits recovered, and lending 
to the real sector grew slightly. 
In the first half of the year, the banking system suffered losses, but returned to profits by the 
year end. Profit stood at 192 billion rubles in 2015, and 234 billion rubles in the first five months 
of 2016. In 2016, we expect profit to be about 500 billion rubles. 
To develop the banking regulation, the Bank of Russia continued to introduce international 
standards,  including  Basel  regulations,  implemented  compensatory  measures  to  ease  the 
adjustment of the banking system to the new environment, and introduced its own regulatory 
measures  which  take  account  of  the  specific  risks  of  the  Russian  banking  system.  We 
continued to pursue a sequential policy of banking sector resolution. Unfortunately, the pace 
of  licence  revocation  was  high.  Here  we  seek  to  occupy  a  more  proactive  position  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   supervision, and take early warning and preventive measures. For this purpose we improve 
our internal procedures. Thus, we decided to establish a risk assessment service. 
We believe that, in order to prevent problems at an early stage, the Bank of Russia should be 
granted the right for professional judgment, because the current strictly formalised approach 
to banking supervision often does not allow us to intervene when banks still have some assets, 
i.e. the owners have not yet withdrawn all of them. It is important mainly to protect creditors’ 
rights. 
The changed attitude to resolution also needs further discussion. Resolution has become a 
more frequent measure. We tightened requirements for turnaround managers over the year 
and will continue to do so. 
Now about the Bank of Russia’s activity as a megaregulator. 
We seek to enhance cross-sectoral approach in supervision and regulation, and in 2015, we 
worked out the first key document covering all sectors of the financial industry, ‘Guidelines for 
the Development of the Russian Financial Market in 2016–2018’. This document is envisaged 
by the law. We held detailed discussions of this project with business associations, including 
in parliamentary hearings, presented it in Russian regions for businesses to understand and 
contribute to our measures to develop the financial market. 
Some words about our achievements in the sector of non-bank financial institutions. 
Today, OSAGO is likely to be the most socially significant type of insurance. Let me remind 
you  that  in  2015  the  tariffs  were  adjusted  for  the  first  time  since  the  introduction  of  the 
compulsory  motor  insurance.  By  that  time  the  situation  in  the  OSAGO  market  was  a 
challenging one. In some regions it was almost impossible to buy the policy without additional 
foisted services, there were difficulties with reimbursement of damages. The overall situation 
has improved, but some regions still experience difficulties with OSAGO. We have introduced 
an electronic OSAGO policy. For now, only 200,000 electronic policies have been issued, that 
is not many. Therefore, we welcome the law that would bind insurers to issue an electronic 
policy upon the customer’s request from January 2017. 
Last  year,  we  improved  the  European  accident  statement  rules  –  documenting  road  traffic 
accidents without involvement of the road police has become easier and more convenient. 
Microfinance organisations. Microfinancing is discussed with fervour. I would like to stress, that 
we believe it to be short-sighted to ban microfinancing. Short-term loans are in demand and if 
there is no regulated business, consumers will turn to illegal lenders. We took measures to 
ensure better protection of citizens’ rights, primarily, by limiting the maximum effective interest 
rate and fines and interests on overdue loans. And I believe we should move from the fourfold 
maximum to the twofold on the legislative level. 
As  for  illegal  lenders,  this  problem  needs  a  legislative  solution,  among  other  things.  The 
accountability of illegal lenders is currently not very serious, so to say. Moreover, ironically 
enough, the illegal lender can recover the debt in court. We believe it to be important to deprive 
agreements with illegal lenders of relief at law. 
Non-governmental  pension  funds.  We  have  established  a  system  of  pension  savings 
guarantees. Now it includes 38 of 91 eligible funds inspected by the Bank of Russia. Many 
funds had to improve the quality of their assets to enter the system. 
Furthermore, actuarial industry has been launched in compliance with the law; today we have 
a bit more than 100 actuaries. They are active and it is an important segment of the financial 
market established last year. 
We have almost stamped out unscrupulous depositories which provided bogus excerpts on 
available  securities. We  implemented  our function  of  a megaregulator which  allowed  us  to 
make  cross-checks  and  reveal  such  situations  immediately.  We  took  measures  under  the 
project “Clean Register”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   We have developed and are implementing the road map on electronic communication in the 
financial  market.  Electronic  communication  decreases  companies’  costs  and  ultimately  the 
price  of  services  for  consumers,  provides  adequate  financial  inclusion  to  avoid  having 
dependence on actual branches. 
New digital technologies quickly transform the financial sector. We have established a special 
technology and innovation task force at the Bank of Russia which is to study technological 
trends in the field of finance, and to timely reveal the areas requiring regulatory and supervisory 
changes.  We  seek  to  avoid  hampering  the  development  of  new,  more  efficient  and  user-
friendly  technological  solutions,  but  prevent  accumulation  of  risks  capable  of  mitigating 
consumer right protection. Last year we established a Centre for Cyber-attack Monitoring and 
Response  in  the  Financial  Sector  (FinCERT),  which  provides,  among  other  things, 
methodological  assistance  in  ensuring  the  highest  possible  cyber-protection  to  market 
participants. 
We always cooperate with the market in financial technologies and innovations. Thereby, in 
2015,  we  held  the  first  forum  on  innovative  financial  technologies;  it  was  in  demand  with 
businesses and we are going to hold it again in autumn. 
We have established an institution of bond programmes. The development of debt instruments 
is  extremely  important  for  our  financial  market,  because  it  is  the  best  instrument  for  large 
companies,  while  banks  should  be  more  focused  on  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized 
businesses. 
In 2015, we laid foundations for the development of a national rating industry, and the new 
legislation allows us to expect that a really respectable and professional rating industry will be 
built in our country. 
Now about the national payment system. 
In 2015, operations and clearing centre of the NPCS was launched. It processes all operations 
made in Russia through cards of international payment systems. The transfer of payments into 
Russia was implemented in a very short period due to external risks but its implementation 
was of high technological quality in line with international standards. In the end of the last year 
a pilot issue of national payment system cards Mir was implemented. The cards are already 
issued by banks of the Crimea (and accepted throughout the Crimea) and some other banks. 
The mass issue of the cards is to start in the second half of the year. 
Besides,  we  have  improved  the  system  of  Bank  of  Russia  financial  messaging  system,  a 
SWIFT counterpart. It complies with all SWIFT formats and everyone can use this convenient 
format to transfer messages domestically. We closely cooperate with our colleagues in Belarus 
and Kazakhstan in coordinating the development of the national payment systems. 
Some words about countering fictitious transactions. 
According  to  our  estimates,  fictitious  transactions  have  shrunk  by  about  one-third.  The 
monitoring has become more efficient. Fictitious transactions in the non-bank sector are better 
revealed  due  to,  among  other  things,  our  thorough  inspections  we  can  implement  as  a 
megaregulator. 
In 2015, quite a few unscrupulous players were swept off the market: 93 banks, 96 insurance 
companies,  21 non-governmental  pension  funds,  1,703 microfinance  organisations,  and 
609 professional securities market participants. One of the reasons behind it was servicing the 
shadow sector of the economy. 
Looking back at the year, I would like to say that it was undoubtedly challenging with external 
environment  constantly  changing  for  the  worse,  but  for  all  that  we  have  achieved  some 
important results. First, the economy showed its adaptability, and not a passive one. We can 
see that new sectors, the whole sectors have managed to grow amid an extremely worsened 
environment. There were also enterprises in the generally failing sectors which took the new 
possibilities and show potential for development. Second, the last year clearly signalled that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   structural reforms are needed for the economy to return to sustainable growth; and removing 
internal restrictions is a short-term objective. I am convinced that we will manage it. 
Thank you for your attention. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
