   Lawrence Schembri: Stress prevention – central banks and financial 
stability 
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at a joint Bank 
of Canada, International Monetary Fund, Centre for International Governance Innovation and 
Peterson Institute for International Economics workshop, Ottawa, Ontario, 6 May 2016. 
 For the better part of the past two centuries, central banks have played an important role in the 
maintenance  of  financial  stability,  but  primarily  one  of  “stress  or  crisis  management.”  In 
particular,  central  banks  have  served  as  lender  of  last  resort,  providing  liquidity  to  prevent 
stress from sparking contagion in solvent, but illiquid, financial institutions. 
But that role is starting to change. 
While central banks responded boldly to the global financial crisis with liquidity provision and 
monetary policy actions to avoid a repeat of the Great Depression, the severity of the economic 
fallout obliges us to ask whether they could have done more to prevent it, rather than just trying 
to manage and mitigate its economic impact. 
This query goes well beyond considering whether monetary policy aggravated the financial 
vulnerabilities  that  contributed  to  the  crisis  and  raises  broader  questions  concerning  the 
responsibilities of central banks. 
It’s time, then, for central banks to rethink their role in financial stability: 
• 
first,  by  recognizing  that  while  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
financial stability is price and macroeconomic stability, this is a necessary, but not 
sufficient, condition for financial stability; 
second, by focusing on crisis prevention through means other than monetary policy, 
while at the same time modernizing their role as liquidity provider or lender of last 
resort; and 
third, by enhancing their contribution to financial stability by exploiting two of their key 
strengths – their financial-system-wide perspective and their analytical capacity. 
  Going beyond monetary policy as a crisis prevention tool 
In thinking about enhancing the role of central banks, we should reconsider two notions that 
have helped to advance our analysis. 
The  first  is  the  “lean  versus  clean”  debate.  As  Lars  Svensson  has  compellingly  argued, 
monetary policy is too blunt an instrument to be used to mitigate financial vulnerabilities. Other 
tools are better suited for this purpose. 
The second notion is the “lines of defence” analogy, with monetary policy serving as the last 
defensive barrier when other measures to reduce financial vulnerabilities and mitigate systemic 
risks are either absent or inadequate. This view suggests that actions be taken sequentially. 
Consider, instead, how we promote road safety and prevent car accidents, which require the 
simultaneous application of standards for 
• 
• 
• 
A similar tri-fold approach for financial stability would entail clear objectives accompanied by 
the necessary powers and instruments for 
driver education and competence; 
automobile operations and safety; and 
road quality and appropriate signage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial education and information for consumers, lenders and investors; 
microprudential regulation and supervision; and 
macroprudential monitoring and regulation. 
  A broader contribution for central banks 
So how can central banks broaden their contribution to financial stability? 
By promoting financial stability through the following measures: 
First, by encouraging prudence on the part of borrowers and lenders. 
Most  central  banks  publish  or  contribute  to  financial  system  reviews  or  financial  stability 
reports.  Such  reviews  or  reports  monitor  and  assess financial  vulnerabilities  and  risks  and 
serve as an early warning mechanism. In addition, the underlying analysis in them provides a 
basis  for  recommendations  for  pre-emptive  policy  actions.  These  publications  are  thus  an 
important means for central banks to contribute to financial stability. 
For example, the Bank of Canada has used its Financial System Review to inform households 
and  lending  institutions  of  our  assessment  of  the  vulnerability  associated  with  elevated 
household debt in an effort to encourage all parties to exercise appropriate caution. 
Second, by enhancing market discipline through increased transparency. 
By making their analyses and assessments public, central banks can increase awareness of 
financial system vulnerabilities, risks and their potential triggers so that investors and other 
market participants can appropriately price and manage risk.   
Third, by strengthening regulation and supervision of the financial sector. 
Since  the  crisis,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial  systems  has  been 
strengthened,  and  more  rigorous  global  standards  have  been  implemented  in  many 
jurisdictions. Central banks contributed to the development of these standards through their 
involvement in international forums such as the Financial Stability Board and other standard-
setting bodies. An important example is the Basel III regulatory reforms, which require banks 
to hold more and higher-quality capital and meet new liquidity and leverage requirements and 
have thus made the banking system more resilient. 
While  some  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  are  not  directly  involved  in 
overseeing  the  implementation  of  these  new  standards,  they  can  help  evaluate  their 
effectiveness.  By  working  with  regulators to  implement  coherent  macro stress tests  on  the 
banking system they can jointly assess the ability of the banking system to withstand severe 
macroeconomic shocks. These tests would incorporate existing vulnerabilities. Their main goal 
is to encourage the institutions themselves, as well as the supervisory bodies, to take remedial 
measures to increase resilience, as necessary. 
In  addition,  given  their  system-wide  perspective,  central  banks  can  monitor  and  evaluate 
unintended consequences of regulatory standards on the financial system and real economy, 
especially with respect to market functioning and the availability of credit. 
Fourth,  by  contributing  to  the  monitoring  of  systemic  risk  and  the  development  of 
macroprudential measures. 
As noted, most central banks do in-depth analyses of financial vulnerabilities. They also often 
investigate possible remedial measures to mitigate the vulnerabilities and they share their work 
with other agencies responsible for macroprudential oversight. The mechanisms for doing this 
differ according to the macropudential policy framework in each jurisdiction. 
Valuable  aspects  of  the  analyses  by  central  banks  include  monitoring  for  the  impacts  of 
financial  innovation  and  possible  instances  of  risky  regulatory  arbitrage,  as  well  as  the 
identification of data gaps. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Again,  because  of  a  central  bank’s  system-wide  perspective  and  analytical  capacity  these 
contributions are essential for the formulation of appropriate macroprudential policy. 
Such policy initiatives come in all sizes, but let me give you an example of what we did here in 
Canada. In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, household debt and house prices resumed 
growing faster than disposable income in response to lower interest rates and the recovering 
economy.  The  Department  of  Finance  and  a  number  of  agencies,  including  the  Bank  of 
Canada, worked together to mitigate this growing systemic vulnerability. 
The Bank’s analysis of household debt and house prices helped inform the regulatory changes 
that  were  adopted.  The  federal  government  tightened  rules  for  government-supported 
mortgage  insurance,  including  increasing  minimum  down  payments.  For its  part,  Canada’s 
bank  regulator,  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  released  new 
guidance  on  mortgage  underwriting  and  mortgage  insurance  that  implemented  enhanced 
global standards. 
These measures were successful in slowing household credit growth and they complemented 
the Bank of Canada’s accommodative monetary policy by better targeting the stimulus to the 
most creditworthy households. 
To  further  enhance  our  contribution  to  macroprudential  oversight  in  Canada,  we  have  two 
aspirations: 
1.  
To  develop  a  framework  for  system-wide  macro-level  stress  tests  that  integrates 
different sectors of the financial system – banking, insurance and investment funds – as well 
as financial markets and financial infrastructures. 
2.  
macroprudential policy. 
To improve our models to better understand the interactions between monetary and 
Conclusion 
Let me summarize and conclude. 
The public often sees central banks as responsible for financial stability, but, in practice, this 
is a mandate the banks rightly share with the government and other financial regulators and 
supervisors. So although central banks don’t themselves have a broad set of instruments to 
mitigate financial vulnerabilities, they do have that system-wide view, which they can and do 
use to promote financial stability by making public their analyses of financial vulnerabilities and 
risks and making recommendations for preventive policy actions. 
In the end, how central banks contribute to financial stability, in conjunction with other public 
authorities, will depend on the macroprudential framework in place. What we have learned 
from  the  participants  at  this  conference  is  that  the  framework  varies  across  jurisdictions, 
typically reflecting differences in institutional settings, and that the different structures seem to 
be working well. Thus, the important take-away from this evidence is that the framework’s form 
matters  less than  its function  and  that  the measure  of  success  should  be  macroprudential 
outcomes, namely lower systemic risk and fewer instances of severe financial stress. 
At the same time that central banks are enhancing their efforts to promote financial stability, 
they  must  maintain  their  focus  on  monetary  policy  to  achieve  price  and  macroeconomic 
stability. These are necessary conditions for financial stability. 
On behalf of my colleagues here at the Bank of Canada, thank you for joining us and for sharing 
your views on this important issue. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
