  Patrick Njoroge: Strengthening Kenya’s sovereign borrowing program – 
challenges and initiatives 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Government Borrowers Forum, Paris, 3 May 2016. 
 Honorable  Minister,  World  Bank  Vice  President  and  Treasurer,  Madame  Commissioner, 
Excellencies, Distinguished Guests. Good morning! It is a great pleasure to speak before this 
distinguished  group  today.  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  organizers  and  our 
French hosts for their gracious hospitality. 
This  meeting  brings  together  public  sector  representatives  facing  common  challenges  and 
opportunities  relating  to  their  public  sector  borrowing  programs.  It  takes  place  at  a  crucial 
time, given the current state of the global recovery and the increased downside risks. In its 
communiqué three weeks ago, the IMFC noted that the global outlook had weakened and 
summarized  the  situation  as  follows:  “Although  recent  developments  point  to  some 
improvements  in  sentiment,  financial  market  volatility  and  risk  aversion  have  risen  […] 
Downside  risks  to  the  global  economic  outlook  have  increased  since  October,  raising  the 
possibility  of  a  more  generalized  slowdown  and  a  sudden  pull-back  of  capital  flows.  […] 
Against this backdrop, it is important to buttress confidence in our policies.” 
Allow me to elaborate on how we are addressing these challenges, and the initiatives we are 
undertaking to strengthen our sovereign borrowing program. Like other central banks around 
the world, we are agents of the government with respect to its borrowing program, but we 
have lead some of the reforms in this area due to the close connection with other aspects of 
our mandate. I will conclude with a few words about the status of our banking sector. 
Macroeconomic stability 
In  the  second  half  of  2015,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  moved  decisively  to  deal  with  the 
emerging  risks,  particularly,  rising  inflation  expectations  and  pressures  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. This was against a backdrop of increased instability in the global financial 
markets,  with  uncertainty  around  the  timing  of  the  increase  in  U.S.  interest  rates,  coupled 
with  pressures  from  China’s  financial  markets  and  the  debt  crisis  in  Greece.  Significant 
stress was also observed in our domestic government securities market in August to October 
2015,  due  to  the  tighter  liquidity  conditions  and  a  perception  of  increased  borrowing 
requirements.  Market  conditions  stabilized  and  then  improved  towards  the  end  of  2015  – 
inflation  expectations  are  now  better  anchored,  interest  rates  have  fallen  to  normal  levels, 
and  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  remained  stable.  Developments  in  the  foreign 
exchange market are supported by a narrowing of the current account deficit with improved 
exports, strong diaspora remittances, and a lower oil import bill. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policy,  Kenya’s  fiscal  position  is  set  to  adjust  gradually  through  a 
combination of lower expenditures and higher revenue collection. The fiscal deficit is targeted 
to narrow to 4.1 percent of GDP by 2018/19, from an estimated 8.0 percent of GDP in FY 
2015/16. Public sector debt, having risen in the recent period to 53 percent of GDP in March 
2016, remains sustainable. 
This  recent  experience  has  underscored  the  importance  of  a  strong  macroeconomic 
framework, in addition to the following: 
• 
Timely  communication  with  the  market  players  is  essential.  There  are 
significant  benefits  in  announcing  a  detailed  advance  borrowing  plans  by  the 
government.  We  have  also  re-established  a  high-level  “Market  Leaders  Forum” 
where  representatives  of  the  Central  Bank,  National  Treasury,  and  the  large 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    commercial banks and custodial investors, discuss freely the government’s domestic 
borrowing plans. 
Close policy coordination between the monetary and fiscal authorities is also 
important. This would minimize the risk of stress in the financial markets. 
Increased differentiation by investors of the economies where they invest is 
urged. Kenya has differentiated itself from other destination economies by pointing 
to the sources of its resilience – e.g., highly diversified exports and external markets, 
strong regional bias, low level of investment by foreigners in government securities 
(4  percent  in  March  2016)  and  equities  (22  percent  in  March  2016).  In  addition, 
more  granular  assessments  by  investors  of  the  destination  economies  would 
support their differentiated investment decisions. 
There is a strong commitment to implement policies that sustain macroeconomic stability and 
to  ensure  availability  of  policy  buffers  to  address  adverse  effects  of  global  shocks. 
Nevertheless, the impact on Kenya of these external shocks is expected to be minimal due to 
the diversification of its export products and markets, and stable financial linkages. However, 
the shock of a potential U.K. exit from the European Union remains of great concern. Looking 
ahead,  we  expect  that  our  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  –  currently  equivalent  to 
5.0 months  of  import  cover  –  and  the  new  IMF  precautionary  arrangements  amounting  to 
US$1.5 billion, will provide adequate buffers against short-term shocks. 
Strengthening the government borrowing program 
Let me now highlight the significant steps that have been taken in recent years to expand 
and  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  government  borrowing  program.  Kenya  is  proud  of  the 
progress thus far, which has resulted in substantial growth in the size, depth, and liquidity of 
the government bond market. The accomplishments include: 
• 
• 
Lengthening the maturity profile of domestic debt and mitigating the refinancing risk. 
Successful  issuance  of  9  Infrastructure  Bonds,  raising  domestically  US$2.6billion 
over asix-year period, to help close the existing infrastructure gaps; 
Benchmark  building  by  the  re-opening  of  benchmark  tenors,  which  has  reduced 
bond fragmentation; 
A well-established and reliable yield curve that now extends to 26 years; 
The  emergence  of  a  vibrant  secondary  market,  largely  attributed  to  issuance  of 
more  liquid  benchmark  bonds,  attractive  infrastructure  bonds  and  improvement  in 
the trading infrastructure. 
  In addition to providing a reliable channel of financing the government’s needs, Kenya’s bond 
market  has  facilitated  improvements  in  financial  intermediation  through  better  financial 
infrastructure,  products,  and  services.  It  has  also  catalyzed  the  emergence  of  a  local 
corporate bond market as an alternative to bank financing. 
Let me also mention a number of other reforms that we are undertaking to further revamp the 
growth  of  the  domestic  debt  market,  including;  launching  of  over-the-counter  markets  for 
government  securities,  introduction  of  electronic  platforms  for  both  primary  and  secondary 
markets, and launching of repo facilities and short selling. 
An important question relates to how infrastructure investment can be supported, to become 
a  key  driver  of  long-term  growth.  Countries  across  Africa  and  the  world  are  experiencing 
huge  infrastructure  gaps,  and  governments  are  grappling  with  the  challenge  of  coming  up 
with  innovative  solutions  for  the  needed financing.  To  raise  these  resources, governments 
have  engaged  in  direct  borrowing  from  other  governments,  multilateral  lenders,  and  the 
international  market  –  e.g.,  by  issuing  Eurobonds,  Sukuk  and  Samurai  bonds.  Kenya  has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  issued  tax-free  infrastructure  bonds,  which  have  drawn  both  domestic  and  international 
investors.  But  these  efforts fall  short  of the  objective,  and  alternative  sources  of  long-term 
funding need to be sought. 
On  the  one  hand,  domestic  banks  would  need  to  step  up  their  participation,  but  this  is 
constrained by legal and prudential limits on the proportion of banks’ lending as a share of 
their core capital. Commercial banks would therefore need to enhance their capital base, to 
remain compliant with the regulatory requirements. On the other hand, external lenders are 
likely to be more concerned about the credit, liquidity and political risks that these projects 
would carry, given their size and long duration. It is therefore important that these projects 
have a clear and equitable contractual structure that optimally allocates project risks across 
participants.  More  innovative  solutions  to  deal  with  these  questions  would  be  highly 
beneficial. 
Mobile financial services revolution 
A  very  exciting  area  of  focus  for  Kenya  and  other  similarly-situated  countries  is  mobile 
financial  services  (MFS),  where  the  Central  Bank  has  played  a  critical  role  in  promoting 
financial inclusion through the regulation of these services. Specifically, the CBK facilitated 
the  rollout  of  innovative  products  driven  by  mobile  phone  technological  platforms  that  are 
integrated  with  banking  platforms.  A  pilot  “test-and-learn  approach”  was  adopted,  allowing 
innovations while ensuring that necessary safeguards were in place to mitigate the potential 
risks. The CBK continues to engage with financial service providers and telecommunication 
companies as they seek to introduce innovative solutions or products in the market. 
We have witnessed great success since 2007 when mobile money service providers begun 
to  operate.  These  have  allowed  banks  to  avail  their  services  more  conveniently  and  cost 
effectively, which has not only revolutionized the delivery channels for financial services, but 
has also enhanced the satisfaction from utilizing financial services. 
• 
Kenya has one of the fastest mobile phone service adoption rates in Africa. As 
at December 2015, there were 37.7 million mobile phone subscribers (penetration of 
88  percent).  There  were  also  31.6  million  mobile  money  service  subscribers,  and 
143,946 mobile money agents. 
Mobile financial services have boosted financial inclusion, with 75.3 percent of 
the adult population now using formal financial services. 
The  range  of  financial  services  accessible  on  mobile  phones  is  increasing, 
with new innovations that reflect the benefits of a diversified financial system. Mobile 
payments account for over 80 percent of the volume of payment transactions, but 
7.4 percent of the total value of transactions. 
  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  proud  of  two  related  products  that  will  soon  be  fully 
operational,  through  which  public  debt  operations  will  leverage  on  the  growth  of  mobile 
financial services. 
The  first  is  Treasury  Mobile  Direct  (TMD),  which  was  rolled  out  in  November  2015.  By 
offering a channel to access small denomination government securities through the mobile 
phone,  this  product  leverages  mobile-phone  technology  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  the 
existing  domestic  debt  issuance  operations,  in  addition  to  increasing  retail  investors’ 
participation  in  the  primary  auctions  for  government  securities.  The  services  that  will  be 
provided  under  TMD  include  information  dissemination,  account  status  inquiry,  bidding  for 
government  securities,  and  payment/settlement  through  mobile  money  platforms.  TMD  will 
facilitate the growth of government securities by broadening significantly the investor base to 
retail investors. 
The  second  product  is  M-Akiba.  This  is  a  critical  government  initiative,  which  seeks  to 
increase the public’s participation in government securities through the existing mobile-phone 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  money  transfer  services,  and  with  a  low  minimum  investment  amount  of  US$30.  The  first 
M-Akiba infrastructure bond will be launched shortly as the necessary arrangements are in 
the  final  stages,  and  is  expected  to  mobilize  Ksh.5  billion  (about  US$50  million).  Retail 
investors will be able to register, bid and pay for government securities through the existing 
mobile platforms. This will provide alternative investment options to retail investors who have 
long been poorly remunerated especially for their deposits held by banks. 
These products will be transformational – in addition to promoting financial inclusion, they will 
facilitate a change in the population’s savings culture, and ultimately lead to an increase in 
national savings. However, as the digital platforms continue to evolve, there are challenges 
and risks that need to be addressed. It is therefore important that countries continue to share 
experiences  and  strengthen  partnerships  based  on  best  practices  to  address  these 
challenges. 
The state of the banking sector in Kenya 
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not say a few words about the recent developments in our 
banking sector. In the main, concerns have been raised following the placing of three banks 
in  receivership,  since  August  2015. We  have  underscored  that  the  Central  Bank’s  actions 
were  necessitated  by  unique  circumstances  in  each  of  these  banks,  and  that  these  were 
carried out in the interest of the depositors, creditors, and the wider public interest. We have 
also  indicated  that  the  weaknesses  revealed  by  these  cases  are  not  systemic  and  the 
banking sector remains strong and stable. The capital-adequacy ratio stood at 18.8 percent 
in March 2016, well above the statutory minimum of 14.5 percent. The average liquidity ratio 
rose to 39.8 percent in March 2016, above the statutory minimum of 20 percent and higher 
than 38.1 percent in December 2015. 
Nevertheless, some challenges remain. For instance, interest rates spread remain very high: 
The spread between the average commercial banks’ lending rate and deposit rate stood at 
10.3  percent  in  March  2016.Poor  liquidity  management  and  distribution  remains  a  key 
concern,  for  which  remedial  actions  are  being  taken.  Bank  supervision  is  also  being 
strengthened  urgently.  The  Central  Bank  remains  committed  to  fostering  banking  system 
stability  and  will  continue  to  exercise  its  supervisory  mandate  in  a  fair  and  even-handed 
manner.  Importantly,  we  have  seized  the  opportunity  occasioned  by  these  events  and 
ushered in “the new normal” in the banking sector, underpinned by the following: 
• 
• 
Greater transparency, which is supported by accurate data. 
Stronger  governance,  with  clear  demarcation  of 
accountability, fair market conduct, and stronger supervision. 
Effective  business  models,  aimed  at  strengthening  the  resilience  of  banks, 
reducing costs, and supporting innovation. 
responsibilities,  greater 
 In closing, I wish to express our gratitude to the various institutions that have assisted Kenya 
achieve  the  significant  growth  and  deepening  of  financial  markets.  Specifically,  I  wish  to 
recognize; the World Bank, which has supported us through a range of projects, the IFC, the 
IMF, and local stakeholders who have contributed useful ideas for developing the domestic 
debt market. 
I  look  forward  to  hearing  of  the  experiences  from  other  countries,  and  learning  from  your 
insights on how to resolve the issues raised. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
