   Raghuram Rajan: Interesting, profitable, and challenging – banking in 
India today 
Address by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FICCI-IBA 
(Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry – Indian Banks’ Association) Annual 
Banking Conference, Mumbai, 16 August 2016. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  give  this  address  to  the  FICCI-IBA  Annual  Global  Banking 
Conference.  Perhaps  the  most  important  issue  on  the  minds  of  bankers,  given  the  results 
season, is the Asset Quality Review initiated in early 2015-16. It has improved recognition of 
NPAs and provisioning in banks enormously, and many of you have fully imbibed the spirit of 
the review. Some banks have taken significant steps in recognizing incipient stress early. 
Now focus should move more to improving the operational efficiency of stressed assets, and 
creating  the  right  capital  structure  so  that  all  stakeholders  can  benefit.  This  implies 
simultaneous action on two fronts. 
Where  necessary,  new  project  management  teams  have  to  be  brought  in,  sometimes  as 
owners, and where this is not possible, as managers. A creative search for new management 
teams, including the possible use of public sector firms or private sector agents, is necessary, 
as  are  well-structured  performance  incentives  for  non-owner  teams  such  as  bonuses  for 
meeting cash flow/profit benchmarks and stock options. Of course, if the existing promoters 
are capable and reliable, they should be retained. 
Equally  important,  the  capital  structure  should  be  tailored to  what  is reasonable, given  the 
project’s situation. If the loan is already an NPA, there is no limit to the kind of restructuring 
that is possible. If it is standard but the project is struggling, we have a variety of schemes by 
which a more sensible capital structure can be crafted for the project. These schemes include 
the 5/25, the SDR, and the S4A. A caveat is in order, though. Some of the current difficulties 
with stressed loans come from an unrealistic application by banks of a scheme so as to prevent 
a  loan  turning  NPA,  rather  than  because  of  a  carefully  analyzed  bank  effort  to  effect 
management or capital structure change. RBI will continue monitoring to see that schemes are 
used  as  warranted,  and  targeted  at  promoters  who  are  cooperative  and  able  rather  than 
misusing the system. 
I  am  sure,  though,  that  you  want  to  look  beyond  stressed  assets  to  growth.  These  are 
interesting, profitable, and challenging times for the financial sector. Interesting because the 
level of competition is going to increase manifold, both for customers as well as for talent, 
transforming  even  the  sleepiest  areas  in  financial  services.  Profitable  because  new 
technologies, information, and new techniques will open up vastly new business opportunities 
and customers. Challenging because competition and novelty constitute a particularly volatile 
mix in terms of risk. In this talk, I will speak about how we see these aspects at the central 
bank. 
Interesting and profitable 
Over the next year, 17 new niche banks will begin business. In addition, licensing for universal 
banks is now on tap, so fit and proper applicants with innovative business plans and good track 
records will enter. Fintech will throw up a variety of new ways of accessing the customer and 
serving her, so new institutions that we have little awareness of today will soon be a source of 
competition. These will finally draw customer sectors, firms, and individuals without access 
today into the formal financial system. Those customers that are already being served will be 
spoiled for choice. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   For the service provider, even though greater competition will tend to reduce spreads, access 
to new customers and new needs will increase volumes. Moreover, risk- and cost reduction 
through information technology and risk management techniques will tend to increase effective 
risk-adjusted spreads. In sum then, despite increased competition, profitability can increase. 
The comparative advantage of banks may lie in their access to lower cost deposit financing, 
the  data  they  have  on  customers,  the  reach  of  their  network,  their  ability  to  manage  and 
warehouse risks, and their ability to access liquidity from the central bank. These should then 
be the basis for the products they focus on. 
Perhaps a couple of examples may be useful. India will have enormous project financing needs 
in the coming days. Even though bankers are very risk averse today, and few projects are 
coming  up for financing,  this  will  change soon. What  is  in  the  pipeline  is  truly  enormous  – 
airports, railway lines, power plants, roads, manufacturing plants, etc. Bankers will remember 
the  period  of  irrational  exuberance  in  2007-2008  when  they  lent  without  asking  too  many 
questions. I am hopeful that this time will be different. 
Here are ways it can be different and risks lowered. First, significantly more in-house expertise 
can  be  brought  to  project  evaluation,  including  understanding  demand  projections  for  the 
project’s output, likely competition, and the expertise and reliability of the promoter. Bankers 
will have to develop industry knowledge in key areas since consultants can be biased. 
Second,  real  risks  have  to  be  mitigated  where  possible,  and  shared  where  not.  Real  risk 
mitigation requires ensuring that key permissions for land acquisition and construction are in 
place  up  front,  while  key  inputs  and  customers  are  tied  up  through  purchase  agreements. 
Where  these  risks  cannot  be  mitigated,  they  should  be  shared  contractually  between  the 
promoter and financiers, or a transparent arbitration system agreed upon. So, for instance, if 
demand falls below projections, perhaps an agreement among promoters and financier can 
indicate when new equity will be brought in and by whom. 
This leads to the third element of project structuring – an appropriately flexible capital structure. 
The capital structure has to be related to residual risks of the project. The more the risks, the 
more the equity component should be (genuine promoter equity, not fake borrowed equity, of 
course), and the greater the flexibility in the debt structure. Promoters should be incentivized 
to deliver, with significant rewards for on-time execution and debt repayment. Where possible, 
corporate  debt  markets,  either  through  direct  issues  or  securitized  project  loan  portfolios, 
should be used to absorb some of the initial project risk. More such arm’s length debt should 
typically refinance bank debt when construction is over. Hopefully, some of the measures taken 
to strengthen corporate debt markets, including the new bankruptcy code, should make all this 
possible. 
Fourth, financiers should put in a robust system of project monitoring and appraisal, including 
where possible, careful real-time monitoring of costs. For example, can project input costs be 
monitored  and  compared  with  comparable  inputs  elsewhere  using  IT,  so  that  suspicious 
transactions suggesting over-invoicing are flagged? 
And finally, the incentive structure for bankers should be worked out so that they evaluate, 
design,  and  monitor  projects  carefully,  and  get  significant  rewards  if  these  work  out.  This 
means that even while committees may take the final loan decision, some senior banker ought 
to put her name on the proposal, taking responsibility for recommending the loan. IT systems 
within banks should be able to pull up overall performance records of loans recommended by 
individual bankers easily, and this should be an input into their promotion. 
Note that none of this is really futuristic, but it requires a much stronger marriage between 
information technology and financial engineering, with an important role for practical industry 
knowledge and incentive design. There are also inputs to making profitable project loans – 
such as the availability of CASA deposits – that will be accrue to the banks that build out their 
IT to access and serve the broader saver cheaply and effectively. Few  banks have the in-
house talent to do all this now, but preparation is imperative. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   An  area  of  more  intensive  use  of  IT  and  analysis  is  customer  loans,  which  is  my  second 
example. It seems today that, having abandoned project loans, every bank is targeting the 
retail customer. Clearly, the risks in this herding will mount over time, as banks compete for 
less and less creditworthy customers. But some of this risk can be mitigated if they do sufficient 
due diligence. 
New means of credit evaluation are emerging. For example, some lenders are examining not 
just credit histories from the credit bureau but mining their own data and also data from social 
media posts by the applicant to see how reliable they might be. Various forms of crowdfunding, 
intermediated by peer-to-peer lenders, also claim superior credit evaluation. Of course, much 
of  the  hoopla  surrounding  these  new  forms  of  lending  has  yet  to  be  tested  by  a  serious 
downturn, and it is unclear how responsibilities for recovery will devolve between intermediary 
and investor at such times. 
Nevertheless, in this Information Age, not only are there more data with which to determine a 
loan applicant’s creditworthiness, it is also possible to track their behavior for early warning 
signs of stress. Furthermore, in this interconnected world, a borrower’s inability to hide adverse 
information such as default when tagged by a unique ID constitutes a big incentive to repay. 
Importantly, banks no longer have a monopoly over all credit-related data; Some IT companies 
may do a better job in pulling together even the bank’s data, in addition to trawling for other 
available  data,  and  analyzing  it  all  to  make  better  lending  and  monitoring  decisions.  Loan 
applications and decisions are now being made entirely online, without a borrower having to 
step  into  a  branch.  Alliances  between  IT  companies  and  banks  are  likely  to  increase 
significantly. 
The bottom line is that competition is increasing, and ways of delivering financial services are 
changing tremendously. Banks have to discover strategies to use their traditional, although 
eroding, advantages such as convenience, information, and trust to remain on the competitive 
frontier.  Competition  and  innovation  constitute  a  particularly  volatile  mix  in  terms  of  risk 
challenging banks’ traditional risk management capabilities. They are also a challenge to the 
regulator, who wants the best for the customer (and therefore wants to encourage competition 
and experimentation), while maintaining systemic stability (and thus wants to understand risks 
before they get too large or widespread). 
The authorities’ dilemma 
Before turning to how the banks should respond to these competitive and technological forces, 
let us ask how these forces affect the regulatory compact. Ideally, the authorities should ensure 
their actions are institution, ownership, and technology neutral so as to ensure that the most 
efficient customer-oriented solutions emerge through competition. However, if the authorities 
deliberately skew the playing field towards some category of institutions and away from others, 
competition may not produce the most efficient outcome. 
Banks in India have been subject to the grand bargain, whereby they get the benefits of raising 
low cost insured deposits, liquidity support and close regulation by the central bank (I am sure 
some of you see this as a cost) in return for maintaining reserves with the central bank, holding 
government bonds to meet SLR requirements, and lending to the priority sector. 
In addition, public sector banks are further subject to government mandates such as opening 
PMJDY  accounts,  or  making  MUDRA  loans.  They  are  also  subject  to  hiring  mandates,  in 
particular the need to hire through open all-India exams rather than from specific campuses or 
from  the  local  community,  and  to  meet  various  government  diversity  mandates.  In  part 
compensation, public sector banks do get more government deposits and business, and are 
backed by the full faith and credit of the government. While it is unclear whether the cost of the 
mandates outweigh the benefits, they do skew the competitive landscape. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Authorities like the central bank and the Government should, over the medium term, reduce 
the differences in regulatory treatment between public sector banks and private sector banks, 
and more generally, between banks and other financial institutions. 
Some of the differences between public sector banks and private banks can be mitigated if the 
government pays an adequate price for mandates. If, for example, when every direct benefit 
transfer is paid a remunerative price, all banks have an incentive to undertake the business 
and open basic customer accounts. The most efficient bank will garner more business, and 
the payment can be gradually reduced over time, commensurate with the accrued efficiencies. 
Some of the mandates will also become less costly with new techniques. For example, banks 
are finding ways to make MSME loans more remunerative by decreasing transactions costs. 
Similar  techniques  could  be  brought  to  agricultural  loans,  especially  as  farm  productivity 
increases. Wider use of credit information bureaus and collateral registries should also help 
improve credit evaluation and lower the cost of repossession. This should make it easier to 
meet  priority  sector  norms.  The  cost  has  been  further  reduced  through  the  introduction  of 
tradeable priority sector lending certificates, whereby the most efficient lenders can sell their 
over-performance, while the inefficient ones can compensate for underperformance by buying 
certificates. 
Nevertheless, over time, differences should be reduced further. This is why, for example, the 
Reserve Bank has been reducing SLR requirements steadily, and allowed over half of the SLR 
holdings to meet the Basel-mandated Liquidity Coverage Ratio. But we are also trying to shape 
mandates to new technologies and approaches. For example, it is mandated that a quarter of 
a bank’s branches should be opened in underserved areas. But what exactly qualifies as a 
branch? Could we accept alternative definitions of a branch so long as they meet the needs of 
the population for a regular outlet for banking business? Of course, all villages would love to 
have a full service brick and mortar bank branch. However, if the cost is currently prohibitive, 
can we accept alternatives that do much of what is needed? An internal RBI committee is 
looking at these issues. 
In sum, mandates should increasingly be paid for, and are becoming easier to achieve as the 
institutional  and  technological  underpinnings  of  financial  services  improve.  As  competition 
increases, however, the authorities should ask how long mandates should continue, and keep 
targeting  them  better  towards  the  truly  underserved.  They  should  also  withdraw  any 
preferential treatment, to the extent feasible, at a commensurate pace. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  how  banks  respond  to  the  emerging  competitive  challenges.  I  will  talk 
specifically about public sector banks, which perhaps face the greatest challenges. 
Challenges faced by public sector banks 
The most pressing task for public sector banks is to clean up their balance sheets, a process 
which  is  well  under  way  and  which  I  discussed  earlier.  A  parallel  task  is  to  improve  their 
governance and management. Equally important is to fill out the ranks of middle management 
that  have  been  thinned  out  by  retirements,  and  to  recruit  talent  with  expertise  in  project 
evaluation, risk management, and IT, including cyber security. 
(i) Governance 
The Bank Board Bureau (BBB), composed of eminent personalities with integrity and domain 
experience, has taken over part of the appointments process in public sector banks. There are 
two ways the Government still plays a role. First, the final decision on appointments is taken 
by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet. Second, appointments of non-official directors 
onto bank boards still lie outside the BBB. As the BBB gains experience, it would make sense 
to allow these decisions also to be taken by it. 
Over time, as the bank boards are professionalized, executive appointment decisions should 
devolve from the BBB to the boards themselves, while the BBB – as it transforms into the Bank 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Investment Company (BIC), the custodian for the Government’s stake in banks -- should focus 
only  on  appointing  directors  to  represent  the  government  stake  on  the  bank  boards.  It  is 
important  that  bank  boards  be  freed  to  determine  their  strategies.  Too  much  coaching  by 
central  authorities  will  lead  to  a  sameness  in  public  sector  banks  that  successive  Gyan 
Sangams have criticized. 
Management efforts to tighten practices are also needed. Far too many loans are done without 
adequate  due  diligence  and  without  adequate  follow  up.  Collateral  when  offered  is  not 
perfected, assets given under personal guarantees not tracked, and post loan monitoring of 
the  account  can  be  lax.  The  lessons  of  the  recent  past  should  be  taken  seriously,  and 
management  practices  tightened.  A  more  stringent  approach  to  evaluating  and  recovering 
large loans will give bank management the credibility when they go to their staff with plans for 
cost rationalization. 
(ii) Talent 
The middle management ranks of public sector banks are being thinned by retirements. In 
addition, they need experts in specific areas like project evaluation and risk management. At 
the same time, banks have to reduce bloated cost structures. All public sector entities across 
the world tend to pay more than the private sector to lower level employees, and less than the 
private sector to higher level employees. This makes it hard for them to attract top talent, but 
makes it easier to attract good people at lower levels. 
Rather than seeing these as difficulties, perhaps they can be opportunities. In the RBI, we find 
that our compensation packages enable us to attract very highly qualified applicants at the 
Class III level. Perhaps part of the solution is to enable such new hires, with technology and 
training, to do far more responsible work than they were given in the past, and give them a 
brighter prospect of movement up the officer ranks. Banks can also use the opportunity offered 
by retirements to reorient hiring towards the skills they need, and to offer attractive rapid career 
progression  supported  by  strong  training  programs  to  new  hires  –  with  thinning  middle 
management, the mix of experience and capabilities should shift towards capabilities. 
And to get talent in specialized areas like project evaluation, risk management, and IT, they 
may have to hire laterally in small doses. While contractual hires are currently permitted, better 
personnel would be attracted only by a strong prospect of career progression internally. Banks 
will have to think about how to enable this. 
One of the difficulties public sector banks have is court judgments that prohibit hiring from 
specific  campuses.  This  leads  to  anomalies  like  the  public-sector-bank-supported  National 
Institute of Bank Management sending most of its high quality graduates to work for private 
sector banks. Public sector banks can petition the courts to allow some modicum of campus 
hire, especially when the campus chooses openly through a national exam. Another alternative 
is  to  make  bank  entrance  exams  much  less  onerous  to  take,  with  applications,  tests,  and 
results, wherever possible, available quickly and online. The banks then have an easier task 
of persuading students on elite campuses to take the exam. We are following this latter course 
at the RBI. 
To  have  local  information,  be  comfortable  with  local  culture,  be  locally  accepted,  and  be 
competitive in low-cost rural areas, PSBs will have to have more freedom to hire locally, and 
pay wages commensurate with the local labour market. Alternatively, they will have to be much 
more effective in using technology to reduce costs. Finally, as banks adopted differentiated 
strategies,  they  should  move  away  from  common  compensation  structures  and  common 
promotion schemes across all public sector banks. 
While one of the strengths of the public sector sometimes is the absence of pay and promotion 
that  is  very  sensitive  to  performance,  too  little  sensitivity  can  also  be  a  problem  as  high 
performers get demotivated, and the slothful are not penalized. An increased emphasis on 
performance evaluation, including identifying low performers with the intent of helping them 
improve,  may  be  warranted.  In  addition,  rewards  like  Employee  Stock  Ownership  Plans 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   (ESOPs) that give all employees a stake in the future of the bank may be helpful. With PSB 
shares  trading  at  such  low  levels,  a  small  allocation  to  employees  today  may  be  a  strong 
source of motivation, and can be a large source of wealth as performance improves. 
(iii) Customers 
Public  sector  banks  enjoy  trust  with  customers.  An  emphasis  on  customer  service  and 
customer-centric  advice  may  allow  them  to  recapture  low-cost  customer  deposits  that  are 
migrating elsewhere. Public sector banks should take the lead in emphasizing the RBI’s 5 point 
Charter  of  Consumer  Rights. While  it  is  understandable  that  with  stressed  balance  sheets 
public sector banks do not want to make too many loans to stressed sectors, it is less clear 
why their deposit growth is faltering, for the low-cost deposit franchise will be the key to their 
future success. 
(iv) Structure 
Some banks may be best off focusing on local activity, and in effect, becoming small finance 
banks. Others may be best off merging with other banks so as to obtain scale and geographic 
diversification.  As  banks  get  cleaned  up,  and  their  boards  are  strengthened,  their  boards 
should focus on appropriate structure as part of an overall rethink on strategy. 
None of these changes are easy, but they are also not impossible. It requires work with the 
unions, persuading them of the need for change that benefits all, especially the long term future 
of the  bank.  Since  each  bank  has  different  challenges  and  probably  different  solutions,  as 
these  solutions  emerge  it  may  also  be  the  occasion  to  rethink  the  collective  bargaining 
approach across the public sector bank universe that now prevails. 
Back to the authorities 
Today, a variety of authorities – Parliament, the Department of Financial Services, the Bank 
Board Bureau, the board of the bank, the vigilance authorities, and of course various regulators 
and supervisors including the RBI – monitor the performance of the public sector banks. With 
so many overlapping constituencies to satisfy, it is a wonder that bank management has time 
to devote to the management of the bank. It is important that we streamline and reduce the 
overlaps between the jurisdictions of the authorities, and specify clear triggers or situations 
where one authority’s oversight is invoked. 
In  particular,  we  have  to  move  much  of  the  governance  to  the  bank’s  board,  with  the 
Government  exercising  its  control  through  its  board  representatives  (chosen  by  the  BBB), 
keeping  in  mind  the  best  interests  of  the  bank  and  the  interests  of  minority  shareholders. 
Wherever possible, public sector bank boards should be bound by the same rules as private 
sector bank boards – one reason why the RBI has recently withdrawn the Calendar of Reviews 
PSBs were asked to follow. Similarly, board membership of public sector banks should pay as 
well as private sector banks if they are to attract decent talent. 
As boards take decisions, the Department of Financial Services could move to (i) a program 
role:  for  example,  ensuring  government  programs  such  as  PMJDY  are  well  designed, 
appropriately  remunerated  to  banks,  and  progress  monitored  (ii)  a  coordinating  role:  for 
example, ensuring financial institutions join a common KYC registry and (iii) a developmental 
role: revitalizing institutions like the Debt Recovery Tribunals through appropriate legislation. 
RBI would perform a purely regulatory role, and withdraw its representatives on bank boards 
– this will require legislative change. Over time, RBI should also empower boards more, for 
instance  offering  broad  guidelines  on  compensation  to  boards  but  not  requiring  every  top 
compensation package be approved. 
Given strong oversight from the bank’s board, the CVC and CAG would get involved only in 
extraordinary  situations  where  there  is  evidence  of  malfeasance,  and  not  when  legitimate 
business judgment has gone wrong. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   I  have  focused  on  the  challenges  public  sector  banks  face  meeting  the  new  competitive 
environment,  as  well  as  some  possible  solutions.  These  should  be  viewed  as  opening  a 
discussion rather than the formal views of the RBI. That I have not discussed the challenges 
private banks will face is not because I think they are perfectly positioned but because they 
are  not  as  constrained as the  public  sector  banks.  But  before  I  end,  let  me  emphasize  an 
immediate area of action for all. 
With changes in technology, cyber security, both at the bank level and at the system level, has 
become very important. I think it would be overly complacent for anyone of us to say we are 
well prepared to meet all cyber threats. A chilling statement by an IT expert is “We have all 
been hacked, the only question is whether you know it or you don’t”. While the statement may 
be alarmist, it is an antidote to complacency. We all have to examine our security culture. Too 
many access points are left unmonitored, too many people share passwords or have easily 
penetrated passwords, too little surveillance is maintained of vendors and the software they 
create. RBI is working on upgrading the capabilities of its inspectors to undertake bank system 
audit as well as to detect vulnerabilities in them. RBI is also in the process of setting up an IT 
subsidiary, which will be able to recruit directly from industry, and will give the Reserve Bank 
better ability to manage and supervise technology. I would urge all of you to take a fresh look 
at your systems, and more important, of the cyber culture within your bank. 
Conclusion 
Let me end. We will be living in interesting times. Whether it is a blessing or a curse is up to 
us. I am confident that we will rise to the occasion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
