  Veerathai Santiprabhob: Recent developments and the way forward for 
the Thai economy 
Speech by Dr Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce (JCC) Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 8 March 2016. 
 Mr. Akira Murakoshi, President of the Japanese Chamber of Commerce, 
Mr. Akihiro Uchikawa, Minister of the Embassy of Japan, 
Members of the JCC Board, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good evening to you, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Japanese  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  inviting  me  to  address  the 
prestigious group of audience at this special event. I assume that many of you had become 
quite  acquainted  with  my  predecessor,  Governor  Prasarn,  as  he  had  joined  this  annual 
dinner talk every year over the past five years. Although this is my first time speaking at this 
event, I would say I feel more like coming to meet my longtime friends, thanks to your warm 
welcoming and also to the longstanding ties between Thailand and Japan. 
With over 5,000 firms actively operating in Thailand, the coverage of Japanese businesses 
extends over more industries than that of any other countries investing in Thailand, both in 
the real and the financial sectors. As many of you know, just two weeks ago, I was speaking 
at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  Sumitomo  Mitsui  Trust  Bank  in  Thailand,  which  marks 
another milestone for a closer bond between the Japanese and Thai financial systems. 
This  evening,  it  is  my  honor  to  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  recent  economic 
developments and the way forward for the Thai economy, which I believe is at the heart of 
Japanese businesses in Thailand, as much as it is at the heart of us at the Bank of Thailand. 
In the first part of my talk, I would like to recap the current global market developments and 
highlight Thailand’s financial strength as we venture through the world of volatility. Second, I 
will  share  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  view  on  the  country’s  current  economic  conditions  and 
outlook.  I  will  then  turn  to  discuss  key  initiatives  and  factors  to  drive  the  Thai  economy 
forward,  in  particular  how  Thailand  is  working  towards  becoming  a  regional  connector  for 
trade and financial services. 
Let me start by talking about global volatility 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The year 2016 started off with growing concerns about the global financial markets, 
with  significant  spillovers  to  stock  markets,  exchange  rates  and  commodity  prices 
across  emerging  economies.  What  brought  about  heightened  volatility  in  the  global 
markets? I would like to highlight three key sources at play. 
The  first  factor  is  inevitably  China.  Large  fluctuations  in  its  financial  markets  reflected 
investors’  concerns  on  slowing  Chinese  economic  growth  and  policy  responses.  More 
importantly, China’s economic restructuring, with transitions from investment to consumption, 
and  from  manufacturing  to  services,  has  altered  growth  pattern  and  created  enormous 
uncertainty to the world economic recovery as well as the global financial markets. 
The second factor driving market volatility stems from the plunge in prices of oil and 
commodities.  Depressed  prices  put  pressures  on  commodity-exporting  countries  and 
related industries. For oil producers, the prolonged low prices would also result in losses in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
revenue and profitability, and increase risks of default on their debt payments. These could 
trigger another rout of credit events and liquidity tightening in financial markets. 
The  third  factor is  the  monetary  policy  divergence  between  the  US  and  other  major 
advanced  economies.  While  the  US  Federal  Reserve  is  poised  to  gradually  tighten  its 
policy stance, the Bank of Japan recently joined the club of many European central banks to 
adopt a negative interest rate policy, and is likely to ease the policy even further. Amid the 
fragile  global  recovery,  the  divergence  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  as  well  as  in  the 
recovery paths among the major economies cause a great deal of global uncertainty, and 
prompt  capital  flows  to  be  overly  sensitive  to  news  and  even  slight  changes  in  market 
expectations. 
In this highly interconnected world, these global risks surely have widespread spillovers to all 
countries  not  least  emerging  markets,  Thailand  included.  But,  the  impact  on  the  Thai 
financial markets, as you might have seen, has so far been relatively limited, compared 
to other emerging markets, thanks to Thailand’s strong external position which serves as a 
great buffer against global volatility. 
Allow me to highlight some of our resilient features: 
• 
We continue to have a strong current account position with the current account last 
year  registering  a  surplus  of  9  percent  of  GDP,  or  around  35  billion  US  dollars, 
thanks largely to a substantial saving on energy imports. 
Our international reserves have been at a healthy level, standing at three times of 
the short-term external debt we hold. 
Our  capital  markets  are  relatively  less  exposed  to  the  risk  of  capital  flight,  with 
foreign holdings at less than 9 percent of the Thai government and Bank of Thailand 
bond  outstanding,  compared  with  more  than  30  percent  in  some  other  emerging 
markets in the region. 
External debt of the Thai corporate sector has been relatively low, hovering around 
13 percent of total corporate debt. And, most of the external debt belongs to large 
corporations which have used the proceeds to finance their investment aboard and 
are  able  to  manage  their  exchange  rate  risks  sufficiently  well.  As  a  result,  the 
currency mismatch does not pose a threat to the Thai corporate sector, unlike what 
they experienced during the 1997 economic crisis. 
   Taken together, the strength of Thailand’s external position on many fronts has helped the 
Thai  economy  withstand  the recent  global financial  turmoil,  and  would  continue  to  provide 
cushions against possible external shocks in the future. 
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to be complacent with where we stand and fail to 
anticipate greater challenges ahead. The world has entered an era of far greater volatility 
in the so-called new normal environment. I want to stress that we must not fear volatility, but 
always be mindful and well-prepared for any unforeseen events. 
In  the  short  run,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  stays  firmly  committed  to  maintaining  our  robust 
buffers.  To  build  market  resilience  in  the  longer  run,  we  embrace  on  financial  market 
developments, as deep and liquid markets would better absorb large swings in capital flows. 
We  continue  to  encourage  the  use  of  risk  management  instruments,  particularly  foreign 
currency  hedging,  which  would  mitigate  the  negative  repercussions  of  financial  market 
volatility on businesses. We also plan to further relax capital flow regulations to allow more 
balanced flows in and out of the country which would enhance stability against speculative 
flows. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to the Bank of Thailand’s assessment of the Thai economy in 2016. 
The  Thai  economy  shows  signs  of  gradual,  though  uneven,  recovery.  Based  on  our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
assessment in December of last year, GDP in 2016 was projected to grow at 3.5 percent 
which is higher than the 2.8 percent growth last year. 
I must admit, however, that since last December, the global economy has continued to 
face  stronger  headwinds  ranging  from  increased  financial  market  volatility,  slowing 
emerging market growth, continued oil price slumps, and diverging monetary policy paths. 
These could weigh on the pace of the already fragile global recovery and create more bumps 
in the road for the Thai economy than we have anticipated. Moreover, the impact could be 
more pronounced in the rural areas, where drought and low commodity prices worsened the 
already weak farm income. 
Nevertheless, I believe there are grounds for optimism for the Thai economic growth. 
The Thai economy this year will continue to be driven largely by domestic demand and 
tourism.  Exports  will  likely  remain  flat  or  decline  further,  not  only  due  to  subdued  global 
demand but also price effects as export prices have tumbled following the low commodity 
prices.  But,  so  far  the  impact  on  the  labor  market,  even  those  in  export-oriented 
sectors, has appeared well-contained. 
Notwithstanding  the  threatening  uncertainty  around  us,  tourism  continued  to  be  a 
main  growth  driver  for  the  Thai  economy,  with  expected  tourist  arrivals  of  around 
31 millions in 2016. The CLMV market is another bright spot. The Thai exports to CLMV 
market are expanding in accordance with their growing middle class and vibrant economic 
activities. The CLMV market is now accounting for 10.4 percent of Thai total exports, which is 
already larger than our exports to Japan, the third largest export destination. 
In terms of the domestic economy, we have learned from the latest GDP release that 
the construction sector has picked up with a strong growth of more than 20 percent in 
the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year,  thanks  to  government  infrastructure  projects.  The 
spillovers  from  these  projects  are  also  benefiting  the  real  estate  market.  Demand  for 
properties continues to expand as we see mortgage loans growing at around 10 percent year 
on year in recent months. 
Financing  conditions  have  also  been  favorable.  Monetary  policy  stance  remains 
accommodative and in full support of economic recovery. And, despite the slow economic 
growth,  the  overall  credit  and  corporate  bond  issuance  to  the  private  sector  continues  to 
grow  at  around  7  percent.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  would  ensure  that  the  cost  of  funds  is 
conducive to the ongoing recovery, while also keeping a cautious eye on risks to financial 
stability. 
On  the  fiscal  front,  the  government  has  become  more  effective  in  disbursing  and 
implementing  investment  projects.  Government  relief  and  stimulus  measures  are  also 
essential  at  difficult  times,  especially  for  those  severely  affected  by  adverse  economic 
situations, such as from the current drought. 
But while taking care of the short-term issues, we must not forget to reckon longer 
term  challenges  facing  the  Thai  economy.  Thailand  is  in  need  of  serious  initiatives  to 
upgrade  and  unlock  our  economic  potential  in  the  long  term.  In  this  context,  we  welcome 
many new initiatives by the government to push ahead with structural reforms. 
This brings me to the last part of my talk tonight on the way forward for the Thai economy, 
and  how  we  and  our  partners  like  Japanese  businesses  may  ride  together  toward 
sustainable prosperity. 
Let me first touch upon some of the ongoing reforms and give you a better picture of what we 
could  expect  to  benefit  from  them.  Among  various  initiatives  to  upgrade  legal 
infrastructure  in  Thailand,  steps  have  been  taken  to  put  in  place  more  efficient  and 
more business-friendly laws and regulations. The new Licensing Facilitation Act will help 
streamline bureaucratic processes in obtaining a business license, registration and approval. 
The Business Security Act will help improve SMEs’ access to bank loans by allowing more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
types of assets to be used as collaterals. The new Payment System Act will unify all related 
laws governing the payment system and lift its standards to international best practices. 
In  addition,  the  law  to  reform  the  governance  structure  of  state-owned  enterprises  is 
underway.  The  success  of  this  reform  will  not  only  improve  the  performance  and 
transparency  of  state-owned  enterprises  (SOEs),  but  also  unlock  the  potential  of  our 
country’s  strategic  assets,  create  a  more  level  playing  field  between  SOEs  and  private 
businesses, and strengthen the country’s overall competitiveness. 
I believe that these developments have a great potential to improve administrative efficiency 
and  make  doing  business  in  Thailand  easier.  The  legal  reform  will  be  here  to  stay 
regardless of which political party comes into power after the next election. 
Moreover,  with the  introduction  of  changes in  the  Board  of Investment’s  criteria  for 
investment privileges, the government has geared up its effort in promoting high value 
added industries. I am glad to see many Japanese firms taking advantage of the new BOI 
scheme, especially the ones with R&D incentives. I look forward to witnessing the growth of 
Japanese  cutting-edge  electronics,  automotive  design  and  testing  centers,  and  other 
advanced-technology products being made in Thailand. 
Besides upgrading our own economic and legal infrastructure, reaching out to other 
economies  in  the  region  is  another  structural  transition  that  will  drive  Thailand 
forward.  Thailand’s  close  economic  ties  with  our  neighbors  are  paving  the  way  for  us  to 
become  a  regional  connector  of  trade  and  financial  services.  Thanks  to  Thailand’s 
geographic  location,  superior  financial  infrastructure,  and  strong  supply  chain  networks, 
Thailand  holds  many  advantages  to  be  a  regional  springboard  for  companies  wishing  to 
expand their operations in the Greater Mekong Sub region (GMS). 
We  can  benefit  from  the  complementarities  each  country  has  to  offer  –  abundant 
natural resources, raw materials and younger population in CLMV while Thailand’s position 
can greatly facilitate connectivity and enhance growth potential of the whole region. 
How may we leverage on this strategic position? 
• 
Thanks to our cross-border infrastructure and logistics systems, Thailand has 
been the center for logistic distribution of goods and services in the region. 
The  CLMV  markets  and  the  AEC  offer  a  great  prospect  for  businesses  that  are 
based in Thailand to capitalize on the close proximity of related industries. Products 
made in Thailand have been well-received among our neighbors due to their good 
reputation and high quality. 
Beside  the  geographical  advantage,  the  Thai  baht  has  gained  wider 
acceptance  in  trading  transactions  with  our  neighbors.  The  use  of  local 
currency in regional trade has lowered financial transactions costs for businesses, 
especially in the current period of foreign exchange volatility. In this connection, the 
Bank of Thailand has relaxed capital account regulations to further support the use 
of local currency in the GMS region. 
To  support regional  connectivity,  Thailand  also  offers  Treasury  Centers  and 
International Headquarters as platforms for businesses to improve efficiency 
in financial and resource management. Some Japanese multinational firms have 
already  been  granted  licenses  and  I  am  glad  to  learn  that  many  more  have 
expressed  interests  for  setting  up  a  Treasury  Center  as  well  as  an  International 
Headquarter in Thailand. 
  On the financial side, Japan and Thailand have continued to strengthen our financial 
linkages.  In  Thailand,  there  are  currently  a  total  of  26  Japanese  banks’  representative 
offices,  2  full  branches,  one  locally  incorporated  bank  and  one  subsidiary,  which  was  just 
recently  inaugurated.  Japanese  non-bank  financial  institutions  providing  personal  loans, 
nano-financing and insurance services also maintain a strong presence in our Thai market. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Looking around in the region, we are proud to be the country with the most active and most 
comprehensive Japanese financial service providers. 
Indeed,  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  taken  the  lead  to  use  Thailand  as  a 
strategic foothold for spreading their wings in the region. As a case in point, the Bank of 
Tokyo-Mitsubishi  recently  acquired  a  microfinance  bank  in  Cambodia,  using  the  Bank  of 
Ayudhya  in  Thailand  as  a  base  for  the  acquisition.  Such  financial  linkages  will  serve 
Japanese enterprises and tap opportunities in one of the region’s exciting emerging markets. 
The  strong  presence  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  in  the  region  will  surely  be  an 
important  conduit  for  non-financial  companies  in  Japan  to  leverage  on  the  promising 
prospect of the GMS region. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We  have  indeed  come  a  long  way  and  have  gone  through  several  tests  of  external 
disturbances. Let me assure you that the Bank of Thailand will continue to strengthen 
our macroeconomic resilience and stay firmly committed to financial stability as one of 
our principle mandates. 
We also embrace continuing reforms and upgrades in the financial sector to remove 
obstacles to the development of regional trade and investments. We are confident that 
Japan, Thailand and the region can mutually benefit from broader and deeper linkages, both 
economically and financially. With stronger economic and financial ties, I am excited to see 
how  we, together, will  move the region forward and continue to  work closely in the global 
arena. 
Again, it is my great honor to be here tonight with our close and longtime friends who have 
supported  Thailand’s  economic  and  financial  development.  Thank  you  very  much  for  your 
friendship, your commitment, and your contribution to the Thai economy. I look forward to 
further cooperation between our countries for many years to come. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
