  Haruhiko Kuroda: Outlook for Japan’s economy and challenges to 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Naigai Josei Chosa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 13 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have the opportunity to address you today at the Naigai Josei Chosa 
Kai. 
I would like to express my sincere condolences to the victims of the Kumamoto Earthquake 
and offer my heartfelt sympathies to those who are suffering. The Bank of Japan continues to 
provide  its  central  banking  services  seamlessly  following  the  earthquake  –  including  the 
supply of cash and business operations at teller windows in its Kumamoto Branch as well as 
the  operation  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System  (BOJ-NET)  used  for  funds 
settlement among banks – and is making efforts to maintain the financial infrastructure. With 
the  support  and  cooperation  of  relevant  parties,  most  of  the  branches  of  the  financial 
institutions in the disaster area have been able to resume their operations, and the financial 
and  settlement  systems  there  are  functioning  in  an  organized  manner.  At  the  Monetary 
Policy Meeting (MPM) held in April 2016, the Bank decided to introduce a funds-supplying 
operation for financial institutions in disaster areas affected by the Kumamoto Earthquake at 
a  total  loan  amount  set  at  300  billion  yen,  with  a  view  to  supporting  them  in  their  efforts 
toward  meeting  demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  This  operation  will  surely 
contribute to backing the restoration and rebuilding. 
The Bank introduced “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative 
Interest Rate” at the January 2016 MPM. Since the turn of the year, global financial markets 
have  been  volatile  against  the  backdrop  of  the  further  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and 
uncertainty  such  as  over  future  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies, particularly the Chinese economy. Meanwhile, there was an increasing risk that 
an  improvement  in  the  business  confidence  of  Japanese  firms  and  conversion  of  the 
deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed  and  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  might  be 
negatively  affected.  In  order  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  this  risk  and  to  maintain 
momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  judged  it 
necessary  to  implement  an  extremely  powerful  policy  scheme.  In  fact,  following  the 
introduction  of  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,”  the  policy  effects  on  interest  rates 
already  have  been  seen;  namely,  a  substantial  decline  in  the  Japanese  government  bond 
(JGB) yields and resulting declines in benchmark rates for business lending and in interest 
rates on housing loans. Going forward, these effects are likely to steadily spread to both the 
real economy and the price front. However, uncertainty over emerging economies has been 
strong  and  volatile  developments  in  financial  markets,  including  the  stock  market  and  yen 
exchange rates, have continued to be seen. Today, I would  like to first explain the Bank’s 
view on Japan’s economic activity and prices under this situation and then elaborate on how 
it is going to implement the new policy framework of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
I. 
Current situation of Japan’s economic activity and its outlook 
Developments in the corporate sector 
Let me start by discussing the current situation of Japan’s economic activity and its outlook. 
At the MPM held in April, the Bank released the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(Outlook  Report)  and  published  its  projections  for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices 
through  fiscal  2018.  I  would  like  to  give  you  the  overview  of  this  Outlook  Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Developments in the corporate sector to date show that the pick-up in exports has paused 
recently  due  to  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  As  for  business  sentiment, 
manufacturers  have  become  cautious  mainly  in  the  sectors  that  are  closely  linked  to 
emerging  economies,  and  the  pace  of  improvement  in  corporate  profits  of  manufacturers 
seems to have decelerated. On the other hand, nonmanufacturers’ profits have followed a 
clear rising trend, partly because the decline in crude oil prices has led to an improvement in 
the terms of trade; thus, current profits in the corporate sector as a whole have remained at 
high levels. Firms maintain their positive stance toward fixed investment on the back of the 
high  corporate  profits.  According  to  business  fixed  investment  plans  shown  in  the  March 
2016 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), investment made both 
by large and small firms in fiscal 2015 is likely to have increased on a year-on-year basis by 
about 10 percent and about 4 percent, respectively. Moreover, the plans for fiscal 2016 are 
relatively favorable (Chart 1). 
With  regard  to  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies,  advanced  economies  are  likely  to 
continue  to  see  a  firm  recovery  trend,  mainly  in  the  United  States.  Meanwhile,  emerging 
economies are expected to remain in a state of deceleration for the time being, but move out 
of  their  deceleration  phase  with  positive  effects  of  firm  growth  in  advanced  economies 
spreading. The Chinese economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path, albeit at a 
somewhat reduced pace, as authorities – having relatively large room for monetary and fiscal 
policy  –  have  proactively  been  carrying  out  economic  stimulus  measures.  Against  this 
background,  Japan’s  exports  are  projected  to  head  toward  a  moderate  increase,  although 
sluggishness  is  likely  to  remain  for  the  time  being.  In  the  meantime,  business  fixed 
investment is projected to continue to see a moderate uptrend, mainly due to continued high 
levels of corporate profits along with the further decline in real interest rates under “QQE with 
a Negative Interest Rate,” an increase in growth expectations, and a rise in demand related 
to the 2020 Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games. 
Improvement in the employment and income situation, and wide-spread wage 
increases 
I  would  next  like  to  explain  developments  in  the  household  sector.  Favorable  corporate 
profits have steadily exerted positive effects on the employment and income situation. The 
tightening trend of labor market conditions is becoming clearer: the active job openings-to-
applicants ratio has been 1.30 times recently, marking the highest level seen since 1991, and 
the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to  3.2  percent,  which  is  the  lowest  level  seen  since 
1997 (Chart 2). A perception of labor shortage suggested by the employment conditions DI in 
the March Tankan has heightened further, which can be regarded as full employment. The 
major feature of recent economic activity is that labor market conditions continue to tighten 
despite the sluggishness observed in exports and production. 
In this situation, upward pressure has continued to be exerted on  wages (Chart 3). In this 
spring’s labor-management wage negotiations, or so-called shunto, it is almost certain that 
base pay will be raised for a third consecutive year. Although the rise in large firms is likely to 
be somewhat less than that of last year, wage increases seem to be spreading to small firms 
and non-regular employees, including part-time employees. This can be explained by the fact 
that, at small firms, mobility of employment is relatively high and wages are susceptible to the 
effects  of  labor  market  conditions.  In  addition,  firms  continue  to  be  willing  to  return  their 
profits  to  their  employees  in  the  form  of  bonuses.  Thus,  the  high  corporate  profits  have 
continued to positively affect employee income. 
Against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
private  consumption  has  been  resilient,  although  relatively  weak  developments  have  been 
seen  in  some  indicators,  due  in  part  to  a  deterioration  in  consumer  sentiment,  reflecting 
volatile  developments  in  financial  markets.  Private  consumption  is  likely  to  increase 
moderately as the employment and income situation continues improving. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outlook for economic activity presented in the April Outlook Report 
Turning to the outlook for Japan’s economic activity based on the developments explained so 
far, although sluggishness is expected to remain in exports and production for the time being, 
domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend,  and  exports  are  expected  to  increase 
moderately  on  the  back  of  emerging  economies  moving  out  of  their  deceleration  phase. 
Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. Taking into account 
the fluctuations  due to  a front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to 
and after the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017, the expected growth rates during 
the projection period are in the range of 1.0–1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, slightly positive for 
fiscal 2017, and about 1 percent for fiscal 2018 (Chart 4). Comparing the current projections 
through fiscal 2017 with those in the January 2016 Outlook Report, GDP growth is somewhat 
lower, influenced mainly by weaker exports that reflect the slowdown in overseas economies. 
Current situation of prices and their outlook 
II. 
Next, I will touch on price developments. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food), 
which had been minus 0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE, increased to as high 
as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike. However, as 
private consumption continued to be relatively weak after the consumption tax hike and as a 
result  of  a  substantial  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change has declined and currently is around 0 percent (Chart 5). Nevertheless, excluding the 
effect of the decline in energy prices, the underlying trend in inflation has improved steadily. 
For example, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items excluding fresh food 
and energy has remained positive for 30 consecutive months since October 2013, and was 
1.1 percent in March 2016. This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy 
fell into deflation, that sustained price increases have been seen. 
Monthly data for the CPI are susceptible to various factors, such as developments in import 
prices  that  reflect  changes  in  energy  prices  and  fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates. 
Therefore,  an  assessment  that  takes  account  of  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  and 
economic  developments  behind  such  trend  is  necessary  in  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
management.  To  this  end,  the  output  gap,  which  is  one  of  the  factors  that  determine  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation,  is  more  or  less  unchanged,  as  the  tightening  of  labor  market 
conditions  has  continued  while  an  improvement  in  manufacturers’  capacity  utilization  rates 
has  been  delayed  against  the  background  of  the  sluggishness  in  exports  and  production. 
Going  forward,  the  output  gap  is  expected  to  move  into  positive  territory  and  gradually 
increase further from the second half of fiscal 2016, albeit with fluctuations due to the front-
loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike, with an increase in capacity 
utilization rates as exports and production are likely to pick up. Thus, upward pressure on 
wages  and  prices  due  to  the  tightening  of  supply-demand  conditions  is  likely  to  steadily 
increase. 
Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  which  represent  another  determinant  of  the 
underlying trend in inflation, have weakened recently, although they appear to be rising on 
the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective. Market indicators – such as break-even 
inflation (BEI) rates calculated using yields of inflation-indexed JGBs – as well as results of 
various surveys conducted of households, firms, market participants, and economists imply 
that inflation expectations have been declining since end-2015. In Japan, where, unlike the 
United States and Europe, inflation expectations are not anchored firmly at 2 percent, these 
indicators  tend  to  be  largely  affected  by  the  observed  inflation  rate,  financial  market 
sentiment, and developments in crude oil prices. When assessing developments in inflation 
expectations, it is necessary to grasp firms’ actual wage- and price-setting behavior as well. 
On  this  point,  firms  have  maintained  their  willingness  to  increase  prices  since  last  year  in 
spite of low all-item CPI inflation due to the decline in energy prices. Consumers seem to be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  accepting  the  price  increases,  benefitting  from  an  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income situation. Taking anecdotal evidence into account, firms seem to be maintaining their 
willingness  to  increase  prices  in  a  situation  where  a  base-pay  rise  for  a  third  consecutive 
year  is  likely  to  be  confirmed.  The  mechanism  in  which  inflation  rises  moderately 
accompanied by wage increases has been operating steadily. 
Looking ahead, as the Bank pursues “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” and the observed 
inflation  rate  rises,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  also  likely  to  follow  an 
increasing  trend  and  gradually  converge  to  around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target. 
Against this backdrop, firms’ wage- and price-setting stance is likely to shift further toward 
raising  wages  and  prices,  and  with  an  acceleration  in  wage  increases,  inflation  rates  are 
expected to rise gradually. 
Specifically, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to 
be about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, and, 
as  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  steadily  rises,  accelerate  toward  2  percent.  Meanwhile, 
assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent level, it is likely that the 
contribution  of  energy  items  to  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  will  decrease 
gradually from the current level of slightly more than minus 1 percentage point, but remain 
negative until the beginning of fiscal 2017. Based on this assumption, the timing of the year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching around 2 percent – the price stability target – is 
projected to be during fiscal 2017. Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 
likely to be around 2 percent on average. As shown  in the April 2016 Outlook Report, the 
projected rate of increase in the CPI for fiscal 2016 is 0.5 percent, and excluding the direct 
effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, those for fiscal 2017 and 2018 are 1.7 percent 
and  1.9  percent,  respectively  (Chart  4).  Comparing  these  projections  with  those  in  the 
January  2016  Outlook  Report,  the  projected  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  fiscal  2016  is 
lower,  mainly  reflecting  downward  revisions  in  projections  for  real  GDP  growth  and  wage 
developments, but that for fiscal 2017 is more or less unchanged. 
III. 
Risk factors regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices 
Risks to economic activity: uncertainties surrounding overseas economies 
Thus  far,  I  have  explained  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices that the Bank considers most probable. From now on, I will explain risk factors that 
could affect the baseline scenario. 
The  most  important  risk  factor  regarding  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  would  be 
developments  in  overseas  economies.  The  outlook  for  emerging  economies,  particularly 
China,  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  including  countries  in the  Middle  East,  Brazil, 
and Russia, remains uncertain. The Chinese economy is likely to follow a generally stable 
growth path, underpinned by proactive economic stimulus measures by the authorities, but if 
adjustments in excess production capacity are prolonged, that may delay the recovery of the 
emerging economies, particularly those in Asia, mainly through the trade channel (Chart 6). 
Meanwhile,  although  anxiety  over  crude  oil  prices  marking  a  bottom  has  waned  recently, 
uncertainty  over  both  the  demand  and  supply  sides  remains  heightened  (Chart  7).  In 
addition, attention continues to be warranted on developments in the U.S. economy and the 
impact on global financial markets of expectations over the pace of future rate hikes by the 
Federal Reserve in reflection of the developments in the economy. Europe faces uncertainty 
regarding such factors as the outcome of the debt problem in Greece and other countries as 
well as the possibility of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union – so-called Brexit. 
If  these  risks  were  to  materialize,  there  is  a  possibility  that  firms’  positive  stance  toward 
investing in physical and human capital might be restrained through the effects of business 
confidence, and this point continues to warrant attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Risks to prices 
One of the risk factors specific to prices is developments in medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations.  The  baseline  scenario  of  the  April  2016  Outlook  Report  assumes  that,  amid 
rises in observed inflation accompanied by  wage increases, people’s inflation expectations 
will  rise  further  and  gradually  converge  to  around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target. 
However,  the  pace  of  any  future  increase  in  wages  and  inflation  expectations  is  uncertain 
during  a  prolonged  period  of  low  energy  prices  and  no  visible  rises  in  annual  all-item  CPI 
inflation. In this regard, the following factors indicate that progress is being made in terms of 
dispelling  the  deflationary  mindset  –  that  is,  the  entrenched  view  that  wages  will  not  rise: 
(1) the certainty that a base pay increase will be achieved for a third consecutive year in this 
year’s  shunto  and  (2) the  spread  of  wage  increases  to  small  firms.  This  progress  is  an 
encouraging  change  toward  overcoming  deflation.  At  the  same  time,  this  year’s  base  pay 
increase  is  viewed  as  being  somewhat  less  than  last  year’s  rise,  mainly  at  large  firms; 
therefore, the pace of wage increases is not felt at present as accelerating. Factors such as 
the slowdown in overseas economies and volatile developments in global financial markets 
since the turn of this year seem to have made firms hesitate to take one step forward. 
Based  on  the  fact  that  corporate  profits  remain  at  historical  high  levels  and  that  labor 
shortages have been heightened under a “full-employment” condition, while the labor share 
remains below the long-term trend, wage increases may well be projected to accelerate. It is 
strongly expected that firms will proactively invest in human capital based on the prospects of 
a post-deflationary economy. 
As  I  explained  earlier,  the  Bank  is  of  the  view  that  the  mechanism  in  which  inflation  rises 
moderately accompanied by wage increases has been operating steadily. As wage increases 
have  been  spreading  to  small  firms,  firms  as  a  whole  seem  to  have  maintained  their 
willingness  to  increase  prices  even  after  the  turn  of  this  fiscal  year.  Depending  on 
consumers’ attitude toward price increases, firms’ price-setting stance could be positively or 
negatively  affected.  The  Bank  will  carefully  assess  the  developments  in  CPI  after  April 
without preconception. 
The Bank’s monetary policy management 
IV. 
Lastly, I will explain the Bank’s monetary policy. 
The Bank introduced “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” at the end of January. Since then, 
yields  on  JGBs  declined  significantly,  with  rates  up  to  a  maturity  of  over  10  years  having 
turned negative. Benchmark rates for business lending and interest rates on housing loans 
also  declined  clearly.  Specifically,  lending  rates  on  10-year  fixed-rate  housing  loans  have 
fallen to a level below 1 percent. In the March Tankan, financial institutions’ lending attitudes 
as perceived by firms have improved further following the introduction of the negative interest 
rate policy, and firms’ perception of borrowing costs is that these have declined notably to a 
degree  that  has  not  been  seen  for  years  (Chart  8).  Issuance  rates  on  CP  and  corporate 
bonds  also  have  declined.  A  number  of  CPs  have  been  issued  with  around  zero  interest 
rates, or even with negative rates in some cases, while long-term corporate bonds – with a 
maturity of ten years or longer in particular – are being issued with ultra-low rates recently 
(Chart  9).  As  such,  the  policy  effects  already  have  materialized  in  the  form  of  declines  in 
interest  rates.  These  effects  are  expected  to  steadily  spread  to  the  real  economy  and 
inflation. Firms find themselves in an environment in which interest rates have never been 
lower.  The  financial  conditions  suggest  that  they  face  a  once-in-a-lifetime  chance  for 
investment. Bearing this fact in mind, I acknowledge that firms’ investment decisions critically 
should depend on the prospects for profitability of each project, which could be formed based 
on  the  outlook  for  medium-  to  long-term  macroeconomic  developments  –  in  other  words, 
growth expectations. In this context, unarguably, expanding the business frontier through, for 
example, regulatory reform is being called for to enhance said expectations. That said, it is 
by far the least convincing argument that the potential growth rate and growth prospects are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  too  low  for  the  economy  to  be  stimulated  by  the  current  real  interest  rates,  which  are 
substantially  negative.  Looking  at  some  specific  data,  Financial  Statements  Statistics  of 
Corporations by Industry, Quarterly points to firms’ profitability in terms of return on assets 
(ROA)  at  somewhere  around  4  percent  while  average  interest  payments  amount  to  only 
about 1 percent (Chart 10). Firms’ ROA exceeds their funding cost by a larger margin than 
ever before. Among other points of evidence, we can reaffirm our progress made in the past 
three years. That is, negative real interest rates in fact have spurred the economy and raised 
prices significantly. As a result, we have come to a situation where the economy is no longer 
deflationary. 
Even in normal cases, it takes some time to see the penetration of monetary policy effects. In 
circumstances  such  as  those  in  evidence  today,  where  global  financial  markets  remain 
volatile,  partly  due  to  uncertainties  regarding  the  outlook  for  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, it could be even more difficult for positive changes to emerge. Against 
this backdrop, at the April MPM, the Bank judged that it would be appropriate at present to 
examine the extent of the penetration of policy effects. To be clear, I am not saying that the 
Bank  will  stand  pat  until  the  policy  effects  can  be  confirmed.  Rather,  I  would  like  to  offer 
reassurance regarding the strength of monetary policy. Namely, we will take monetary policy 
measures in a timely, forward-looking manner. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside 
owing  to  (1)  uncertainty  over  the  global  economy,  particularly  emerging  economies, 
(2) volatile  developments  in  financial  markets,  and  (3)  the  repercussions  on  business 
sentiment. The Bank will continue to carefully examine these risks to economic activity and 
prices at each MPM, and take additional easing measures without hesitation in terms of three 
dimensions – quantity, quality, and the interest rate – if it is judged necessary for achieving 
the price stability target. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” is an extremely powerful policy 
scheme and there is no doubt that ample space for additional easing in each of these three 
dimensions is available to the Bank. It will carefully consider how to make the best use of the 
policy scheme in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, and will act decisively 
as we move on. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
