   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building institutions to support economic development 
Special lecture by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara 
Malaysia), at the SEACEN Conference on Central Bank Cooperation and Mandates “Building 
Institutions  to  Support  Economic  Development”,  Sasana  Kijang,  Kuala  Lumpur,  14  March 
2016. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  and  honour  to  speak  at  this  conference  in  honour  of  Dr.  Puey 
Ungphakorn on the subject of “Building Institutions to Support Economic Development”. The 
topic is highly relevant in the current environment which places greater demands on institutions 
given  the  significant  structural  shifts  that  are  taking  place  in  the  global  landscape  and  the 
changing  character  of  the  economic  cycles  that  has  brought  with  it  a  great  many  new 
challenges that need to be managed.  
Given that building institutions is about creating a positive environment for the economy to 
function,  one  that  will  shape  the  incentive  structure  that  will  drive  economic  activity  and 
encourage the efficient use of resources, the new evolving environment would place a further 
urgency  for  institutional  building.  There  is  thus  a  great  motivation  for  building  effective 
institutions to serve this purpose. In particular, the urgency is for strong institutions that will 
transcend the passage of time and will ensure the path towards sustainable economic growth 
and  development.  Experience  has  shown  us  that  institutions  are  pivotal  to  any  economic 
success. However, institutional building is in itself an arduous task. And building institutions 
that are relevant for the future is even more challenging. But it is something that needs to be 
done now if we are to prepare the ground for our future generations.  
It is from the legendary Dr. Puey whom we can draw significant inspiration. Dr. Puey had long 
recognised the importance of institutions to economic development and dedicated a major part 
of his life to this endeavour. He was a true leader, whose contribution to his country’s economic 
progress extended beyond the Central Banking sphere to several other areas of public service, 
to education, and to beyond the national borders of Thailand. We are now the beneficiaries of 
Dr. Puey’s efforts which laid the foundation for the greater Central Bank cooperation that we 
see in the region today. Dr. Puey was a true visionary. He had consistently demonstrated his 
vision, dedication and foresight and in the process, created highly regarded institutions not 
only in Thailand but also for the region.  
The  subject  of  institutional  building  has  generally  referred  to  institutions  that  support  the 
functioning of markets. It is maintained that markets allow for the more efficient use of skills 
and resources to engage in activities with higher productivity. As stated by Douglass North, 
known for his work on institutional economics, institutions comprise a set of formal rules that 
provides the framework for interaction and which shapes the incentives for the functioning of 
the economy. These include the incentives for people to invest in more efficient technology, to 
increase  their  skills  and  to  organise  efficient  markets.  Therefore,  in  strengthening  the 
effectiveness of institutions, it is about putting such institutions in an environment in which they 
are able to rise to the demands for performance and discipline. This therefore places emphasis 
on following a certain order, rules and regulations that would bring value to society.  
While  mature  and  developed  economies  have  benefitted  from  effective  institutions,  the 
changing global and national landscape that is becoming increasingly more interconnected 
now  demands  for  new  institutional  arrangements  for  the  way  in  which  engagements  or 
interface takes place. Equally important are the arrangements for the management of the new 
emerging challenges. Experience has shown us that this can be highly challenging when it 
involves changes in relationships when the structures of institutions have not changed. Such 
institution building is particularly important for public policy decision making. This is particularly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   relevant when coordination arrangements for inputs from the different parts of the public sector 
become necessary. For the economies in the emerging world that are at a different phase of 
development, the creation of strong and effective institutions is even more pressing. Not only 
do existing institutions need to be strengthened but new institutions need to be built to facilitate 
the effective functioning of the economy.  
 
We have heard this morning in the tribute to Dr. Puey, his tremendous role in institution building 
in Thailand and his role in the Asian region. There are numerous examples in his legacy, in 
being resolute in pursuing his convictions and about his effective management of the interface 
with the political process, given that politics is an important part of the ecosystem of institution 
building.  He  achieved  this  without  compromise,  sustaining  always  the  integrity  of  the 
institutions he was associated with. Institutional building therefore needs to be viewed from the 
broader perspective to include strengthening the institutional arrangements of how economies 
and  financial  systems  can  more  effectively  function,  adding  value  for  greater  economic 
wellbeing. Just as we have seen that with the advances in technology, we need to change the 
hardware  and  software.  So  is  the  case  for  institutional  building  to  support  economic 
development. It will also involve changing the institutional “hardware” and the “software”  
Increasingly, emerging economies are in transition towards greater market orientation in which 
the market has become an important mechanism in generating economic growth. While market 
mechanisms are generally successful in achieving greater productive efficiency, it does not 
always result in greater allocative efficiency. As a consequence, disequilibrium conditions and 
market  failures  may  not  only  be  detrimental  to  social  welfare,  but  may  also  weigh  on  an 
economy’s growth and development prospects. Strong institutions that provide regulatory and 
supervisory oversight are therefore necessary, in order to facilitate the effective functioning of 
markets while having the institutional capability to manage disruptions.  
The sustainability and continuity of effective policy management depends on the performance 
of public institutions that have sound policies and governance processes that are formalised 
in a clear, structured and well-defined framework. Equally important is the accountability. In 
this  aspect,  the  institutionalisation  of  policies  and  processes,  which  culminates  in  sound 
governance  serves  to  preserve  good  practices  and  imposes  the  necessary  discipline  for 
objective  policy  making.  The  gaps  in  the  market  infrastructure  in  the  emerging  economies 
however  increase  the  vulnerability  of  our  respective  economies  to  external  shocks.  Such 
shocks have increased in frequency and magnitude, with the risk of prolonged implications on 
our economic growth. With its important role in the management of domestic macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability,  Central  Banks  in  this  changing  environment  also  need  to  be 
strengthened in order to enhance its effectiveness in facilitating conditions to support economic 
development.  
My  remaining  remarks  this  afternoon  will  focus  on  institutional  building  and  economic 
development from the perspective of Central Banks in emerging economies. In particular, on 
the role of Central Banks in supporting the development agenda and as an institution building 
agent.  In  most  emerging market  economies, the  mandate  of the  Central  Bank  is generally 
broader beyond monetary and financial stability to include development of the financial system 
to  ensure  effective  and  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  financial  inclusion  to 
maintain  balanced  growth  and  more  recently  preserving  the  environment  to  secure 
sustainability of our progress and development 
Special role of Central Banks in emerging economies 
 
Allow me to focus on the special role of Central Banks in emerging economies. Central Banks 
in most emerging economies are frequently called upon to have a role in the development of 
the financial system. A well-developed and robust financial system constitutes an essential 
foundation  for  sustainable  economic  growth  as  it  enhances  the  efficiency  of  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   intermediation, contributing towards lower transaction costs and increased competitiveness. 
Many Central Banks have drawn up masterplans and blueprints for this purpose.  
 
The key building blocks are the strengthening of financial infrastructure, such as the payments 
and  settlement  system,  the  development  of  money  and  bond  markets  and  in  the 
implementation of financial reforms involving the deregulation and greater market orientation 
and liberalisation resulting in greater integration with the global financial system. Central Banks 
in  many  emerging  economies  are  also  tasked  with  promoting  financial  inclusion.  Greater 
financial inclusion is a key component for an economy towards achieving a more balanced 
growth and thereby increasing the prospect for a more sustainable growth.  
What are the factors that have allowed Central Banks in the emerging economies to perform 
these roles? Honed by international benchmarks, best practices and the scrutiny of a global 
audience, Central Banks are institutions that over the years, have built a strong reputation for 
intellectual  rigour,  credibility  and  independence.  Given  this,  Central  Banks  are  often  called 
upon to be the institution that drives important and often challenging financial reforms in an 
economy. Additionally, in most emerging economies, the largest concentration of talent resides 
in the Central Bank, providing it with the resources and intellectual capacity to undertake multi-
faceted  developmental  roles  that  extend  beyond  our  core  mandates.  The  fact  that  Central 
Banks are often a highly-regarded public institution in a country also lends it to having greater 
legitimacy in addressing challenging domestic issues. In managing this role effectively, three 
elements are key: clarity of the outcomes to be achieved, a governance process which gives 
clarity on the decision making process and accountability, and finally, ensuring the integrity 
and the independence of the Central Bank is not undermined.  
Another  recent  important  element  of  Central  Banking  in  the  emerging  economies  that 
contributes to the effectiveness of the Central Banks in policy making is the close collaboration 
amongst Central Banks in the emerging economies – in particular in the Asian region. The 
formation  of  formal  regional  platforms  for  collaborative  initiative  facilitates  the  sharing  of 
information, experience and knowledge which are crucial in driving the national, regional and 
even international agenda. It also has involved cooperation in not only the areas of surveillance 
and harmonisation of rules and regulations, but also the assessment of risks to the region and 
the building of regional financial safety nets.  
Finally, allow me to say something about the current environment. While Asia has not been 
immune from the effects of the turbulence and upheavals taking place in the different parts of 
the world, the region has been able to demonstrate time and again the ability to manage a swift 
rebound. Factors that have contributed to this resilience is not so much what we have done in 
response  to  the  development  but  it  is  what  we  have  done  previously  that  prepared  us  to 
manage  these  developments.  We  have  been  better  able  to  absorb  and  intermediate  the 
financial turmoil and turbulence, while the series of financial reforms we have implemented 
have also increased our flexibility and produced better price and exchange rate adjustments. 
This has been reinforced by our sound macroeconomic fundamentals and the policy space we 
have to manage the implications of these challenging developments.  
 
Looking ahead, there is much to be done by all of us. I have always said that the business of 
Central Banking is an unfinished business. There will always be new challenges on the horizon. 
In Asia, while we have successfully prepared ourselves for the current environment, we now 
need to prepare ourselves for the future. Among the future challenges that are likely to confront 
Asia is the sustainability of our prevailing growth model given the consequences arising from 
the erosion of our demographic advantage, the rising indebtedness, the rising cost of living 
despite  an  apparent  period  of  low  inflation,  the  need  to  meet  the  massive  infrastructure 
requirements  and the  need  to  address  the  rising  income  disparities  and  the  environmental 
challenges. What then are the ways economic management can prepare us for the future? 
This will involve policies and reforms that will reduce leverage, that will address the widening 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   income disparities, that will effectively manage infrastructure development and urbanisation, 
that  will  accord  environmental  sustainability  and  finally  that  will  accord  importance  to 
governance,  accountability  and  integrity  in  the  implementation  and  execution  of  the  many 
endeavours  to  achieve  a  sustainable  advancement.  This  implies  an  important  role  of 
institutional building that will support the ability to address these challenges. 
 
 For most Central Banks in the emerging world, our mandate is broader. Most certainly we are 
expected to have a role in contributing to addressing many of these challenges both directly 
and  indirectly.  Some  of  these  issues  include  financial  inclusion,  financing  of  infrastructure, 
putting in place financial and social safety nets, and environmental sustainability. As much of 
these  efforts  will  involve  interface  with  other  parts  of  the  public  sector,  it  has  been  my 
experience that the participation of the Central Bank in many of these agendas will require 
careful boundary management and a signing off when it is completed so that it does not remain 
permanently with the Central Bank. New institutional arrangements will need to be developed 
to render effective coordination across the public sector. Of great importance in this process is 
also to carefully safeguard the independence of the Central Bank.  
Conclusion 
 
As  policy  makers  in  emerging  economies,  we  have  the  added  responsibility  of  building 
institutions for the country. Our quest is filled with challenges but we can learn much from each 
other. Going forward, the transitions that are taking place in the global economy necessitate 
continuous  institutional  building  at  the  national,  regional  and  international  level.  A  regional 
institution such as SEACEN has an important role in enhancing future talents, facilitating the 
sharing of knowledge, ideas and insights on policy management in the region and from its 
research on subjects important to the region.  
 
In conclusion, allow me to express my deep gratitude and appreciation to my fellow governors 
and to all my colleagues at the SEACEN member Central Banks and to SEACEN for all the 
cooperation  and  support  that  has  been  extended  to  me  and  to  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
throughout my career. For the friendship and for the collaboration, it has truly been enriching 
and  special  for  me.  It  has  been  a  great  privilege  for  me  to  be  part  of  this  Central  Bank 
community. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
