  Yannis Stournaras: Sustainability in banking 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) workshop on “Sustainability in 
Banking”, Athens, 12 July 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
It is a great pleasure to welcome Ms. Sabina Dziurman, Director of the EBRD in Greece, to 
the  Bank  of  Greece.  I  would  also  like  to  welcome  all  speakers  and  participants  to  today’s 
workshop on sustainability in banking. 
With  this  opportunity  I  would  like  to  note  the  EBRD’s  function  and  contribution  in  Greece. 
Since the establishment of its representative office in Greece a year ago, EBRD has invested 
around €340 million mainly through participating in the recapitalisation of the four significant 
Greek banks as well as financing energy and industry projects. 
In today’s workshop two perspectives regarding sustainability in banking will be juxtaposed: 
 
The  perspective  of  an  international  development  financial  institution,  namely  of 
EBRD. 
The perspective of Greek systemic banks. 
 
The  Bank  of  Greece  acknowledges  the  importance  of  sustainability  both  for  the  financial 
sector and the economy at large. In this context, the Bank of Greece has been thoroughly 
studying since 2009 climate change with emphasis on the assessment of its environmental 
and social impact. 
At  this  juncture,  as  Greek  banks  gradually  begin  to  restore  their  intermediation  role,  they 
surely  need  to  consider  environmental  and  social  issues,  such  as  funding  of  energy 
efficiency, renewable energy, and cleaner production methods. 
Moreover, sustainable banking also entails promoting sustainable restructuring solutions for 
non-performing exposures (NPEs) both for non-financial corporate entities and households. 
The  efficient  management  of  NPEs  is  one  of  the  key  challenges  that  the  Greek  financial 
sector  faces  and  of  utmost  importance  for  the  rebalancing  of  the  Greek  economy  towards 
tradeable and export-oriented sectors. In turn, this will also free-up scarce resources for the 
financing of sustainable investments. 
I look forward to an exciting discussion and a very fruitful exchange of views. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
