   Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank’s Semiannual Report on Currency and 
Monetary Control 
Statement by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, before the Committee on 
Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 18 February 2016. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Japan  submits  to  the  Diet  its  Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary 
Control  in  June  and  December.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  today  to  talk  about 
developments in Japan’s economy and present an overall review of the Bank’s conduct of 
monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
I. 
First, I will explain economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to 
spending  operating  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors,  although  exports  and 
production  have  been  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  Looking  ahead, 
Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend as domestic demand is likely 
to  follow  an  uptrend  and  as  exports  are  expected  to  increase  moderately  on  the  back  of 
emerging economies moving out of their deceleration phase. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
items less fresh food is about 0 percent. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all 
items  less  fresh  food  and  energy  has  remained  positive  for  27  consecutive  months  and 
increased to 1.3 percent recently; this suggests that the underlying trend in inflation has been 
improving steadily. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food is 
likely to be about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, 
and, as the underlying trend in inflation steadily rises – on the back of an improvement in the 
output  gap  and  of  an  increase  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  –  accelerate 
toward the price stability target of 2 percent. Assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately 
from the recent level, the timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching around 
2 percent is projected to be around the first half of fiscal 2017. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
As  explained,  the  baseline  scenario  assumes  that  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  be  on  a 
moderate expanding trend and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to accelerate 
toward  2  percent.  However,  from  the  turn  of  the  year,  global  financial  markets  have  been 
volatile against the backdrop of the further decline in crude oil prices and uncertainty such as 
over future developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, particularly the 
Chinese economy. For these reasons, there is an increasing risk that an improvement in the 
business confidence of Japanese firms and conversion of the deflationary mindset might be 
delayed and that the underlying trend in inflation might be negatively affected. 
In order to preempt the manifestation of this risk and to maintain momentum toward achieving 
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  introduced  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate” in January 2016. The Bank will lower 
the short end of the yield curve by slashing its deposit rate on current accounts into negative 
territory and will exert further downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve, 
in combination with continued large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). 
The JGB yield curve has declined after the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and policy effects have been seen. Going forward, these effects are likely to steadily spread 
to both the real economy and the price front. 
The Bank will continue with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” aiming to achieve the price 
stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable 
manner.  It  will  examine  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  take  additional  easing 
measures in terms of three dimensions – quantity, quality, and interest rate – if it is judged 
necessary for achieving the price stability target. 
In global financial markets, risk aversion of investors has been spreading excessively around 
the globe recently. The Bank will carefully monitor how the developments in global financial 
markets influence Japan’s economy and prices. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
