  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Anchoring confidence in an era of radical 
uncertainty 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 16th Bloomberg FX Summit, Makati City, 16 August 
2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon! It is indeed a pleasure, as always, to address traders 
and industry experts in this 16th Bloomberg Foreign Exchange Summit. 
It’s  interesting  that  Bloomberg  chose  for  this  Forum,  a  date  in  the  middle  of  what  is 
traditionally called the “ghost month” of August. Could it be because they thought this time 
would  be  quiet  enough  and  we  could  get  more  of  you  traders  and  bank  and  corporate 
treasurers to participate in the Forum? Maybe, but if one were to gauge it by the price action 
in the markets since the beginning of August, one would need to be careful to characterize it 
as a “ghost” month. For the Phisix crossed the 8000 point mark again and continues to flirt 
very close to it; the peso changed big fig and broke the 47 level, reflecting foreign monies 
that  have  returned  to  our  markets  post  Brexit,  with  current  market  buoyancy  somewhat 
surprising given that the underlying issues remain unresolved; the TDF auctions continue to 
be oversubscribed even as we have already raised the auction size; and bank lending has 
remained brisk. In other words, it hasn’t been all that quiet. 
But it is precisely when something is behaving not quite the way it is expected to, that the 
market should be watchful and regulators even more so. 
Global developments 
I don’t have to deal lengthily into the global events that have gripped us this year. You know 
the issues quite well, the list of challenges has been daunting and, in fact, has become even 
longer: 
1. 
Global  monetary  policy  divergence  between  a  previously  hawkish  US  Fed  and 
accommodative advanced economies (AEs) elsewhere; 
Growth slowdown in big emerging markets (EMs) such as China; 
The collapse and the recent see-saw in oil prices; 
More recently, the unfolding of Brexit; and then, 
The global portfolio rebalancing that accompanies these challenges. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Clearly, we are all trying to divine a number of things, like: what the next move of the Fed 
would be; when the stimulus packages of the BOJ and ECB would finally provide traction to 
Japanese  and  European  economic  growth;  how  the  heavy  corporate  debt  levels  in  China 
would be affected by continued weak global trade prospects; when the inflection point for oil 
prices  would  come  about  and  how  would  any  turnaround  happen;  and  finally,  whether  we 
have really seen the worst of Brexit and what would transpire during this two-year period of 
transition. 
Eight years after the GFC and still a clear definition of “new normal” remains elusive. Even 
so, one thing is emerging – the period of global low economic growth, heightened volatility1 
and  “lowflation”  as  the  IMF  calls  it,  seems  to  be  quite  enduring,  despite  massive  stimulus 
from policymakers in many parts of the world. 
                                                
1  El-Erian, M. (2016). “The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability, and Avoiding the Next Collapse.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A number of explanations have been put forward to help us understand why nothing seems 
to be working as fast and as effectively as we have been hoping for. From economic theory, 
secular  stagnation  (as  most  recently  advanced  by  Larry  Summers)  –  where  there  is  an 
increasing propensity to save and a decreasing propensity to invest, the result of which is 
that excessive saving acts as a drag on demand, reducing growth and inflation, and keeping 
interest rates low.2 From behavioral finance, we are taught that we must contend with animal 
spirits that must be appropriately incentivized to look towards long-term sustainable projects. 
This  is  important  so  that  flighty,  search-for-yield  herd  behavior  is  minimized.  And  from 
demographics, we are seeing shifts in working age population and productivity. 
A position of relative strength 
Fortunately, the Philippines is not in the same situation as other jurisdictions find themselves 
in.  We  had  survived  the  GFC  generally  unscathed  and  we  continue  to  enjoy  the  healthy 
combination of strong growth and low inflation. To cite some indicators: 
• 
The  Philippines’  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  has  been  resilient,  registering  69 
consecutive quarters of positive growth. In the first quarter of 2016, the country grew 
by 6.9 percent, its fastest since the third quarter of 2013. 
The sustained benign inflation environment over the past years continues to support 
economic growth. 
The  sound  and  stable  condition  of  Philippine  banks  and  robust  external  sector 
dynamics  have  also  been  among  the  anchors  of  the  robust  performance  of  the 
domestic economy. 
  In  addition,  the  domestic  economy  has  sufficient  buffers  that  help  weather  the  external 
headwinds: 
• 
The BSP’s foreign exchange (FX) reserves currently stands at US$85.5 billion as of 
end-July 2016, more than enough to meet the country’s FX liquidity requirements for 
trade and short-term debt obligations. 
The  country’s  current  account  has  been  in  surplus  for  13  consecutive  years  now, 
supported by the sustained increase in overseas Filipino (OF) remittances, as well 
as business process outsourcing (BPO) revenues and tourism receipts. 
 Current stance of monetary policy 
This  position  of  relative  strength  has  allowed  us  to  keep  our  policy  rates  at  4%  since 
September  2014  until  we  reduced  it  to  3%  in  June  this  year,  following  the  operational 
adjustment when we adopted the Interest Rate Corridor. 
However, even with the 100 bps adjustment in the headline rate, 3% is still over 250 basis 
points  higher than the  Fed funds target rate. That gives  us  significant  wiggle  room,  in  this 
environment where some jurisdictions have gone into negative interest rate territory. 
At  our  policy  meeting  last  week,  we  again  kept  the  policy  rate  steady  at  3%.  While  our 
assessment showed that inflation would be slightly below the NG target range for 2016, we 
expect that inflation would be within the target of 2–4% in 2017–2018, with an upside bias for 
2017. 
In  addition,  our  credit  growth  suggests  favorable  monetary  conditions,  and  aggregate 
demand remains firm. Therefore there was no strong impetus for us to move policy levers or 
adjust the stance of monetary policy. 
                                                
2  Summers, L. (2016). “The Age of Secular Stagnation.” Foreign Affairs. February Issue. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  monetary  policy  space  and  our  current 
monetary settings are appropriate. 
Triggers to shifts in policy stance 
You must have heard me say this on a number of occasions already. But you may ask, what 
would cause us to change the stance of policy? 
My answer to that would be: our next move would be data dependent. Which then begs the 
question, what data are we looking at? 
Data  dependence  sounds  almost  trite.  Some  may  say  this  is  veiled  “central  bank  speak”, 
given that nearly all central bankers today seem to say this in unison. But in truth, when we 
speak  these  words,  we  do  so  with  great  thought  and  much  humility.  For  we  do  not  know 
everything. It would be foolish to say otherwise. And to even be so definitive as to say which 
one  single  data  point  we  are  looking  at  would  not  be  prudent  at  this  time,  given  how  the 
financial and the goods markets are so globally interconnected. 
There are indeed many moving parts that we look at when we consider the stance of policy. 
Of  course,  the  first  is  the  inflation  forecast  relative  to  the  target.  That’s  the  primary 
consideration.  We  would  also  consider  any  significant  shift  in  any  of  the  domestic  macro 
variables  I  mentioned  earlier.  We  would  look  at  any  strong  misalignments  in  interest 
differentials  with  external  trading  partners.  This  is  important  to  consider  especially  if  such 
misalignments would significantly endanger domestic financial markets and produce knock-
on  effects  on  the  real  sector.  We  would  also  make  a  move  when  market  confidence  and 
expectations threaten to be forcefully dislodged. 
Impulses vs policy tools 
But even as I narrate those possibilities, you must be cognizant that the BSP has an array of 
tools. Since the GFC, our tool kit has deepened. We are no longer limited to the policy rate 
alone to address these impulses. 
For instance, under the IRC, the auction size of the TDF is one tool that we could use. Under 
a  financial  stability  framework,  we  can  put  in  place  macroprudential  measures,  as  we  did 
when we raised the capital risk weight of NDF transactions. We can consider liberalizing the 
foreign exchange regulatory framework, as we did last week. 
And  just  on  this  last  point,  as  you  know,  the  Monetary  Board  last  Friday  approved  a 
significant  liberalization  of  foreign  exchange  rules.  These  measures  aim  to  encourage  the 
public to transact their FX needs more with banks. Briefly, the recent liberalization involves 
increasing  the  current  limit  of  allowable  FX  purchase  from  banks  without  supporting 
documentation  by  as  much  as  4  times  for  individuals  and  8  times  for  corporations,  and 
allowing payments in FX for certain transactions between residents, among other measures. 
Moreover, we have the flexibility to allow the exchange rate to absorb some of the shocks 
from  capital  inflows,  or  if  the  flows  go  the  other  way,  we  have  ample  reserves,  to  keep 
exchange rate volatility in check, consistent with our inflation targeting framework. Learning 
from  our  previous  experience  during  the  Asian  and  global  financial  crises,  the  limitation 
imposed  by  the  impossible  trinity3  could  actually  work  to  our  advantage.  First,  flexible 
exchange  rates  act  as  an  automatic  stabilizer  and  contain  wild  swings  in  the  financial 
markets.  Second,  this  also  allows  us  to  focus  our  monetary  policy  on  maintaining  price 
stability in tune with the developments in domestic demand, particularly with the considerable 
reduction  in  the  exchange  rate  pass-through  to  inflation.  Furthermore,  during  periods  of 
                                                
3 
 The  impossible  trinity  states  that  a  central  bank  can  only  pursue  two  of  the  following  objectives:  fixed 
exchange rates, independent monetary policy, and open capital account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  stress, flexible exchange rates and independent monetary policy allow us to idiosyncratically 
respond  to  shocks  in  line  with  domestic  economic  conditions,  which  is  crucial  in  calming 
markets. 
Not monetary policy alone 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have monetary policy space to keep prices stable. But price and 
financial stability are but one component of a vibrant economy. 
We need the other cylinders of the economy to be working, too. We would need the fiscal 
authorities to ramp up infrastructure spending. And we need the cooperation of the private 
sector to find feasible long-term projects that would help raise the absorptive capacity of the 
economy. In this whole process, we need you to facilitate the movement of funds from savers 
to users, in a safe, efficient and sound manner. 
The BSP will continue to pursue its mandate of securing price and financial stability through 
an appropriate policy stance and relevant measures. We trust that this will help anchor your 
confidence, so you could in turn do your part. We need treasurers and market participants to 
go  beyond mark-to-market gains  on  your financial  assets. We  need  you  to translate those 
financial assets to gains in the real sector that can help create jobs. 
Conclusion 
It  is  my  view  that  in  this  post-GFC  era,  when  we  are  in  the  midst  of  what  former  BOE 
Governor  Mervyn  King  calls  a  period  of  “radical  uncertainty”,  we  can  secure  a  path  of 
sustainable growth by keeping economic confidence up. I trust that the BSP can engage you 
– in the financial markets – to work with us in anchoring confidence among all our economic 
stakeholders.  In  the  process,  we  hope  to  be  able  to  lay  a  solid  bedrock  of  sustainable 
economic growth. 
Thank you very much and I wish you a productive summit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
