  Mark Carney: The Sustainable Development Goal imperative 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly,  High-Level  Thematic 
Debate on Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, New York City, 21 April 2016. 
 The SDG imperative 
1. 
The  Sustainable  Development  Goals  are  a  moral  imperative,  with  objectives  that  include 
nothing  less  than  ending  poverty,  fighting  inequality  and  injustice,  and  tackling  climate 
change.1 
The  SDGs  are  also  an  economic  imperative.  Their  achievement  would  mean  greater 
productivity, increased labour supply and ultimately stronger growth. In short, they could pull 
the global economy out of its current malaise of secular stagnation. 
The scale of investment required to achieve the SDGs is immense 
2. 
Achieving  the  SDGs  will  require  both  a  step  change  in  the  quantum  of  investment  and  a 
marked reorientation of its destination. 
Over  the  next  15  years,  the  global  population  is  expected  to  grow  by  just  over  a  billion.2 
Another one and a half billion people are expected to urbanise.3 
Although  moving  to  a  low-carbon  future  will  not  necessarily  require  substantially  more 
investment  than  business  as  usual,4  it  will  require  a  radical  re-focusing  of  that  investment 
from high- to lower carbon technologies. 
Overall, it is estimated investments of between US$5 and $7 trillion a year are needed for 
infrastructure,  clean  energy,  water,  sanitation,  agriculture,  and  the  other  SDGs.5  This  is 
significant but achievable. 
Building the financial system we need to deliver this investment 
3. 
While  they  are  important  catalysts,  private  niches,  like  social  impact  investing,  or  public 
sources, like Multilateral Development Banks won’t be sufficient. 
Achieving the SDGs will require mainstream finance. 
To get enough finance in the right places will require more than just fixing the fault lines that 
caused the last crisis. 
                                                
1   At the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit in September 2015, world leaders adopted the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which included a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
The SDGs aim to end poverty, hunger and inequality, support action on climate change, improve access to 
health and education, and build strong institutions and partnerships, over the next 15 years. For further detail 
on the goals, see www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/ 
2   Population  growth  figures  from  United  Nations,  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  Population 
Division, “World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision”.  
3   Urbanisation growth figures from United Nations Population Fund, www.unfpa.org/urbanization  
4   See  New  Climate  Economy  “Infrastructure  investment  needs  of  a  low  carbon  scenario”  (2014),  which 
estimates that there are infrastructure investment needs totalling approximately US$90 trillion between 2015 
and 2030, in the context of a growing population and increasing urbanisation. It is estimated that adopting a 
low-carbon pathway increases these costs by 5%.  
5   See UNCTAD “World Investment Report” (2014), which estimates that this is the annual amount of investment 
required to meet the SDGs by 2030. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
We need to build a new system – one that delivers sustainable investment flows, based on 
both resilient market-based, and robust bank-based, finance. 
We need finance for the long term. 
We need a financial system that is F-A-I-R: that is Fair, Aligned, Inclusive and Resilient. Let 
me expand briefly on each, beginning with fairness itself. 
Fair 
(i) 
The twin crises of solvency and legitimacy undermined trust in market mechanisms and the 
effectiveness  of  the  financial  system.  Banks  were  undercapitalised,  mismanaged  and 
operated in a privileged heads-I-win-tails-you-lose bubble. In parallel, there was widespread 
rigging of some markets for personal gain. 
By replacing such implicit privilege with the full discipline of the market, social capital is now 
being rebuilt and economic dynamism restored. 
G20 leaders have endorsed a wide range of measures to end too-big-to-fail in banking. 
The Financial Stability Board6 is now working on a series of initiatives to make the system 
more fair and effective, including examining governance and compensation arrangements to 
ensure they promote good, and punish bad, behaviour.7 In the UK, authorities are pursuing 
reforms  that  will  increase  individual  accountability,  particularly  in  wholesale  financial 
markets.8 
Such initiatives are beginning to turn the tide of ethical drift which has plagued the system 
and would hold back the SDGs if left unchecked. 
Aligned 
(ii)  
Aligning incentives will increase finance’s potential to support the SDGs. Alignment requires 
transparency. Consider the example of climate change. 
Financial  policymakers  will  not  drive  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy.  Only 
Governments can solve the Tragedy of the Horizon.9 
Financial  policymakers  can  amplify  the  impacts  of  those  decisions,  while  ensuring  the 
financial system remains resilient during the transition. With respect to climate, our role is to 
develop the frameworks for markets to adjust efficiently. 
Financing the de-carbonisation of our economy is a major opportunity for investors. It implies 
a  sweeping  reallocation  of  resources  and  a  technological  revolution,  with  investment  in 
                                                
6   The FSB brings together national authorities responsible for financial stability from the G20 and other major 
financial centres, international financial institutions and standard-setters. The FSB also conducts outreach with 
65 other jurisdictions through its six regional consultative groups.  
7   As summarised in the “FSB Chair’s letter to G20 Ministers and Governors on Financial Reforms – Progress on 
the Work Plan for the Hangzhou Summit” (February 2016), the FSB is working on reducing misconduct risk, 
including  exchanging  best  practices  on  governance  frameworks  and  potentially  developing  a  supervisory 
toolkit  or  guidance;  examining  the  effectiveness  of  post  crisis  reforms  to  compensation  and  whether 
disincentives  to  misconduct  should  be  strengthened;  and  sharing  national  experiences  on  bank  regulators’ 
enforcement powers. 
8   See  Bank  of  England  “Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  –  Final  Report”  (June  2015),  which  sets  out 
recommendations  to  help  restore  trust  in  the  wholesale  Fixed  Income,  Currency  and  Commodity  (FICC) 
markets including: raising standards, professionalism and accountability of individuals; improving the quality, 
clarity and understanding of FICC trading practices by firms; strengthening the regulation of FICC markets by 
UK regulators; and improving international standards in this area.  
9   See Carney (2015) “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
long-term  infrastructure  assets  at  roughly  quadruple  the  present  rate.10  Transparency  is 
critical to recognising the risks and seizing the opportunities of this transition. 
Improved  disclosure  is  necessary  to  reveal  how  the  valuations  of  companies  that  produce 
and  use  fossil  fuels  might  change  over  time.  It  will  expose  the  likely  future  cost  of  doing 
business,  of  paying  for  emissions  and  of  tighter  regulation.  By  doing  so,  it  will  build  a 
“market” in the transition to a 2 degree world, allowing firms and market participants to take a 
view  on  the  transition  path.  With  improved  disclosure,  climate  sceptics  and  evangelists, 
techno-optimists and pessimists, alike will be able to back their convictions with capital. 
The  current  fragmented  reporting  practices  prevent  investors,  creditors  and  underwriters 
from taking these decisions on a fully informed basis. 
That’s  why,  at  the  request  of  G20,  the  FSB  established  an  industry-led  Task  Force  at 
COP21.  Chaired  by  Michael  Bloomberg,  it  is  in  the  process  of  developing  consistent, 
comparable, reliable and clear disclosures around climate-related financial risks. 
The Task Force has just published its phase 1 report for public consultation in advance of its 
final recommendations to G20 Leaders over the next year.11 
Improved private disclosure will also support public climate action. 
Better information will allow policymakers to assess companies’ speed of adjustment relative 
to  countries’  nationally  determined  contributions  (NDCs).  It  will  support  more  informed 
policies, including early responses if there are clear shortfalls. Virtuous circles could be more 
quickly  established.  If  Governments  build  credibility  by  implementing  their  NDCs,  this  will 
raise the probability of further action to achieve 2 degrees. Markets can then do what they do 
best and pull forward that adjustment. 
Early awareness of the risks and opportunities associated with a low-carbon economy will 
attract mainstream institutional capital. That impact will be maximised if there are the right 
vehicles. 
In this regard, green bonds have the potential to align the interests of issuers and investors. 
To investors, green bonds offer a stable, rated and liquid investment with long duration. To 
issuers,  they  could  tap  the  US$100  trillion  global  institutional  fixed  income  investor  base. 
Moreover, the shift to the capital markets from banks will free up limited bank balance sheet 
capacity for early-stage project financing and other important infrastructure lending. 
At present, with less than one percent of outstanding bonds globally being “green”, the G20 
is considering initiatives to catalyse this market, including: 
• 
Developing  a  “term  sheet”  of  internationally  recognised  standardised  terms  and 
conditions to make issuance more efficient; 
Creating voluntary certification and validation frameworks to give certainty to issuers 
and investors that a project is “green”; 
Integrating environmental risk and green certification into credit ratings; 
Developing green bond indices to unlock the potential power of passively managed 
investments; 
Standardising and harmonising principles for green bond listings to promote resilient 
and efficient trading and adequate liquidity; and 
                                                   
10   The IPCC estimates that additional investment of US$190–900bn is required annually in the energy sector 
alone  if  the  rise  in  average  global  temperature  is  to  be  capped  at  2C.  www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/  Mercer 
estimates that additional cumulative investment in efficiency improvements, renewable energy, biofuels and 
nuclear,  and  carbon  capture  and  storage  could  be 
trillion  by  2030. 
www.mercer.com/insights/point/2014/climate-change-scenarios-implications-for-strategic-asset-allocation.html 
11   See  the  Task  Force  on  Climate-related  Financial  Disclosures  “Phase  1  Report  and  Public  Consultation” 
the  range  of  US$3-5 
in 
available at www.fsb-tcfd.org/phase1report/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Evaluating mechanisms for consistent, transparent dispute resolution processes. 
• 
We all know the paradox that, as climate risks are a function of cumulative emissions, earlier 
action  will  mean  less  costly  adjustment.  Better  climate  disclosure  and  an  effective  green 
bond market will mean more investment with foresight and less regret in hindsight. 
Inclusive 
(iii)  
Inclusiveness is at the heart of the SDGs, and it must be at the heart of financial reform. 
However, recent years have seen a worrying decline in correspondent banking services, with 
local banks and money service businesses in numerous regions losing access to the global 
banking system.12 
The impact, in terms of unfulfilled economic potential, lost access to finance, and the break 
on sustainable development, is more than financial. Financial abandonment also has social, 
economic  and  security  consequences.  Communities  that  become  financially  excluded 
become  vulnerable,  particularly  where  lost  banking  services  cut  off  income  flows  from 
remittances. 
Our shared challenge is to combat money laundering and terrorist financing while reversing 
financial  abandonment.  These  aims  are  entirely  compatible.  Keeping  flows  inside  the 
financial system, and subject to stringent due diligence against clearly articulated standards, 
rather than forcing them underground is the way to ensure that the financial sector continues 
to serve real economies around the world. 
To this end, the FSB, the World Bank and the IMF are implementing the four-point action 
plan endorsed by G20 Leaders. It is: 
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
Assessing the dimensions and implications of the issue; 
Clarifying regulatory expectations by working with the FATF and relevant countries; 
Expanding capacity through technical assistance in those jurisdictions whose firms 
have lost correspondent banking services; and 
Strengthening tools for due diligence by correspondent banks. 
(4)  
These  efforts  to  reverse  financial  exclusion  from  the  global  system  from  termination  of 
correspondent  banking  relationships  can  be  complemented  by  greater  use  of  financial 
technology to promote inclusion. 
Over  the  past  decade,  mobile  and  web-based  payment  providers  have  dramatically 
expanded  access  to  payment  services,  particularly  in  developing  countries.  Consider 
Vodafone’s  M-PESA  since  its  launch  in  2007.  It  has  reached  23.4m  customers  across 
11 countries,  many  of  whom  do  not  have  bank  accounts.13  Meanwhile  alternative  lending 
models have opened up access to credit and investment. Examples include Faircent in India, 
which aims to provide credit on demand for all  Indians, and Biva in Brazil  which seeks to 
operate in regions traditionally underserved by banks.14 
                                                
12   In responding to a recent World Bank survey, whose results are summarised in its October 2015 ‘Report on 
the G20 survey on de-risking activities in the remittance market’, half of banking authorities, three quarters of 
large  banks  and  a  majority  of  local  and  regional  respondent  banks  reported  a  decline  in  correspondent 
banking relations. 
13   Data 
from  M-PESA,  http://www.vodafone.com/content/index/media/vodafone-group-releases/2015/mpesa-
ghana.html 
14   Data from Peer & Social Lending, http://peersociallending.com/investing/peer-to-peer-lending-sites-16-of-the-
worlds-best/ 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
If  fully  realised,  recent  developments  –  including  expanded  use  of  legal  entity  identifiers, 
know-your-customer  utilities  and  even  potentially  distributed  ledger  technology  –  have  the 
potential to restore correspondent banking services and remittance flows. 
Financial  technologies  can  redraw  the  parameters  of  the  financial  system  and  promote 
inclusivity and growth. To promote sustainable growth and poverty reduction, this must not 
come at the cost of less resilience. As such, the FSB is working to understand better both the 
potential benefits and risks technology poses to the financial system. 
Resilient 
(iv)  
I want to conclude by underscoring how fundamental the FSB’s core mission is to achieving 
the  SDGs.  Without  an  open,  global  financial  system  that  can  support  sustainable  cross-
border investment flows, there can be no sustained economic growth or financial contribution 
sufficient to achieve the development goals. In this way, the FSB’s core work complements 
broader G20 initiatives to promote in inclusion, infrastructure, innovation and green growth. 
Inevitably, since the crisis, the FSB’s principal focus has been on agreeing reforms to fix the 
fault lines in banking that led to that crisis. Given the enormous progress made, we are now 
increasingly  concentrating  on  building  a  diverse  and  resilient  system  that  will  harness  the 
potential of market-based finance. 
Since the crisis, market-based finance has grown significantly, bringing new sources of credit 
and  investment,  promoting  financial  openness  and  international  capital  flows,  and  adding 
welcome diversity to the system. 
Emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) have particularly benefited from these 
developments, doubling their stock of international bonds to US$2.8 trillion over the past five 
years.15  And  average  annual  portfolio  flows  to  EMDEs  have  more  than  tripled  from  their 
average in the decade prior the crisis.16 
For the SDGs to be achieved, such flows must be larger, more reliable and better utilised. 
That’s  why  the  FSB  is  now  developing  new  policies  to  address  liquidity,  leverage  and 
securities financing risks in asset management activities. These measures will help ensure 
asset managers can provide sustainable and reliable financing to EMDEs. 
That’s why the FSB is working to ensure the central counterparties that support the plumbing 
of the new system are resilient and can be resolved without disruption to the flow of financing 
to the real economy. 
And  that’s  why  FSB  members  are  working  to  develop  more  effective  macro  prudential 
policies. These will dampen the impact of capital flows on domestic vulnerabilities and allow 
countries to be more open and connected to global trade and investment. 
The  FSB’s  work  plan  is  highly  complementary  to  other  G20  priorities  in  infrastructure, 
inclusiveness and climate change. 
A FAIR system is essential if we are to move to a 2 degree world. 
A FAIR system is critical to achieving the economic and moral imperatives of the SDGs. 
I look forward to our discussion of how to build such a system to the benefit of all. 
                                                
15   BIS International Debt Statistics, (all sectors, nationality basis). 
16   IMF World Economic Outlook data show that average annual portfolio flows to EMDEs have more than tripled 
from their average in the decade prior to the crisis to an average of US$257 billion annually between 2009 and 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
