   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Mobilising ASEAN - building the future through 
partnership 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Wharton  Global  Forum  Kuala  Lumpur  2016  “Mobilising  ASEAN: 
Building the Future Through Partnership”, Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 11 March 2016. 
 It is my very great pleasure to welcome you to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia for the Wharton Global 
Forum 2016. Over the years, the Wharton community has very much recognised the potential 
of the ASEAN region as a growing force in the global economy. Indeed, in the recent five years, 
Malaysia is the third country in ASEAN to host this Global Forum (Bangkok in 2015 and Jakarta 
in 2012) and while central bankers have been a recurring feature at the Wharton Forum,  
I do however believe that this is possibly the first time a Central Bank is the venue and host to 
the Wharton Global Forum. We are really delighted to have this opportunity to be the host for 
this year’s Wharton Forum.  I am particularly pleased to welcome you to Sasana Kijang, our 
Central  Bank’s  centre  of  excellence  for  learning  and  international  cooperation.  Indeed,  the 
word ‘Sasana’ is a Sanskrit word that means a meeting place. The building Sasana Kijang 
which  opened  its  doors in  2011  was  envisioned  to  be  a global  meeting  place for  learning, 
international knowledge exchange, collaboration and  cooperation. Today,  it  has  evolved  to 
become  a  truly  global  meeting  place  for  thought  leadership  and  collaboration,  with  the 
presence  of  several  international  organisations  in  the  building  and  the  regional  and 
international  meetings  that  are  held  here.  Being  a  Central  Bank,  our  goal  is  to  ultimately 
enhance our knowledge and capability to enable us to better serve society. This is not unlike 
Joseph Wharton’s vision for the Wharton School to produce graduates who would become, 
what he referred to as, “pillars of the state, whether in private or in public life”.  
The Collective Strength of the ASEAN Region 
Turning to the theme of the Global Forum – “Mobilising ASEAN: Building the Future through 
Partnership”.  Founded  almost  half  a  century  ago,  ASEAN  is  currently  one  of  the  fastest-
growing  and  most  dynamic  regions  in  the  world.  While  at  different  stages  of  economic 
development, the ten economies of ASEAN all share immense growth potential. The region 
has experienced a long-term average annual growth of more than 5%, much higher than the 
global average, and this is expected to be sustained going forward. Collectively, ASEAN is 
now the sixth-largest economy in the world, with a population of 630 million and a combined 
GDP of USD2.5 trillion.  ASEAN is also one of the centres of global trade, after the European 
Union,  North  America  and  China,  and  it  is  home  to  more  than  220  global  companies  with 
annual  revenues  of  above  USD1  billion.  This  strong  growth  and  economic  dynamism  of 
ASEAN  are  supported  by  its  favourable  demographic  structure.  With  a  young  population, 
ASEAN has the third-largest labour force in the world, after China and India, with a fast-growing 
middle class given the rapidly rising affluence. By 2020, ASEAN is expected to account for 
more than USD2 trillion of additional consumption to the world economy.  
Motivation for ASEAN Integration 
 A  key  factor  that  underpins  the  region’s  potential  is  its  progressive  economic  integration. 
ASEAN is one of the most diverse regions in the world – in terms of economic size, income 
level, resource endowment, economic structure, financial sector development, and economic 
systems.  The  region  has  therefore  leveraged  on  its  complementarities  arising  from  this 
diversity.  This  is  reflected  in  the  increased  cross-border  production  networks,  and  the 
significant increase in intra-regional trade and investment activities. Since 1990, ASEAN intra-
regional trade has grown from 18% to 24% of its total trade, and intra-regional investment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   activities have now quadrupled since 2000, from 4% to 17% of its total investment.  While there 
has been a trend towards greater intra-regional trade and investment, financial integration in 
the  region  has  not  progressed  as  significantly.  ASEAN  economies  have,  however,  now 
reached that stage of development whereby greater regional financial integration can further 
unlock our growth potential. The push for regional financial integration is to bring about a more 
effective  intermediation  of  funds,  bringing  the  excess  savings  from  one  country  to  be 
channelled  into  productive  investments  in  another.  The  ASEAN  region,  having  one  of  the 
highest savings rates in the world, therefore has the immense potential to meet some part of 
the region’s massive requirements for financing, particularly for large investment projects and 
infrastructure development. Financial integration will facilitate channelling part of such surplus 
funds  towards  productive  investment  opportunities  in  the region. It  will  also  allow  for  more 
efficient risk diversification of assets to include foreign assets from within the region. This will 
not only reduce vulnerability to external developments but will contribute to achieving more 
stable conditions in the regional financial markets.   
ASEAN’s Approach towards Greater Integration  
Turning to the approach we have taken for ASEAN integration. Like most regional blocs, the 
integration process for ASEAN seeks to promote greater regional connectivity which will in turn 
expand and reinforce the region’s growth potential. For ASEAN, this integration process has, 
however, followed its own distinct path. While ASEAN has drawn lessons from the European 
experience of monetary and financial integration, the approach taken by ASEAN is distinctly 
different in order to be consistent with the circumstances of the region. Unlike the European 
Union, in which the formation of a monetary union with a single currency represents a major 
element in realising its economic integration, the ASEAN region had come to a decision in 
early 2000s, based on a study by the ASEAN Central Banks that a common currency would 
not be pursued. This was because the ASEAN economies did not have the preconditions to 
achieve such a monetary union and that the effort to achieve such preconditions would involve 
immense costs to the economies. It was therefore concluded that the region would instead be 
better served by greater regional financial integration to achieve the very same objectives of a 
greater  shared  economic  prosperity  for  the  region.   Additionally,  in  Europe,  the  integration 
process  is  facilitated  by  a  more  centralised  governance  structure  led  by  supra-national 
institutions while ASEAN has built on institutional arrangements and mechanisms that would 
facilitate financial integration that leverages on a network of committees for the governance 
process.  ASEAN  has  also  adopted  a  more  flexible  path  that  allows  member  countries  to 
participate in the financial integration process based on the state of readiness. Of particular 
focus  is  the  harmonisation  of  regulatory  standards  and  supervisory  practices,  which  is 
reinforced by capacity building initiatives and technical assistance to bring all member states 
to a similar level. This inclusive approach ensures that all member states mutually benefit from 
the  integration  process.   Additionally,  regional  cooperation  in  the  areas  of  surveillance 
arrangements, financial safety nets, and crisis management has been intensified to secure 
financial stability during the integration process. While much remains to be done, significant 
achievements in regional financial integration have already been met in recent years. Notably, 
the  launch  of  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  (ABIF)  in  March  2015  and  the 
progress made in integrating the regional capital markets and the payment and settlement 
systems are important milestones in this process.  
Partnerships for a Successful Future  
While the authorities and policy makers in ASEAN have entered into multilateral partnerships 
to achieve the common goal of a more promising future, so has the private sector, given the 
immense  opportunities  the  more  integrated  region  presents.  This  is  also  reinforced  by  the 
intrinsic predisposition of the DNA of the region and its people and institutions. The future of 
ASEAN needs to be built on the collective actions that are for the advancement of ASEAN. 
Businesses have already been proactive in harnessing the benefits arising from the diversity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   and complementarities in the region. To date, these efforts have culminated in the launch of 
the ASEAN Economic Community in 2015. 
In a global landscape that is constantly evolving, uncertain and complex, building effective and 
smart  partnerships  has  become  an  imperative  for  the  common  goals  that  ASEAN  aims  to 
achieve. Partnerships are important because no one entity has all the solutions, answers and 
expertise to take full advantage of all the opportunities and synergies that are created in such 
partnerships. 
Moving forward, building successful partnerships is an important strategy to realise the true 
economic potential of ASEAN. As an example, effective partnerships in the financial sector 
have made important contributions to institutional building in our financial systems. It allowed 
shared knowledge and expertise to tap into opportunities to create scale and efficiencies for 
the  development  of  common  infrastructure.  Another  area  that  has  leveraged  effectively  on 
partnerships  has  been  in  developing  the  ecosystem  to  support  start-up  businesses.  An 
example  of  this  is  the  Malaysian  Global  Innovation  &  Creativity  Centre  (MaGIC)  ASEAN 
Startup track which builds a community of startups within ASEAN and accelerates their time-
to-market-readiness.  There  are  also  various  financial  technology  or  ‘fintech’  initiatives  by 
regional financial institutions that foster partnerships to accelerate financial innovators in the 
region.  
In 1919, an American biochemist discovered the four basic building blocks that form the DNA’s 
iconic double helix structure. Similarly, I believe that successful partnerships are also anchored 
by  four  strong  foundations  in  its  DNA,  namely  Adaptability  and  Responsiveness, 
Complementarity, Trust, and Governance. Let me elaborate on these essential foundations 
for success for aspiring policymakers and entrepreneurs to reflect on. 
The first base of a strong partnership is adaptability and responsiveness. In today’s world, 
challenges will not be easily addressed with conventional and one-dimensional solutions. With 
greater interconnectedness and intensification of competition, one needs to draw on broader 
perspectives that can be gained from partnerships, to build the agility to manage in an ever-
changing  environment.  In  a  partnership,  it  is  important  to  strive  for  mutual  respect  and 
recognition  of  the  differing  needs,  preferences  and  interests,  and  to  encourage  an  open 
dialogue around them. In this, the parties involved need to be adaptable and responsive in 
offering  pragmatic  solutions  that  will  deliver  on  the  common  goals,  while  respecting  the 
respective priorities of various stakeholders. 
The second base of an effective partnership is complementarity. ASEAN’s diversity does not 
only manifest in terms of potential economic development, it also extends to the region’s varied 
cultures, languages, and religions. ASEAN therefore presents a unique opportunity to tap into 
this  diversity  as  a  unique  strength  and  to  harness  the  complementarities.  By  working 
collectively,  ASEAN  partners  can  build  significant  collaborative  advantage  to  exploit  new 
opportunities and achieve shared goals. This will involve removing constraints and taking bold, 
even experimental, steps to push new frontiers that may not have been considered possible 
before. 
The third base of a successful partnership is trust. And with trust, must come accountability. 
One can observe the fallout from the lack of trust in the financial markets during and after the 
global financial crisis, when many markets froze and fraudulent actions by financial institutions 
shattered the public’s confidence. Trust is pivotal in any collaborative relationship. The value 
of trust at the individual, institutional, national, and global levels cannot be overstated. Building 
trust,  particularly  among  very  diverse  stakeholders,  is  of  course  not  easy.  Therefore, 
partnerships will benefit from a clear commitment to stated goals that are in turn supported by 
accountability structures that will sustain and reinforce that commitment. 
Finally,  a key  aspect  in delivering  partnership  aspirations  is governance.  Partnerships  will 
thrive and add value when they are supported with effective decision-making structures and 
organisational  frameworks  to  ensure  the  smooth  translation  of  ideas  from  conception  to 
implementation. These factors create partnerships with real impact as they are able to fully 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   and sustainably utilise their specialist skills, knowledge and technological capacity in ensuring 
successful outcomes.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the road to a promising and sustainable future for ASEAN is not one that can be 
traversed in isolation, especially in a world that is becoming increasingly borderless. As we 
see  our  economies  prosper,  our  society  will  also  mature  with  our  improved  growth 
potential.   However,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  having  good  ‘genes’  does  not  guarantee 
successful results until we come together to activate and realise our latent potential. Therefore 
policymakers, business community and civil society must collaborate effectively for this better 
future, together.  On this note, I wish you an enriching, dynamic and productive Forum. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
