  Andreas Dombret: Overshooting the mark? Banking regulation and its 
implications for banking business 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, for Bankenverband Hamburg at the Bundesbank Regional Office in Hamburg, 
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, 21 April 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Do  you  think  that  banking  regulation  and  its  implications  are  the  stuff  of  which  myths  are 
made?  For  my  part,  I  was  sceptical  about  that  for  a  long  time.  Nevertheless,  the  last  two 
years as a banking supervisor have taught me better. 
That is because, regrettably, the question of whether banking sector regulation has overshot 
the mark is discussed not only on the basis of objective arguments, but also frequently with 
reference to myths that have no rational basis. In the next few minutes or so I shall explain 
my position here with regard to what implications are objective criticism and which are more 
vague myths. 
Too much reform or too little? 
2. 
Eight years ago we saw the outbreak of the biggest financial and economic crisis since the 
Great  Depression  in  the  1930s.  Right  at  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  heads  of  state  or 
government of the G20 countries agreed to initiate global regulatory reforms. It was obvious 
to everyone that something had gone seriously wrong in the preceding years and that it now 
had to be put right. 
At  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  G20 
heads  of  state  or  government  finally  decided  that  the  outstanding  reform  of  the  Basel 
framework – known as Basel III – was to be finalised by the end of 2016. Some of you will be 
of the opinion that the Basel III reforms, which were adopted in 2010, already went a very 
long way. That is, of course, correct. But even back then, there was agreement that there 
would  still  have  to  be  a  number  of  fundamental  improvements  to  the  framework  and  that 
these could only be worked out over the long term. 
In plain terms, that means that some major improvements to the Basel framework will not be 
finalised before the end of this year. But then we shall have a coherent, sound and global 
regulatory framework for credit institutions. 
Regulators  repeatedly  hear  calls  for  the  reform  of  banking  and  financial  market  regulation 
now to be brought to completion. More than that: I often hear calls – couched in politically 
correct language, of course – for parts of the reforms to be scaled back again. On the other 
hand, there is a desire for reforms to go much further. This is expressed by well-regarded 
experts  such  as  Paul  Volcker,  Martin  Hellwig,  as  well  as  by  Nobel  Prize  winners  Joseph 
Stiglitz and Eugene Fama. 
Between these two positions there is also a third one. Its proponents firmly believe that the 
current reform projects will eliminate the existing shortcomings of the regulatory framework 
and that the reforms therefore have to be completed. After that, we should monitor how the 
new rules work in practice before thinking about new regulatory projects. 
Behind that third position is where I align myself. As I see it, it is totally right that we cannot 
leave it forever and a day to finalise the reforms. By the same token, I firmly believe that we 
have  to  bring  the  current  reforms  to  a  reasonable  conclusion.  Only  then  can  we  create  a 
consistently stable regulatory framework which lessens the probability of future crises. I think 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that the time frame agreed by the Basel Committee and the G20 heads for completing the 
reforms by the end of this year is appropriate, reasonable and necessary in order to be able 
to  present  a  convincing  outcome.  We  shall  complete  it  in  2016  –  anything  that  does  not 
undergo reform will stay at the present status quo. 
Financial crises come at a cost 
3. 
Before  talking  about  the  reforms  and  their  implications,  I  would  like  to  state  something 
unequivocally: financial crises come at a cost – at a very high cost in fact. That is not a myth, 
it is a fact. 
The fact that financial crises come at such a cost is now even something of a platitude. In 
other words, it is an insight that is basically of no particular value, since everyone knows it 
anyway. But, unfortunately, it is still something that people dismiss from their minds too often 
when fiscal policy and regulatory decisions are under discussion. 
Just think of the global financial crisis of 2008. The costs of that crisis were simply enormous. 
Between 2007 and 2014, the sovereign debt of the developed G20 countries went up from 
about  70 %  to  roughly  105 %  of  gross  domestic  product.1  Unemployment,  too,  in  those 
countries  increased  on  average  by  more  than  two  percentage  points.  The  preceding 
excesses of the financial sectors thus did lasting damage to economic growth potentials. 
And  the  realisation  that  the  enormously  high  costs  of  financial  crises  are  socialised  is  a 
fundamental given. Taking a historical perspective, three years after a banking crisis public 
debt is on average 86 % higher than before.2  
We therefore don’t have to argue about whether the likelihood of crises has to be reduced as 
far as is humanly possible. That much is obvious. For this reason, it was absolutely correct to 
revise  and  improve  the  regulatory  framework  in  response  to  the  crisis.  Basel III  and  the 
further reform components are thus the foundation of a more stable financial system. 
At the present juncture, it is quite possible to say that the reforms were successful and have 
indeed  contributed  to  a  stabilisation  of  the  banking  sector.  This  is  revealed,  for  example, 
when  looking at the bank balance sheets: between 2008 and 2015, the banks of the euro 
area reduced the volume of their balance sheets by roughly 15 % and increased their capital 
ratios by more than five percentage points to around 15 %.3 In Germany, the balance sheet 
volume during the same period was reduced by as much as 23 % – and the capital ratios 
went up from about 9 % to more than 15 %. 
4. 
Myths, platitudes and constructive criticism – good regulation is relatively 
cheap 
Time and again, I hear credit institutions complain that regulatory reform has gone too far. 
One of their main arguments is that higher capital requirements constrain banks’ lending and 
thus constrict growth. They are asserting, therefore, that regulation takes a heavy financial 
toll on them. 
That,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  a  myth.  Empirical  studies  suggest  that  tighter  capital 
requirements are in fact beneficial, and not just for stability reasons. They reveal that higher 
                                                
1 
IMF World Economic Outlook Database. A similarly high level had been reached only once before since 1800: 
between 1942 and 1949 (see p 11 of S A Abbas, N Belhocine, A ElGanainy and M Horton (2010) A Historical 
Public Debt Database. IMF Working Paper WP/10/245). 
2  C  M  Reinhart  &  K  S  Rogoff  (2013),  Banking  Crises:  An  Equal  Opportunity  Menace,  Journal  of  Banking  & 
Finance 37(11), 4557–4573. 
3  ECB data. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  levels of equity capital are correlated with higher lending volumes – so in fact, the number of 
loans goes up, not down.4  
At the same time, one could also argue that the quality of loans improves as well. The reason 
for  this  is  quite  straightforward:  the  better  a  credit  institution  is  capitalised,  the  more  its 
owners stand to lose if loans default and cause losses. So the more equity a bank or savings 
bank has, the greater its incentive to look more closely at loans. This is ultimately also one of 
the reasons why the overall cost of capital for credit institutions rises only slowly as equity 
capital levels increase – and this hypothesis is firmly backed by empirical evidence.5 This is 
because equity capital not only reduces the risk of a bank running into financial distress in 
the first place – the improvement in credit quality also minimises the danger of a bank failure 
still further, which, all other things being equal, tends to dampen that bank’s funding costs. 
In a nutshell: the costs of good regulation, in terms of lending, are not as high as some would 
have you believe. In addition, we must not look at the costs of regulation in isolation. They 
have to be compared with the cost of crises. And the costs of regulation come off as looking 
very reasonable – especially from the taxpayer’s point of view. 
Our goal should therefore be a sound and coherent regulatory framework that is geared to 
reducing the probability of future crises. And that is precisely what we are pushing for. 
In my view, this insight still hasn’t become a platitude, regrettably, but it is gaining more and 
more disciples. And this change of heart has also seen a slight shift in the focus of regulatory 
criticism.  What  I’m  referring  to  is  the  debate  surrounding  the  complexity  of  regulation  and 
compliance. 
Complexity  levels  have  increased  substantially  since  Basel II  and  been  compounded  by 
subsequent reforms – there’s no doubt about that. And I, too, would admit to seeing some 
scope for constructive criticism in this regard. I’m not alone in sometimes being taken aback 
by how multifaceted and detailed the regulatory framework has become in recent years. 
What exactly is behind this increase in complexity? A growing number of rules, their intricacy 
and their degree of detail. This has made compliance with the rules an increasingly costly, 
time-consuming and complicated undertaking. 
Regulatory complexity has now emerged as a very stiff challenge indeed. The international 
Basel regimes have become ever more comprehensive and intricate. A growing tendency for 
legislation  to  be  implemented  at  the  European  level,  and  the  resulting  co-existence  of  EU 
and  national  law,  have  made  the  regulatory  space  even  more  of  a  maze.  This  mesh  of 
different  pieces  of  interacting  legislation  means  that  it  isn’t  always  clear  what  institutions 
need to do in order to comply with the regulatory framework as a whole. It’s often a case of 
consulting and gauging the interplay between several articles and sections of legislation such 
as the Banking Act and the CRR at the same time. 
Admittedly,  this  is  not  the  ideal  world  that  banks  or  supervisors  might  have  imagined.  But 
let’s face it: what were the alternatives? Some voices in academic6 and regulatory circles7 
are  calling  for  a  more  drastic  approach  to  be  taken.  The  thrust  of  these  proposals  is  to 
prevent  credit  institutions  once  and  for  all  from  posing  a  threat  to  the  functioning  of  the 
                                                
4  C M Buch  and  E Prieto  (2014),  Do  better  capitalized  banks  lend  less?  Long-run  panel  evidence  from 
Germany, International Finance 17 (1), 1–23. T Kapan and C Minoiu (2013), Balance sheet strength and bank 
lending during the global financial crisis, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 33/2013. 
5  D Miles  et  al  (2012),  Optimal  bank  capital,  The  Economic  Journal  123,  1–37;  D J Elliott  and  A O Santos 
(2012), Estimating the costs of financial regulation, IMF Staff Discussion Note, 12(11). 
6  A Admati and M Hellwig (2013), The bankers’ new clothes: what’s wrong with banking and what to do about it. 
Princeton. 
7  A Turner (2015), Between debt and the devil. Money, credit, and fixing global finance. Princeton. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  financial  system  by  imposing  size  limits  on  each  individual  institution  and  setting  capital 
adequacy  requirements  at  a  comfortably  high  level  of  20  to  30 %.  Other  observers, 
meanwhile,  are  saying  that  it  should  no  longer  be  possible  to  use  internal  risk  models  for 
calculating regulatory minimum capital requirements. Standards, they say, should be based 
more on a kind of “raw leverage ratio” – that is, a straightforward leverage ceiling for credit 
institutions without any exemptions for purportedly low-risk retail business, say, and without 
netting agreements etc. 
Those ideas aren’t feasible, if you ask me. At the end of the day, the regulatory framework is 
as  complex  as  it  is  because  of  the  different  business  models  which  credit  institutions  run, 
their  huge  size  differences,  and  the  very  nature  of  financial  transactions  themselves.  A 
comprehensive regulatory framework is more or less bound to be highly detailed because it 
needs to ensure that no relevant types of business are left uncovered and that every kind of 
risk is regulated with the prudence it deserves. The extensive rules, then, are a “next-best 
solution”  of  a  kind  that  certainly  has  its  merits,  when  viewed  from  that  perspective.  In  my 
view, the existing, soon-to-be-completed set of rules will be with us for some time yet. 
Supervisors concede that the one-off costs of adjusting to the new rules are steep, but I am 
in  no  doubt  that  the  non-recurring  transitional  outlay  is  appropriate,  given  that  financial 
stability is such a valuable public asset. And as for the ongoing costs of compliance, this is 
another area where we will reach a viable long-term situation once the dust has settled over 
the reforms. 
I  firmly  believe  that  Germany’s  credit  institutions  will  be  able  to  live  comfortably  with  this 
situation following a period of transition. 
We will, of course, review the rules and their impact after some time, listening very attentively 
to take constructive criticism on board wherever possible. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let’s sum up the issue of complexity. The rules have become much 
more detailed and multifaceted; the alternative to this would have been much tighter capital 
requirements,  say,  which  would  have  been  imposed  regardless  of  the  underlying  risk.  A 
multi-layered regulatory approach, then, is a “next-best solution”; and I am in no doubt that 
the  banking  community  will  be  able  to  live  comfortably  with  this  situation  after  a  period  of 
transition. 
The  often-cited  negative  implications  of  regulation  –  that  it  tightens  the  credit  supply  and 
drives up administrative costs at credit institutions – should be analysed objectively. Viewed 
from a distance, it’s possible to identify the myths and drill down to a kernel of constructive 
criticism. This kernel is what we need to give serious thought to – but blanket criticism would 
be unwarranted here. 
One  point  of  departure  for  simplifying  matters  might  be  a  move  towards  greater 
proportionality in banking regulation, and by that, I mean the debate over whether it would 
make sense to introduce a more graduated set of rules for smaller, less risky institutions. 
But  why  should  we  graduate  regulation?  Some  claim  that  proportionality  isn’t  necessary. 
After  all,  isn’t  complying  with  complex  rules  a  costly  and  time-consuming  exercise  for 
institutions,  whatever  their  size?  But  I  would  say  that  the costs  of compliance  weigh  more 
heavily on smaller institutions, with their smaller workforces. 
They  essentially  face  two  challenges  simultaneously.  First,  the  complex  rules  place  strict 
demands on their operating business; second, smaller institutions have limited organisational 
capacities  to  cope  with  the  legal,  technical  and  operational  requirements.  Intricate  sets  of 
rules can cause particular duress for smaller institutions with limited capacities. 
These  considerations  lead  me  to  believe  that  we  are  right  to  consider  whether,  and  how, 
rules  can  be  tiered  according  to  an  institution’s  size.  And  that’s  why  I  wholeheartedly 
condone the proposal recently put forward by Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble and his 
UK counterpart George Osborne to review the relevant EU regulations – mainly the Capital 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Requirements Regulation, but others as well. That review is lined up in the next two years. 
Apart from that, of course, we still have to implement the final Basel III elements in the EU, a 
topic I will touch upon later in my speech. We ought to make the most of these revisions of 
the  EU  regulations  and  explore  whether  a  graduated  set-up  is  feasible,  and  if  so,  what  it 
would look like. 
But – and this is a big but – at no point should financial stability be weakened. That’s why 
any simplifications need to address the organisational and operational burden rather than the 
capital adequacy requirements. 
Completing the reforms 
5. 
After eight years of regulatory reform, there is a real danger that motivation to complete the 
reforms will wane. Memories of the financial crisis are fading, superseded by more pressing 
problems. We cannot afford to succumb to reform fatigue as we approach the final stretch. 
When it comes to banking regulation and the impact of the reforms, we must therefore take a 
long-term rather than a short-term view. Please don’t get me wrong: it is important that banks 
and  savings  banks  remain  profitable  in  the  long  term.  But  our  focus,  as  regulators,  is  on 
stability  –  with  a  view  to  sustainable  real  economic  growth.  Again,  the  profitability  of  the 
banks plays an important role in this. 
Let  us  not  forget  the  repeated  instances  in  the  past  in  which  credit  bubbles  have  led  to 
financial crises – and on each occasion we were told that “this time is different” and “this time 
it’s not a bubble”.8 But every bubble has ended up bursting, and the costs have had to be 
socialised in most cases. 
There is a simple but important truth in this: the reforms must be completed swiftly. This is 
the  only  way  we  can  reduce  the  risk  of  future  crises  and  ensure  that  those  who  are 
responsible for causing a financial crisis are the first to be held accountable for its costs. 
With this in mind, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision developed the new Basel III 
regulatory  framework,  which  contains  tougher  capital  requirements,  a  leverage  ratio,  new 
liquidity regulations and new macroprudential instruments. These rules were implemented in 
Europe as the CRD IV package and have been in force since 2014. 
As I mentioned earlier, however, some major elements of the reform agenda are still missing. 
The Basel Committee is taking longer to consider how they will be completed. For instance, 
we plan to revise existing methods of measuring risk-weighted minimum capital ratios with a 
view to reducing the disparities in calculations for similar portfolios and the misuse of internal 
calculation methods. The regulations on market risk have already been established and the 
finalised  version  of the credit  risk  standardised approach  will  be  published  in  the  next  few 
months. 
At  the  moment,  we  are  also  discussing  proposals  relating  to  other  areas,  including  the 
internal ratings-based approach for calculating credit risk, which we will continue to discuss 
with  the  banking  industry  until  June.  We  plan  to  thoroughly  overhaul  this  approach  – 
portfolios  that  do  not  meet  strict  modelling  requirements  will  be  excluded  from  the  IRB 
approach, the regulatory parameters will be fully revised and tightened in many cases, and 
capital floors will be introduced to ensure that minimum capital requirements do not fall below 
a certain level. These floors will be set according to the standardised approach. 
In  addition,  the  new  standardised  measurement  approach  for  operational  risk  will  be 
presented for consultation with the banking industry by the end of June. Among other things, 
                                                
8  C M Reinhart & K S Rogoff (2008) This Time is Different. Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  it will replace the existing internal model-based method, meaning that, in future, there will no 
longer be an internal approach for measuring operational risk. 
These revisions are far-reaching and necessary, and it is important that German banks and 
savings  banks  participate  in  the  consultations  by  providing  constructive  suggestions. 
However,  I  would  like  to  make  one  thing  clear  from  the  start:  criticism  of  the  fundamental 
concept will not achieve anything – the decision to limit the use of internal approaches has 
already been made. 
At the same time, the final consultation on treating the leverage ratio as a Pillar 1 minimum 
capital requirement will continue until July. A key aspect here is that we want to introduce a 
surcharge for global systemically important institutions. 
In  addition  to  the  Basel III  reforms,  the  Basel  Committee  is  also  discussing  the  current 
practice  of  giving  sovereign  bonds  privileged  regulatory  treatment.  The  Bundesbank  is 
campaigning to require banks to hold sufficient capital against the risks of sovereign bonds 
and for exposures to sovereigns to be covered by the usual large exposure rules. However, 
these reforms will only be finalised after 2016. 
Reforming business models 
6. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  rules  must  be  developed,  reviewed,  accepted  and  implemented. 
Banks and savings banks will probably adapt their organisations in the very same  way for 
years to come. 
As a former banker myself, I can understand that these costly and challenging processes can 
be  frustrating,  especially  for  those  working  at  banks  that  played  little  or  no  part  in  the 
excesses prior to the crisis. 
But we must not forget that the processes in question are transitional and involve high one-
off costs and greater compliance expenses in the long term. In the light of the important role 
of credit institutions in the economy, they are absolutely justified. 
Many of the problems stem less from regulation but more from the fact that some institutions 
are still clinging to their old business models despite finding themselves in a new world. But 
the old world of unlimited financial markets has gone – for good. 
Like many other European banks, some German institutions are still searching for business 
models that are competitive, viable, and yet sustainable. This is clear, among other things, 
from the fact that German credit institutions have the poorest cost-income ratio in the EU, 
and also lag behind in terms of other profitability ratios. 
However,  I  won’t  pretend  that  finding  the  solution  to  this  problem  is  simple.  After  all, 
profitability cannot and must not focus on the short term. That was, in fact, one of the causes 
of the most recent financial crisis. Sustainable business models must be well-conceived and 
must also enable banks to weather difficult phases. If credit institutions change their strategic 
focus as a result of the new rules, as we have actually already seen in a few cases, this is 
not necessarily a negative side effect of regulation or proof that the regulators have overshot 
their  mark.  It  may  actually  be  proof  that  the  new  regulation  has  achieved  its  aim  –  to 
encourage banks to adopt sustainable business models. 
Conclusion 
7. 
Ladies and gentlemen, since the 2008 global financial crisis, regulation has been significantly 
tightened all over the world. 
Are the costs of regulation excessive? Without a doubt, they are significant. But if we analyse 
the costs and benefits to society, the outcome is clear: compared to the costs of a crisis, the 
costs  of  regulation  are  an  appropriate  price  to  pay  for  greater  stability.  And  what  is  more, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  effective regulation not only increases the stability of the financial system, it also encourages 
sustainable developments in the real economy. 
On the whole, I believe we have been neither overregulating nor underregulating. It is now 
crucial to apply the rules that have already been adopted consistently and to complete the 
outstanding  reforms  promptly  and  comprehensively.  The  rest  of  the  reforms  are  in  the 
pipeline.  They  will  be  rigorous,  but  not  excessively  so.  That’s  all  there  is  to  say.  Credit 
institutions will have to get used to a new market environment and develop business models 
that are sustainable in the long term. 
But  we  in  the  Basel  Committee  will  make  sure  that,  on  average,  the  minimum  capital 
requirements  do  not  continue  to  rise  above  the  level  already  reached.  To  do  this,  the 
Committee  will  insist  that  the  overall  burden  of  the  reforms  is  analysed  in  advance  and 
limited if necessary. Once the Basel III reforms have been finalised, it is also important to 
allow time for them to be implemented rather than immediately embarking on new reforms. 
And  I  believe  that  we  should  check  whether  the  rules  could  be  simplified  for  smaller 
institutions. I therefore wholeheartedly back the proposals to review the EU framework by the 
German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, and the British finance minister. 
Credit  institutions  must  be  regulated.  But  regulation  cannot  succeed  without  credit 
institutions.  Without  the  tireless  efforts  of  the  banks  and  savings  banks,  the  banking  and 
financial system will not improve. They have already gone to extraordinary lengths over the 
last eight years, and that must be rewarded. However, we have not yet reached the end of 
this long and winding road. Let’s continue to travel together in the future. 
I now look forward to discussing with you what the path ahead might look like. Thank you 
very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
