  François Villeroy de Galhau: Recovery and resolution of CCPs 
Opening speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
Policy conference “Recovery and resolution of CCPs”, Paris, 24 June 2016. 
 I  will  not  comment  now  on  the  results  of  the  British  referendum.  Be  only  assured  that  we  are  mobilised  and 
determined. 
France  has  already  quite  a  long  history  with  CCPs.  La  Caisse  de  liquidation,  based  in  Le 
Havre,  was  the  first  to  provide,  in  1882,  an  insurance  against  counterparty  risk  on 
commodities  markets.  This  history  explains  why  we  have  a  longstanding  role  as  CCP 
overseer; it gives us also a special interest and commitment to contribute to this policy issue, 
on which I would like to share a few thoughts. Considering the growing importance for 
financial  markets  and  financial  stability  of  CCPs,  it  is  our  collective  responsibility  -
shared among the financial industry and regulators- to maintain a robust network of 
CCPs. As we strongly believe in the key role of CCPs we must ensure that they never 
become the next “too big to fail” institutions. 
The growing importance of CCPs is linked to regulatory changes, but not only. It is 
also  linked  to  financial  disintermediation  and  changes  in  the  behaviour  of  market 
participants, which in both cases are most welcome evolutions.  
Regulatory  changes  and  the  Pittsburgh  agenda  have  been  obviously  major  factors 
contributing to the systemic importance of CCPs. However, the clearing obligation for OTC 
derivatives is not the end of the story. 
Another  potent  factor  is  indeed  the  movement  towards  disintermediation,  which  should 
further amplify the role of CCPs. This disintermediation trend is fostered by public initiatives, 
such as the Capital Markets Union promoted by the European Commission in the EU. This 
movement is also related to market initiatives, notably in our financial centre here in Paris, to 
promote  market  financing  as  a  complement  for  bank  credit:  for  instance,  the  ESNI  (Euro 
Secured  Note  Issuer)  allows  for  the  securitisation  of  high  quality  credit  claims  to  improve 
SME financing. 
We  also  see  a  growing  appetite  of  market  participants  for  central  clearing  to  further 
secure their transactions. Repos are increasingly cleared in CCPs in the EU, and this has 
stood as a key factor in the resilience of the European repo market over the latest years. 
However, with greater systemic importance come greater responsibilities. 
Greater responsibilities lie first with the industry. 
The clearing industry  must have a coherent and resilient organization. We must not 
yield to the temptation to maximize netting effects. 
We  all  agree  that  the  primary  objective  of  central  clearing  is  to  reduce  systemic  risk. 
CCPS  cannot  be  considered  primarily  as  vehicles  for  improving  operational  and  capital 
efficiency. They should be as well financial stability enhancers. The proposed merger of the 
London Stock Exchange Group and Deutsche Börse might be a relevant illustration of the 
risk of a trade-off between these two objectives. So we will closely look at it from a financial 
stability perspective, as I already said. 
It is also industry’s responsibility to locate CCPs in the appropriate currency area, to enhance 
the management of liquidity risk, which is essential for CCPs’ resilience. 
Clearing  members  are  also  responsible  for  steering  CCP  risk  management  towards  best 
practices. Their participation in the governance of CCPs is key in this regard. This should be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  materialised  by  regular  feedback  on  CCPs’  methodology  and  stress  test  results,  which 
should be disclosed to participants. 
When considering regulators and overseers,  the  priority  must  be  to  constantly  improve 
CCP resilience, building on the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures. 
We  must  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage  and  competition  through  the  reduction  of  prudential 
requirements. This means tighter international harmonization of CCP requirements. In this 
regard, I salute the important work currently carried out by CPMI-IOSCO to promote more 
granular guidance and steer CCPs towards best practices. This includes the alignment of 
incentives among market stakeholders to improve risk management. This can be illustrated 
with the promotion of the “skin in the game” for CCPs in the default waterfall, which aligns the 
incentives of CCP shareholders with those of clearing members. This should also include the 
conduct of frequent supervisory stress tests for CCPs, to bring more comfort with regard 
to their resilience. It would create an objective external metric to ensure the adequacy and 
the  consistency  of  their  risk  practices.  This  needs  to  be  developed  to  assess  the 
management of credit risk but also of liquidity risk, which is too often ignored. 
Finally, let me say a last few words to introduce the precise topic of this conference. As you 
know, regulations require CCPs to consider all extreme but plausible scenarios in their daily 
risk  management.  However,  we  cannot  ignore  tail  risk.  The  remote  possibility  that  CCP 
resources would be exhausted in a crisis must be dealt with appropriately. This is why we 
need  robust  recovery  and  resolution  arrangements  for  CCPs,  to  preserve  financial 
stability in all circumstances. 
Before I leave you to discuss this complex issue, I would like to offer a few thoughts:  
– 
The cornerstone principle of resolution is always financial stability: this should 
be achieved through the continuity of CCP services when possible, but not at the 
expense of the financial survival of CCP members and clients. 
The  permanent  cost  of  such  a  regime  should  be  assessed  carefully  in  order  to 
preserve  incentives  in  favor  of  central  clearing.  CCPs  already  have  properly 
sized financial resources and a sound business model that must be preserved. 
Resolution arrangements should balance predictability for CCP participants and 
flexibility for the resolution authorities, whose task to preserve financial stability 
in the most extreme circumstances should not be hampered. 
the 
And 
international  level  are  key  to  ensure  efficient  resolution  planning  and  resolution 
actions, and to avoid regulatory loopholes and arbitrage. This conference is indeed 
illustrative of the spirit for further international cooperation in this field. 
lastly,  cooperation  between  authorities  and  consistency  at 
   Thank you for your attention. I wish you a very fruitful conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
