  Minouche Shafik: Small is beautiful but big is necessary 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England,  at  the  Bloomberg  Markets  Most  Influential  conference,  London,  28  September 
2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of England’s website. 
The  title  of  this  speech  is  an  expression  used  by  Sir  Fazle  Abed,  the  founder  of  BRAC,  the  largest  non-
governmental organisation in the world. He was referring to the development community’s fascination with small 
projects rather than focussing on large scale systemic change. In response he built an organisation that reaches 
over 100 million people, provides loans to five million poor women, and runs 40,000 schools. 
I  am  especially  grateful  to  Grellan  McGrath,  whose  combination  of  creative  challenge,  analytical  depth  and 
organisational  skills  greatly  enhanced  this  speech.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Ben  Morley,  Lee  Robinson  and 
Alastair Firrell for their assistance. I am grateful to other Bank of England staff and fellow members of the policy 
committees on which I sit for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Nevertheless, the view expressed are my own 
and not necessarily those of the Monetary Policy Committee, the Financial Policy Committee or the Board of the 
Prudential Regulation Authority. 
Introduction 
Central banks are bigger than ever before. Gone is the pre-crisis ideal of minimalist central 
banks with small balance sheets, narrowly defined objectives and tools, and a bias toward 
non-intervention. Today, major central banks have greater responsibilities and a wider range 
of tools at our disposal. Our balance sheets are larger and for the most part continuing to 
increase  (Chart  1).  I’d  like  to  use  these  remarks  to  offer  a  number  of  reflections  on  these 
developments,  using  the  Bank  of  England’s  recent  experience  by  way  of  example,  and 
focussing on four themes. 
My first theme is that the broadening of our responsibilities and range of tools at our disposal 
has facilitated a more joined up approach to how we set monetary policy and pursue financial 
stability  –  as  I  will  illustrate  using  the  example  of  our  contingency  planning  around  the 
referendum. Second, the increase in size of our balance sheet has been a necessity of the 
times we live in. Deep structural forces have combined to depress the level of interest rates 
at  which  the  economy  would  be  in  equilibrium,  obliging  us  to  rely  evermore  on  monetary 
policies that were once considered unconventional. This requires us to operate with multiple 
instruments in multiple markets meaning that our impact on the financial system – the central 
bank’s footprint – is larger. 
Third, we are aware that some of our policies have spillovers and side effects, but we take 
steps to address them where feasible to do so within our mandate. We know that a bigger 
footprint means we need to be mindful of our step. Finally, despite our bigger size, there are 
some  things  central  banks  cannot  do.  To  generate  sustainably  strong  growth  over  the 
medium term, monetary and financial stability policy must be part of a balanced package that 
also includes the government’s economic policies and, given strong global interconnections, 
international policy co-ordination. 
Joined up contingency planning 
I’ll start with our contingency planning prior to the referendum on the UK’s membership of the 
EU. We started from a position of strength thanks to changes made since the financial crisis, 
including: reform of the regulatory capital and liquidity frameworks; a more robust supervisory 
model; and increased access to our own liquidity facilities. Nevertheless, as we made clear in 
the run up to the vote, the three statutory committees on which I sit – the Monetary Policy 
Committee  (MPC),  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC),  and  the  Prudential  Regulation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Authority (PRA) Board – undertook extensive work to consider the implications of a vote to 
leave the EU. 
This contingency planning was the embodiment of joined up policymaking. The MPC and the 
FPC  met  to  exchange  views  on  risks  around  the  referendum  for  financial  and  economic 
conditions; the FPC and the PRA Board both considered the potential for the referendum to 
create  financial  instability;  supervisory  and  market  operations  staff  worked  in  tandem  to 
ensure that banks’ liquidity needs could be met through a prudent combination of their own 
buffers and Bank of England facilities; and we made sure to reach out to our international 
partners in order to be able to present a co-ordinated response whatever the result of the 
vote. 
I  am  sure  that  everyone  in  this  room could  tell similar  stories  of  detailed  and  co-ordinated 
contingency planning in firms across the UK and indeed internationally. In part because of 
this careful planning by all of us, the day after the referendum was remarkably orderly. Like 
many of you, I arrived in a dealing room in the very early hours of the 24th of June to witness 
astoundingly large volumes go through the foreign exchange market in a remarkably orderly 
fashion as sterling found its new level – many banks and trading platforms reported turnover 
that was up to ten times the typical daily amount. And, like many of you, I went through a 
series  of  pre-scheduled  conference  calls  and  meetings  with  market  participants  and 
counterparts  in  the  international  system  which  had  an  eerily  calm  atmosphere  as  the 
immediate risks we had most feared – thankfully – did not materialise. 
That is not to say there was nothing to do. Having raised the countercyclical capital buffer in 
March, the FPC was in the welcome position of being able to reduce it once again and thus 
send a strong signal that banks would be expected to support lending to the real economy. 
And having already made clear that it would allow insurers to use the flexibility built into the 
transition  to  Solvency  II,  the  PRA  was  able  to  re-iterate  publicly  that  firms  could  apply  for 
approval to re-calculate the Transitional Measures on Technical Provisions as at the end of 
June  –  thus  reducing  the  impact  of  the  sharp  decline  in  risk  free  interest  rates  on  their 
solvency positions. 
Given my responsibility for the Bank of England’s market operations, one success story I will 
draw particular attention to is the resilience of banks’ liquidity positions. By way of context, in 
the period since the financial crisis banks have increased their liquid asset buffers fourfold, 
and increased fourfold the lendable value of collateral pre-positioned for use in the Bank of 
England’s  normal  liquidity  facilities. In recent  years  we  have  made much  of these facilities 
and how they have been overhauled since the crisis to provide access to a broader range of 
counterparties, and to provide liquidity against a broader range of collateral. 
But in truth this was one of the first times these new facilities had truly been put to the test, 
and I am pleased to say they performed admirably. The flexibility we were able to show by 
increasing  the  frequency  of  our  regular  operations  gave  added  reassurance  to  banks  that 
they would indeed be able to rely on us. Our ability to send the message to the wider public 
on the day of the referendum that we stood ready to lend more than £250bn to the banking 
system  helped  head  off  any  concern  about  the  health  of  our  banks.  And  the  fact  that  the 
facilities were used in moderate size proved they are an effective form of insurance – over 
the month of June banks borrowed about £9bn of central bank reserves from us through our 
regular  operations  in  exchange  for  pre-positioned  collateral  as  they  prudently  maintained 
very high levels of liquidity around the referendum result. 
Navigating through uncertainty 
Once it became clear that the immediate financial stability risks had either not materialised or 
been  effectively  mitigated,  our  attention  turned  to  the  macroeconomy.  In  setting  monetary 
policy after the referendum result, we faced two challenges. The first was that there was little 
data on which to base an assessment of how the outlook had changed; the second was that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  we  started  from  the  unusual  position  of  Bank  Rate  already  being  at  a  record  low.  I’ll  take 
each of these challenges in turn. 
It  is  vital  that  monetary  policy  is  set  in  a  forward  looking  manner,  given  the  lags  in  the 
transmission mechanism, and this means taking decisions even when the data cycle is at an 
early stage. That was very much the case in August. Although we had little hard economic 
data covering the period since the referendum, we did have some forward looking surveys 
and leading indicators of GDP growth at our disposal. Now these leading indicators are of 
varying quality – some have a high predictive content for GDP growth, others very little, so it 
can be difficult to know what signal to take. 
One  simple  way  of  organising  this  information  is  illustrated  in  this  “radar”  of  economic 
indicators which I found helpful to navigate through the data (Chart 2). Its cells are coloured 
green  when  the  indicators  are  above  their  long run  average;  amber  when  they  are  below, 
which is cause for concern; and red when they are well below, which is even more worrying. 
The cells in the centre represent the data which have historically had the highest correlation 
with GDP growth, while those in the outer circles have a lower correlation with GDP growth 
and are less reliable. 
The first  radar  dates from  early  2014,  a  year  in  which  GDP  growth  was  3.5%,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  its  cells  are  predominantly  green.  The  intervening  years  remained  mostly 
green, though some amber spots began to appear as the initial recovery slowed to a more 
normal rate of expansion. In the wake of the referendum result, at the time of our decision in 
August, the most reliable indicators – those at the centre – were for the most part flashing 
amber or red (Chart 3). Since then, of course, the data have turned out more positively than 
expected, and the radar has become a little less red, a little more amber, though it mostly 
remains below average levels (Chart 4). 
Now, this is just a way of organising the data. Formally extracting a signal from it requires 
much  by  way  of  econometrics  –  there  is  a  rich  literature  devoted  to  data  uncertainty  and 
nowcasting, to which the Bank has contributed significantly1. Forward looking indicators are 
prone to overreaction and in some cases are outright misleading. Moreover, their predictive 
power is limited to the very near term outlook. Given that monetary policy has its greatest 
effect  one  to  two  years  ahead,  this  means  we  must  combine  our  assessment  of  the  near 
term indicators with a view of the underlying shocks which will drive the economy over the 
coming years. 
There is no doubt in my mind that the UK is experiencing a sizeable economic shock in the 
wake  of  the  referendum.  Any  reduction  in  openness  or  need  to  reallocate  resources  will 
necessarily imply a slower rate of potential growth for the economy. Moreover, the reality of 
the protracted process of withdrawing from the EU means we still know very little about the 
nature of our future trading arrangements, and this uncertainty is weighing on prospects for 
business investment. Our agents around the country report that some new projects are being 
scaled  back  or  deferred  until  the  outlook  becomes  clearer.  There  are  signs  that  foreign 
companies have become more cautious about investing in the United Kingdom, and we know 
that  some  of those  who  rely  on  the  European  Union  as  a  destination  for  their  exports  are 
beginning  to  make  contingency  plans  in  case  they  have  to  move  some  of  their  business 
elsewhere. 
All of this reflects the unavoidable economic reality of a period of transition. The depreciation 
of the sterling exchange rate is certainly helping the economy find a new equilibrium. While 
                                                
1  The Bank currently uses several nowcasting models to predict the current rate of GDP growth. Details of some 
of  these  models  can  be  found  here:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterly 
bulletin/2014/qb14q106.pdf. Initial estimates of GDP growth get revised over time, so the Bank makes distinct 
predictions  for  “preliminary”  and  “mature”  estimates  of  GDP  growth.  More  details  can  be  found  here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb070301.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  flexible  nature  of  the  UK  economy  means  it  will  ultimately  adjust  to  its  new 
circumstances, the process of adjustment can sometimes be painful. That’s where monetary 
policy can help, and it seems likely to me that further monetary stimulus will be required at 
some  point  in  order  to  help  ensure  that  a  slowdown  in  economic  activity  doesn’t  turn  into 
something more pernicious. 
However, the likely timing of that stimulus will depend on the continued evolution of the data 
over  the  coming  weeks  and  months.  Thus  far,  the  welcome  improvement  in  the  forward 
looking  indicators  suggests  that  the  slowdown  may  not  be  as  sharp  or  as  sudden  as  we 
might  have  feared.  For  example,  Bank  staff  have  revised  up  their  forecast  for  the  mature 
estimate of GDP growth in Q3 to 0.3% from 0.1% at the time of the August Inflation Report. 
But we will learn a lot from the arrival of more official data for the post-referendum period, 
and that will allow us to navigate by looking out the window as well as down at our radar. 
A package tailored to our starting point 
What is unusual about this particular loosening relative to previous cycles is its starting point. 
Despite many real economic variables having returned to around normal levels following the 
financial crisis the absence of any signs of overheating or inflationary pressure meant that at 
the time of the referendum Bank Rate was already at an all-time low of 0.5% and we held a 
stock of £375bn gilts on our balance sheet. 
The global  decline  in  market-based measures  of  long  run real  interest rates  –  which  have 
fallen by more than 5 percentage points since the 1980s (Chart 5) – suggests that the neutral 
rate of interest is now far lower than any time in the past.2 The drivers behind this move are 
deep structural shifts in trend growth rates, demographics and risk appetite. Taken together, 
they have changed the global balance of savings and investment, thus depressing the level 
of interest rates which will bring the economy into equilibrium. 
These structural factors are beyond the influence of monetary policy. We can only respond 
by setting Bank Rate lower than in past economic cycles – to do otherwise would result in an 
unwarranted slowing of the economy. It means we must consider carefully where we think 
the  effective  lower  bound  in  our  policy  rate  is  –  taking  into  account  financial  stability 
considerations.  It  also  means  that  we  must  be  ready  to  use  monetary  policy  instruments 
other  than  Bank  Rate  –  what  was  once  unconventional  is  increasingly  becoming 
conventional. 
With that in mind, the MPC had actively considered in the run up to the referendum how we 
would go about loosening if it was necessary. Working closely with supervisors in the PRA 
we  confirmed  that  we  had  room  to  lower  Bank  Rate  to  a  small  positive  number  without 
endangering  the  banking  system.  Based  on  our  continuous  dialogue  with  the  Debt 
Management Office and market participants, we knew there was scope to buy more gilts. We 
also confirmed that there were a number of additional tools that we could use to generate 
economic stimulus. In fact our creativity was limited only by the number of combinations and 
calibrations the nine members of the MPC could come up with – making the voting process a 
bit like trying to solve a Rubik’s cube. 
The package the MPC ultimately chose had five elements: a cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%; the 
launch  of  a  Term  Funding  Scheme  (TFS)  to  reinforce  the  pass  through  of  that  cut;  the 
purchase of up to £10bn of corporate bonds; the purchase of an additional £60bn of gilts; 
and forward guidance that should the data prove to be broadly consistent with the August 
Inflation  Report forecast,  a  majority  of members expected  to  support  a further  cut  in  Bank 
Rate during the course of the year. A sixth element was added by the FPC, who in parallel 
                                                
2  Carney (2013) Haldane (2015), Rachel and Smith (2015), Shafik (2015a). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  approved a change to the definition of the leverage ratio to exclude central bank reserves, 
thus making our monetary policy package more effective. 
This package involved several pieces of innovation for the Bank of England. It brought our 
official policy rate to a new record low in the Bank’s 322 year history. It will bring the stock of 
government bonds on our balance sheet up to £435bn, representing 23% of nominal GDP, a 
new  high.  For  the  first  time,  we  will  purchase  private  sector  assets  for  monetary  policy 
purposes3. And we will lend central bank reserves to the banking system, at a rate close to 
Bank Rate, for a longer term than ever before. 
Mindful of our step 
The reason the MPC took these actions is because they  will benefit the economy and, by 
delivering monetary stability, contribute to prosperity. Our initial assessment of the impact so 
far has been positive. But we are very aware that all monetary policy has spillovers and side 
effects,  and  that  we  have  a  duty  to  minimise  those  where  it  is  possible  to  do  so  without 
jeopardising  the  overall  beneficial  impact.  With  that  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  discuss  three 
criticisms frequently levelled at monetary policy  of this kind, and to illustrate how the MPC 
tried to take them into account. 
1. 
Ultra low interest rates are self-defeating because banks are unable to pass them 
through to customers. This criticism has its genesis in the fact that once household 
and  business  deposit  rates  have  reached  a  very  low  level,  it  becomes  difficult for 
banks to reduce them further. They face a choice between not passing the change 
in Bank Rate through to borrowers, or having their net interest margins squeezed. 
In light of the mixed experience of pass-through of very low levels of policy rates by 
other central banks, this was something the MPC was acutely aware of in deciding 
how  far  it  should  reduce  Bank  Rate.  Using  the  intelligence  and  analysis  of  bank 
supervisors  in  the  PRA,  we  were  able  to  establish  that  net  interest  margins  on 
banks’ UK retail business were sufficient to comfortably withstand a cut in our policy 
rate to a small positive number. UK banks’ Net Interest Margin were around 230bps 
in 2015 on average (Chart 6). 
However, we still faced the risk that banks would choose to preserve these existing 
margins, dampening the pass through of our change to rates faced by households 
and  consumers.  The  TFS  is  explicitly  designed  to  counter  that  risk  to  the 
transmission mechanism by tethering banks term funding costs more closely to our 
policy rate. It gives them the ability to borrow from us for up to four years at Bank 
Rate so long as they maintain their lending to the real economy. The initial signs are 
good  –  standard  variable  rates  have  already  been  or,  we  expect,  shortly  will  be 
reduced on the vast majority of existing mortgages, and the rates available on new 
lifetime  tracker  mortgages  are  on  average  25bps  lower.4, 5  Though  it  is  of  course 
difficult to say how much of this is directly attributable to the TFS. 
                                                  
3  The  Bank  has  previously  purchased  private  sector  assets,  via  the  Asset  Purchase  Facility,  in  order  to  help 
improve market liquidity in credit markets that are not functioning normally. For example, the Corporate Bond 
Secondary Market Scheme offered to make regular small purchases and sales of corporate bonds from 2009 
until 2013, when it was moved to operating only if warranted by market demand. Since there was no indication 
of demand in the intervening period, the scheme was closed in August 2016. More information is available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/apf/withdrawnschemes/default.aspx. 
4  Based  on  announced  changes  and  supervisory  intelligence  on  changes  to  Standard  Variable  Rates  by  19 
lenders representing 90% of the stock of Monetary Financial Institutions’ lending, weighted by their share in 
the value of outstanding mortgages.   
5  Based on the Bank’s quoted rates data on new Lifetime Tracker mortgages. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 2. 
  3. 
 Quantitative  Easing  has  adverse  consequences  for  pension  funds  and  insurance 
companies. The MPC is very aware that the marginal impact of low long term risk 
free interest rates is – all else equal – to increase the present value of pension fund 
liabilities,  and  to  increase  the  margin  that  insurers  must  set  aside  to  cover  the 
present value of otherwise unhedgeable risks. This is something we hear frequently 
through our Market Intelligence, from businesses we meet, in conversations with the 
Pensions  Regulator,  and  of  course  through  the  PRA’s  prudential  supervision  of 
insurers. It is also an international concern since long rates are low globally. 
Ultimately, the way the MPC can most effectively contribute to generating the stable 
return  on  assets  that  these  investors  need  to  meet  their  long  term  liabilities  is  by 
supporting stable economic growth and by pursuing its inflation target. The boost to 
economic activity that will come with lower interest rates should increase the profits 
of  companies  across  the  country,  and  boost  the  value  of  financial  assets  more 
generally.  Indeed  for  a  pension  scheme  that  starts  off  in  balance,  the  increase  in 
value  of  assets  can  be  expected  to  offset the  increase  in  liabilities.6  The  problem 
arises for pension funds that already start from a deficit, who will find it more costly 
to acquire the assets to match their future liabilities. 
In  making  our  policy  decisions  we  must  bear  in  mind  we  are  uncertain  about  the 
magnitude of both the impact of QE on the economy and its side effects. Indeed that 
was one of the key motivations in working to develop a broad range of tools. At the 
margin,  our  determination  to  use  a  range  of  easing  options  –  rather  than  relying 
solely on the purchase of gilts – likely reduced the marginal impact on long term risk 
free  rates.  Our  package  spread  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  more  evenly 
across short-term interest rates, corporate credit and bank funding markets, as well 
as  long  rates.  Conscious  of  the  structural  changes  in  market  liquidity  over  recent 
years7,  we  are  also  purchasing  at  a  slow  pace  compared  to  previous  rounds  of 
quantitative easing to minimise any impact on market liquidity (Chart 7). 
The  central  bank  should  not take the  place  of  private markets  in  allocating  credit. 
The  need  to  avoid  unduly  affecting  the  allocation  of  credit  was  paramount  in  our 
design of the corporate bond purchase scheme. As a result, we have deliberately 
chosen criteria for purchases that will give us a broad and representative range of 
issuers  and  sectors.  Those  companies  who  have  an  investment  grade  rating, 
subject  to  assessment  by  our  risk  management  staff,  and  who  make  a  material 
contribution to the UK economy can expect their bonds to be eligible.8 Purchases 
began yesterday, and at the end of each month we will publish our holdings in each 
of 9 sectors, and how that compares to the corresponding market share. Over time, 
we will adjust our purchases with the aim of achieving a sectoral balance across our 
portfolio that matches that of the market as a whole. 
                                                
6  See Bean (2012) for illustrative scenarios of the impact on pension funds with different initial positions. 
7  Shafik (2015b), Cunliffe (2015). 
8  Eligibility  decisions  will  be  made  by  our  risk  management  staff,  taking  into  account  a  number  of  different 
factors. Eligible companies may be incorporated in the UK or other jurisdictions. Companies with significant 
employment in the UK or with their headquarters in the UK will normally be regarded as making a material 
contribution to the UK economy. We will also consider whether the company generates significant revenues in 
the  UK,  serves  a  large  number  of  customers  in  the  UK  or  has  a  number  of  operating  sites  in  the  UK.  For 
example,  a  company  headquartered  outside  of  the  UK  but  employing  hundreds  of  people  in  the  UK  and 
generating sales of £20m in the UK would be considered to make a material contribution to the UK economy.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Things a central bank cannot do 
I hope I have by now convinced you of three things: (i) that the benefit of gathering a broad 
range  of  responsibilities  under  one  roof  allows  us  to  practice  more  effective  joined  up 
planning  and  policymaking  (ii)  that  the  expanding  size  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  balance 
sheet is a necessary response to the circumstances we find ourselves in (iii) that in making 
decisions we are conscious of the spillovers of our actions. 
Let me end on a note of humility. If I were to be granted one wish as a central banker it would 
be to increase the neutral rate of interest toward a more historically normal level. That would 
hasten our return to a simpler world in which Bank Rate would be our only monetary policy 
tool, and allow us to reduce our footprint in other financial markets accordingly and return to 
a “small is beautiful” world. 
However,  despite  the  broadening  of  our  responsibilities  and  the  increase  in  tools  at  our 
disposal, the Bank of England does not set the neutral rate of interest – that is set by the 
economy.  Over  the  long  run,  it  is  determined  by  deep  structural  forces,  including 
demography, the flexibility of our labour and product markets, the quality of our institutions 
and infrastructure, and the balance of savings and investment in the world economy. Policies 
that affect those forces can increase the potential growth rate of the economy, and lead to a 
general  improvement  in  the  underlying  appetite  for  investment,  thereby  driving  up  interest 
rates. 
So monetary policy is just one part of the story alongside government’s fiscal and structural 
policies and the degree of international policy co-ordination. A good balance between them 
can put us on a more prosperous and stable path. But for now, even if we might wish for the 
time when small was beautiful, big is necessary. 
References 
Bean  (2012)  “Pension  Funds  and  Quantitative  Easing,”  Speech  given  to  the  National 
Association of Pension Funds’ Local Authority Conference. 
Carney (2013) “The Spirit of the Season,” Speech given to the Economic Club of New York. 
Cunliffe (2015) “Market Liquidity and Market-Based Financing,” speech given at the British 
Bankers Association International Banking Conference, London. 
Haldane (2015) “Stuck,” Speech given at the Open University, Milton Keynes. 
Rachel, L. and Smith, T. (2015) “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate,” Bank of 
England Staff Working Paper No. 571. 
Shafik, M (2015a) “Interpreting the Yield Curve: Warning or Opportunity?” Speech given at 
the Association of Corporate Treasurers Annual Conference, Manchester. 
Shafik, M (2015b) “Dealing with change – Liquidity in Evolving Market Structures,” Speech 
given at AQR Asset Management Institute, London Business School. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
