  Minouche Shafik: “Passthrough Efficiency in the Fed’s new Monetary 
Policy Setting” 
Remarks by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England,  as  a  discussant  of  “Passthrough  Efficiency  in  the  Fed’s  new  Monetary  Policy 
Setting” by Mr Darell Duffie and Mr Arvind Krishnamurthy, at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City Economic Symposium “Designing resilient monetary policy frameworks for the 
future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26 August 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of England’s website. 
I would like to thank Grellan McGrath for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  discuss  this  paper,  which  brings  together  many  of  the 
themes of this timely and important conference. Interest in the pass-through of central banks’ 
policy rates has enjoyed something of a resurgence in recent times, as the Federal Reserve 
begins to tighten policy in the presence of a vast amount of reserves created by quantitative 
easing, and as other central banks loosen further by moving their policy rates to new record 
lows. 
Of  course  the  Bank  of  England  is  in  the  latter  camp.  This  month  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC) – of which I am a member – voted to introduce a package of measures to 
support  the  necessary  adjustments  of  the  UK  economy  as  it  responds  to  the  decision  to 
leave the European Union. This package included a reduction in Bank Rate to a new low of 
0.25%, and the launch of a Term Funding Scheme to reinforce the pass-through of this cut, 
alongside a £60bn increase in our stock of UK government bonds and the purchase of up to 
£10bn of investment grade non-financial corporate bonds. 
As  central  bankers  and  money  market  enthusiasts  know,  the  issue  of  pass-through  is  of 
utmost  importance.  The  paper  begins  with  the  premise  that  a  necessary  condition  for 
competitive  money  markets  is  that  any  change  in  the  Fed’s  policy  rate  is  passed  through, 
one  for  one,  to  all  market  transaction  rates.  In  truth,  one  can  make  the  much  broader 
statement that the very efficacy of monetary policy and its usefulness as a tool for influencing 
the economy is premised on the pass-through of changes in policy rates to money market 
rates. And that’s why some of us have endless appetite to discuss any wedge between them. 
With that in mind, I’d like to pick up on two of the central themes of Darell and Arvind’s paper. 
• 
The  first  is  the  impact  of  regulation  –  in  particular  the  leverage  ratio  –  on  money 
market function. I will restate the case for having a leverage ratio, but will also argue 
that  it  can  be  much  improved  by  the  exclusion  of  central  bank  reserves  from  the 
exposure measure. 
The second is the role of central banks in money markets. Building on the paper’s 
analysis of the Fed’s Reverse Repo Facility (RRP), I will make the case that central 
banks are now more proactive in: the influencing of market rates; the provision of 
liquidity insurance, and the design of market infrastructure. 
 Finally,  I’d  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  pass-through  beyond  the  money  markets.  As 
interest  rates  decline  toward  zero,  it  becomes  more  difficult  for  banks  to  pass  through 
changes in policy rates to those rates faced by households and businesses – hampering the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  Term  Funding  Scheme  is  designed  to  mitigate  this 
impact, and hence re-inforce pass-through to the real economy. So I’ll end by briefly outlining 
how that works. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The impact of regulation on money market function 
Let  me  start  with  the  impact  of  regulation  on  money  market  function.  Darell  and  Arvind’s 
analysis of the dispersion of money market rates offers evidence of the impact of regulation 
on behaviour and pricing. Their index of money market rate dispersion has risen since the 
introduction of the Supplementary Leverage Ratio, and has a tendency to increase around 
key regulatory reporting dates (Chart 1). 
It is difficult to dispute the idea that regulation has had an impact on how markets function 
globally. The decline in repo market activity has actually been larger in the UK than in the US 
and is around 20% below its 2013 level (Chart 2). And the price of repo in sterling markets 
has increased approximately in line with its US counterpart, as measured by the increase in 
GC  repo  rates  relative  to  3-month  OIS  swaps  that  carry  similar  economic  risks  (Chart  3). 
Alongside  this  there  has  been  a  deterioration  in  perceptions  of  overall  sterling  secured 
market function over the past year or so, which participants note has coincided with pressure 
to  reduce  balance  sheet  size  due  to  regulatory  reporting  requirements  –  in  particular  the 
leverage ratio (Chart 4). 
Some of this impact may be transitory: as dealers and others adjust to the new arrangements 
they may find ways to transact more efficiently while staying within the letter and spirit of the 
regulation. As the paper describes, opportunities for netting could be further increased were 
a greater proportion of repo transactions to be centrally cleared – around 10% of US Dollar 
repo transactions are currently cleared centrally, compared with 45% in Sterling, and 65% in 
Euro.1 Dealers may improve the optimisation of their balance sheets across the whole group, 
better  allocating  leverage  headroom  in  one  part  of  the  business  to  more  leverage-
constrained  activity  in  other  parts  of  the  group.  And  over  time  new  approaches  to 
intermediation could emerge – some exchanges are exploring platforms to allow end users of 
the repo market (such as pension funds) to transact directly with one another. 
However,  such  innovations  and  adjustments  will  only  ever  provide  a  partial  offset  to  the 
underlying changes. And Darell and Arvind are right to say that regulation bears a social cost 
by increasing segmentation and reducing incentives to compete, search and match in money 
markets. But it would not be right to then conclude that the framework of regulation that was 
introduced following the crisis represented a net cost to society. Would it really be desirable 
to return to a world in which, as Pozsar (2016) put it, the quantities traded were “endless”, 
and the impact on balance sheet “an afterthought”? 
The role of the leverage ratio 
Given that I am a member of the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), which has been one of 
the architects of the post crisis regulatory framework in the UK and put a leverage ratio in 
place  in  2015,  you  probably  won’t  be  surprised to  hear that  I support  the  existence  of  the 
leverage ratio. Remember that over the period from 2000 to 2007 around a quarter of dealers 
held less than enough equity to absorb losses worth 2% of their assets. That was facilitated 
by an over-reliance on risk weighting, which tended to place too much weight on periods of 
stability and too little on periods of underperfomance. It’s now clear that in the years before 
the crisis banks were underpricing the use of their balance sheet, and that the dispersion of 
rates 
true  real  marginal  cost  of 
intermediation. 
in  money  markets  probably  underestimated 
the 
                                                
1  Source:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/Microsites/arrc/ 
files/2016/ARRC-roundtable-slides.pdf);  Money  Market  Liaison  Committee  Sterling  Money  Market  Survey; 
European Central Bank Euro Money Market Survey. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This view has been formalised in numerous studies that have found the leverage ratio was a 
better predictor of bank failure during the crisis than the risk-weighted capital ratio (Chart 5)2. 
And recent studies (such as Fender and Lewrick (2015) and Grill, Hannes and Smith (2015)) 
suggest that a calibration of 3–5% maximises the benefits to society in the form of greater 
financial system resilience relative to the impact of higher bank funding costs. 
However,  despite  my  belief  in  the  utility  of  the  leverage  ratio,  I  also  recognise  that  no 
regulation is perfect. And that if we policymakers spot opportunities to minimise regulation’s 
adverse impact on the liquidity of core financial markets without compromising the positive 
effect on resilience, we should take them. 
Reducing unintended consequences 
The FPC actively seeks out these improvements – a process we refer to as “snagging” in 
reference  to  the  process  by  which  a  newly  constructed  building  is  checked  for  protruding 
nails  and  screws  which  could  snag  and  tear  one’s  clothing.  (If  only  all  architects  were  so 
diligent.) 
As a result of one such snagging exercise – our annual statutory review of the leverage ratio 
Direction  –  this  month  we  made  the  decision  to  exclude  central  bank  reserves  from  the 
exposure  measure  of  the  leverage  ratio  framework.  This  change  was  a  good  example  of 
close co-ordination between macroprudential and monetary policy – without it a loosening of 
monetary policy through the creation of reserves by the MPC to purchase assets would have 
led to a deterioration in banks’ leverage ratios at precisely the time we  would like them to 
support credit growth in the economy. 
In  making  this  decision  we  were  comfortable  that  it  wouldn’t  dilute  the  financial  stability 
benefits  of  the  leverage  ratio  because,  as  you  know,  central  bank  reserves  are  a  unique 
asset class. So long as they are matched by liabilities in the same currency (which we have 
stipulated  as  a  condition  of their  exclusion),  they  pose  neither  credit  nor  liquidity  risk.  And 
banks’ holdings of them represent a buffer against unexpected events. 
It is true that this change will mechanically reduce the nominal amount of capital required to 
meet the leverage ratio standard, other things equal. That is not the FPC’s intention, and so 
we intend to re-calibrate the standard to offset this impact as part of our planned 2017 review 
of the leverage ratio framework. 
To  be  clear,  removing  central  bank  reserves from  the  leverage  exposure  measure  will  not 
neutralise all of the impact of the leverage ratio that Darell and Arvind highlight – for example 
repo will be unaffected by this change. However it should address some of the other issues 
around money market rate dispersion and pass-through efficiency raised in the paper. 
• 
If central bank reserves are included in the leverage exposure measure, banks must 
think  carefully  before  accepting  a  deposit.  If  it  implies  an  increase  in  their  overall 
asset size, their leverage capital requirement will increase commensurately, and that 
will  bring  a  shadow  regulatory  cost  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  those 
calculated in the paper. This disincentivises competition for deposits, and drives a 
wedge  between  the  central  bank  policy  rate  and  rates  that  banks  will  pay  on 
wholesale deposits. 
If central bank reserves are removed from the exposure measure it instantly gives 
banks somewhere to place cash without impacting their leverage ratio. They would 
therefore maximise profits by competing for deposits at rates all the way up to the 
rate  that  can  be  earned  on  reserves  at  the  central  bank,  thus  improving  pass-
through  to  average  bank  deposit  rates  and  strengthening  the  transmission  of 
                                                 
2  For example, IMF (2009) and Aikman et al (2014), and others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy.  And  the  early  indication  from  market 
participants is that they do indeed expect this change to strengthen the link between 
money market rates and Bank Rate. 
In short, although regulatory innovations such as the leverage ratio are here to stay, we can 
and should attenuate some of their impact on money market function where it is possible to 
do so  without reducing the financial stability benefits. This process of reducing unintended 
consequences is made easier by close 
co-ordination of different policymakers, which at the Bank of England is facilitated by having 
monetary, macro- and micro-prudential policy all under one roof. 
The role of central banks in money markets 
Let me turn to the role of central banks as a participant in money markets. Just as private 
market participants have grappled with new challenges in the post-crisis world, so too have 
central banks. And we have responded in three ways. 
First, we have become more flexible in the way we implement changes in the policy rate. The 
frameworks we use to influence market rates need to recognise the fact that there are a lot 
more reserves in the system than before, and that regulation has reduced the incentive to 
arbitrage small differences in money market rates. As the paper sets out, the Fed’s RRP is a 
good example of adapting to this new reality. The facility improves pass-through efficiency by 
offering a risk-free asset to a broad range of counterparties that extends beyond banks, thus 
strengthening the floor on money market rates more generally. The counterpart to this facility 
in the UK is our ability to issue Bank of England bills, though thus far we haven’t had the 
need to do so: since we began paying Bank Rate on all reserves in 2009 the wedge between 
overnight  unsecured  money  market  rates  and  Bank  rate  has  averaged  4bps,  and  the 
standard  deviation  also  been  4bps  (Chart  6).  Another  example  of  changing  the  way  we 
operate was our decision in 2014 to grant broker dealers access to reserve accounts at the 
Bank of England for the first time. 
Second,  empowered  by  strengthened  regulatory  frameworks  and  resolution  regimes,  we 
have reaffirmed our commitment to abide by Bagehot’s 19th century advice that the best way 
to  avoid  a  panic  is  to  “lend  freely  and  vigorously...on  all  good  banking  securities.”  For 
example, shortly after the result of the UK’s referendum on EU membership was declared we 
made clear that banks already had collateral positioned with us such that they could borrow 
more than £250bn, and announced that our regular liquidity auctions would continue to run 
on a weekly basis throughout the summer. Coupled with banks’ own strong internal liquidity 
positions, this has helped ensure the smooth functioning of money markets. And overnight 
market rates have stayed close to Bank Rate throughout the period since the referendum. 
Third, we have taken steps to ensure that the vital infrastructure of money markets continues 
to  remain  effective.  The  work  on  risk-free  benchmark  rates  being  undertaken  by  both  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  is  a  good  example  of  this.  Building  on 
recommendations made by the FSB3 – which drew on the findings of a market practitioners 
group  chaired  by  Darell  –  both  central  banks  have  convened  working  groups  of  market 
participants  with  the  aim  of  identifying  benchmarks  of  nearly  risk-free  reference  rates  that 
could that could sit alongside Libor.4 And both have taken steps to improve the resilience and 
coverage of overnight unsecured benchmark rates – the Bank of England by taking over the 
                                                
3  Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks – July 2014 http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140722.pdf. 
In the US, this is the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC). In the UK it is the Working Group on 
4 
Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  administration  and  reform  of  SONIA5,  and  the  Fed  by  overseeing  the  creation  of  the 
Overnight Bank Funding Rate. Such benchmarks are a vital means of assessing the pass-
through efficiency of changes in policy rates – meaning Darell and Arvind will continue to be 
able to write papers on the topic long into the future. 
Pass-through beyond money markets 
Let  me  turn  briefly  to  pass-through  beyond  money  market  rates.  Deep  structural  forces 
affecting savings and investment preferences have combined with the ongoing legacy of the 
financial  crisis  to  push  the  interest  rate  required  to  keep  our  economies  in  balance  much 
lower than historical experience. 
The resulting proximity of policy rates to what was once known as the zero lower bound has 
important implications for the pass-through of monetary policy. Specifically, once household 
and business deposit rates have reached a very low level, it becomes difficult for banks to 
reduce them further. Recent international experience seems to bear this out – Chart 7 shows 
that pass-through to retail deposit rates tends to be weaker when risk-free rates are very low. 
As a result, in order to protect their margins banks may not reduce the rate they charge on 
lending, thus dampening the transmission of monetary policy. 
The MPC was acutely aware of this when it decided at the beginning of this month to reduce 
Bank Rate to 0.25%. In order to reinforce the transmission of this change we also launched a 
Term Funding Scheme (TFS) through which central bank reserves will be lent to banks and 
building societies for four years. Should they maintain their lending to the real economy, the 
rate  they  will  pay  over  this  period  will  be  Bank  Rate.  For  each  1%  that  net  lending  by  an 
institution falls, the cost of TFS funding will rise by 5bps to a maximum of 25bps. By tethering 
banks’  term  funding  costs  more  closely  to  our  official  policy  rate,  this  should  create  the 
capacity for them to pass the reduction in that rate through to households and businesses, 
thus strengthening the transmission to the real economy. 
Since  the  MPC’s  decision  we  have  published  further  documentation,  technical  detail  and 
guidelines for firms considering using this facility. We are now open to applications, and the 
scheme will be available to be drawn upon from the middle of September. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise. Darell and Arvind’s paper draws attention to some very important issues, 
namely the decrease in competitive forces and increase in frictions in money markets, which 
work to reduce the pass-through efficiency of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy setting. 
And the behaviour of the index of dispersion of money market rates that they have created 
provides evidence that these developments are at least in part due to post-crisis changes in 
the regulatory framework. 
Taking into account the improved resilience of the financial system, these regulatory changes 
are net beneficial to society, so they are not going to be rolled back. However, policymakers 
can and should be willing to attenuate some of their unintended consequences, and be open 
to challenge on their design. 
As  participants  in  money  markets,  central  banks  should  be  open to  new  ways  to  enhance 
pass-through efficiency by showing flexibility in their implementation of monetary policy. The 
Fed’s RRP does this by making a risk-free asset available to a wider range of counterparties 
                                                
5  SONIA is the weighted average of unsecured brokered transactions, and it is the main reference rate in OIS 
contracts. Current daily volumes are around £7-10bn, down from around £25bn before the financial crisis. In 
July 2015 the Bank announced its plans to reform SONIA, including by broadening its coverage to encompass 
overnight  unsecured  transactions  negotiated  bilaterally  aswell  as  those  arranged  via  brokers.  For  more 
information see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/benchmarks/soniareform.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  than would ordinarily be the case. And the Bank of England’s recently launched TFS will help 
the  pass-through  of  very  low  levels  of  Bank  Rate  to  the  rates  faced  by  households  and 
businesses in the real economy. Central banks can also contribute to the function of money 
markets more broadly, by being willing to act early to address potential liquidity needs, and to 
support money market infrastructure more generally. 
I’ll  end  with  a  word  on  central  banks’  “footprint.”  Many  of  the  developments  raised  in  the 
paper and that will be discussed over the course of this conference have been a response to 
the  needs  of  the  day:  having  more  reserves  in  the  system  is  a  reflection  of  the  monetary 
policy stance required by economic developments; the leverage ratio has been developed as 
a part of the response to failure of the pre-crisis capital framework; and our intervention in 
risk-free  benchmark  rates  is  intended  to  avoid  a  co-ordination  failure  in  which  the  most 
appropriate and robust benchmarks would not be adopted by the market. 
So while it is true to say that central banks’ footprint in money markets is larger now than in 
the  days  prior  to  the  crisis,  this  has  been  out  of  necessity  rather  than  design.  As  a  tribe, 
central bankers retain a strong belief in financial markets’ ability to facilitate price discovery, 
allocate capital efficiently, and provide useful signals about the macro economy and financial 
stability. 
References 
Duffie, D and Krishnamurthy, A (2016), “Passthrough efficiency in the Fed’s New Monetary 
Policy Setting”, Preliminary version for presentation at the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium. 
Fender,  I  and  Lewrick,  U  (2015),  “Calibrating  the  leverage  ratio”,  BIS  Quarterly  Review, 
December, pages 43–58. 
Grill, M,  Hannes  Lang,  J  and  Smith,  J (2015),  “The  leverage  ratio,  risk-taking  and  bank 
stability”,  preliminary  version;  www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1018121/Grill,%20 
Lang,%20Smith+-+The+Leverage+Ratio,%20Risk-Taking+and+Bank+Stability+-+Paper.pdf. 
Haldane, A and Madouros, V (2012), ‘The dog and the frisbee’, www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2012/speech596.pdf. 
IMF (2009), Global Financial Stability Report, April. 
Laeven, L and Valencia, F (2010), “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad and 
the Ugly”, IMF working paper, 10/146. 
Pozsar, Z (2016), “Money Markets after QE and Basel III,” Credit Suisse June 2016. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
