   Gent Sejko: Oversight, analysis and vision of public governance in 
Albania 
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the presentation of the Supreme 
State Audit Annual Review 2015, Tirana, 1 February 2016. 
 Your Excellency President of the Republic of Albania, 
Dear Chairman of the Supreme State Audit institution, 
Honourable Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, 
Your excellency Ambassador Lu, 
Your excellency Minister, 
Dear representatives of public institutions, 
Honourable MPs, dear professors, dear participants, 
It is a special pleasure for me to be here today on the occasion of the annual review of the 
activity of the Supreme State Audit (ALSAI) for 2015. ALSAI is among the most important 
constitutional institutions in Albania, whose objective – ensuring good management of public 
finances – is highly significant. 
The effective use and certification of public funds in conformity with the laws regulating the 
economic and financial activity of the public sector, on-going public communication, in relation 
to irregularities and relevant responsibilities have been at the focus of ALSAI’s work in recent 
years. In this perspective, the role and mission of the ALSAI are highly important; therefore, 
the issues raised in ALSAI’s reports should be thoroughly analysed. They are both necessary 
and preventive instruments for the institutions subjected to ALSAI’s audit. 
Notably, the Bank of Albania and ALSAI have had a fruitful cooperation, in line with both current 
and prospective dynamics and developments. We have made constant and joint efforts so that 
the conclusions and recommendations left by ALSAI become a useful, guiding, helpful, and 
corrective tool. 
In view of the insofar experience, this combination is an essential component in the work of 
audit institutions. I have believed and still do believe that auditing is a key instrument, which 
serves  to  further  perfecting  public  sector  governance.  The  ALSAI  has  contributed  and  will 
continue to contribute to identifying various problems facing public institutions, divergences 
from legal and regulatory framework, with subsequent financial effects, and their correction, in 
accordance with legal requirements and international standards. 
Focusing  on  the  future  role  of  ALSAI,  I  am  confident  it  will  increase  the  contribution  to 
perfecting the three main dimensions – oversight, analysis, and vision – of public governance. 
More specifically, 
• 
With regard to the oversight dimension, the great dilemma is whether public entities 
are accomplishing their mission in detecting and preventing corruption; 
With regard to the analysis dimension, the great dilemma is whether these institutions 
are  making 
responsible  decisions  about  economic  policies,  development 
programmes, operations and the achieved results; 
With regard to the long-term vision dimension, the great dilemma is whether the right 
directions and future challenges facing auditors are properly determined. 
  Hence,  approximation  of  the  auditing  role  with  the  best  and  contemporary  international 
standards,  learning  about  specifics  and  characteristics  of  the  audited  entities,  and  further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
intensification of inter-institutional cooperation during the processes are some of the elements 
having a key role in the work and results of this institution. 
In conclusion, I am fully confident that, by promoting the above-stated factors, the ALSAI will 
continue  to  perform  at  its  best  vis-a-vis  the  duties  and  challenges  imposed  by  current 
developments  and  will  succeed  in  accomplishing  its  mission  towards  the  improvement  of 
institutional governance. 
Thanking you for your attention, I wish you success in your work in 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
