  Andreas Dombret: Cui bono? Complex regulation and its consequences 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 20th Banking Symposium of the European Center for Financial Services 
at the University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, 7 September 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Rolfes, 
Bernd, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
For me, Duisburg brings back memories of the infamous Inspector Schimanski from the TV 
crime series Tatort. Perhaps it’s because, as a banking supervisor, I’m as unpopular as the 
police are among suspects. 
However, unlike Schimanski, banking supervisors don’t start throwing punches if a meeting 
with an institution breaks down. 
Thankfully,  banking  regulation  is  not  exactly  rife  with  physical  violence.  Nevertheless,  this 
symposium claims that “complexity kills”. 
And  so  we  already  have  a  perpetrator:  lawmakers  and  supervisors.  The  murder  weapon? 
Complex, detailed banking regulation. The victims: banks and their customers. Case closed, 
no investigation necessary. Splendid. Let’s just call it a day. 
But would an experienced inspector like Schimanski accept this at face value? I think this all-
too convenient solution would leave a bad taste in his mouth and he would soon realise that 
something was missing altogether: a motive. 
This  is  why  I  am  today  reopening  the  case  of  complex  banking  regulation  and  its 
consequences. Let’s examine the evidence together. Who benefits, and who suffers? 
Banking regulation today: optimised or muddled? 
2. 
Banking  regulation  has  become  ever  more  intricate  and  complex  in  recent  years.  This 
presents a challenge above all to small institutions with limited human resources. 
I  must  confess  that  I,  too,  am  sometimes  dissatisfied  at  how  intricate  the  regulatory 
framework has become over the past few years. 
But what exactly is behind this increase in complexity? It’s the many rules and regulations 
which  are  becoming  ever  more  detailed  and  technically  specialised,  as  well  as  the 
multilayered nature of regulation as a whole. 
Today, people still look back wistfully at the clear and simple Principle I, which set out capital 
requirements  for  Germany  in  a  concise  and  straightforward  manner.  In  2004,  Basel  II 
ushered in an era of technical standards that not only ran into hundreds of pages but also 
included  numerous  calculation  formulas  and  tables.  And  I  daren’t  mention  the  annexes  or 
background papers. 
The reforms following the financial crisis intensified this trend further still. Basel III and the 
Capital Requirements Directive, or  CRR, are even more detailed, heavier on formulas, and 
more complex. 
Why  is  there  this  trend  towards  ever  more  complex  rules?  Five  reasons  stand  out  in 
particular. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
First: Regulation has needed to keep pace – and still needs to keep pace –with ever more 
complex banking business. 
Second: We are increasingly dealing with what is known as risk regulation. Here, historical 
data  and  statistical  procedures  are  used  to  calculate  the  probability  of  dangerous  events 
occurring  –  the  rules  and  regulations  then  stipulate  how  banks  must  prepare  for  such 
scenarios. 
Third:  Global  harmonisation  brought  about  by  the  Basel  standards.  These  standards  were 
created  mainly  for  large  international  banks,  but  are  being  applied  to  all  institutions  in 
Germany and the European Union. 
Fourth: Complexity is also caused by European regulation, which imposes an additional set 
of  rules  that  need  to  be  followed.  Furthermore,  the  relationship  between  European  and 
national rules is often unclear. 
And  last,  but  not  least,  complicated  rules  are  also  an  outcome  of  compromises. 
Compromises are a necessary element of regulation – especially where a large number of 
countries  with  a  wide  variety  of  banking  landscapes  are  involved.  Moreover,  the  changes 
proposed by banks and saving banks often haven’t exactly made the rules any simpler. 
This  has  made  compliance  with  the  rules  an  increasingly  costly,  time-consuming  and 
unwieldy  undertaking.  Such  a  complicated  set  of  rules  is  all  but  bound  to  lead  to  a 
considerable increase in the costs of compliance. 
If such rules had been imposed on Inspector Schimanski and his ilk, Tatort would have been 
a much less exciting show. I personally wouldn’t be thrilled to spend 90 minutes watching the 
inspector poring over implementing regulations. That’s only something for masochists, and 
Götz George, the actor who played Inspector Schimanski, certainly wasn’t one of those. 
Disadvantages: high compliance costs 
3. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  suspect’s  motive  to  cause  harm  to  banks  and  their 
customers via complicated rules isn’t very plausible. And the supposed sequence of events 
isn’t exactly water tight either. 
But  one  thing  we  do  have  to  admit  is  that  the  complexity  of  banking  regulation  has  made 
compliance very expensive for institutions – in two respects. 
First,  the  regulatory  requirements  generate  work  for  the  institution’s  executives  and 
employees. This includes one-off costs, such as the costs of procuring new software. But it’s 
also about the overhead costs, ie the operational or HR costs. And it’s about the time that 
needs to be devoted to these matters – which is time no longer available to deal with clients, 
to conduct credit analysis or to develop investment strategies. 
This means that the problem is not so much the minimum capital or liquidity requirements but 
instead the high operational burden imposed by implementation and compliance. 
Second,  as  a  result  of  the  complex  regulations,  it  is  becoming  ever  more  difficult  for  new 
institutions to enter the market. This could significantly impact the competitive dynamics and 
innovativeness of the bank and savings bank sector. 
That’s  all  I  want  to  say  for  now  on  the  effects  of  complex  rules  on  institutions.  But  this 
complexity affects supervisors, too, of course. One interesting take on the matter comes from 
a  couple  of  experts  at  the  Bank  of  England.1  They  believe  that  complexity  fails  to  provide 
                                                 
1   AG Haldane and V Madouros (2012), The dog and the frisbee. Speech delivered at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City’s 366th economic policy symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming on 31 August 2012; 
D Aikman, M Galesic, G Gigerenzer, S Kapadia, K Katsikopoulos, A Kothiyal, E Murphy and T Neumann 
(2014), Taking uncertainty seriously: simplicity versus complexity in financial regulation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
absolute security, because gaps can always emerge elsewhere. In addition, regulation ties 
up  human  resources  because  of  the  dense  blanket  of  rules  that  need  to  be  enforced.  In 
England it is recognised that there is therefore a danger of supervisors following a ticked-box 
approach rather than carrying out a critical examination. 
I think this reasoning touches on a rather sore point – it is, of course, true that complexity ties 
up vast amounts of our regulatory resources. Sometimes a simple rule would perhaps be just 
as effective, but less costly. 
However,  overall  I  come  to  a  different  conclusion.  Namely,  that  complex  regulation  with 
multiple safety nets – such as the risk-weighted approaches and the debt ratio – are a good 
alternative to simple rules. 
At this juncture, Schimanski would probably conclude that while the supervisor’s attack was 
perhaps  a  little  heavy-handed,  it  wasn’t  deadly.  And,  what’s  more,  the  supervisor’s  self-
interest in having complex rules is very limited, so this scarcely cuts the mustard as a motive 
for murder. Inspector Schimanski would therefore have to carry out further investigations. To 
this end, let’s take a look at the advantages of complex banking regulation. 
Advantages: providing stability and innovation 
4. 
There is no question that the cost of the new regulation is considerable. However, this must 
be  weighed  against  the  benefits  to  society  of  preventing  financial  crises.  In  this  context,  I 
believe the cost of regulation to be justified overall. 
It is therefore important, despite all of the well-reasoned criticism, to be realistic. All too often, 
the debate is used to wrap broad-brush criticism of regulation in politically correct packaging. 
But this broad-brush criticism clearly goes too far. Regulatory tightening in the wake of the 
financial crisis was the right move as, with hindsight, capital requirements were too low prior 
to the crisis. At the same time, there were quite substantial regulation gaps – and we all now 
know where that led us. We must take care not to throw the baby out with the bath water in 
the face of reasonable criticism. 
Moreover  –  and  I  think  it  very  important  to  emphasise  this  –  it  is  not  just  society  and  the 
economy which benefit from the new rules. Institutions, too, gain from complexity to a certain 
extent. 
They  do  so  in  two  ways.  First,  regulators  recognise  the  institutions'  internal  models  and 
therefore enable them to use internal procedures for regulatory purposes as well. This is not 
self-evident. Second, this system leads to low capital requirements by historical standards. 
This, too, is undoubtedly an advantage that we should not ignore. 
A second-best solution that we can live with 
5. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  case  can  be  closed:  bank  supervisors  are  not  murderers,  and 
complexity is not a murder weapon. 
Nonetheless, complexity can only ever be a second-best solution. If we could go back to the 
drawing board and create the banking world afresh with the experience we have gained over 
the last few decades, we would probably choose simpler rules. However, that is not currently 
a realistic option. What is more, this approach would have its weaknesses, too: for example, 
less complicated requirements would probably entail higher capital requirements. 
That's why we must now accept the complex set of rules as the new status quo and work 
with  them.  For  us  regulators,  this  means  subjecting  the  reformed  rules  to  a  systematic 
review. For institutions, it means they must review and realign their business models. 
These are the challenges that I would now like to address. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
Implications for supervision: reviewing the rules with regard to proportionality 
6. 
Let's start with supervision. There is no doubt that sweeping reforms were necessary in the 
wake of the financial crisis. 
However, now that such far-reaching reforms have been implemented, we need to honestly 
ask  ourselves  the  following  questions.  Do  they  still  make  sense  as  a  package?  Are  the 
individual  components  of  reform  working  together  as  a  whole?  Precisely  this  process  of 
reflection  has  been  ongoing  for  several  months  now,  and  the  Bundesbank  is  playing  an 
active  role  in  these  discussions.  Politicians  and  authorities  have  started  to  examine  more 
closely the impact of and interaction between these individual components. 
Assessing the proportionality of the rules with respect to smaller institutions is a focal point of 
this review. This issue is particularly close to my heart, which is why I would like to outline 
what I believe greater proportionality in banking regulation could look like. 
To  do  this,  let's  return  briefly  to  our  point  of  departure:  complexity.  What  burdens  are 
complex rules imposing on smaller institutions? 
The compliance burden is high for all institutions – regardless of their size. However, small 
institutions, owing to their smaller staff sizes, are less able to spread the costs of compliance 
across  their  employees  and  have  to  either  hire  additional  staff  or  enlist  external  aid.  This 
leads to relatively higher burdens. 
How  might  we  change  this?  Any  expansion  of  proportionality  must  begin  at  the  European 
level.  That  is  why  I  endorse  the  proposal  recently  put  forward  by  Wolfgang  Schäuble  to 
review  the  relevant  EU  regulations  with  a  view  to  achieving  greater  proportionality.  This 
mainly applies to the CRR and CRD IV,2 but also other legal regulations. That review will take 
place sometime in the next two years. So you see, it's worth talking about good ideas. 
These are two particular ways to give relief to smaller institutions. The first is a details-driven 
approach that involves introducing special exceptions or adjustments for individual rules. 
Another,  more  radical  approach  would  be  to  rewrite  the  rules  from  scratch,  thereby 
establishing new legal bases that introduce relief for smaller institutions regarding some or all 
of the rules. 
It's  worth  noting  here  that  the  details-driven  and  the  basic approaches  are  not in any  way 
mutually exclusive. However – lest I wear out my welcome – I will confine my remarks to the 
basic approaches in three areas. 
One option would be to establish a set of EU-level rules which make greater allowances for 
proportionality  while  legislation  and  standards  are  still  on  the  drawing  board.  Additional 
proportionality clauses could, for instance, be built into the CRR and CRD IV. This would give 
the  EBA  and  the  European  Commission  a  legal  footing  that  makes  it  easier  for  them  to 
incorporate simplifications into guidelines and technical standards.3 Of course, this can only 
be achieved if clearly defined objectives are put in place. 
Another option worth considering is the creation of an improved review process as part of the 
legislative  procedure  –  a  mandatory  due  diligence  process,4  if  you  will.  This  is  already 
                                                 
2   Capital Requirements Directive IV. 
3   According  to  the  EU  institutions'  reading,  they  are  not  authorised  to  make  far-reaching  exceptions  to 
strengthen  the  principle  of  proportionality  if  those  exceptions  are  not  specifically  provided  for  in  the 
relevant sections of the CRR, CRD IV etc. This would also render the subsidiarity and proportionality 
provisions of the EU Treaties ineffective (since the CRR, being a lex specialis, takes precedence over 
the general legislation of the EU Treaties). 
4   See  also  Hackethal,  A  and  Inderst,  R  (2015)  Auswirkungen  der  Regulatorik  auf  kleinere  und  mittlere 
Banken  am  Beispiel  der  deutschen  Genossenschaftsbanken.  Expert  opinion  commissioned  by  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
enshrined in law in a number of countries, including the USA and UK. So why can't we do it 
here in Europe, too? 
In this scenario, checks would have to be carried out whenever regulations are introduced or 
revised  in  order  to  assess  whether  the  principle  of  proportionality  has  been  given  due 
consideration. Such checks could be performed before adopting a new regulation or after a 
trial  period.  The  process  requirements  could  be  drawn  up  in  the  form  of  a  joint  directive 
passed by all of Europe's supervisory authorities.5  
The second area in which improvements need to be made for small banks is in the field of 
reporting and disclosure. Ladies and gentlemen, I am aware that these days, you are being 
asked to report an awful lot of information, and it's right and appropriate to question just why 
that is. We shouldn't forget, though, that supervisors aren't the only recipients of these data – 
monetary policy and financial stability decision-makers use this information as well. 
So, what's the best plan of action with regard to banking supervision going forward? I would 
propose  a  systematic  approach  that  checks  what  information  supervisors  and  other 
recipients really need and compares the findings with the data which institutions are currently 
required  to  report.  This  might  impact  on  the  Implementing  Technical  Standard  on 
Supervisory Reporting, for example. If it turns out that a disproportionately large amount of 
information is being collected, then we need to focus on ways to reduce this burden. 
Another starting point would be to abolish disclosure requirements that have been rendered 
obsolete  by  the  co-existence  of  European  and  German  rules.  I  think  unnecessary 
duplications in the collection of data should be eliminated by amending the German rules. 
Viewed from this angle, I see Germany's Liquidity Regulation as a candidate for the chopping 
block.  And  it  will,  in  fact,  be  eliminated  at  the  start  of  2018,  once  the  LCR  has  been  fully 
implemented. 
Yet  another  point  I  think  is  worth  considering  is  to  slim  down  smaller  banks'  reporting 
requirements to a minimal data package. Then, only compliance with the minimum standards 
would be monitored. 
Disclosure is another field where banks could be given a break. Here, we should investigate 
just how often disclosure reports need to be published in order to supervise smaller regional 
institutions. In addition, we need to make sure that the disclosure reforms do not introduce 
any intra-year disclosure duties. 
My third suggestion for achieving greater proportionality is probably the most far-reaching of 
all.  What  I  have  in  mind  is  the  creation  of  separate  regulatory  frameworks  for  smaller 
institutions, on the one hand, and large multinational banks, on the other. Even though the 
response to this proposal has been tepid so far, I nonetheless think it is worth considering as 
a fundamental approach – one that would systematically address the excess burden placed 
on smaller institutions' operational capacities. 
A two-tiered system could be put into practice through a graduated set of Basel standards for 
institutions that are neither multinationals nor large in size. A broadly similar set-up has been 
up and running in the United States ever since the Basel II regime was implemented. Any 
institution  whose  balance  sheet  exceeds  a  certain  threshold  there  is  subject  to  the  Basel 
rules. However, it would only be possible to do the same here in Germany by creating rules 
at the European level. 
                                                                                                                                                      
Federal Association of German People's Banks and Raiffeisen Banks and European Banking Authority 
Banking Stakeholder Group (2015) Proportionality in Banking Regulation (52 f). 
5   The legal basis for this and for the Commission's work could be inserted in the CRR (and in the CRD IV, 
too, if appropriate). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
In  this  scenario,  only  banking  multinationals  would  be  subject  to  the  fully  loaded  Basel  III 
requirements  in  the  EU.  This  would  be  appropriate  from  a  risk  perspective:  global  banking 
institutions would be regulated according to a harmonised set of global rules, while smaller 
institutions and those operating within a certain region would be governed by graduated rules 
which do justice to their different business models and risk profiles by setting less complex 
requirements. 
Of course, there are some who claim that transitioning to that kind of system is a flight of 
fancy. What these doubting Thomases mainly ask is where exactly the line should be drawn. 
I'll be the first to admit that this is a challenge, but it's anything but impossible. One way of 
tackling this problem would be to use a smart combination of selection criteria – for instance, 
combining a balance sheet threshold with a prudential decision based on the institutions' risk 
profiles. 
But there are still many crucial details and potential pitfalls that need to be addressed before 
we  can  even  begin  devoting  serious  thought  to  an  option  of  this  kind.  This  is  something  I 
think we should consider with an open mind. A systematic approach, assuming it's feasible, 
is usually superior to an approach based on workarounds and emergency repairs. 
The proposals in the three areas I have just spoken about – first, incorporating proportionality 
clauses  into  EU  legislation;  second,  easing  reporting  and  disclosure  standards;  and  third, 
creating  a  two-tiered  system  –  are  just  some  of  the  options  that  are  available.  Before  any 
relief of this kind can occur, fundamental conditions need to be met. 
I think it's particularly important that the focus remains on reducing the burden on operational 
activities  –  an  easing  of  minimum  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  is  not  on  the  table.  In 
contrast to what is commonly argued, lower capital requirements do not automatically lead to 
elevated growth, nor do they only result in increased lending. 
Accordingly, the idea is not to sew a patchwork of wish lists for easing minimum capital or 
liquidity requirements into existing regulations. 
And  what's  more,  relief  must  never  endanger  financial  stability.  Medium-sized,  highly 
systemically interconnected institutions – those referred to as "too interconnected to fail" – 
and  those  institutions  with  risky  business  models  should  not  be  provided  any  relief.  The 
recent financial crisis, during which many insolvent institutions had to be bailed out, is still 
fresh in all of our minds. We also need to be careful not to create any loopholes that end up 
being used by so many institutions that smaller banks run into difficulties. 
Consequences for banks: adapting business models to fit the new reality 
7. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  rules  must  be  developed,  reviewed,  adopted  and  implemented. 
Following the regulatory reforms' implementation, banks and savings banks will now have to 
adapt to the new reality over the coming years. 
I realise that these costly and challenging processes can be frustrating, especially for those 
working at banks that played little or no part in the pre-crisis excesses. 
But  what  we  are  talking  about  here  are  transitional  processes  which  involve  high  one-off 
costs  and  greater  compliance  expenses  in  the  long  term.  In  light  of  the  important  role  of 
credit institutions in the economy, they are absolutely justified. 
Many of the problems stem not from regulation but from the fact that some institutions are 
still clinging to their old business models despite finding themselves in a new world. But the 
old world of unrestricted financial markets has gone – for good. 
Like many other European banks, some German institutions are still searching for business 
models that are competitive, viable, and yet sustainable. This is clear, amongst other things, 
from the fact that German credit institutions have the worst cost/income ratio in the EU, and 
also lag behind in terms of other profitability ratios. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
I'm not going to pretend, however, that finding the solution to this problem is a piece of cake 
–  profitability  cannot  and  must  not  focus  on  the  short  term.  After  all,  this  was  one  of  the 
causes  of  the  most  recent  financial  crisis.  Sustainable  business  models  must  be 
well-conceived and must also enable banks to weather difficult phases. If credit institutions 
change their strategic focus as a result of the new rules, as we have actually already seen in 
a few cases, this is not necessarily a negative  side-effect of regulation. It may actually be 
proof  that  the  new  rules  are  working  –  that  is,  that  they  are  encouraging  banks  to  adopt 
sustainable business models. 
Conclusion 
8. 
Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude, I have some good news and some bad news. Let's start 
with the bad: banking regulation has admittedly become a very complicated matter. And we 
all  just  have  to  accept  this  new  status  quo.  And  now  for  the  good:   we  actually  have  the 
potential to improve on this status quo. 
We  supervisors  can  achieve  this  by  looking  at  any  negative  implications  that  arise  and 
identifying where small institutions are being unreasonably disadvantaged. 
Institutions,  on  the  other  hand,  can  achieve  this  by  accepting  the  fact  that  their  business 
models – in many instances – were not sustainable in the past and will never become so in 
the future barring fundamental changes. 
I am confident that we can manage both. Let's keep exchanging ideas on this matter – and 
unlike Schimanski, without resorting to fisticuffs. 
On that note, I'd like to congratulate this conference on its 20-year anniversary and now look 
forward to some lively debates. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
