  Salvatore Rossi: The launch of Solvency II – the implementation of the 
new regime: open issues, implications for business models, and effects 
on institutional and financial communication 
 Keynote address by  Mr  Salvatore Rossi, Senior  Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and 
President of IVASS (Istituto per la Vigilanza sulle Assicurazioni), at the IVASS Conference 
2016, Rome, 3 March 2016. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you to this Conference on the launch of Solvency II. 
I  want  to  thank  Victoria  Saporta,  Chair  of  the  International  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors (IAIS), Gabriel Bernardino, Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational 
Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA),  Frank  Grund  of  BaFin  and  all  the  other  panelists,  for  kindly 
accepting our invitation. I also want to thank you all, the audience, for being so numerous. 
This  is  the  proof  that  the  topic  we  will  be  discussing  today  –  namely  the  Solvency  II 
implementation  challenges  we  are  facing  only  two  months  after  the  entry  into  force  of  the 
new regime – is of great relevance, for both regulators and the industry. 
Indeed, this is not the first conference on Solvency II and will not be the last. Actually a lot of 
other conferences and seminars have already taken place since the project started. But we 
still need some more discussion, and a deeper and wider comprehension of the implications 
of this multifaceted issue. 
We will start with a keynote speech by Gabriel Bernardino. Two panel discussions will follow. 
The first one on the most relevant and controversial aspects of Solvency II implementation. 
The second one devoted to a specific but crucial feature of the new framework: information 
disclosure. The panelists are very distinguished and well known representatives of both the 
supervisory  community  and  the  industry.  The  moderators  will  be  Ferdinando  Giugliano, 
former editorial writer of Financial Times, now at the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, and 
Fausto  Parente  of  IVASS.  Alberto  Corinti,  member  of  the  board  of  IVASS  and  of  the 
management board of EIOPA, will offer some concluding remarks. 
I am sure that we will gain important insights from today’s debate, also based on everybody’s 
concrete experience in the past few weeks of the new regime. 
Now a few introductory words on my part. 
Solvency II was born on 1st January 2016 after a pregnancy lasting more than 10 years. We 
all  remember  the  last  thrilling  moments  when  the  Directive  Omnibus  II,  essential  for 
advancing the project, seemed for a while too hard to be agreed upon. A failure would have 
put the childbirth at deadly risk. But we made it. 
EIOPA had a fundamental role in that delicate process. It impressed a decisive push when it 
adopted  the  interim  measures  for  the  preparation  to  Solvency  II  in  2013.  That  move 
energized  the  whole  insurance  sector  (both  supervisors  and  the  industry),  keeping  its 
attention high in view of the final goal of the new regime. 
Notwithstanding the long and complex preparatory works, not each and every detail is fully 
fixed yet, nor, I would add, fully understood. That is why we organized this Conference. Of 
course, we are not going to solve all our doubts today. In our ordinary work we continuously 
bump into new implementation problems, asking ourselves how to practically deal with this or 
that aspect of Solvency II. To some extent it is physiological, as it always happens when one 
moves from theory to practice. I am confident that at the end of the day we will be able to 
exploit all the benefits of the new regime, while minimizing the implementation costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let me briefly touch upon what are – to my understanding – the key points we need to tackle 
now. 
First  of  all,  we  need  to  stimulate  and  accommodate  a  thorough  cultural  change  in  the 
insurance  sector.  The  transition  from  the  Solvency  I  static/historical  approach  to  the 
Solvency II forward-looking one is revolutionary. It is not rhetoric: in the banking sector the 
same revolution – back in the remote past by now – required years to be digested by all the 
stakeholders.  In  a  risk  dominated  environment,  supervisors  are  expected  to  systematically 
challenge  undertakings  on  their  risk  profile/appetite  and  on  their  ability  to  pursue  it;  for 
instance,  supervisors  should  periodically  discuss  with  the  board  of  each  company  its  risk 
profile and long-term strategies. 
IVASS  has  already  taken  some  steps  in this  direction. One  example:  immediately  after  an 
on-site  inspection  we  convene  a  dedicated  meeting  with  the  board  of  the  company,  to 
discuss  the  outcome  and  possible  corrective  measures.  In  our  experience  not  all  board 
members  are  always  willing  and  able  to  sustain  such  a  constructive  dialogue  with  the 
supervisors,  especially  in  small  undertakings.  But  that  is  essential  in  the  new  regulatory 
framework. It is a cultural gap. We have to work together on it. 
All cultural changes require time, effort and perhaps even some pain. What is important is to 
keep moving ahead – step by step but constantly – towards the main goal: a forward-looking 
approach  in  assessing  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  Both  camps  have  to  adapt  their  way  of 
reasoning: supervisors when analysing data coming from undertakings, the latter when, for 
example, performing the Own Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA). 
A second key point is what I consider now the top priority for the supervisory community in 
the EU: harmonization and convergence of supervisory practices. 
We cannot consistently manage a common regulatory framework if we accept for too long a 
playing field which is not level, arbitrages among national supervisors, discriminations in the 
protection of policyholders along national borders. This was often the case under Solvency I, 
with so many national differences permitted by the EU directives. Solvency II allows a much 
more  limited  number  of  national  specificities.  We  can  more  easily  work  on  harmonizing 
supervisory practices, pointing to a really common approach. This means identifying the best 
practices and being ready, each of us, to adopt them in our national sphere even if they do 
not  come  from  our  own  experience.  It  is  not  easy.  Day-to-day  supervision  remains  in  the 
national  supervisory  authorities’  responsibility,  with  their  different  stories  and  long  years  of 
experience. Spreading the best practices, irrespective of where they were developed, would 
sometimes require forgoing national pride in order to embrace the cause of rationality and 
efficiency. 
I believe EIOPA can do a lot in this field. Not only because “enhancing convergence” is in its 
mandate, but also because it is in the best position to collect and compare all the different 
approaches, identify and recommend the best ones, promote their common adoption, while 
acknowledging differences on aspects that actually merit to be treated differently.  
To accomplish this task the tools are already there. Let me just mention the finalization of 
EIOPA’s supervisory handbook, which we believe is “the” essential tool. Hence, IVASS very 
much supports it and is actively working on it. Another important tool in order to select and 
share best practices is the “peer review work”. 
Even  in  this  case,  we  will  need  time.  From  our  side,  I  can  assure  that  we  are  seriously 
committed to such collective effort. 
A  third  key  point  is  public  disclosure.  Solvency  II  will  be  a  fantastic  opportunity  to  better 
understand the risk profile and the business model of each company, for all the stakeholders: 
supervisors  first,  but  also  market  analysts,  board  members  and  managers,  journalists, 
politicians,  and  the  public  opinion.  The  market  disclosure  rules  foreseen  by  the  new 
legislative  framework  will  really  allow  everybody  interested  to  have  access  to  the  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  position of an insurer with an unprecedented level of detail. The inherent sophistication and 
complexity of Solvency II, however, raise issues that need to be addressed. 
It  is  essential  that  such  informative  treasure  be  of  high  quality,  that  could  be  easily 
understood  and  used.  A  possible  complication  stems,  at  least  in  our  country,  from  the 
coexistence  of  the  Solvency  II  informative  approach  with  financial  statements  based  on 
accounting  standards  not  matching  the  former.  It  may  be  a  source  of  confusion  and 
misunderstandings, possibly endangering the reputation of both supervisors and companies. 
It will be interesting to exchange views on that today. 
Let  me  conclude,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  a  word  of  caution.  Solvency  II  is  just  a 
regulatory framework. It designs the urban map, it imposes one-way streets and speed limits, 
it deploys traffic lights and traffic officers. All this infrastructure has just been changed, and 
today we are going to discuss how to ease the transition towards the new regime. But the 
traffic itself, the thousands of cars and drivers in a modern city, well, that is the market. And 
the insurance market, all over the world, is now facing a bigger challenge than the one posed 
by a change in the rules of the game, though radical. 
The  challenge  is  twofold.  A  structural  one:  technological  innovation.  The  other  one  is 
apparently  of  a  conjunctural  nature,  but  it  is  actually  persisting  almost  like  a  structural 
feature: that is the environment of low and volatile financial returns in which we have been 
living  for  years  now.  I  said  low,  I  could  have  said  negative,  in  the  short-term  segment  of 
financial markets. 
How  fast  will  the  new  technologies  disrupt  the  traditional  way  of  conducting  the  insurance 
business? How long will monetary policies keep interest rates at the present unprecedented 
levels,  or  even  lower?  Nobody  knows,  and  every  opinion  is  legitimate.  But  the  whole 
business is rocked by these developments. 
Understanding  the  trends  and  the  challenges  behind  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  the 
insurance market should be a common endeavor for regulators/supervisors and the industry. 
For  the  time  being,  we  have  to  work  together  in  order  to  make  the  implementation  of 
Solvency II as smooth and effective as possible, also for the purpose of strengthening the 
insurance  sector  and  make  it  capable  of  resisting  the  present  headwinds  and  catch  the 
opportunities of tomorrow. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
