  Louis Kasekende: Key strategic policies needed for Sub-Saharan Africa 
to sustain growth momentum 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Launch of 
IMF’s April 2016 Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa, Kampala, 3 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  both  presenters  for  very  insightful  presentations.  The  trajectories  of 
Africa’s  economies  since 
for 
macroeconomic management on the continent. In my remarks, I will focus on what I believe 
are the most pertinent lessons for macroeconomic policy for all countries in the region. I also 
want  to  highlight  the  lessons  which  prospective  future  oil  and  gas  producers,  such  as 
countries  in  the  East  African  Community,  can  learn from the  current  challenges facing  the 
continent’s commodity producers. 
the  global  economic  crisis  offer 
important 
lessons 
The importance of macroeconomic and fiscal space 
When  African  economies  suffered  shocks  from  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  in 
2008, many countries in the region were able to use countercyclical macroeconomic policies 
–  monetary  and/or fiscal  policy  –  to  help  offset the  negative  impact  on  aggregate  demand 
and  thus  dampen  the  adverse  consequences  for  real  output  growth.  A  countercyclical 
macroeconomic policy response was only possible for those economies which had sufficient 
macroeconomic and fiscal space, in terms of their current account and fiscal balances, public 
debt ratios and foreign exchange reserves. 
Across the continent, macroeconomic and fiscal space has narrowed in the last half decade, 
as  a  consequence  of  deteriorating  fiscal  and  current  account  balances  and  lower  foreign 
exchange  reserves  in  terms  of  months  of  import  cover.  This  is  shown  in  figures  1–3.  The 
reduction of macroeconomic and fiscal space is most pronounced among oil exporters, but it 
also  affects  the  region’s  oil  importers.  As  a  consequence,  both  sets  of  countries  have  les 
scope  for  addressing  the  negative  consequence  of  the  external  shocks  facing  their 
economies  by  implementing  countercyclical  macroeconomic  policies  than  was  the  case  at 
the end of the 2000s. 
The  narrowing  of  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  space  is  partly  the  result  of  governments 
adopting  more  ambitious  public  spending  programmes  to  address  infrastructure  needs, 
mainly  financed  with  external  capital.  There  are  sound  economic  reasons  for  scaling  up 
public  investment,  but  we  have  also  to  recognise  that,  if  it  is  funded  through  higher 
borrowing,  it  will  unavoidably  constrain  the  policy  options  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation, 
leaving  the  region’s  economies  more  vulnerable  to  negative  exogenous  shocks.  Over  the 
medium  term,  I  agree  with  Antoinette  Sayeh  that  a  gradual  rebuilding  of  macroeconomic 
buffers  is  warranted,  which  means  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  fund  higher  public 
investment  by  making  savings  in  recurrent  budgets  or  by  strengthening  the  domestic  tax 
effort, rather than by resorting to higher levels of borrowing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Exchange rate flexibility and inflation 
As  discussed  by  Antionette  Sayeh  in  her  presentation,  exchange  rate  flexibility  provides  a 
crucial tool for facilitating macroeconomic adjustment to external shocks. Unless shocks are 
purely temporary and can be financed, which does not apply to the current shocks facing the 
continent,  some  form  of  adjustment  to  deteriorating  external  terms  of  trade  and/or  a 
tightening  of  access  to  external  finance  is  unavoidable.  This  adjustment  will  be  less 
contractionary for the economy as whole if the real exchange rate depreciates. 
 
 
An  argument  sometimes  advanced  to  oppose  exchange  rate  flexibility  is  that  nominal 
depreciation  will  drive  up  domestic  inflation,  imposing  hardship  on  the  population  and 
obviating any real depreciation. But the experience of several African countries, with flexible 
exchange rates and monetary policies which focus on controlling domestic inflation, does not 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  support this pessimism. As shown in the table above, several countries in the region suffered 
substantial nominal exchange rate depreciations against the US dollar (albeit less so on a 
trade weighted basis) during 2014 and 2015. The table shows the annual depreciation at the 
end of September 2015, which for most countries was close to the peak of the depreciation 
in 2015. Because the pass through to domestic prices is not instantaneous, we would expect 
the impact of the depreciation on inflation to be at its maximum several months later. 
Yet at the end of December 2015, annual inflation rates were much lower than the nominal 
depreciation  in  four  out  of  the  five  countries  shown  in  the  table,  and  have  remained  at  a 
similar level or fallen since then. Their central banks were able to keep control of inflation, by 
tightening monetary policy through raising interest rates or reducing money supply growth, as 
illustrated on slide 17 of Antionette Sayeh’s presentation. Good monetary policy can offset 
the pass through from the exchange rate to domestic prices. The key is tightening monetary 
policy in a decisive and timely manner. The lesson I would draw is that a combination of a 
flexible  exchange  rate  and  a  monetary  policy  which  targets  domestic  policy  objectives  is 
feasible  and  probably  optimal  for  macroeconomic  management  for  most  countries  in  the 
region outside of the currency zones. 
How robust are estimates of Government financing envelopes? 
Governments in the region – especially in the frontier markets – have expanded their access 
to  market  finance  for  their  budgets  over  the  last  decade,  both  from  domestic  (through 
competitive  securities  auctions)  and  external  sources  via  sovereign  bond  issues.  This  has 
been  a  positive  development  in  many  respects,  enabling  governments  to  reduce  their 
dependence on donor aid for budget resources, expand their budget resource envelopes and 
also promote domestic financial market development. 
However, the experience of the last year has shown that financing conditions in both external 
and  domestic  markets  can  tighten  very  rapidly,  thereby  contracting  the  space  for  funding 
fiscal  deficits  from  the  market.  Sovereign  bond  spreads  and  yields  on  domestic  securities 
rose  sharply  for  many  countries  in  the  region,  as  a  result  of  both  exogenous  factors  and 
concerns about fiscal sustainability. Figure 4 illustrates the rise in domestic borrowing costs 
since  April  2014  for  four  countries  in  the  region:  Kenya,  Tanzania,  Uganda  and  Zambia. 
Yields  on  one  year  Treasury  Bills  rose  by  between  9  and  12  percentage  points  in  these 
countries during the course of 2015 and the first quarter of 2016. 
The sharp rise in financing costs for countries across the region indicates that the stability 
and  predictability  of  medium  term  budget  financing  envelopes  might  be  much  less  certain 
than fiscal planners would like. As such, fiscal deficits could become a threat to inflation if 
conditions  in  financial  markets  worsen  and  monetary  financing  of  the  budget  becomes 
inevitable, because government borrowing requirements cannot be met from the market. The 
lesson  is  that  fiscal  policy  planners  must  be  cautious  in  forecasting  the  magnitude  of 
financeable  deficits  and  leave  room  within  their  fiscal  frameworks  to  accommodate  the 
possibility  that  access  to  finance  from  the  market  might  turn  out  to  be  much  lower  than 
forecast. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What lessons can prospective oil and gas producers learn from the recent commodity 
cycle? 
The performance of Africa’s primary commodity producers and the problems they are facing 
because of the commodity price slump, provide important lessons for the prospective oil and 
gas producers in the East African region, which we ignore at our peril. As was pointed out in 
the second presentation, Africa’s commodity producers – about half of the countries in the 
region – have become more dependent on commodity exports, mainly oil and metals, over 
the last 25 years. Furthermore, their economies are very vulnerable to shifts in their external 
terns of trade; commodity price volatility is transmitted to volatility of output. 
First, given the sensitivity of output to commodity price swings, it is particularly important for 
commodity producers to accumulate macroeconomic and fiscal space during periods of high 
commodity prices, so that countercyclical macroeconomic policies are feasible during price 
slumps. This requires saving a significant share of the resource revenue earned during price 
booms,  and  avoiding  accumulating  substantial  liabilities  which  will  have  to  be  repaid  from 
uncertain future resource revenues. Most of the commodity producers in the region failed to 
build adequate policy buffers during the commodity price boom and, as a consequence, have 
no  option  but  to  implement  fiscal  retrenchment  during  the  current  price  slump,  which 
exacerbates the contraction in demand and output. 
The second lesson pertains to the need to avoid becoming over-dependent on commodity 
exports  for  foreign  exchange  earnings  and  public  revenues.  The  East  African  economies 
have begun to diversify their economies away from primary commodities. This is shown in 
figure 5 for Uganda. The share of primary commodity exports, proxied by SITC categories 0–
3 and 9, has fallen from over 90 percent of total merchandise exports in 2002 to less than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  two thirds in 2015. In contrast, the share of processed commodities (SITC categories 4, 5 
and  6)  and  manufactured  products (SITC  categories  7  and  8)  has risen from  8  percent  to 
35 percent over this period. 
 
This  diversification  could  be  put  in  jeopardy  if  hydrocarbon  production  drives  up  the  real 
exchange rate and renders existing export industries uncompetitive. 
Real  exchange  rate  appreciation  is  not  caused  by  oil  production  per  se,  rather  it  is 
determined  by  the  magnitude  of  additional  domestic  spending  which  revenues  from  oil 
production  make  possible.  The  key  to  avoiding  damaging  real  exchange  rate  appreciation 
when  oil  starts  to  be  produced  in  commercial  quantities  is  the  careful  management  of  the 
public  spending  out  of  oil  revenues.  If  oil  revenues  allow  a  large  and  rapid  expansion  of 
public spending, Uganda will risk suffering all of the negative consequences of the resource 
curse which have afflicted other oil producers in the region. 
Finally,  I  want  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  building  strong  institutions.  Institutions  are 
crucial  for  macroeconomic  management,  and  especially  so  in  commodity  producing 
economies.  Empirical  research  from  around  the  world  has  shown  that  whether  or  not 
commodity  producers  actually  derive  benefit from  their  natural resources,  or  instead  suffer 
from a resource curse, depends on the quality of their economic governance, which in turn 
depends on the strength of their institutions. Strong institutions are also important to create a 
business  environment,  characterised  by  transparent  and  predictable  rules  and  regulations, 
competitive markets and a level playing field for all participants, which is necessary to attract 
private  sector  investment  on  a  large  scale.  Good  governance  is  also  important  for  the 
corporate  sector,  as  well  as  the  public  sector,  not  least  because  companies  with  good 
corporate governance are better able to mobilise finance for investment than those whose 
corporate governance is weak. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to emphasise what I think are the key strategic policies needed for 
sub-Saharan Africa to sustain growth momentum over the medium to long term. 
First,  policy  buffers  have  to  be  rebuilt  and  maintained,  to  create  more  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic space to enable governments to implement countercyclical macroeconomic 
policies in the face of negative macroeconomic shocks. 
Second, if SSA economies are to sustain export led growth and diversify away from over-
dependence on primary commodities, they must maintain competitive real exchange rates. 
There is a plethora of empirical evidence to demonstrate how crucial real exchange rates are 
to sustainable export and economic growth. 
Third, regional integration is crucial for many economies on the continent, especially those 
which  are  landlocked.  It  can  provide  markets  for  exports,  allow  traded  goods  industries  to 
achieve  more  optimal  economies  of  scale  and  strengthen  competition  in  markets,  thereby 
stimulating productivity growth. 
Fourth,  as  I  have  just  noted,  strong  institutions  for  economic  governance  are  an  essential 
foundation for economic development. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
