  Andreas Dombret: Banks and the German economy – will they continue 
to work hand in hand? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 4th Regensburger Wirtschaftsgespräch, Industrie- und Handelskammer 
(IHK) Regensburg, Regensburg, 11 February 2016. 
 Introductory remarks 
1. 
Mr Witzany 
President Olschok 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be here in Regensburg to speak to you today. Over the next hour, I would 
like  to  discuss  with  you  whether  banks  and  savings  banks  and  enterprises  will  be  able  to 
continue  working  hand  in  hand  in  future  to  tackle  the  challenges  of  business  life.  I  have 
learned that the forum provided by your first Wirtschaftsgespräch already discussed to what 
extent  the  sometimes  complex  rules  of  the  Basel III  framework  might  affect  the  supply  of 
credit to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in particular. I would now like to revisit 
that debate and continue it in my speech. 
Banks and enterprises: for or against each other? 
2. 
Mark  Twain  once  said,  “A  banker  is  a  fellow  who  lends  you  his  umbrella  when  the  sun  is 
shining, but wants it back the minute it begins to rain.” I probably don’t have to point out that 
bankers aren’t, of course, like that – well, at least most of them aren’t. On the contrary, banks 
often play a very important role for enterprises and for the economy as a whole. They act as 
mediators  between  those  who  invest  capital  and  those  who  need  it.  They  finance 
investments,  they  take  on  and  manage  risks,  they  settle  payments  and  they  play  a 
supporting  role  for  enterprises  in  IPOs.  That  means  that  businesses  need  banks,  but  that 
banks also need businesses. As at the end of last year, German banks and savings banks 
had lent a total of far over €900 billion to domestic enterprises alone – that corresponds to 
just under 12% of their consolidated balance sheet total. Their lending business, in particular 
with  corporate  clients,  is  therefore  a  key  pillar  of  our  domestic  credit  institutions’  business 
activity. 
I am certainly not exaggerating when I say that this kind of cooperation between banks and 
savings  banks  and  enterprises  works  well  in  Germany  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases.  The 
traditional  concept  of  the  “house  bank”,  or  relationship  banking,  has  major  importance  in 
particular for the German Mittelstand. Many enterprises work together with just a single credit 
institution, and, in a lot of cases, have done so for many years. 
Nevertheless,  the  recent  financial  crisis  has  not  left  the  relationship  between  credit 
institutions and enterprises unaffected. The banks’ standing was severely damaged, a lot of 
trust was forfeited, and quips like that by Mark Twain started making the rounds again. The 
loss of trust went so far that some enterprises made enquiries at the Bundesbank during the 
crisis  about  whether  they  could  open  an  account  with  us,  because  they  said  that  they  no 
longer had any confidence in the commercial banks. At the same time, massive government 
financial rescue packages were being put together – without them it is likely that there would 
have  been  a  complete  collapse  of 
the  financial  system  with  even  more  serious 
consequences for the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Banking regulation: we’ll soon be there 
3. 
The financial crisis and the ensuing global financial crisis have made it abundantly clear to us 
how closely interlinked the financial system and the real economy are. We have learned that 
institutions can be so large that they can’t really be removed from the market – this is known 
in the debate as the “too big to fail” problem. We are also aware that credit institutions’ bonus 
systems can get out of hand and generate destabilising effects if they are geared excessively 
to  short-term  profits  and  ignore  long-term  risks.  And  we  now  know  that  the  banks’  high 
degree of interconnectedness and phenomena such as herding behaviour can indeed give 
rise to risks for the financial system, even though each individual bank is stable when viewed 
in isolation. Comprehensive reforms were and are therefore still necessary in order to create 
a secure financial system that reliably fulfils its actual purpose for the real economy. 
And  that  is  why  we  have  seen  many  new  regulatory  initiatives  over  the  past  few  years. 
Today, seven and a half years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers – which for many was 
the beginning of the financial crisis – we are significantly closer to our goal than ever before. 
In response to the financial crisis, the G20 countries have worked on improving the resilience 
of the individual banks. Strengthening the individual banks as the smallest component part of 
the financial system strengthens the system itself. With this goal in mind, in 2010 the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  adopted  a  regulatory  framework,  called  Basel III  for 
short. 
The first step set out in this framework was to overhaul the capital requirements in place for 
credit institutions. Equity capital is key to the stability of the banks as it constitutes their main 
buffer  for  absorbing  losses.  Under  the  new  rules,  banks  have  to  satisfy  higher  capital 
requirements  in  terms  of  both quantity  and  quality.  Since  last  year,  these  institutions  have 
been  required  to  hold  CET1  capital  equal  to  4.5%  of  their  risk-weighted  assets.  This  was 
followed on 1 January by an additional 0.625% for the capital conservation buffer, which is 
set to rise to a total of 2.5% by 2019. From 2019, when it is possible for all instruments to be 
deployed in full, banks and savings banks will have to hold CET1 capital equal to at least 7% 
of risk-weighted assets. This is a significant increase compared with the 2% minimum ratio 
that applied until the end of 2013. What is more, the other new capital instruments, which 
include  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  the  additional  buffers  for  the  most  significant 
institutions, also need to be backed by CET1 capital. 
The new rules will help make the banking system more stable as a whole. At the same time, 
however, it goes without saying that the new rules also place a cost burden on the banks. 
This is by no means unintentional in the case of buffers for the most significant institutions: 
as  their  systemic  importance  puts  them  at  an  advantage  in  terms  of  funding  costs,  this 
burden levels the playing field at least in part. However, some observers fear that this is also 
detrimental to the real economy. They argue that the new rules are making it more expensive 
for banks to lend and are therefore concerned that the institutions will be forced to reduce 
their lending activities in the future. 
The Basel Committee was well aware of the impact that the new rules would have. It was for 
this reason that the Committee also established transitional periods with the aim of rendering 
it easier for banks and savings banks to make the necessary adjustments. These apply to 
both  the  qualitative  and  the  quantitative  aspects  of  the  new  capital  requirements.  For 
example, the capital instruments that are no longer eligible for inclusion in CET1 capital will 
not be excluded in one fell swoop; instead, they will be phased out over a period of several 
years. Furthermore, increasing requirements regarding the level of capital to be held will be 
introduced only gradually. 
But  the  Basel  Committee  has  also  come  in  for  criticism  in  response  to  these  transitional 
periods  –  in  the  eyes  of  some  government  representatives  and  market  observers,  they 
appeared to constitute too great a concession to the banks. Personally, however, I believe 
that the Committee has served the interests of the real economy, in particular, without having 
to compromise on in its efforts to increase the resilience of the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Of course, the development of Basel III has and will continue to be accompanied by impact 
studies  that  assess  the  effects  of  the  new  rules  on  financial  institutions  and  the  real 
economy. These studies have thus far come to the conclusion that the short-term economic 
impact  is  rather  low  and  are  therefore  consistent  with  numerous  earlier  findings  that  were 
able  to  demonstrate,  for  instance,  that  credit  institutions’  borrowing  costs  would  only  rise 
marginally  if  additional  capital  requirements  were  imposed.  According  to  these  findings, 
increasing  capital  requirements  by  100  basis  points  would,  on  average,  cause  institutions’ 
overall capital costs to rise by less than ten basis points. 
Turning our attention to the future, tighter regulation actually promotes prosperity because it 
lessens the likelihood of financial crises. This is a very important point! When talking about 
the implications of regulation, we cannot focus solely on the short-term costs that the banks 
are  facing  –  we  must  also  pay  attention  to  the  long-term  benefits.  Just  think  of  the  many 
billions of euros of public money that had to be spent in Germany alone over recent years to 
stabilise the banks. In some countries, taking this measure has even plunged governments 
themselves into significant financial difficulties. Viewed from this perspective, I think the price 
we are paying for stricter regulation is entirely appropriate. Of course, the impact that reforms 
have on the real economy must, nevertheless, always be taken into account. 
Our objective, not just within the Basel Committee, is to make banks safer and thus minimise 
the likelihood of financial crises. At the same time, we want to ensure two things in the event 
of  an  institution  running  into  trouble: that  the  taxpayer  will  not  immediately  be  called  upon 
once  again  to foot  the  bill  for failings  on  the  part  of the  bank’s  management,  and  that  the 
institution can be resolved without causing any major disruptions. 
Aside  from  this,  the  regulation  seeks  to  accommodate  those  enterprises  that  rely  on  bank 
loans.  Take,  for  instance,  the  Basel  framework’s  “SME  package”,  which  was  introduced 
under Basel II and updated under Basel III. As part of this package, the capital that has to be 
held  against  loans  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  is  cut  by  as  much  as  half 
depending on probability of default and collateral. As a result, capital costs for loans to small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises  are  significantly  cheaper  than  those  for  loans  to  larger 
enterprises. It will come as no surprise to you that it was the Bundesbank that campaigned 
so  hard  for  this  SME-friendly  regulation.  Notably,  the  Basel  framework’s  SME  package 
creates significant incentives for lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. Thanks to 
this regulation, I believe that we have been able to sensibly exert a positive influence on the 
relationship between banks and enterprises. 
Regulation calls for a sense of proportion 
4. 
If we are to discuss the impact of banking regulation on small and medium-sized enterprises, 
I  believe  we  must  also  consider  the  regulatory  implications  for  small  and  medium-sized 
banks and savings banks. The global regulatory reform of the banking sector in the past few 
years was intended to tighten the regulation of internationally active credit institutions whilst 
also  creating  a  fair  and  level  playing  field  worldwide.  As  a  result,  however,  almost  all 
regulatory measures are essentially aimed at internationally active large banks. This makes 
absolute  sense  in  the  context  of  the  crisis.  But  here  and  there,  there  is  a  feeling  that  in 
applying the rules we may have thrown the baby out with the bathwater; in other words, we 
have  made  the  rules  so  complex  that  they  are  overwhelming  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions. 
As a result, the debate about the proportionality of regulation is heating up. Of course, tighter 
regulation  means  a  considerable  workload  for  banks  and  savings  banks,  as  well  as  for 
supervisors. But it is also very important to weigh this against the cost to society of financial 
crises. Size is only one of several important criteria that determine whether an institution is 
“systemically  important”.  Other  major  factors  are  substitutability,  interconnectedness  and 
exposure to similar risks, which is why we cannot simply apply a less complex set of rules to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  small banks than to their large competitors. Instead, these institutions must be regulated in 
relation to the risk they pose. 
At  this  point,  I  feel  it  is  very  important  to  emphasise  that  the  current  regulatory  and 
supervisory  frameworks  are  already  largely  proportionate.  For  example,  at  present,  risk-
weighted capital requirements are calculated differently under standardised approaches and 
internal  ratings-based  approaches.  Furthermore,  a  portfolio  has  been  introduced  to  help 
determine regulatory capital requirements in retail banking. And last but not least, small and 
medium-sized  institutions  are  benefiting  from  greater  regulatory  leeway  for  business  with 
corporate  customers  from  the  SME  sector,  which  are  an  important  client  group  for  these 
banks. 
So  as  you  can  see,  the  implications  of  the  sometimes  complex  new  rules  of  the  Basel  III 
framework affect credit institutions and enterprises in similar ways. Small and medium-sized 
market participants, in particular – both in the financial sector and in the real economy – are 
concerned about the new regulation. However, I think many of their worries are unfounded. 
The Basel framework creates active incentives to lend to SMEs, which play an important role 
in employment and economic activity – especially in Germany. In addition, the new rules will 
provide relief for credit institutions that are less significant in terms of their impact on financial 
stability. In my opinion, Basel III will bring us a balanced framework that lays the foundations 
for sustainable economic growth. 
Capital markets union will broaden the funding base 
5. 
As I mentioned earlier, the cooperation between banks and enterprises is hugely important 
for  both  parties.  Whilst  banks  provide  financing  to  enterprises,  they  are  themselves 
dependent on enterprises to generate their income. I am firmly convinced that this symbiotic 
relationship  in  Germany  functions  well.  But  the  financial  crisis  also  showed  that  this 
symbiosis can very quickly evolve into a destructive relationship, specifically when individual 
banks conduct business of rather limited use to the real economy, the repercussions of which 
cause everyone to suffer in the end. Enterprises suffer when a crisis in the financial system 
snowballs  into  an  economic  crisis.  Taxpayers  suffer  when  the  state  has  to  rescue  ailing 
banks. And banks suffer when their reputations are ruined in the wake of a crisis and both 
enterprises and the general public lose their trust in them. Against this backdrop, it is crucial 
that banks remember their true role: to finance the real economy. 
So  how  might  the  future  relationship  between  banks  and  enterprises  look?  You  may  be 
familiar with the concept of the “capital markets union”, which is currently the subject of much 
debate and which aims to bring about deeper integration of Europe’s financial markets – and 
not just  the  debt  markets,  but  also the  equity  capital  markets. I  am  assuming  that this  will 
also trigger further changes to the structure of the European financial system. But we mustn’t 
overlook the fact that much has already changed in recent years. In 1999, bank loans still 
made up 22% of German enterprises’ liabilities; in the third quarter of 2015, this figure fell to 
just over 14% – and this was despite the healthy economic situation in Germany. Following 
their  experiences  in  the  financial  crisis,  when  a  number  of  banks  drastically  reduced  their 
credit supply, enterprises have started seeking alternatives to the traditional bank loan and, 
where possible, have increasingly turned to the capital market. The scale of capital market 
financing  nonetheless  remains  low  in  Germany  –  especially  when  compared  to  the  United 
States or the United Kingdom. 
All the same, I am confident that the cooperation between banks and enterprises will still be 
of  great  importance  going  forward.  For  SMEs,  in  particular,  the  relationship  with  their 
principal  bank  continues  to  play  a  vital  role  –  not  least  because  trust  is  built  on  past 
experience. A principal bank thus has an information advantage over another investor, which 
is highly likely to benefit enterprises. 
But  besides  market-based  funding,  other  lenders  such  as  insurers,  other  financial 
intermediaries or trade credits from other enterprises are also increasingly taking the place of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  traditional bank loans. The use of own funds has also risen, primarily among SMEs. In short, 
the funding options for German enterprises are becoming more varied. 
At this point, one might worry that this development will have a negative impact on banks’ 
earnings, but I would like to put something into perspective here. Diversification of funding 
sources can surely contribute to the stability and efficiency of the financial system – and that 
ultimately  benefits  the  banks,  too.  There  is  still  a  great  deal  of  potential  in  this  respect  in 
Germany especially, but also other European countries, compared with the English-speaking 
world.  For  this  reason,  I  take  a  thoroughly  positive  view  of  the  increased  importance  of 
bonds,  securitisations  and  borrowers’  notes,  even  in  the  SME  sector.  It  is  particularly 
important, however, to pay attention to the quality of these instruments, especially in such a 
young market segment. Thus, even SME bonds do not provide a real way out of the funding 
problems of weak enterprises, but instead are a suitable instrument for larger SMEs with high 
credit quality. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Let me sum up by saying that banks and enterprises are closely interconnected. They play a 
crucial role in the functioning of our economy, both individually and together. 
Yet  to  a  great  extent,  banks  and  enterprises  shape  their  relationship  themselves:  banks 
decide which enterprises to lend to at which conditions, and enterprises return this trust with 
their  demand  for  loans.  I  am  therefore  firmly  convinced  that  credit  institutions  and 
enterprises,  working  hand  in  hand,  will  still  be  able  to  overcome  the  future  challenges  of 
business  life.  Even  so,  their  relationship  will  certainly  experience  further  change  in  the 
coming years and incorporate additional participants, mainly in the capital market. I consider 
this a positive development, as the next rainstorm is sure to come, and when it does, it will 
be  a  good  thing  that  enterprises  are  able  to  procure  their  umbrellas  both  on  the  capital 
market and in the shape of loans. 
Thank you for your attention. I now look forward to a lively discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
