   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Philippines in 2016 – sustaining resilience amid 
headwinds 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  3rd  Business  Forum  of  The  Manila  Times,  Manila, 
23 February 2016. 
 I am pleased to join you this morning for the 3rd Manila Times Business Forum.  
There are quite a number of fora that tackle economic outlook and issues of the day, but I don’t 
know of any that is organized by a private institution, which dates itself to the time the country 
became independent from Spain!1 In addition, The Manila Times President & CEO Mr. Dante 
Ang  said  earlier  that  this  forum  gathers  various  speakers,  including  those  officials  from 
institutions such as IMF, WB and BSP to present their prognosis for the economy this year.  
Very few institutions stand the test of time – technology, innovation, and more recently, social 
media, among others; change the way we do things, how we perceive events, and therefore 
how we react.  
Central banking in the Philippines is just 67 years old and yet the events of the last two decades 
have dramatically changed how we do things.  
I am sure many, if not all of you, have heard of central banks lowering their policy rates to 
negative territory, of quantitative easing (QE), and of macroprudential measures. In reality, the 
central banker’s tool box now contains other implements beyond the traditional interest rate 
and on-site supervision. But, I am getting ahead of myself here. I’ve been asked to speak on 
the Philippine economic outlook for 2016. 
While that seems much focused, our conversation today will certainly touch upon global events 
of the last few years and our expectations beyond 2016. For me to speak of 2016 however, I 
need to take a step back. 
A newspaper lives or draws interest from its public through its headlines. And since this Forum 
today is being hosted by The Manila Times, I thought I would frame my talk today as a series 
of headlines.  
My first is this – The Philippines entered 2016 from a position of relative strength. 
The country grew 5.8 percent for the full year 2015. If we take Q4 alone, the country grew at 
6.3 percent, making us the 4th fastest growing economy in Asia, following India, China and 
Vietnam. That Q4 performance also brings to 68 the number of consecutive quarters of positive 
economic  growth.  The  services  sector  remained  the  biggest  driver  of  output  while  the 
resurgence  of  manufacturing  also  helped  to  strengthen  our  base  for  growth.  Growth  also 
continued  to  be  buoyed  by  strong  private  spending,  aided  by  the  increase  in  domestic 
employment and the steady inflow of remittances from overseas Filipinos (OFs). The “catch 
up” in fiscal spending in 2015 also helped to raise domestic output. 
We experienced this strong economic growth together with low and stable prices. For the full 
year 2015, the average inflation rate stood at only 1.4 percent, the lowest registered since the 
BSP adopted the inflation targeting framework in 2002. In the BSP, we characterize this “sweet 
spot” as – the positive convergence of strong growth and low inflation. 
For  certain,  the  country’s  healthy  banking  system  founded  on  years  of  judicious  reforms, 
including financial inclusion initiatives, aided the country’s economic expansion. Our banks’ 
                                                
1   The tagline of The Manila Times – “Trusted since 1898”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   balance  sheets  have  remained  strong.  In  particular,  our  banks  maintain  high  capital,  with 
capital adequacy ratio above national regulatory and international standards and the quality of 
their assets continues to improve, with declining NPL and NPA ratios. 
The country’s external liquidity position has also continued to be robust and helped shield the 
economy and the domestic financial markets from the worst effects of the global shocks.  
Our current account has been in surplus since 2003 supported by steady remittances and, in 
more recent years, strong receipts from the business process outsourcing sector. For the full 
year 2015, the overall balance of payments (BOP) position yielded a surplus of US$2.6 billion, 
a  reversal from  the  US$2.9  billion  deficit  in  2014.  Last  Friday,  we  released  the  balance of 
payments position for January 2016. It was a deficit of $0.81 billion, which was due to the 
payment  of  National  Government  (NG)  debt  service  and  the  BSP’s  foreign  exchange  (FX) 
operations  that  were  only  partially  offset  by  FX  inflows  from  deposits  of  the  NG  and  BSP 
income from abroad. We see this deficit as temporary and we expect a turnaround in the BOP 
position later this year, similar to what we experienced in 2015.  
Our  gross  international  reserves  continue  to  grow.  At  end  2015,  our  gross  international 
reserves (GIR) stood at US$80.7 billion, over US$1.0 billion more than that registered in 2014. 
This  level  of  reserves  can  cover  10.3  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and  payment  for 
services and income.  
These  encouraging  developments  have  helped  elevate  third-party  assessments  on  the 
domestic economy’s progress and prospects. Several indices of the country have moved up. 
These indices include those on transparency, governance and ease of doing business, among 
others. In September last year, Fitch upgraded its credit outlook on the Philippine economy to 
“positive”  from  “stable.”  This  is  important  because  it  raises  the  prospect  that  Fitch  would 
upgrade the country’s credit rating in the next 12–18 months.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the facts and figures that I just discussed provide evidence to support 
the first headline, that is, that the Philippines entered 2016 from a position of relative strength.  
My second headline: The Philippines is SEEN to SUSTAIN resilience in 2016.  
Resilience is a word that many use, but it is important to remember that this is a word that 
holds meaning only when it is taken in context. In other words, in a specific circumstance. 
Clearly, resilience cannot be tested if one is sailing over calm seas.  
For us, 2015 was not at all calm. It was a challenging year. The markets and other policy 
makers were cautious. We were all waiting for the Fed “lift off” (or when the Fed would begin 
to raise its target rate). We weren’t sure where oil prices were headed. We didn't know how to 
fully interpret the actions by Chinese authorities, including the devaluation of the Renminbi 
(RMB). And yet, in the face of all these uncertainties, the country stood its ground in 2015.  
2016 was off to a bumpy start. While, we foresee the same risk factors in 2016 as those in 
2015, it may be more difficult to predict how these factors would play out in 2016. Policy makers 
are being more sensitive to spill overs and spillbacks to their economies. And market sentiment 
continues to be “shifty.” Let me quickly go through how we see each challenge evolving in 
2016.  
Let me begin with China. When the global financial crisis (GFC) started in 2007/2008, global 
growth remained afloat because the emerging markets, the largest of which is China, were 
growing. This time around, China’s growth prospects are not as clear-cut as then. There is now 
debate whether China could experience a hard landing. This is creating market uncertainty, 
because in addition to contraction in global trade, a significant slowdown in China could also 
put downward pressure on global commodity prices.  
Furthermore,  the  markets  are  carefully  watching  the  Chinese  authorities’  next  moves  to 
liberalize their markets. You may recall the stock market rout in China in August last year. That 
was precipitated by the surprise RMB devaluation. That led to a sell-off in equities across the 
globe. Analysts say that to avoid a recurrence of such adverse reactions, markets need to see 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   more cohesiveness in the policy measures from Chinese authorities, as well as clarity in their 
communication.  
In the US, the Fed, in December 2015, determined that the US labor market conditions and 
inflation outlook already warranted “lift off”. Based on the assessment of the FOMC members 
then, the Fed was projected to raise its target rate by 100 basis points in 2016. But more recent 
statements  of  some  Fed  governors  now  reveal  less  conviction  in  terms  of  the  speed  and 
magnitude of normalization of its policy. Even Fed Chair Yellen indicated in her latest testimony 
to  the  US  Congress  that  foreign  economic  developments  could  pose  “risks  to  economic 
growth.” Some analysts have taken these recent statements to mean that the Fed may delay 
its next tightening moves. This uncertainty is heightening market volatility – yet again! 
Turning to oil – oil price is now at about $30 per barrel (pbl). In mid-2014, it was about $108 pbl. 
While the rate of decline has decelerated, the price is now at levels that have triggered major 
oil producers to “come to the table” to discuss the possibility of “freezing” production to specific 
output levels. Global oil supply has overtaken demand since 2014. 
Oil importers such as the Philippines benefit from low oil prices. Low oil prices feed positively 
towards lower inflation and encourages domestic economic activity. But low prices are double-
edged  in  that  significantly  low  oil  prices  could  lead  to  oil-exporters  cutting  back  on  capital 
expenditures. This in turn may trigger a decline in global trade and growth.  
The uneven global growth prospects, the differences in the policy actions across the globe, 
and  the  uncertainty  in  oil  price  movements  are  triggering  global  portfolio  rebalancing.  As 
market  players  flesh  out  their  interpretation  of  these  developments,  volatility  in  financial 
markets is heightened.  
According to the Institute of International Finance (IIF), emerging market economies (EMEs) 
experienced strong net capital outflows in 2015. It forecasts that further net outflows from China 
are expected to continue in 2016. These net movements of funds from EMEs in 2015 have 
been reflected, among others, in a decline in ASEAN stock market values and an increase in 
the volatility of currencies in the region. 
How could these developments impact the Philippines?  
I already spoke earlier about the positive impact of low oil prices on the Philippines – which it 
helps  reduce  inflationary  pressures  while  encouraging  domestic  consumption.  We  could, 
however, be adversely affected if the low oil prices cause export destinations of our OFWs in 
the Middle East to cut back on employment.  
As for the divergent growth prospects in the US and China, we could be affected via the trade 
channel. If US growth will continue and gain further traction, this could mitigate the impact of a 
slowdown in China.  
Furthermore, our domestic financial markets have not been spared from the market volatility 
that these external developments have stirred. The Philippine Stock Exchange index (PSEi) 
fell, credit default swaps (CDS) and bond spreads widened, and the peso depreciated. 
To complete the picture, I should mention that we have our own domestic considerations in 
addition to these external challenges. Most prominent of our domestic risks are the prospects 
of a prolonged El Niño and the persistence of the infrastructure gaps.  
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the operating environment expected in 2016. As I said, while it’s 
the same factors, how these factors will play out may not necessarily be the same in 2016. To 
paraphrase the title of the book of Reinhart and Rogoff, “This time it COULD BE different.” 
You may ask – How can we claim (as a second headline) that – “the Philippines will sustain its 
resilience in 2016?” First, because we have come into 2016 from a position of relative strength. 
This was my first headline. Second, from the point of view of the BSP, we have been focused 
in our policy thrusts.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   We are forward-looking in our policy formulation. Let me illustrate using our monetary policy. 
In 2014, we moved pre-emptively, in anticipation of the Fed lift off. Markets had been talking 
about “lift off” since the Fed “taper tantrum” in May 2013. But because until 2014, the Fed had 
only moved to end QE and not actually raise rates, markets kept on “pushing the envelope,” 
so to speak, in terms of maximizing the benefits of low interest rates.  
Through a series of tightening measures, we communicated to the market then that players 
should begin to take stock of how they were assessing and pricing risk. In a way, the BSP was 
reminding banks (and the general public) that interest rates would not remain low forever, and 
that there is need to re-think business models and investment strategies. We also ensured that 
our tightening measures were consistent with the inflation outlook at the time. Because our 
actions were early enough, our markets were well-positioned when the Fed finally raised its 
target rate in December 2015. 
We  are  not  only  forward-looking;  we  are  also  calibrated  in  our  actions  and  mindful  of  the 
idiosyncrasies of our domestic economy.  
Let me illustrate using our approach to banking reform. In the aftermath of the GFC, the global 
financial  market  reform agenda  was  thick  and  heavy-handed,  primarily  because  there  was 
much fear of a recurrence of crisis from slack regulation. The Philippine banking system was 
not as affected by the GFC. In part, because our bankers are inherently conservative.  
Therefore the BSP adopted the global reforms in a calibrated manner and only as appropriate 
to our domestic conditions. We were an early adopter of the capital requirements under Basel 
3, and we are now phasing in the rest of the components of Basel 3.  
In addition to adopting global reforms that are suited to our particular requirements in a timely 
manner, we also put out regulations and guidelines that are intended to raise bank governance 
standards, strengthen credit, operational, IT risk management and internal control frameworks, 
and improve market conduct.  
Our  approach  to  regulatory  reform  is  anchored  on  Financial  Stability.  This  is  an  important 
lesson we learned from the GFC. Most policy makers have now come to realize that having 
strong  individual  banks,  while  that  is  necessary,  is  NOT  sufficient.  Policy  makers  need  to 
consider the strength and soundness of the system as a whole. 
Our regulations benefit from consultation with the banking industry and are evidence-based. 
We meet with industry associations and groups – 15 in all – through the BSP Supervisory 
Policy Committee. 
Putting all these together, you can see that our approach to regulatory reform and adoption is 
comprehensive and strategic. Our goal is not only to grow strong domestic banks but also 
banks that can compete in the global arena, particularly when ASEAN integration comes to full 
swing.  
BSP policy formulation is forward-looking. It is calibrated and consultative. It is also based on 
solid academic foundations and strong market surveillance. In policy formulation, the BSP uses 
various econometric and macro- models. To help ensure that these tools are current against 
the  latest  economic  research,  we  constantly  fine  tune  our  forecasting  models,  stress-tests 
parameters; recalibrate early-warning systems and distress indices.  
You may have also heard about our implementation of the interest rate corridor (IRC) in Q2 
2016.  As  we’ve  emphasized  in  our  public  briefings,  the  implementation  of  the  IRC  is  an 
operational change. It is not a shift in our monetary policy framework. We will continue to be 
an inflation targeting central bank. The objective of the operational shift is to allow BSP to 
better steer short-term market interest rates towards the BSP policy rate. This should make 
the transmission of changes in the monetary policy stance to the rest of the economy more 
effective.  
Ladies and gentlemen, while we are improving how we do things, there will be no change in 
our primary mandate – we will keep our eye on inflation. At our most recent policy meeting, we 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   kept  policy  rates  steady  (at  4  percent  for  the  reverse  repurchase  rate).  Our  view  was  that 
domestic demand continues to be quite robust and there is no urgent need to provide further 
monetary stimulus.  
Our models showed that even as inflation is currently below our target range of 2-4 percent 
(i.e.,  1.3  percent  in  January  2016),  inflation  will  slowly  move  to  within  target  in  2016  (i.e., 
2.2 percent) and 2017 (i.e., 3.2 percent). Going forward, we will continue to closely monitor the 
inflation process. 
We will also keep our FX policy of allowing the exchange rate to be determined by market 
forces. We are mindful that the peso is sensitive to external developments, so we will have 
scope for official action to limit excesses in exchange rate movements.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me reiterate, we have the policy space to respond to uncertainties 
in the external and domestic environment. We will therefore make adjustments to the stance 
of policy as conditions warrant.  
Headline number 3: A stable macroeconomy should be inclusive.  
Some of you in the audience may be wondering why the Central Bank Governor would speak 
about  inclusiveness. With  the  many  macroeconomic  and  banking  concerns  it  already  has, 
should the central bank still be involved in inclusion. Our response in the BSP is YES, we 
should. We cannot ignore the financial consumer. When all is said and done, the purpose of a 
stable macroeconomic environment is ultimately to improve the consumer’s well-being.  
In the BSP, we have institutionalized financial inclusion in our strategic agenda. We put in place 
banking regulations that leverage on technology to increase access to financial products for the 
underserved  and  unbanked,  strengthen  financial  consumer  protection,  and  raise  financial 
education and awareness to these new financial products and modes of delivery.  
We will also pursue the development of our National Retail Payments System or NRPS. The 
NRPS  should  move  the  country  from  being  cash-heavy  to  being  “cash-lite”.  The  NRPS  is 
expected  to  improve  transparency,  security,  and  efficiency  and  reduce  costs  in  financial 
transactions.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I presented three headlines. First, the Philippines bucked the trend in 
2015. Next, we will continue to be resilient in 2016. And, finally we will endeavor to share the 
fruits  of  a  strong  macroeconomy  to  a  broader  cross-section  of  the  economy.  These  three 
should be sufficient to make a full page of news. 
Indeed,  our  country  has  continued  to  expand  despite  the  difficult  external  and  domestic 
operating environment. It has been said that difficulty or adversity BUILDS character. In a way, 
we can say that the challenges our country has faced so far, and continue to face, have helped 
BUILD our character. We have also built buffers in the interim. And have become stronger as 
a nation. 
But, I also believe difficulties or adversities REVEAL character. The challenges and difficulties 
we have faced have revealed that we, as a nation, have what it takes to be resilient.  
However, ladies and gentlemen, these sources of resilience and buffers, the gains that we 
have attained so far, all these can only be fully harnessed if YOU in the private sector will 
continue to do your part as well. YOU turn the wheels of industry and business. YOUR actions 
will help solidify these gains. I hope to see YOU make headlines of your own. Headlines that 
will help ensure the Philippines sustains resilience in 2016 and beyond. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
