  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Macro-financial linkages – looking back to look 
ahead 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  6th  BSP  International 
Research Conference, Manila, 21 September 2016. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  6th  International  Research  Conference  of  the  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP). The theme of this year’s conference “Revisiting macro-financial 
linkages:  Looking  back  and  looking  ahead,”  highlights  the  growing  attention  placed  on  the 
importance of the interactions between financial conditions and the real economy. 
A look back: The traditional view on transmission 
Macro-financial linkages as a body of economic work was not that extensive before the turn 
of the century. To help illustrate, I asked staff to do an advanced search in Google Scholar 
for articles on macro-financial linkages. The results are quite revealing. If you take the period 
1980–1999, the search will yield 82 articles on the subject. But if the search is made for the 
period 2000–2016, the number of articles increases dramatically to 2,700. 
The reviews of literature done in formal research work confirm this finding as well. Research 
and modeling of macroeconomics and the financial sector traditionally proceeded in isolation 
from  one  another.  Previously,  the  models  of  the  economic  growth  process  were  largely 
driven  by  “real”  factors  —  productivity  of  the  workforce,  the  quality  of  entrepreneurs,  the 
quantity and quality of the capital stock, the availability of resources, the state of technical 
knowledge. And, financial markets were assumed to be frictionless. 
But the work on asymmetric information and principal-agent theory afforded economists new 
ways of thinking about the role that financial markets play in the real economy. For instance, 
because  of  asymmetric  information,  banks  would  need  to  “screen”  borrowers  either  by 
carefully  looking  at  the  firm’s  value  or  requiring  collateral.  Now,  when  the  value  of  assets 
increases, the value of a firm’s balance sheet, including its collateral, also increases. At the 
same time, the upward valuation of assets raises a bank’s capital, allowing it to increase its 
lending. In other words, an increase in asset prices leads to an increase in loans and raises 
economic activity. By contrast, a fall in asset prices results in slower economic activity. 
Weak  macroeconomic  conditions,  in  turn,  reduce  profits  of  businesses  and  incomes  of 
households,  which  can  push  up  borrowers’  default  probabilities  that  may  weaken  balance 
sheets of banks and other financial institutions. 
This cycle or reversal mechanism can last long and the results may be pervasive – affecting 
investment decisions, investor confidence, consumption, savings, and risk aversion, among 
others. In the literature, this vicious feedback loop is what we refer to as financial accelerator 
. 
The Feedback loop – there is a real cost 
The  concept  of  a  feedback  loop  became  even  more  pronounced  during  and  post-2008 
Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC),  creating  a  need  to  reassess  and  review  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism as we knew it then. 
The GFC  has  taught  policy  makers  and  academia, that  we  could  no  longer  deal  only  with 
monetary impulses and “assume away” the financial market. A clear lesson from the GFC is 
that there are frictions in the financial market and that these frictions can increase costs in 
the economy significantly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Empirical estimates before the 2008 GFC (that is from 1980–2007) show that output losses 
after a financial crisis could result in losses of more than 25 percent of GDP. In some cases, 
financial crisis could have lasting effects by lowering the trend growth of GDP. 
For the US, estimates by the US Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas show that relative to the 
2007  output,  about  40  to  90  percent  of  the  output  was  foregone  as  result  of  the  financial 
crisis in 2008. Not only was the crisis associated with a huge loss of economic output and 
financial  wealth,  but  also  with  psychological  consequences  from  extended  unemployment, 
homelessness, university drop-outs, deferred or denied retirements, among others. Thus, the 
real total cost of the crisis likely exceeded the value of one year’s output. 
found 
the  BIS  study 
Domestic turbulences can spill over 
But output losses can go beyond the boundaries of a single economy. As we witnessed in 
the last two decades, the progress in the globalization of financial markets was accompanied 
by the frequent occurrences of financial crisis. What might, in the past, have been considered 
to only be a domestic problem, could now quickly “spillover” and become a global problem. 
Moreover, in considering such spillovers, the IMF warns that there could also be spillbacks. 
IMF Managing Director Lagarde refers to spillovers and spillbacks as the “two-way street of 
unintended knock-on effects.” 
Let me cite fairly recent developments that can magnify spillovers, particularly to EMEs. First, 
the  global  presence  of  asset  managers.  A  2014  study  by  the  BIS  concluded  that  asset 
managers  in  emerging  market  economies  tend  to  behave  in  a  correlated  manner.  In 
particular, 
these  global  asset  managers  used 
common/similar  portfolio  benchmarks,  their  strategies/recommendations  to  institutional 
clients  tended  to  also  be  similar,  ultimately  fanning  “herding  behavior”  in  investor  flows. 
Investment  flows  to  asset  managers  and  asset  prices  then  amplified  each  other’s 
fluctuations, and reinforced each other’s directional movements. 
Second,  co-movements  among  non-financial  corporates  in  emerging  market  economies. 
Chui,  Fender  and  Shusko  (2014)  found  that  non-financial  EME  corporates  have  been 
borrowing  more  internationally  than  domestically  to  take  advantage  of  global  low  interest 
rates and strong local currencies. While “cheap” funding could boost economic performance 
if it supports viable investment projects, it also increases the borrower’s rollover interest and 
currency risks, especially if revenues are in local currency. Furthermore, some corporations 
may have used borrowed funds for purely financial (i.e., speculative) purposes. 
Third,  the  asynchronous  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies,  and  more  recently,  the 
uncertainty  regarding  the  timing  and  pace  of  further  monetary  policy  tightening  by  the  US 
Federal  Reserve.  These  developments  have  led  to  heightened  interest  rate  volatility  and 
rising spreads, adding pressures on emerging market currencies. 
that  because 
Looking forward: Macrofinancial Stability 
Clearly, given these interlinkages, policy makers can no longer view macrostability only as 
“either” monetary/macroeconomics “or” just the financial sector. There have been increasing 
discussions on the development of a macro-financial stability framework that would embody 
policies  –  whether  monetary,  fiscal  or  prudential  –  to  systematically  incorporate  financial 
stability considerations into traditional macroeconomic analysis – to more effectively address 
financial booms and busts or the so-called financial cycles. 
Moreover, work by Borio and Zhu (2012) point to the “risk taking channel” of monetary policy 
transmission, or how monetary policy affects the way economic agents perceive, tolerate and 
ultimately price risk. In considering the risk taking channel of policy transmission, it is quite 
evident that policy makers need to more closely examine market behavior and its phases — 
the uncharacteristic calm, market herding, reversal and then panic. When one stops to think 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  about it, these phases really led us from the Great Moderation to the Great Global Financial 
Crisis. 
Policies and macro-financial linkages 
This  risk-taking  behavior  by  agents  necessitates  a  new  set  of  tools.  To  address  financial 
stability  concerns  arising  from  financial  cycles,  policymakers  in  both  advanced  and 
developing economies have increasingly used macroprudential policies in all forms. We have 
seen credit-related measures such as caps on loan-to-value ratio and debt-to-income ratio, 
caps  on  foreign  currency  lending,  and  ceiling  on  credit  or  credit  growth;  liquidity-related 
measures such as limits on net open currency positions or currency and maturity mismatch, 
and  reserve  requirements;  and  capital-related  measures  such  as  countercyclical  capital 
requirements and dynamic provisioning. 
While  some  specific  measures  have  proven  to  be  more  effective  than  others,  all  these 
policies  intend  to  change  the  constraints  and  incentives  faced  by  financial  market 
participants. In Asia, there is evidence that credit-related and sector-specific macroprudential 
policy instruments have been effective in addressing imbalances, which have helped contain 
the severity of economic downturns or prevent the occurrence of a major economic crisis. 
Even fiscal policies can have significant impacts on financial stability. The structure of taxes 
and subsidies can influence private sector decisions on leverage. Studies have shown that 
corporate  income  tax  systems  generally  encourage  the  use  of  debt  rather  than  equity 
finance. This is because interest payments are allowed as a deduction in calculating taxable 
profits,  but  the  return  to  equity  is  not.  The  favorable  tax  treatment  on  corporate  debt  can 
create  a  debt  bias,  which,  in  turn,  can  lead  to  more  highly  leveraged  banks.  Likewise, 
underpriced  and  implicit  government  guarantees  of  corporate  debt  liabilities  have  often 
encouraged debt over equity financing. 
Today’s Conference - Contribution to the discussion 
Ladies and gentlemen, macro-financial linkages are continuing to evolve. There are just so 
many  moving  parts  and  therefore  many  possible  outcomes.  The  risk  that  our  analysis  of 
these evolving developments as well as the risk that our policy tools may not be responsive 
enough to these changes are present. 
In  this  two-day  conference,  we  re-examine  what  we  know  about  macro-financial  linkages, 
with the hope of reducing what we do not know, and possibly reduce the risks of unknown 
outcomes. 
We have brought together experts with a wide range of backgrounds, including policymakers, 
and those working in international research institutions and academia, to exchange ideas on 
these issues. I thank the authors and discussants, and your respective institutions for your 
valuable  contribution  to  this  research  conference.  The  BSP  is  also  grateful  to  the  session 
chairs for accepting our invitation to facilitate the discussions. 
This morning’s session will focus on the international aspect of macro-financial linkages as 
papers  dwell  on  financial  globalization,  monetary  and  financial  spillovers,  and  financial 
contagion.  The  afternoon  session  will  focus  on  the  macro-financial  linkages  within  the 
domestic  economy  with  papers  touching  on  liquidity,  sovereign  bond  markets,  credit 
conditions, and interbank markets. In tomorrow’s morning session, discussions will be on the 
implications of different policies on financial and business cycles, including the possible use 
of macroprudential, monetary, and fiscal measures at different stages of the cycle. 
We  shall  conclude  the  conference  with  a  panel  discussion  comprised  of  distinguished 
economists from organizations that cover the globe. The experience and expertise of these 
gentlemen  in  research  and  policy  making  promises  to  provide  an  insightful  discussion  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  macro-financial linkages and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Thank you for 
gracing this year’s BSP International Research Conference. 
Final Thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is very apparent that we have entered an era of intensifying and 
uncertain macro-financial linkages. The challenges that this era brings demand not just more 
scrutiny of linkages, but may even require altering our policy perspectives. 
I am confident that the sessions in this conference will provide a good opportunity to share 
ideas and to take stock of the different dimensions of macro-financial linkages. 
I  wish  you  well  in  this  Conference.  And  I  look  forward  to  a  productive  and  interesting 
exchange. 
Thank you very much and once again, welcome good morning. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
