  
 
William C Dudley: Panel remarks at the 7th High-Level Conference on the 
International Monetary System 
Panel remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 7th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary 
System, Zürich, 10 May 2016. 
Linda Goldberg and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in this panel. To me, the question 
posed  for  discussion  seems  relatively  straightforward:  Will  more  reserve  currencies 
strengthen the international monetary system? My answer can be summed up in one word: 
“yes.” I believe that a reserve currency – or at least an enduring and important one – has to 
have a number of demonstrated attributes. These include that the reserve currency country 
has  a  strong  and  credible  institutional  structure;  that  its  policymakers  follow  a  sustainable 
fiscal regime as well as a monetary policy that keeps inflation low and stable over time; and 
that the currency is readily convertible and serves as a stable store of value. These are good 
attributes for any country – reserve currency or not. The greater the number of countries that 
have such attributes, the more stable and sound the global financial system is likely to be. 
Also, such a regime is desirable because it provides an environment that should encourage 
international  trade  and  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  which,  in  turn  should  lift 
productivity and living standards. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own view and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.  
Although a reserve currency can formally be defined as any currency that is part of a foreign 
country’s  foreign  exchange  reserve  holdings,  I  do  not  think  this  is  what  we  have  in  mind 
when we talk about a reserve currency. 
While the status of being a reserve currency can be conferred, the stature of being a reserve 
currency  must  be  earned.  As  I  see  it,  a  successful  reserve  currency  needs  to  satisfy  a 
number  of  conditions.  First,  the  currency  needs  to  be  fully  convertible  –  with  no  risk  of 
restrictions that could limit the ability to convert such holdings into cash denominated in the 
investors’  domestic  currency.  Second,  the  reserve  currency  country  needs  to  have  deep, 
liquid and transparent capital markets so that the sovereign debt instruments and other high-
quality  debt  obligations  can  be  bought  and  sold  at  narrow  bid-ask  spreads  and  easily 
converted  to  and from  cash. Third, the  assets  in  the country  must  be governed  by  a  well-
understood, consistent and enforceable legal regime. This is to ensure that investors’ rights 
will  be  well  protected,  regardless  of  short-term  political  developments  or  changes  in  the 
governing regime. Fourth, the financial system in the country must be strong and stable to 
ensure that liquidity will be available even during times of stress. Fifth, the risk of default on 
the country’s sovereign debt must be viewed as negligible, to ensure both that the currency 
is a stable store of value and that continuous, deep liquid domestic markets will be available 
regardless of the economic circumstances. Sixth, the country must have a credible central 
bank that is insulated from political interference and committed to keeping inflation low and 
stable – a necessary condition for a reserve currency to be a reliable store of value. 
I  think  that  the  U.S.  dollar  satisfies  these  general  criteria.  That  is  why  over  60  percent  of 
foreign exchange reserve holdings are denominated in dollars – a share that has been quite 
stable  in  recent  years.  The  dollar’s  share  has  remained  steady  despite  the  presence  of  a 
number of currencies that broadly satisfy the attributes that I have just discussed. 
But  should  the  U.S.  be  concerned  if  more  countries  satisfy  the  attributes  needed  to  be 
successful  reserve  currencies?  Would  it  be  problematic  for  the  United  States  if  the  U.S. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  dollar  share  of  foreign  exchange  holdings  slipped  over  time  because  of  progress  made 
elsewhere? 
I think the answer to both of these questions is “no.” It would seem positive to me if a decline 
in  the  U.S. market share  reflected the following  developments:  a greater  number  of stable 
and effective central banks and fiscal authorities, more investors who are reassured about 
countries’  institutional  arrangements  and  financial  stability,  and  deeper  and  more  liquid 
capital  markets  outside the  United  States. These  attributes  are  a  prerequisite for  a  vibrant 
international financial system and are supportive to global trade. A regime with many reserve 
currencies would imply a well-governed international economy. This should facilitate global 
investment, resulting in rising productivity growth and improving standards of living. In other 
words,  I  don’t  see  this  as  a  zero-sum  game.  If  other  countries’  currencies  emerge  to gain 
stature  as reserve  currencies,  it  is  not  obvious  to  me  that the  United  States  loses. This  is 
assuming,  of  course,  that  the  emergence  of  alternatives  is  being  driven  by  their  progress, 
rather than by the U.S. doing a poorer job in satisfying the attributes that I discussed earlier. 
Having  more  countries  achieve  the  stature  of  having  a  reserve  currency  may  also  be 
desirable  for  other  reasons.  First,  with  more  reserve  currencies  available,  portfolio 
diversification opportunities are enhanced. This is desirable because, all else equal, it would 
allow investors to move further out on the risk/return frontier. Second, more currencies are 
likely  to  be  close  substitutes,  which  could  dampen  currency  volatility.  With  many  viable 
reserve  currencies  available,  no  particular  one  would  necessarily  have  to  bear  the  bulk  of 
any adjustment. 
The dollar’s dominant reserve currency status has sometimes been referred to as the United 
States’  “exorbitant  privilege,”  implying  that  the  U.S.  benefits  extraordinarily  from  this 
privileged status. I’d argue that the situation is much more nuanced. Yes, this status does 
allow the U.S. to benefit from seigniorage. More than half of all U.S. currency outstanding is 
held abroad. But, there are also costs of being the dominant reserve currency. For example, 
this  can  lead  to  shifts  in  the  valuation  of the  dollar  that  are  due  primarily  to  developments 
abroad  that  affect  risk  appetites  and  international  capital  flows.  In  such  cases,  the  dollar’s 
valuation can be pushed to levels inconsistent with U.S. economic fundamentals. 
For the United States, I believe that the most important goal must be to keep our own house 
in order. If we do this, then I expect that the U.S. dollar will earn the right to remain the most 
important reserve currency in the world. 
The United States has a number of advantages in sustaining the dominant reserve currency 
status  of  the  U.S.  dollar.  First,  there  is  a  first-mover  advantage.  As  the  leading  reserve 
currency in the world, there is no strong incentive for countries to move to other currencies 
as  long  as  the  dollar  continues  to  have  the  attributes  I  discussed  earlier.  The  history  of 
reserve currency usage is characterized by considerable inertia. The U.S. dollar emerged as 
the  leading  reserve  currency  quite  a  bit  after  it  became  the  world’s  largest  economy. 
Typically, the loss of dominant reserve currency status requires either substantial economic 
decline or political instability that motivates foreign counterparties to shift to a new reserve 
currency. Second, the U.S. has the deepest and most liquid capital markets in the world. This 
is  important  in  making  U.S.  Treasuries  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  attractive 
holdings  as  part  of  countries’  foreign  exchange  reserve  portfolios.  Third,  the  U.S.  has  an 
independent  central  bank  –  the  Federal  Reserve  –  which  has  been  successful  in  keeping 
inflation low and stable. As a result, the dollar has been a reliable store of value in recent 
years. 
Another point in the United States’ favor is the considerable steps taken to shore up areas of 
weakness  revealed  by  the  financial  crisis.  In  particular,  the  safety  and  soundness  of  our 
financial system has been enhanced. Capital and liquidity requirements for U.S. banks have 
been  raised  significantly.  Stress  tests  have  been  imposed to  enhance the  viability  of  large 
systemic  institutions  even  in  very  adverse  economic  and  financial  environments.  Reforms 
have  been  enacted  to  facilitate  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  troubled  institutions.  This 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  includes  living  will  requirements  for  the  major  systemically-important  financial  institutions, 
and the development of an improved resolution regime to ensure that institutions that do get 
into difficulty can be resolved without disrupting the stability of the financial system. 
In  conclusion,  I  welcome  other  countries’  progress  toward  achieving  the  preconditions 
necessary for their currencies to attain the stature of a reserve currency. However, we should 
not  act  as  if  this  is  sufficient  to  achieve  a  well-functioning  global  financial  system.  In 
particular,  the  current  regime  is  inefficient  in  a  number  of  important  ways.  Countries  have 
found it necessary to self-insure against the risk of large capital flow reversals. This has led 
to  a  very  sharp  rise  in  aggregate  foreign  exchange  reserve  holdings.  This  form  of  self-
insurance is very expensive – especially  when the return on the foreign exchange reserve 
portfolio is less than the cost of the domestic liabilities that fund these holdings. As I have 
said in the past, I encourage more work to examine whether there are other more efficient 
regimes that, for example, would economize on required foreign exchange reserve buffers. In 
this regard, I think expanding the capacity of the IMF’s resources and working to further de-
stigmatize drawing on the IMF’s liquidity facilities could be worthwhile steps in this direction. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
