  Gent Sejko: Bank - business relationships: lending perspective 2016 
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  discussion  forum  on 
"Bank  -  Business  relationships:  lending  perspective  2016"  between  representatives  of  the 
business community and the banking sector, Tirana, 3 March 2016. 
 Dear representatives of business community in Albania,  
Dear banking system executives,  
Dear participants,  
It is a great pleasure to open the discussions in this meeting between representatives of the 
business community and the banking sector.  
I have always believed that the business sector is the engine driving the economy forward. It 
is the main contributor to employment and, hence, to fulfilling the goal to improve the citizens’ 
welfare. The role of the banking sector in the economy is equally important. Its mission to 
effectively manage the savings of the population in supporting the economic development is 
vital to the long-term prosperity of a country.  
In  the  post-crisis  period,  we  are  facing  a  situation  we  had  never  imagined  before.  Many 
structural  ambiguities  and  weaknesses  surfaced  along  with  their  aggressiveness.  The 
worsened  credit  portfolio  was  one  of  the  most  problematic  developments,  being  highly 
intensive and uniform across all products.  
This undesirable development decelerated lending to the economy, contributing negatively to 
a  further  increase  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs).  The  vicious  circle  continued  for  a  long 
time, peaking when NPLs shared 25% in total loans.  
Notably,  this  problem  is  facing  not  only  Albania  but  also  the  global  economy.  Emerging 
economies,  especially  the  regional  economies,  experienced  strong  shocks.  Financial 
systems,  currencies,  consumption  and  investments  were  mostly  affected.  Many  of  the 
business  plans,  compiled  and  implemented  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  failed,  driving  to  the 
increased  insolvency  for  many  large  borrowers.  This  situation  existed  for  5-7  years,  until 
2015, the year I would consider as the long-expected turning point.  
For the first time, attributable to the coordinated efforts among all institutional stakeholders, 
we provided the grounds for a considerable reduction of NPLs. I have addressed this issue 
before. I would rather not repeat myself, but I would like to bring to your attention today an 
effort, an attempt, an initiative to analyse jointly the causes and the reasons why we are in 
this situation. Most importantly, we should discuss and reach clear conclusions on ways to 
boost lending to the economy.  
The developments in recent years drive to the conclusion that the relationship or interaction 
between the two communities represented in this room stands at low historical levels. The 
most  meaningful  indicator,  in  this  regard,  is  the  low  level  of  lending.  From  the  frequent 
contacts  with  the  banking  industry  and  business  representatives,  I  understand  that  the 
parties  see  the  problem  in  the  other  party.  In  many  cases,  banks  adopt  rather  rigid  and 
excluding positions, while many business' representatives do not understand that compliance 
with contractual obligations is the basis for the success of the market economy. I may bring 
numerous examples, but I assure you, this is not the goal of this meeting.  
Dear participants,  
The Albanian economy has entered into an interesting phase and the signs on its recovery 
are present on daily basis. In the second half of 2015, there is an increasing consensus on 
the  acceleration  of  economic  activity  beyond  the  forecasts  at the  year  start.  Based  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  current  trends,  I  deem  that  the  economic  growth  acceleration  will  be  a  distinctive  feature 
during 2016 as well.  
The available information leads us to the conclusion that private investments have shown a 
positive  performance.  Foreign  Direct  Investments,  easing  of  financing  conditions  in  the 
banking  system,  and  improved  financial  situation  of  businesses  due  to  the  payment  of 
arrears have all contributed positively. The reforms implemented recently have provided the 
first  effects.  With  time,  in  addition  to  the  other  reforms  in  the  joint  agenda  with  the 
International Monetary Fund, we will have higher and more stable economic recovery.  
Our expectations were reinforced by the recent comments by the IMF's Executive Board of 
Directors  in  the  approval  of  the  Fifth  and  Sixth  Review  under  the  Extended  Arrangement, 
which enabled the disbursement of the next tranche for EUR 72.4 million, for Albania. The 
Albanian  economy  is  on  a  positive  development  trajectory  and  domestic  demand  will 
continue to gather strength as a result of the further materialisation of reforms, the IMF notes.  
The IMF also assesses positively the accommodative monetary policy implemented by the 
Bank of Albania and constant efforts to reduce the stock of non-performing loans and boost 
lending.  
In  addition,  the IMF  welcomed  the  structural  reforms  by  Albanian  authorities  to  strengthen 
public  finances  through  a  further  fiscal  consolidation.  The  IMF  also  noted  the  insofar 
progress  and  the  need  for  the  steadfast  implementation  of  those  measures  aimed  at 
improving the business environment and promoting economic growth.  
All  the  above  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  environment  is  more  attractive  and  the 
incentives to boost lending are more significant. I believe that the Bank of Albania has done 
its duties in this regard. In concrete terms:  
First,  the  strong  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  has  brought  interest  rates  in 
financial markets to historic minimum levels. The Bank of Albania deems that these rates will 
remain below the historical average level, over the next two years. In the light of achieving 
our inflation target and of economic growth approaching its potential, based on the available 
information,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  not  reduce  the  intensity  of  the  monetary  stimulus 
throughout 2016 and the monetary conditions will remain stimulating in the next two years.  
Second,  the  issue  of  the  euro  bond  led  to  the  reduction  of  public  borrowing  in  domestic 
financial markets. This has brought interest rates further down - even beyond signals given 
by the monetary policy - thus increasing the monetary stimulus in the economy.  
Furthermore, the pullback of public sector from domestic borrowing provided for the liquidity 
"pie" to be made entirely available to the private sector. In accordance with the medium-term 
budget plan, the Bank of Albania deems that the effect of this factor will be also present over 
the next two years.  
Third,  liquidity  situation  and  financial  soundness  of  banking  system  is  rather  promising  to 
credit  economy.  During  2015,  the  banking  system  expanded  the  activity,  improved  the 
financial  performance,  and  remained  well-capitalised  and  had  ample  liquidity.  The  profit  of 
the  banking  system  amounted  to  around  ALL  15.7  billion.  The  financial  result  improved 
attributable  to  lower  financing  costs  and  lower  credit  risk  provisions.  The  return  on  assets 
and return on equity were further improved. The number of banks making profits increased. 
Albeit at a slower pace, public deposits expanded in 2015, maintaining their share of around 
82%. The measures implemented in the last three years to tackle non-performing loans have 
started to yield results.  
The  credit  quality  improved  and  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  fell  from  25%  to  18%, 
mainly as a result of restructuring and write off of loss loans from banks' balance sheets.  
Fourth, the implementation of the plan of measures for reducing non-performing loans will 
free the banking system from the stress and the nervousness accumulated over time. This 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  will drive to easing of credit standards and increase of banking credit supply by the banking 
system.  
Fifth, the expectations are more optimistic even in the overall international context, including 
the  approach  of  supervisory  and  regulatory  institutions,  and  at  the  level  of  large  banking 
groups.  
All these reasons have led us to believe that there is a great potential to credit economy. In 
fact,  we  believe  that  lending  to  the  economy  in  2016  will  grow  at  higher  rates  than  in  the 
previous year. This is reflected also in the business plans of the banking system for 2016, 
where particular banks with a considerable share in crediting, have planned ambitious growth 
compared to 2015. I hope, and I will insist, seeing this objective materialise in the economy.  
As I mentioned at the beginning of my address, I would like to invite you to discuss for a new 
beginning. The conditions are already ripe. The economy is growing, business opportunities 
are in place, liquidity is ample, and prices are convenient.  
I  urge  the  banking  system  to  leave  behind  a  relatively  passive  approach.  One  should 
understand that it is time to turn back to the traditional activity of the commercial bank, that 
is, crediting to economy. This is the mission of commercial banks in the economy and I invite 
you to fulfil this goal successfully.  
Be  no  longer  hostage  of  some  old  practices  of  failed  loans!  Draw  the  right  lessons  and 
increase the communication with your head offices! Explain the Albanian reality to them and 
the  opportunities  for  investment!  Convince  them  that  there  are  a  lot  of  activities  with 
guaranteed return, hence they should be credited.  
I would like to let you know that the management chain of the Bank of Albania is not satisfied 
with the current situation. In the meantime, the many reasons or claims that may have risen 
cannot justify that apathy or lack of risk appetite for investment. We will be increasing our 
pressure  in  this regard. I  invite  you  to  swiftly  take  corrective  measures to  better  credit  the 
economy.  
On  the  other  hand,  I  urge  the  business  community  to  raise  the  level  of  professionalism  in 
drafting  and  implementing  the  projects  they  submit  for  crediting.  The  business  should  pay 
great  attention  to  the  genuine  financial  and  legal  assistance,  prior,  during  and  after  the 
signing of the contracts. You should adopt a contemporary management philosophy.  
The governance of your enterprises should be responsible; meanwhile it is to your benefit to 
build realistic projects, in terms of size, location and resources. Keep in mind that productivity 
guarantees  high  return.  Do  not  neglect  the  research  and  invest  in  qualified  human 
resources!.  Although,  they  appear  as  simple  pieces  of  advice,  allow  me  to  clarify  that  the 
underlying reasons for many unsuccessful practices are exactly the elements I mentioned.  
I would like to guarantee you that the Bank of Albania will be a reliable, open and serious 
partner, in compliance with its mandate, implying its supervisory function. We will continue to 
improve  the  legal  and sublegal  framework to  reflect the  relevant  best  standards  and 
European directives regarding the micro and macro-prudential supervision.  
The Bank of Albania will place fulfilling the commitments deriving from the National Action 
Plan for Tackling Non-performing Loans at the centre of its efforts. We will firmly cooperate 
with  other  public  authorities,  the  World  Bank  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  or  the 
further reducing the stock of non-performing loans.  
As in the past, the stability of the banking system is a top priority. In this regard, the Bank of 
Albania will continue to contribute also in the framework of the Financial Stability Committee 
in Albania.  
Dear representatives of business community and banking system,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  At the end of my speech I would like to emphasise once again that in this room we represent 
three groups of interest. In order to be successful, we need to help and cooperate with each 
other.  
I  would  like  to  appeal  once  again  to  you  to  enhance  the  mutual  understanding  and 
cooperation 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
