  François Groepe: The changing role of central banks 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, 12 August 2016. 
 Good morning – and thank you for the opportunity to address you. 
The past few years have been extremely challenging, both domestically and internationally. 
The  aftershocks  of  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008–09  have  persisted.  The  advanced 
economies are still struggling to recover on a sustained basis, while the emerging markets, 
initially the main engine for the recovery, have fallen out of favour in the past four years, as 
the Chinese economy has slowed and brought commodity prices down with it. 
Low growth is not the only issue. We are seeing increasingly widespread discontent about 
rising income and wealth disparities in many countries, where the fruits of growth have not 
been equitably shared and have been aggravated by persistently low growth.  
The  initial  responses  to  the  financial  crisis  involved  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy 
loosening. But fiscal space was eroded very soon as debt ratios rose to unsustainable levels. 
This placed a near impossible burden on monetary policy, which persists to this day. 
Referring to the post-crisis focus on central banks, Mohamed El-Erian appropriately titled his 
most recent book The only game in town.1 Today, I would like to highlight the role that central 
banks can play in the economy and, perhaps more importantly, point out the limits to what 
central banks can do. It is important to understand these limits because, I would argue, the 
biggest  risk  to  central  bank  independence  is  the  possible  backlash  from  being  unable  to 
deliver  on  unreasonable  expectations.  Central  bank  mandates  have  expanded  –  perhaps 
appropriately  so  –  but  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  was  designed  to  achieve. 
Central banks cannot be, and should not be regarded as, “the only game in town”. 
The role of central banks has changed over time. The first central bank was established in 
Sweden  in  1668  and  had  a  chequered  early  history,  from  providing  commercial  banking 
services  to financing  a war  against  Denmark. Most  of  the  early  central  banks  were  in  fact 
initially  private  banks,  and  for  this  reason,  a  number  of  them  (including  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank)  have  private  shareholders  to  this  day.  Over  time,  however,  these  banks 
evolved into official institutions, with various roles. 
It is not my intention to give a historical account of the evolution of the role of central banks 
through the ages. Rather, I will fast-forward to the modern period and highlight the current 
thinking about central banks and their appropriate mandates and policies. Important to note 
is that the role of central banks is still evolving, so what is conventional wisdom today could 
well  be  supplanted  tomorrow.  Although  central  banks  are  no  longer  in  the  business  of 
financing wars, the cost of maintaining peace and stability during periods of crisis is perhaps 
far higher!  
Prior to the financial crisis, there were a number of generally accepted views about the role 
of central banks. Besides their exclusive responsibility for printing and issuing banknotes and 
coins, the almost unquestionable view was that a principal role of central banks should be to 
maintain price stability. While this opinion was generally accepted, the choice of framework 
was  not.  Before  the  1990s,  the  focus  was  on  intermediate  targets  for  monetary  policy,  for 
instance  money  supply  targets.  More  recently,  the  trend  has  shifted  towards  targeting 
inflation  directly,  generally  through  using  an  official  interest  rate  as  the  policy  tool.  The 
                                                
1  El-Erian, M A (2016). The only game in town. Central banks, instability and avoiding the next collapse. New 
York: Random House. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inflation-targeting framework evolved, with the objective of monetary policy clearly specified 
and  quantified.  It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  the  choice  of  framework  is  constrained  by  the 
nature of the exchange rate regime: in a fixed exchange rate environment, the focus is on 
maintaining  the  peg,  and  monetary  policy  is  determined  by  the  policies  of  the  currency  to 
which it is pegged. 
It may be rightfully asked why price stability should be elevated to a policy objective. There 
are  a  number  of  reasons  why  we  want  to  pursue  stable  prices.  First,  it  makes  planning 
investment  for  the  future  so  much  easier.  The  more  unpredictable  future  prices  are,  the 
higher the risk premium that investors are likely to price into their decisions. Although price 
stability  is  not  in  itself  a  generator  of  economic  growth,  it  is  an  important  prerequisite  for 
providing a sound macroeconomic basis within which growth can be achieved. Second, it is 
generally the case that it is the poor who are most vulnerable to the ravages of high inflation, 
as  they  are  the  least  able  to  hedge  against  this.  The  only  people  who  benefit  from  high 
inflation  are  those  who  have  fixed-interest  nominal  debt,  as  the  real  value  of  the  debt 
declines during inflationary periods. However, under these conditions, lenders are reluctant 
to  lend  at  fixed  rates  and  demand  higher  interest  rates  to  be  compensated  for  higher 
expected  inflation.  Therefore,  high-inflation  countries  tend  to  have  high  nominal  interest 
rates. 
The more contentious issue is the impact that monetary policy can have on economic growth 
and employment. It is generally accepted that monetary policy can play a role in stabilising 
the business cycle. The concept of ‘the potential rate of output growth’ is central to this view. 
This  concept  refers  to  the  maximum  growth  rate  which  an  economy  can  sustain  without 
generating  inflationary  pressures  and  consistent  with  employment  at  the  natural  rate. 
Potential output is determined by structural factors in the economy, such as the availability of 
capital  and  labour,  infrastructure,  technology,  skills  levels,  and  trade  policies.  Changes  to 
potential output are determined by changes in these factors. It follows then that if growth is 
above potential, there will be inflationary pressures and the role of monetary policy will be to 
moderate  these  pressures  by  reducing  demand  pressures  to  be  consistent  with  price 
stability. We do this through raising interest rates. 
The  converse  also  holds  true.  When  the  economy  is  growing  at  levels  below  potential, 
demand is weak, as are inflation pressures, and monetary policy has room to stimulate the 
economy  by  reducing  interest  rates.  In  other  words,  under  normal  conditions,  monetary 
policy should be conducted contra-cyclically, by boosting growth in a downturn and cooling 
down an overheating economy during a cyclical upturn. 
The central point here is that monetary policy has little role in determining potential output. Its 
impact  on  output  is  cyclical.  The  challenge  is  that  potential  output  is  not  observed  but 
estimated. Although there are a number of techniques with varying levels of sophistication, 
these estimates are subject to a great deal of uncertainty and often vary quite considerably 
from one to another. This means that, while we can observe how current output changes, it is 
difficult  to  be  certain  at  any  point  in  time  whether  the  potential  itself  has  changed.  This  is 
critically important for policy purposes. For example: if cyclical growth falls below potential, 
then countercyclical monetary and/or fiscal policies are appropriate, but what if the current 
observed  growth  slowdown  is  also  a  reflection  of  a  decline  in  potential  output? This  could 
mean that countercyclical policies would not necessarily be effective. 
This issue is at the heart of the current debates about the persistence of low growth in the 
global  economy.  Some  have  argued  that  below-potential  growth  is  a  cyclical  phenomenon 
that can be resolved through contra-cyclical macroeconomic policies by stimulating demand. 
However,  others  have  warned  that  we  are  experiencing  a  period  of  secular  stagnation, 
associated  with  a  prolonged  period  of  low  growth  and  declining  potential  output.  If  this  is 
indeed  the  case,  it  follows  that  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  stimulating  the 
economy will be limited. What is required under such circumstances is structural change in 
the economy, in order to stimulate supply.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy may help to prevent deflation by underpinning demand to some extent, but it 
is unlikely to be the primary source of growth. 
Recently,  many  countries  have  revised  down  their  estimates  of  potential  output  growth. 
However, it is unclear whether these are short-term estimates or whether a prolonged period 
of secular stagnation is with us. Domestically, we at the South African Reserve Bank have 
also successively revised down our estimates of potential output, from around 3,5 per cent in 
2010 to the current levels of around 1,4 per cent. We see these as an estimate of short-term 
potential output; our longer-term estimate is higher, when, for example, the electricity supply 
constraint  is  expected  to  be  relieved.  But  the  longer-term  estimates  remain  lower  than 
previous ones. This constrains the ability of monetary policy to stimulate cyclical growth, as 
the output gap – which is the difference between actual output and potential output – is not 
as wide as would be the case with a higher potential output. Thus, if the growth problem is 
structural in nature, the scope for successful monetary stimulus is limited. 
When the global financial crisis struck, it was viewed as a cyclical downturn, and there was 
almost universal agreement on the need for stimulatory monetary and fiscal policies. While 
fiscal space was quickly eroded, monetary policies in the advanced economies remain highly 
expansionary and ‘unconventional’. It used to be assumed that once interest rates reached 
the zero lower bound,2 then monetary policy would become ineffective.3 But the post-crisis 
period  saw  attempts  at  monetary  stimulus  through  quantitative  easing  (or  QE)  which  took 
various forms but in essence entailed central banks buying government or corporate bonds, 
thereby injecting liquidity into the system. While the US ceased its QE programme in 2014, 
the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank have maintained theirs while the Bank of 
England recently resumed its QE programme in the wake of the UK’s decision to leave the 
European  Union.  Interest  rates  in  the  advanced  economies  remain  extremely  low  and  in 
some instances in fact negative. In early 2015, both the US and the UK were expected to be 
the first of the advanced economies to begin raising interest rates. The US tightened policy in 
December 2015 but it has remained on hold since then, while the UK has recently reduced 
rates  further.  Unfortunately,  this  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy  environment  has  not 
generated  the  growth  that  was  hoped  for,  but  it  can  be  argued  that  it  prevented  the 
immediate situation from getting worse. 
I  should  note  that  there  are  potential  negative  effects  from  very  low  or  indeed  negative 
interest  rates,  not  least  of  which  is  that  they  create  problems  for  defined-benefit  pension 
funds which have to provide cover for ageing populations while many of these funds face the 
risk  of  underfunding.  The  amount  of  government  debt  trading  at  negative  yields  has 
increased significantly since the beginning of the year. Pension funds are therefore forced to 
search  for  higher  yields  and,  almost  by  definition,  they  move  their  funds  to  more  risky 
investment categories and jurisdictions. This is a potential time bomb waiting to explode, far 
more  serious  than  the  concerns  over  the  potential  inflation  risks  of  ultra-loose  monetary 
policy. In fact, inflation is not currently a concern in the advanced economies, and in some 
instances the concern is that inflation is too low. 
The  situation  in  emerging  markets  and  developing  economies  is  more  complicated, 
particularly in those that are currently facing rising inflation and slowing or low growth. These 
inflation pressures have typically been driven by weakening exchange rates in response to 
declining  commodity  prices  –  and  not  by  excess  demand  where  monetary  policy  is  most 
effective.  This  is  the  case  in  South  Africa  at the  moment. Our  economic growth  outlook  is 
weak  following  the  contraction  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  The  South  African  Reserve 
                                                
2  This  is  when  short-term nominal interest  rates  are  at  or near  0  per cent.  A  liquidity  trap  is caused  and  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy is limited. 
3  This is due to the existence of physical money. As interest rates fall below 0 per cent, economic agents may 
switch from central bank money or electronic cash to physical cash. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Bank forecasts 0 per cent growth this year and below-trend growth of just 1,1 per cent and 
1,5 per cent in 2017 and 2018, respectively. At the same time, inflation is outside our target 
range of 3 – 6 per cent and is expected to remain outside the range until the third quarter of 
2017. However, demand pressures are weak while inflation is driven primarily by supply-side 
factors,  including  drought-induced  food  price  increases,  a  relatively  depreciated  currency, 
and administered prices.  
None of this means that monetary policy should not be used under such circumstances. We 
know there is nothing we can do about the impact or first-round effects of these supply-side 
shocks. We try to look through these effects and focus on the second-round effects, where 
higher prices feed into higher generalised inflation and higher wage settlements. If we ignore 
these pressures, inflation expectations are likely to rise. And if wage negotiators and price 
setters  believe  that  inflation  will  accelerate,  they  will  adjust  wages  and  prices  accordingly, 
and in so doing bring about a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
This scenario of high inflation and low growth creates a dilemma for monetary policy. The 
tightening of monetary policy could have a negative impact on the already weak economy, 
but  failure  to  act  could  cause  inflation  expectations  to  become  unhinged  and  ultimately 
undermine  inflation.  It  is  a  difficult  balancing  act.  Since  January  2014,  we  have  been  in  a 
gradual tightening cycle, with a cumulative increase of 200 basis points since then, the most 
recent a 25 basis point increase in March. The moderate nature of the tightening cycle is due 
to our concern over the growth outlook; the tightening would have been more aggressive had 
the  economy  been  more  buoyant.  Furthermore,  real  interest  rates  remain  relatively  low, 
implying an accommodative monetary policy stance despite the tightening. 
But central banking is not only about monetary policy. Since the global financial crisis, the 
mandates of central banks have expanded, particularly with respect to financial stability. Prior 
to the crisis, many central banks had an implicit mandate, or no mandate at all, in this regard. 
In  South  Africa,  for  example,  although  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  had  explicit 
responsibility for regulating and supervising individual banks (micro-prudential policy), it did 
not have an explicit mandate to ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole. By 
way  of  an  example,  excessive  price  increases  or  bubbles  in  asset  markets,  including  the 
housing market – particularly if financed by excessive leverage or borrowing against these 
assets – could pose a risk to the financial system at large should the prices of these assets 
collapse. 
Prior to the global financial crisis, conventional wisdom dictated that there was not much that 
central banks could do to cool down overheating asset markets. Indeed, many – including 
Federal Reserve Bank Chairman Alan Greenspan – argued that there was no reason why 
central banks were better placed to recognise asset price bubbles – and that the best they 
could do was to clean up after things had already fallen apart. The predominant view at the 
time was that things were unlikely to fall apart. 
There were, of course, dissenting voices, notably at the Bank for International Settlements, 
who argued that central banks should not have a narrow focus on inflation only and should 
rather  lean  against  this  excessive  leverage  with  higher  interest  rates,  focusing  on  the 
financial  cycle,  which  is  usually  longer  than  the  business  cycle.  This  would  have  implied 
higher  interest  rates  than  those  prevailing  before  the  crisis,  despite  the  low  inflation 
environment. 
History  shows  that  these  dissenting  voices  were  correct;  current  conventional  wisdom 
prescribes that financial stability should be an explicit focus of central bank policy. There are 
disagreements,  however,  about  where  this  responsibility  should  lie  and  what  instruments 
should be used. Some argue that it should be part of monetary policy and that interest rate 
settings should take the financial cycle into consideration. Others argue that monetary policy 
should remain focused on inflation and that the task of financial stability should be given to a 
separate committee, although it is not self-evident whether this separate committee should 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  be housed within the central bank or outside the central bank in a separate institution, as is 
the case in Sweden. 
In South Africa, we have adopted a position similar to that of the Bank of England, where the 
responsibility for financial stability is given to the central bank overseen by a financial stability 
committee.  This  committee  considers  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  more  broadly, 
rather  than  regulating  and  supervising  individual  banks.  The  latter  remains  the  job  of  the 
Bank Supervision Department at the South African Reserve Bank, which is transforming into 
a  Prudential  Authority  in  terms  of  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  (FSR  Bill)  currently 
before Parliament.  
The  promulgation  of  the  FSR  Bill  will  make  the  Bank’s  responsibility  for  financial  stability 
explicit.  The  Bill  sets  the  provisions  that  will  give  effect  to  the  Bank’s  financial  stability 
mandate. The Bank will be responsible for protecting and enhancing financial stability, and 
for maintaining or restoring financial stability if a systemic event has occurred or is imminent. 
In monitoring the strengths and weaknesses of the financial system, as well as any risks to 
financial  stability,  the  Bank  will  be  expected  to  advise  the  financial  sector  regulators  and 
other agencies of the steps required to mitigate risks to financial stability. The FSR Bill also 
requires the Bank to publish its assessment of the stability of the financial system at least 
every six months in the Financial Stability Review, which is to be submitted to the Minister of 
Finance and the Financial Stability Oversight Committee. 
Once the FSR Bill is promulgated, the Prudential Authority will regulate individual banks and 
insurance  companies  while  the  Financial  Services  Board,  previously  responsible  for 
overseeing  the  entire  insurance  sector  and  other  non-banks,  will  assume  responsibility  for 
market  conduct  within  the  banking  and  wider  financial  sector.  So  while  monetary  policy, 
macro-prudential  policy  and  micro-prudential  policy  are  all  separate  functions  of  the  Bank, 
their coordination is facilitated by them being housed within the same institution, with some 
degree of overlapping membership. 
But  we  could  ask  whether  the  central  bank  has  a  wider  role  to  play  in  the  economy, 
particularly  within  emerging  markets.  We  are  often  asked  why  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank does not get involved with direct lending or development finance, be it to industry or the 
agricultural  sector,  and  whether  we  should  not  be  more  involved  in  promoting  financial 
inclusion. 
Theoretically,  there  is  no  reason  why  central  banks  cannot  perform  wider  functions. 
Generally, apart from the functions I have outlined above, central banks have the important 
role  of  being  responsible  for  issuing  currency.  Furthermore,  in  South  Africa,  the  banking 
sector plays a prominent role in the national payment system, which facilitates the settlement 
of millions of transactions every day; the total value of transactions settled in the 12 months 
to  March  through  the  Bank’s  SAMOS4  system  amounted  to  R123,9  trillion.  We  take  for 
granted simple things like credit card or other card transactions that are settled immediately. 
This requires a significant infrastructure, and the South African Reserve Bank ensures that 
the rules are applied. At a regional level, we have played an important role in extending this 
infrastructure  and  expertise  to  a  number  of  countries  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  which  in  turn 
helps 
inclusion  by  helping 
communities access financial services. 
In some countries, central banks play a prominent role in the allocation of credit to various 
sectors. For example, the Nigerian central bank plays an important role in directing credit to 
the agricultural sector, and in South Korea the central bank decides how much credit banks 
should extend to small and medium enterprises. Whether such functions should indeed be 
performed by a central bank is often dependent on the nature of the financial system, its level 
trade  and  promotes 
intra-regional 
facilitate 
financial 
to 
                                                
4  South African Multiple Option Settlement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  of sophistication, and the existence of other institutions that are focused on extending credit 
to other sectors. 
In South Africa, we have a number of public sector institutions that are focused on extending 
credit  to  different  sectors.  These  include  the  Industrial  Development  Corporation,  the 
Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa,  the  Land  Bank,  and  a  number  of  institutions  that 
specialise in lending to small businesses. These functions could theoretically be performed 
by the central bank as a separate function, but there is no clear advantage to this – unless 
there were scarce skills in the economy and/or a lack of resources that would make a good 
operational argument for this. In many developing economies, there may be a lack of skills, 
and  combining  these  diverse  functions  into  one  institution  may  be  helpful  from  the 
perspective of achieving economies of scale. 
But  even  if  it  were  the  case  that  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  granted  loans  to  the 
agricultural  sector  or  small  businesses,  these  loans  would  not  be  financed  by  ‘printing 
money’. Rather, such an arrangement would disburse funds raised in the money and capital 
markets  at  competitive  rates,  or  it  would  be  funded  by  grants  from  government  and/or 
multilateral  organisations.  There  is  no  reason  why  the  Bank  would  necessarily  have  the 
advantage  of  assessing  the  needs  of  these  sectors,  as  opposed  to  the  specialised 
institutions that focus on these sectors, or have the necessary expertise to do so. 
In  developing  economies,  central  banks  often  have  a  role  in  promoting  financial  inclusion. 
This  is,  however,  a  particularly  challenging  area  of  policy  formulation  and  one  that  means 
different  things  to  different  people.  At  a  superficial  level,  financial  inclusion  is  often  simply 
seen as having access to a bank account and consequently to the national payment system. 
Mobile  banking  has  brought  banking  services  to  the  rural  areas  in  a  number  of  African 
countries. In South Africa, the low-cost Mzansi accounts have given easy and cheap access 
to rudimentary banking services to a broader segment of the population. 
I would, however, argue that financial inclusion entails much more than this and that, from a 
political economy perspective, it is a complex matter, particularly due to the broad range of 
opinions on how best to achieve this policy objective. There is, however, broad consensus 
that financial inclusion should extend to include access to loans, transactional banking, and 
risk products and services.5 
Financial inclusion should not mean irresponsible or reckless lending to people who cannot 
afford  it.  After  all,  it  was  the  unfettered  provision  of  cheap  loans  to  people  who  could  not 
afford  them,  or  the  so-called  sub-prime  lending,  that  largely  triggered  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
Typically, banks grant loans on the basis of some security provided by the borrower. Often, 
this entails fixed property. But in a country like South Africa, with a highly skewed distribution 
of income and wealth, the ability to provide such security is beyond the reach of a significant 
proportion  of  the  population.  It  becomes  even  more  complicated  when  we  consider  rural 
communities  and  communal  forms  of  land  ownership  which  is  not  conducive  for  providing 
surety for loans. 
As the sub-prime crisis in the US has illustrated: while lending to disadvantaged communities 
may  be  a  noble  cause,  there  are  dangers  to  excessive  lending,  particularly  when  such 
lending is simply financing consumption. In South Africa, we experienced extremely strong 
growth in unsecured lending between 2009 and 2013, some of which was to lower-income 
groups previously excluded from formal sector borrowing and some of which may yet come 
to  manifest  itself  in  higher  levels  of  non-performing  loans  –  although  it  is  the  view  of  the 
                                                
5 
In this regard, I prefer the term “financial deepening’ over ‘financial inclusion’ for the reasons stated above; the 
former is a much broader concept. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  South African Reserve Bank that our banks have sufficient capital buffers to absorb any such 
increases. 
Access  to  unsecured  loans  has  meant  that  lower-income  groups  could  avoid  having  to 
borrow  from  ruthless  informal  money-lenders  at  exorbitant  rates  of  interest.  But  it  has  not 
solved  the  problem  of  over-indebtedness  of  the  poor  and  its  social  consequences.  In 
numerous instances, large portions of earnings were paid over to lenders (both formal and 
informal), often in terms of court orders, leaving wage earners with very little to live on. 
There were also concerns that this form of lending and its rapid expansion posed a systemic 
risk to the financial sector and broader financial system. However, unsecured lending was a 
fairly small portion of total bank lending. Nevertheless, at a micro-prudential level, the Bank 
Supervision Department of the South African Reserve Bank kept a close eye on these forms 
of  loans  –  and  although  one  significant  player  in  the  field,  African  Bank,  did  collapse,  its 
failure cannot be solely attributed to its provision of unsecured lending. The role of the central 
bank in this instance was not to decide who the beneficiaries of bank loans should be or how 
much should be lent; the role of the central bank was to ensure that commercial banks in 
general maintained adequate capital and made appropriate provisioning for risk. 
The  African  Bank  episode  did  illustrate  the  danger  of  talking  about  the  need  for  financial 
inclusion in a glibly manner. Banks have often been criticised for not extending lending to the 
poorer  segments  of  society,  but  when  they  did,  they  were  criticised  in  some  quarters  for 
“reckless  lending”  and  for facilitating the  accumulation  of  excessive  debt. While  increasing 
financial  inclusion  is  a  laudable  and  important  goal,  a  fine  balance  needs  to  be  struck 
between protecting consumers from exploitation and extending credit in such a manner that 
the stability and soundness of the financial system as a whole is not undermined. The market 
conduct regulators, including the National Credit Regulator and the Financial Services Board, 
are responsible for preventing reckless lending, and the role of the South African Reserve 
Bank in the context of promoting financial inclusion is to ensure the stability of banks and the 
financial system. 
There is a view that giving too much discretion to central banks in some of the areas I have 
highlighted  could  politicise  the  central  bank  unduly.  This  brings  us  to  the  issue  of  central 
bank  independence.  The  main  argument  for  independence  is  that  it  minimises  the 
politicisation of monetary policy decision-making and avoids what is known as the “political 
interest rate cycle”. This refers to the incentive of politicians to lower interest rates in advance 
of elections. The argument is that an operationally independent central bank does not have 
to bow to such pressures. 
That is not to say that central banks are not pressurised by political and other elements in 
society to act in a particular way, and monetary policy in South Africa has not been without 
its  domestic  critics  and  political  economy  challenges.  The  monetary  policy  framework  has 
been  criticised,  and,  not  surprisingly,  opposition has  tended  to  intensify during the  upward 
phases of the interest rate cycle. But the South African Reserve Bank has been able to resist 
such  pressures,  as  its  operational  independence  is  entrenched  in  the  Constitution.  The 
inflation-targeting  framework  lends  itself  well  to  the  separation  of  goal  and  instrument 
independence:  generally,  central  banks  do  not  have  goal  independence  as  the  target  is 
usually,  but  not  always,  set  by  government,  but,  in  order to  prevent  the so-called  “political 
interest  rate  cycle”,  central  banks  do  have  instrument  and  operational  independence  to 
pursue the mandate given to them. 
However, the global crisis has created challenges for central banks that could undermine this 
seemingly comfortable insulation from the political arena. The expanded mandate of financial 
stability  in  itself  may  have  implications  for  their  independence,  while  the  other  possible 
objectives  –  such  as financial  inclusion  and  direct finance  –  imply  political  decisions  being 
made by unelected officials.  
Compared to financial stability decisions, decisions on monetary policy, while not easy, are 
more  straightforward  and  better  understood  by  the  public.  They  usually  involve  the  use  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  one  tool,  namely  the  interest  rate,  and  there  is  a  clear  objective.  The  financial  stability 
mandate  is  more  complicated,  as  it  is  a  shared  responsibility.  It  generally  involves 
government  in  crisis  resolution,  particularly  when  public  funds  are  involved,  and  the  policy 
tools are more directed at particular sectors; it may therefore be more politically sensitive as 
the  distributional  impacts  are  more  apparent  than  in  the  case  of  monetary  policy. 
Furthermore, as has been argued in a paper published by the International Monetary Fund, 
financial  stability  is  difficult  to  measure  but  financial  stability  crises  are  evident,  so  policy 
failures  are  observable,  unlike  successes.  As  has  been  noted  in  the  IMF  paper,  “central 
banks would find it difficult (even ex post facto) to defend potentially unpopular measures, 
precisely because they succeeded in maintaining financial stability”.6 Whichever failures may 
be perceived on the financial stability front have the potential to undermine monetary policy 
independence through a general loss of credibility of the central bank. 
In conclusion, we are living in challenging times. Central banks are called on to do more and 
more,  and  are  still  called  on  to  provide  solutions  to  the  low-growth  environment  we  find 
ourselves  in.  But,  as  I  have  argued,  although  central  banks  play  an  important  role  in  the 
economy and society at large, there are limits to what they can do – and these limits are not 
always well understood. Mohamed El-Erian argues that while we should give central banks 
due credit, their effectiveness is waning given the limited number of tools available to them. 
He argues that the world has come to a critical junction, and faces a choice of two roads. 
One road “involves a restoration of high-inclusive growth that creates jobs, reduces the risk 
of financial instability, and counters excessive inequality. It is a path that also lowers political 
tensions, eases corporate governance dysfunction, and holds the hope of defusing some of 
the world’s geopolitical threats. The other road is one of even lower growth, persistently high 
unemployment,  and  still  worsening  inequality.  It  is  a  road  that  involves  renewed  global 
financial  instability,  fuels  political  extremism,  and  erodes  social  cohesion  as  well  as 
integrity”.7 
This is a sombre warning – and relevant both domestically and at the global level. It is clear 
what the preferred road is. Taking it requires political leadership and political will. This is not 
a responsibility that can be abdicated to central banks. 
Thank you 
                                                
6  Bayoumi,  T  et  al.  (April  2014):  Monetary  policy  in  the  new  normal.  International  Monetary  Fund  Staff 
Discussion Note. 
7  El-Erian, M A (2016). The only game in town. Central banks, instability and avoiding the next collapse. New 
York: Random House. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
