  Ignazio Visco: Financial stability in a world of very low interest rates 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  43rd  General 
Assembly of The Geneva Association, Rome, 9 June 2016. 
 Since the 1980s we have been observing a marked downward trend in nominal interest rates 
in the major advanced economies. This decline is explained by lower inflation and inflation 
risk premia, and by a reduction of real interest rates. In these countries real long-term yields 
have fallen on average from around 5 percent in the early 1980s to about 2 percent before 
the financial crisis, and to approximately zero percent today. 
More  recently,  very  low  or  even  negative  interest  rates  mainly  reflect  the  slack  in  the 
economy and excessively low actual and expected inflation. The euro area, in particular, is 
still slowly recovering from two consecutive financial crises and a long recession. Real GDP 
has only recently returned to the 2008 level and cyclical positions continue to differ across 
member states. Inflation remains well below the levels consistent with the ECB definition of 
price stability: it has now been below 1 percent for almost three years  and in the  last few 
months it has turned negative once again. Core inflation (which excludes the more volatile 
components)  has  not  exceeded  1  per  cent  over  the  last  two  years;  it  reached  a  historical 
minimum  (0.6%)  at  the  beginning  of  2015  and  stands  only  slightly  above  it  in  the  latest 
readings. The risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations has become material since mid-
2014  and  is  still  high,  although  it  declined  at  the  beginning  of  2015  following  the 
announcement by the ECB Governing Council of its public sector purchase programme. 
While  these  considerations  indicate  that  the  current  low  level  of  interest  rates  is  not  an 
arbitrary  choice  of  central  banks,  the  risks  posed  by  a  protracted,  very  accommodative 
monetary  policy  need  to  be  monitored  carefully.  And  so  they  are.  Very  low  (or  negative) 
interest rates for too long raise fears that they may be a source of financial risks by fuelling 
asset price misalignments and endangering the profitability of financial institutions. 
The risk of asset price misalignments (or “bubbles”) is strictly connected to the incentives for 
an  excessive  “search for  yield”  that  an  environment  of  low  nominal  and  real  interest  rates 
creates for investors and financial intermediaries alike. At present, indicators of imbalances 
in housing and credit markets do not point to increasing vulnerabilities in the euro area as a 
whole.  To  the  extent  that  risks  materialise,  appropriate  macro-prudential  measures  at  a 
country  level  can  be  implemented  to  limit  their  accumulation.  Moreover,  in  assessing  the 
risks of excessive “search for yield” we should not forget that the quest for higher yields may 
also  improve  the  scope  for  portfolio  diversification.  In  the  euro  area,  institutional  investors 
certainly  have  room  to  better  diversify  their  assets.  According  to  recent  estimates  by  the 
European Commission, for insurance companies and pension funds, the portfolio share of 
equity instruments is around 10 percent, compared to more than 20 percent in the UK and 
almost 45 percent in the US. 
The other main concern for financial stability is that low or negative interest rates may have 
an adverse impact on the profitability of banks and institutional investors, ultimately putting 
their financial soundness at risk. In evaluating this issue we should take into account all the 
effects that low interest rates may have on the balance sheets of financial institutions. In the 
banking sector, the negative impact on interest income may be counter-balanced by a more 
favourable  effect  on  other  revenues:  in  addition  to  one-off  capital  gains  on  securities 
portfolios, an increase in fees and commissions from banking services and – given that low 
interest  rates  bring  about  an  improvement  in  the  economy  and  thus  in  borrowers’ 
creditworthiness – a reduction in provisions. Institutional investors may also benefit from a 
stronger demand for asset management services by households, due to the latter’s need to 
better diversify their portfolios, as well as from a broader range of investment opportunities 
thanks to corporations’ greater demand for non-bank debt and equity capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 in  alleviating 
 
 
In  the  short  term,  the  main  risk  derives,  not  least  for  financial  institutions,  from  the 
persistently  weak and uncertain macroeconomic outlook; the most effective  way to reduce 
this is to lift economic growth and employment. In the euro area, and in the other advanced 
economies that are still facing subdued activity and too-low inflation, this calls for economic 
policies to sustain aggregate demand; improvements in the cyclical position will also facilitate 
the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  needed  to  raise  potential  output  and  ensure  a 
sustained economic recovery. 
Non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  are  especially  effective 
the 
contractionary  consequences  of  economy-wide  deleveraging  in  an  environment  in  which 
nominal interest rates are hovering around the zero lower bound. We have clear evidence 
that the measures undertaken by the ECB Governing Council over the last two years have 
been  effective.  Estimates,  among  others,  by  Banca  d’Italia  staff  (which  do  not  consider 
further  possible  non-linear  effects)  show  that  in  the  absence  of  the  measures  adopted 
between June 2014 and December 2015, both annual inflation and GDP growth in the euro 
area  would  be  lower  by  about  half  a  percentage  point  in  2015–17.  The  expansion  of 
economic  activity  in  2015  would  have  been  slightly  below  1  percent,  against  an  observed 
1.6 percent; inflation would have been negative, at about –0.5 percent, against 0.0. These 
estimates are consistent with those of the Eurosystem and the ECB staff. In Italy, the effects 
are estimated to be even stronger. 
From  a  medium-term  perspective,  the  financial  stability  implications  of  a  low  interest  rate 
environment  require  a  deeper  assessment  of the  fundamental  forces  shaping  real  interest 
rates. In the current debate there are varying views. According to the “debt super-cycle” view, 
interest rates, growth and inflation are low because of the legacy of the financial crisis; in the 
medium  term  they  will  go  back  to  “normal”.  According  to  the  today  fashionable  “secular 
stagnation”  hypothesis,  advanced  economies  suffer  from  a  persistent  imbalance  resulting 
from  an  increasing  propensity  to  save  and  a  decreasing  propensity  to  invest;  excessive 
savings  act  as  a  hindrance  to  growth  and  inflation,  and  pull  down  real  interest  rates.  A 
number  of  supply  and  demand  factors,  all  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of  persistence, 
have  been  considered  to  justify  this  imbalance.  Demographic  developments,  high  demand 
for  safe  assets  in  emerging  economies,  increases  in  wealth  and  income  inequality  and  a 
permanent decrease in total factor productivity are the main examples. 
If we accept, instead, the view of those who suggest that we are in a transition towards the 
“second  machine  age”,  low  interest  rates  may  be  seen  as  the  result  of  an  adjustment 
temporarily  characterised  by  weak  demand  and  high  unemployment;  in  the  longer  run, 
productivity gains due to the ongoing digital revolution and many other current and foreseen 
technological innovations will increase economic growth and raise real interest rates, even if 
with uncertain consequences for the distribution of incomes. It is not easy to assess which of 
these views is more likely to be confirmed by the future evolution, but none of them can be 
totally dismissed a priori; future developments could result in a combination of these different 
hypotheses. All this considered, it is conceivable that real interest rates will go up in future 
years, but how far in the future this will occur is very difficult to assess. 
Since a scenario in which a low interest rate environment extends for a long time into the 
future cannot be ruled out, it is important to assess its possible impact on financial institutions 
in  order  to  identify  the  appropriate  responses.  The  main  vulnerabilities  for  life  insurance 
companies  and  pension  funds  would  result  from  maturity  and  yield  mismatches  between 
assets  and  liabilities.  As  identified  by  the  2014  stress  test  conducted  by  EIOPA,  a  low 
interest  rate  scenario  could  put  under  particular  pressure  the  profitability  and  resilience  of 
insurance  companies  with  long-term  guarantees  and  negative  duration  gaps,  leading  to 
shortages in their solvency capital ratio. The risk is significant in some euro-area countries; it 
may be less marked in Italy, thanks to a fundamentally balanced financial structure. 
To mitigate profitability  concerns, life insurance companies and pension funds will have to 
adapt their business strategies. So far, actions taken by insurance companies have differed 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
depending on whether they are related to new or existing products. For new contracts, there 
is  a  general  trend  to  offer  lower  or  no  guarantees  and  develop  other  types  of  products, 
including unit linked policies, in which the risk is held by policyholders and beneficiaries. This 
is also a response to the new Solvency II prudential regime, which requires additional capital 
for guaranteed products. For existing contracts, the main actions consisted in reducing the 
shares of returns distributed to policyholders and, where legally feasible, the renegotiation of 
contract terms. 
As  far  as  retirement  savings  are  concerned,  the  persistently  low  market  yields  have 
strengthened  the  tendency,  already  established,  to  replace  defined  benefit  schemes  with 
defined contribution schemes. The mechanisms  to mitigate the risk of the underfunding of 
defined  benefit  schemes  vary  across  national  jurisdictions;  they  include  increased  capital 
buffers,  additional  sponsor  support  and  guarantee  funds,  as  well  as  the  reductions  of 
accrued benefits. 
From  a  regulatory  viewpoint,  the  introduction  of  Solvency  II  for  European  insurance 
companies is a major turning point. The new regulatory regime is a valid tool for mitigating 
portfolio  risks.  Some  provisions  were  introduced  in  Solvency  II  to  dampen  the  impact  of 
interest-rate volatility on insurance companies’ balance sheets, such as those related to the 
parameters for the extrapolation of risk-free interest rates at very long-term maturities and 
other measures that are meant to smooth the transition to the new prudential regime; such 
provisions  may  also  reduce  the  impact  of  a  prolonged  situation  of  low  interest  rates.  The 
scope  for  portfolio  diversification  has  been  enhanced  by  introducing  lower  capital 
requirements for investments in high-quality infrastructure and securitisation instruments, as 
well as in shares of closed-end funds targeting long-term investments and venture capital. In 
order to deal with system-wide instances of instability, other measures are currently being 
discussed at a macro-prudential level, including a harmonised EU framework of recovery and 
resolution for the insurance sector; however, such framework is still at an early stage. 
The  low  interest  rate  environment  and  the  rapid  pace  of  transformation  of  the  supply  of 
financial services make consumer protection as important as ever. Ensuring an appropriate 
level  of  consumer  awareness  and  information  is  a  policy  priority,  especially  in  countries 
where households depend, to a large extent, on guaranteed insurance savings products or 
funded pension schemes. 
 We all face a highly uncertain future environment. A deeper understanding of challenges and 
possible  consequences  is  crucial  for  all  the  stakeholders  in  the  financial  industry. 
Policymakers, financial institutions, firms and households need to be ready to rethink and, if 
necessary, adapt their behaviour. 
In the short term, in particular in the euro area, an expansionary monetary policy remains of 
key  importance  to  supporting  aggregate  demand  and  attaining  price  stability,  and  to 
preserving financial stability from debt-deflationary risks. As to the longer term, it is difficult to 
foresee how the factors affecting real interest rates will evolve; and this uncertainty bears on 
their  current  low  level.  Financial  institutions  should  be  aware  of  the  compelling  need  to 
effectively adapt their business models, both in their internal organisation and in their supply 
of  products;  it  will  be  especially  important  to fully  exploit  the  new  technologies  in  order  to 
provide the most suitable financial products for firms and households. In any event, access to 
sound information about issuers and financial contracts, transparent behaviour by firms and 
financial corporations, improvements in households’ financial education are key prerequisites 
for  the  financial  sector  to  effectively  allocate  risks  in  the  economy.  For  regulators,  the 
challenge  remains  one  of  striking  the  right  balance  between  allowing  financial  innovation 
while preventing it from endangering financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
