  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developing Malaysia’s financial sector for the 
future 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Future  Finance  Conference  2016,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
23 September 2016. 
 This  conference  gathers  the  leaders  of  the  industry  to  discuss  opportunities  and  develop 
substantive ideas for the development of our financial sector relevant to Malaysia’s future. In 
the  weeks  leading  up  to  today,  some  ideas  have  been  exchanged  among  us  and  further 
refined. It is our intention that the industry can come to an understanding on implementing 
substantive and collective solutions to the four subjects that we had identified: going beyond 
access  to  promote  financial  inclusion,  creating  opportunities  for  underprivileged  children, 
financing  the  new  economy  and  improving  insurance  penetration.  We  will  also  have  the 
opportunity to hear from international speakers and financial technology (fintech) companies 
on how the world around us is changing, and how the financial industry will need to evolve 
with it. 
Part I: Progress and achievements so far 
Five years have now passed since the Financial Sector Blueprint was released in 2011, with 
the  clear  vision  of  creating  a  financial  system  that  can  navigate  Malaysia’s  transformation 
into a high-value added, high-income economy. 
As the title of the Blueprint “Strengthening the Future” suggests, the goal was to move the 
financial  system  towards  higher  levels  of  stability,  efficiency  and  competitiveness  in  the 
financial  sector  to  power  the  economy  of  tomorrow.  Judging  by  the  financial  data,  we  are 
pleased to note that the financial sector is steadily advancing towards these goals. 
We  have  significantly  strengthened  our  legal  and  regulatory  foundations  for  a  safe  and 
stronger financial system with the enactment of the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009, and 
the Financial Services and Islamic Financial Services Acts of 2013. We have continued to 
update our prudential guidelines in line with international standards, a contributory factor in 
supporting the regional and global expansion of our financial institutions. The changes that 
we had made also ensured a highly resilient banking and insurance sector amid much more 
challenging conditions. The capital buffers of banks and insurers today collectively stand in 
excess of over RM140 billion above the regulatory minimum levels. 
Ongoing efforts of financial institutions to strengthen risk management, governance structure 
and  a  strong  focus  on  effective  supervision  further  reinforce  the  strength  of  our  financial 
system. Collaborative efforts between the industry and the Bank had resulted in significant 
investments  to  build  a  strong  talent  pipeline  for  the  financial  services  sector,  including  the 
transformation of the key industry professional bodies and training institutes. 
At the same time, the financial sector has continued to play its intermediary role in financing 
the economy, in particular the SMEs. As at end July 2016, financing by the banking system 
to businesses and SMEs stood at RM533 billion, growing at an average annual rate of 9.9% 
between 2011 and 2015. Banks remain the largest financiers to SMEs, and this relationship 
is expected to remain, thanks to the high approval rates of close to 80%. 
In 
the  subsequent 
operationalisation of the Islamic bank-backed Investment Account Platform (IAP) will further 
expand access to financing for a wider cross-section of businesses with different profiles and 
at  different  stages  of  development.  The  industry  is  making  encouraging  headway  in 
introducing  more  diverse  products  and  services  in  the  financial  system.  For  example,  the 
investment  accounts  and 
introduction  of 
finance, 
Islamic 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  successful migration of deposit products into investment account which now constitute 10% 
of  all  Islamic  funding  in  just  over  a  year  since  Islamic  banks  were  required  to  clearly 
distinguish  between  principal  guaranteed  and  investment  accounts  consistent  with  Shariah 
principles. 
Also important has been the development of a stronger consumer protection framework and 
more  inclusive  financial  system.  Earlier  this  week,  over  500  policymakers  and  industry 
participants  from  30  countries  were  in  this  building  to  address  the  immense  challenge  of 
reaching more than 2 billion adults worldwide who remain excluded from the formal financial 
system. At that forum, a point was made that, it is an important moral obligation for all of us 
to do more, to help the millions who are still living in abject poverty or those who are highly 
vulnerable to financial hardship, with no means or opportunity to change their circumstances. 
Financial  inclusion  has  also  received  greater  attention  by  global  leaders,  including  the 
international  standard  setting  bodies  which  has  considered  the  important  characteristics  of 
financial inclusion in formulating global standards. Malaysia continues to play an active role 
in this aspect. 
We have achieved important strides since the release of the Financial Inclusion Framework 
in  2011  which  outlined  strategies  to  promote  greater  financial  inclusion  over  the  coming 
decade. The level of financial inclusion in Malaysia as measured by the Financial Inclusion 
Index  has  risen  significantly  from  0.77  to  0.90.  Today  97.4%  of  mukims  in  Malaysia  have 
financial  access  points,  reaching  out  to  99%  of  Malaysia’s  population.  Agent  banking  in 
particular,  has  been  a  highly  effective  game  changing  initiative  in  expanding  financial 
accessibility while protecting the integrity of financial transactions. 
In the insurance and takaful sector, we have also carefully laid the ground for wide-ranging 
reforms  that  are  ultimately  aimed  at  increasing  insurance  penetration  and  reducing  the 
protection  gap  among Malaysians.  The  detariffing  exercise  is  set  to  fundamentally  change 
the  general  insurance  business  in  Malaysia.  In  our  effort  to  chart  the  growth  and 
development  of  the  industry  over  the  next  10  years,  we  have  established  an  Insurance 
Development Department that will serve as the primary reference for the insurance industry. 
I  also  wish  to  highlight  the  important  role  played  by  development  financial  institutions  in 
contributing to the inclusion agenda, which includes participation as agent banks as well as 
supporting the development of SMEs, the agricultural sector and co-operatives. 
To further improve the operational efficiency and resilience of these institutions, amendments 
to  the  Development  Financial  Institutions  Act  were  made  and  came  into  effect  in  January 
2016.  The  amendments  further  strengthen  important  areas  such  as  governance  and 
consumer  protection.  The  strengthened  legislation  will  ensure  that  development  financial 
institutions  can  better  contribute 
the  next  phase  of  Malaysia’s  socio-economic 
developments, building on achievements over the past decade. 
Finally,  the  Malaysian  financial  system  has  become  more  regionally  integrated  to  support 
stronger economic and financial linkages with our strategic trading partners. This has been 
characterised by the push for regional economic and financial integration in ASEAN, which 
includes  the  continuing  proliferation  of  local  currency  settlement  arrangements  with  banks 
serving  as  key  enablers  in  these  mechanism,  and  the  deepening  of  regional  financial 
markets. 
Greater  banking  integration  within  the  ASEAN  region  is  gaining  traction  under  the  ASEAN 
Banking  Integration  Framework,  with  attention  now  turning  to  the  formulation  of  a  similar 
framework  for  insurance  integration.  Malaysia’s  commitment  to  support  multilateral-
cooperation  and  development  is  also  reflected  in  the  international  organisations  that  have 
chosen  to  base  their  headquarters  or  offices  in  Malaysia,  including  the  World  Bank,  the 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion and the Islamic Financial Services Board. 
This  will  benefit  the  country,  by  enriching  the  domestic  talent  pool,  building  intellectual 
capacity,  and  originating  research  and  policy  recommendations,  that  address  today’s  key 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  and  economic  challenges,  and  placing  Malaysia  as  a  centre  of  excellence  for 
training  and  capacity  development.  It  would  also  benefit  many  countries  where  member 
countries will be able to share experiences in developing their economy. 
Part II: Reassessing our position – are we heading in the right direction? 
These developments that I outlined above have enhanced the breadth, depth and resilience 
of our financial system. It is important that we continue to stay the course to reinforce these 
core  strengths  of  our  financial  system.  More  work  still  lies  ahead  to  achieve  specific 
outcomes  that  were  envisioned  in  the  Blueprint.  In  Islamic  finance,  encouraging  greater 
product  diversity  supported  by  strong  institutional  capacity  remains  critical  to  increase  the 
share of Islamic banking assets to 40% of the banking system by 2020. Similarly, insurance 
and takaful penetration, currently around 5% of GDP, remains low. This is compounded by 
an enormous protection gap ranging between RM550,000 to RM723,000 per household. A 
focus on consumer education, product development and underwriting capabilities, alternative 
delivery channels and service quality remains important to increase penetration. 
The  Malaysian  financial  sector  has  achieved  a  significant  milestone  in  facilitating  the 
country’s cross-border linkages with other economies. Yet, there remains vast potential for 
our  onshore  financial  institutions  to  support  the  growing  financing  needs  of  domestic  and 
foreign corporates operating in Malaysia. 
For  example,  over  the  last  five  years,  offshore  corporate  borrowings  have  risen  to 
RM233 billion or 19.7% of GDP. From a macroeconomic perspective, total offshore corporate 
borrowing remains lower relative to the position observed during the Asian Financial Crisis at 
47.1% of GDP. Furthermore, these borrowings were largely hedged, either naturally through 
foreign  currency  earnings  or  through  the  use  of  financial  instruments.  The  bulk  of  these 
borrowings reflected intercompany loans extended by the parent of multinational companies 
operating in Malaysia, which tends to be more favourable in their terms and are more flexible 
on requirements for collateral and borrowing tenures. In sum, the macroeconomic prognosis 
of our offshore corporate borrowings suggests that they are manageable and within prudent 
levels. 
On the other hand, when viewed from the perspective of banking and financial opportunities, 
onshore  banks  and  financial  institutions  could  do  more  to  tap  this  opportunity.  Onshore 
banks  would  need  to  increase  competitiveness  by  increasing  its  skill  and  strengthening 
capacity and offering innovative and tailored financing solutions, while at the same time play 
an important role in helping businesses manage the attendant risks from these transactions. 
This requires more discerning credit assessments of prospective borrowers and competitive 
financial solutions. 
By  itself,  the  banking  sector  will  however  not  be  able  to  cater  for  all  the  increasing  and 
expanding needs of the economy of the future. This is precisely why we need to develop the 
role of market-based financing institutions as a new source of funding. 
Niche institutions such as factoring and leasing companies, angel funds and alternative credit 
providers of various industries such as motor, housing and consumer retail sector can play 
an important role in contributing towards providing consumers with greater funding choices. 
There, however exist a high bar and strict preconditions that must be met before this funding 
model can take root and flourish. The presence of a strong regulator, a sound and resilient 
supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  as  well  as  robust  consumer  protection  statute  are 
some  of  the  critical  foundation  required  to  ensure  these  institutions  ‘clear  the  hurdle’  to 
become a viable source or financing and benefit our economy. The ultimate aim remains in 
protecting  consumers’  interests,  preventing  predatory  practices,  managing  debt  levels, 
including high household debt, and preventing borrowers from falling into financial hardship 
due to inability to service debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  At the same time, we must not ignore important changes in the global and domestic financial 
landscape  that  will  affect  current  and  future  priorities  to  deliver  a  financial  system  that 
effectively  serves  our  economy.  One  of  the  most  significant  changes  has  been  the 
commoditisation  of  financial  services.  This  has  been  largely  driven  by  technological 
advancements, enabling financial products and services to be delivered by a broader set of 
institutions while driving lower margins for traditional providers such as banks and insurance 
companies. These “disruptions’ introduce new ways of interacting with consumers as well as 
changes to the nature of financial intermediation itself. The implications are far reaching and 
call for a re-thinking of business models and growth strategies, regulatory frameworks and 
customer relationships. 
The global  economy  and  financial  systems  have  also  become  more  interconnected. While 
this development augers well for businesses and trade, it also dramatically compounds the 
economic and social costs of financial failures. At a macro level, low to stagnant economic 
growth has become a ‘new normal’. Growth in the developed economy is still anaemic and 
below  pre-recession  levels.  Depressed  long-term  interest  rates  have  impacted  net  interest 
margins  for  banks  and  investment  income  for  insurers.  With  projections  for  a  sustained 
period of low growth, traditional growth models and strategies are coming under increasing 
pressure, with focus turning to new engines of growth. 
Bank Negara Malaysia is moving on a number of fronts in response to these developments. 
To  support  financial  innovations  and  new  business  and  growth  models  of  financial 
institutions, we have recently introduced a discussion paper on the regulatory sandbox that 
provides  a  collaborative  opportunity  for  fintech  firms,  financial  institutions  and  the  Bank  to 
evolve  responsible  innovations  and  sensible  regulation.  The  final  policy  document  on  the 
regulatory sandbox is targeted to be issued by early October 2016. Later today, you will also 
have the opportunity to see some of these solutions and consider how they can complement 
your own businesses. 
We are also working with the Government to introduce consumer credit legislation that will 
provide  consistent  protection  to  businesses  and  households  that  deal  with  financial 
intermediaries that are not licensed financial institutions. Appropriate arrangements are also 
being considered to drive and support the development of alternative financing vehicles to 
serve the financing needs of small businesses. 
To  address  an  increasingly  interconnected  domestic  and  global  financial  system,  we  are 
coordinating  the  development  of  a  recovery  and  resolution  framework  with  Perbadanan 
Insurans Deposit Malaysia (PIDM). This is a multi-year project and an important priority of 
the Bank to ensure that financial institutions are well prepared to manage potential stress, 
and to preserve the broadest options for managing any failure of a financial institution with 
minimal  impact  on  financial  stability.  The  Bank  and  PIDM  will  be  initiating  a  series  of 
engagement  sessions  with  the  industry  from  early  next  year  to  share  more  details  on  this 
work and how it will affect your institutions. 
Part III: Reinventing the future – financing growth and innovation 
We are entering a new era of economic development of unprecedented nature, one of the 
most  important  roles  of  the  financial  sector  will  be  financing  innovation  and  supporting 
businesses  in  managing  the  associated  risks.  Competing  objectives  and  the  obligations  of 
financial institutions to depositors and policyholders have suggested that this role is likely to 
be more limited for traditional financial institutions. However, there are growing prospects for 
financial institutions to support innovation without compromising the overriding obligations to 
safeguard deposits and claims by policyholders. Two notable developments have supported 
this. 
The first is the evolution of a more comprehensive ecosystem for innovation. This includes 
incubator  programmes  that  are  proving  to  be  highly  successful  in  helping  entrepreneurs 
commercialise ideas and scale up companies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Such  programmes  can  significantly  reduce  the  cost  of  innovation  for  firms,  and  risks  for 
financiers and risk managers such as insurance providers. Malaysia also has in place well-
developed  institutions  that  can  play  a  key  role  in  partnership  with  financial  institutions  to 
support  innovative  financing  solutions.  These  include  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation, 
Cagamas and SME Corporation. 
Second is the increasing opportunities presented for financial institutions to develop models 
to evaluate risks associated with innovative ventures by making use of technology and big 
data.  This  needs  to  be  further  complemented  by  broader  efforts  to  develop  valuation 
standards and strong protections for intellectual property. 
The  financial  industry  should  organise  itself  to  advance  such  efforts  in  coordination  with 
professional  bodies  and  authorities  to  open  up  wider  avenues  for  financing  innovative 
businesses in Malaysia. 
In the final analysis however, a larger role for financial institutions in financing growth and 
innovation  demands  a  clear,  strategic  focus  on  enhancing  the  organisational  capacity  to 
promote innovation. It cannot be achieved with incidental measures and half steps. Financial 
institutions must be able to effectively mainstream innovation into their operations – across 
all  parts  of  business,  from  developing  innovative  financial  and  risk  management  solutions, 
strengthening  learning  on  innovation  within  the  organisation  and  reviewing  operational 
models  and  policies  to  support  responsible  practices  that  promote  innovation.  As  earlier 
alluded  to,  the  industry  must  also  take  a  more  active  role  in  creating  the  conditions  for 
innovative finance and insurance to be viable, working with legislators, policymakers, valuers 
and incubators. It is high time that the industry associations devote a sustained focus with 
dedicated resources to lead this effort. 
Innovations must be firmly anchored in a mentality that has the public interest in mind, and 
customers at the core. Just as innovation propels the financial sector forward, as custodians 
of public funds, it is trust and integrity that prevents a gulf from forming between finance and 
real value creation. This not only serves to build public confidence in the financial system, but 
places  finance  firmly  back  in  service  of  society.  We  ought  to  aspire  for  the  banking  and 
insurance industry to be the pride of Malaysian, for its professionalism and integrity. 
If  innovation  is  the  source  of  future  prosperity,  then  financial  solutions  that  promote 
innovation  must  surely  be  its  cradle.  Over  120  years  ago,  Thomas  Edison  banked  on  his 
famous  invention,  the  incandescent  light  bulb,  to  obtain  financing  for  his  start-up,  General 
Electric,  which  went  on  to  become  one  of  the  most  enduring  and  successful  global 
conglomerates  of  our  time.  More  currently,  18  banks  and  fund  managers  have  invested 
USD170  million  in  Symphony,  a  secure  messaging  platform  which  is  being  touted  as  the 
“Whatsapp”  of  the  financial  world.  Innovation  such  as  this  might  or  might  not  work  but 
experimenting new solutions always involve risks and we have learnt that it is an imperative 
for any economy to grow to the next level of progress. Many other examples of our era exist 
– each one illustrating the promise of innovative industries that have the potential to create 
high-skill jobs and new economic opportunities that contribute to growth and development. 
Let  this future finance  conference  serve  as  an opportunity for  us  to  critically  reflect  on  the 
actions  that  we  can  take  individually  and  collectively  to  reinforce  existing foundations,  and 
build new ones for sustainable growth in the new economy. The future is in our hands, let us 
shape it to the advantage of the industry and the nation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
