  
 
Andreas Dombret: Opt-in or opt-out? The future of the European Union in 
light of the UK referendum 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Atlantik-Brücke, Hamburg, 23 Juni 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Schwenker 
Mr Kracht 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Yet  again,  Europe  finds  itself  at  a  crossroads,  at  least  it  does  from  the  UK’s  perspective. 
41 years on from the UK referendum in which the country came out in favour of becoming a 
member of what was then the European Economic Community, the people of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland are, as I speak, once again voting on the “European question”. 
Though this decision is quite clearly one for the UK alone to take, voices in all quarters have 
been sounding a note of caution right up to the last minute. One very notable example is the 
IMF’s  Christine  Lagarde,  who  recently  underscored  the  many  benefits  that  the  European 
partnership brings for the UK after an IMF paper sketched out a distinctly bleak future for a 
post-Brexit  UK  economy.  Echoing  Ms  Lagarde’s  remarks,  Federal  Reserve  chair  Janet 
Yellen  warned  that  a  UK  vote  to  leave  the  EU  could  have  “significant  economic 
repercussions”. 
UK voters alone will now have to make of these scenarios what they will. Now is neither the 
time nor the place to pass judgement on the decision to hold a referendum or the pros and 
contras of the respective standpoints from a UK angle. 
I will instead look at matters from a European vantage point and invite you to discuss what 
today’s referendum means for the European Union. In doing so, I will take a look at both the 
direct challenges we will face in the event of a Brexit and the long-term outlook for the EU. 
2. 
Standing firm in the face of uncertainty: the direct repercussions of a Brexit 
for the EU 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  half  of  the  UK’s  exports  go  to  other  EU  countries.  46%  of  foreign 
direct investment in the UK comes from the EU; the other way around, the figure is 43%.1 
Thanks to the UK’s long-standing membership of the EU, its economy now enjoys closer ties 
than ever before with its European partner countries. Figuratively speaking, a Brexit, then, 
would  set  in  motion  highly  complex  divorce  proceedings  and  herald  a  protracted  spell  of 
uncertainty. 
What a Brexit would mean in practice depends to a large extent on what’s hammered out in 
Brexit negotiations. While the mechanics of leaving the EU are now codified in Article 50 of 
the Treaty of European Union, that article only maps out the process and preliminary two-
year timeframe within  which an agreement is to be negotiated between the Union and the 
withdrawing member state. 
Both sides would undoubtedly be interested in maintaining the existing trade links. But at the 
same  time,  there  should  be  no  doubt  that  the  EU  should  resist  any  efforts  by  the  UK  to 
cherry-pick the most advantageous terms. 
                                                
1  C Fuest, Der Brexit ist ökonomisch irrational (in Wirtschaftswoche, 27 May 2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A  glance  at  the  agreements  that  exist  with  other  countries  makes  it  plain  that  sharing  a 
market  always  means  sticking  to  a  common  set  of  standards  as  well.  The  European  Free 
Trade Association (EFTA) for Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, for instance, is tied up with 
membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). But this also means applying the full set 
of EU legislation, a notable component of which is the freedom of movement – an issue that 
“Brexiteers” have cited in the run-up to the referendum as one of the reasons why they think 
the  UK  should  leave  the  Union.  By  contrast,  the  alternative  model  used  by  Switzerland, 
which is not part of the EEA, does not initially envisage the country having freedom to access 
the common market. In all likelihood, individual arrangements which grant access won’t be 
possible  without  concessions.  And  with  a  jungle  of  contractual  small  print  to  contend  with, 
time  constraints  will  mean  that  the  negotiating  parties  will  be  unable  to  repeatedly  redraft 
proposals in their efforts to hammer out an agreement. 
So it’s anything but certain how the legal situation will ultimately pan out. The terms of the EU 
Treaty would remain in force during the negotiation period. But businesses on both sides of 
the Channel would be unable to forge out any longer-term plans as long as these conditions 
haven’t been clarified – so planning uncertainty is bound to be costly. And it’s very much up 
in  the  air  whether  the  spell  of  uncertainty  will  be  over  after  two  years  or  whether  the 
negotiating parties will have agreed by mutual consent to extend the negotiating period. 
Putting  aside  the  tall  order  of  gauging  the  economic  fallout  of  a  Brexit  decision,  there  is 
naturally another question which arises from a European angle and for me personally as a 
central banker – given that a “leave” vote might spark a turbulent market response, how far 
will Europe’s banking and financial system remain stable and continue to function properly? 
Financial markets have already started to price in a Brexit scenario, and heightened volatility 
and climbing risk premiums are coming to the fore in the lead-up to the referendum. It’s a 
safe bet that markets will remain in turmoil if the UK chooses to leave the EU. 
For  example,  the  pound  is  open  to  exchange  rate  risk,  as  it  could  devalue  again  strongly 
should there be a vote to leave the EU. Effects can also be expected on the stock markets. 
In particular, British bank shares could come under pressure if the markets expect a Brexit to 
push up banks’ wholesale funding costs to the detriment of their profitability. Seeing as the 
financial sector accounts for a much greater share of the UK economy, at 6.7%, than it does 
in the rest of Europe,2 UK bank shares will be at the epicentre of market jitters. So it’s not 
surprising that Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, has spoken out, as part of the 
BoE’s monetary and financial stability mandate, on the repercussions of a Brexit and points 
to the likelihood of negative short-term effects.3  
That’s  why  European  supervisors  wasted  no  time  in  urging  euro-area  credit  institutions  to 
precisely quantify and continuously review their forex, credit, equity and bond market risks, 
simulate scenarios and draw up “contingency plans”. The vast majority of banks have treated 
the Brexit scenario with the seriousness it deserves and are rigorously prepared to face the 
aftermath – in some cases, their preparations have required a great deal of time and effort. 
The same goes for central banks, too, of course. They’re ready to face up to the real risk of a 
“leave” vote. As things stand today, I think the risk that might emerge, say, from a theoretical 
UK  rating  downgrade  or  a  possible  revaluation  of  the  UK  property  sector  is  manageable 
overall, but of course, no one really knows for sure. 
As for the EU, a Brexit would also cause some fallout in the medium term. European banks 
based  on  the  continent  operate  in  the  UK  market  and  have  branches  in  London.  The  UK 
capital  is  also  home  to  a  great  number  of  non-European  institutions  which  use  the  EU’s 
                                                
2  Financial and insurance activities expressed as a share of UK GDP; the equivalent for the EU as a whole is 
4.7% (source: OECD.Stat). 
3  Bank of England Inflation Report Q&A (12 May 2016). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  passporting regime to conduct business in any other EU country – that makes London a hub 
for the entire European market. 
If  the  UK  voted  to  leave  the  EU,  institutions  in  Germany  and  the  other  EU  countries  that 
operate  branches  in  the  UK  would  face  the  prospect  of  losing  access  to  this  passporting 
regime or seeing it be changed. This would force institutions to either convert their London 
branches into standalone subsidiaries and to apply for them to be licenced by the Bank of 
England or shift their operations out of the UK and into the euro area – two immensely costly 
options, might I add. But saying that, it is also true that if the UK opts to leave the EU, we will 
have to wait for the outcome of post-referendum negotiations before anything can really be 
said on the EU’s passporting regime that will stand up in court. 
But  for  financial  centres  elsewhere  in  the  EU,  the  Brexit  scenario  opens  up  a  number  of 
opportunities over the medium term. Also, a larger number of foreign banks look set to switch 
from the UK to mainland Europe – and that’s something that might even benefit the Frankfurt 
financial  centre.  London’s  pulling  power  as  a  venue  for  European  bond  and  forex  trading 
would shrivel. For even today, supervisors take a critical view of the fact that euro trading is 
based mostly in London, and therefore outside the euro area. This criticism would intensify if 
the UK chose to leave the EU, of course. The same can be said for clearing business and 
central securities depository services, at least for euro-denominated business – supervisory 
authorities will need to be a lot more tolerant if this business is to be allowed to be conducted 
not  just  outside the  euro  area  but  outside  the EU  as  well.  If truth  be  told,  that’s  a  level  of 
tolerance I can barely imagine. 
Looking at the medium-term horizon, the European Union also needs to consider how, given 
the  close  links  between  financial  agents  in  the  UK  and  continental  Europe,  it  intends  to 
safeguard financial stability in Europe if a more national brand of regulation and supervision 
is reintroduced on the other side of Channel. While UK banks aren’t currently affected by the 
Single  Supervisory  and  Resolution  Mechanisms  of  the  banking  union,  they  do  need  to 
comply with the Single Rulebook. 
Incidentally, the European Banking Authority plays an important role in this regard. Not only 
does the EBA ensure a harmonised interpretation of the rules, it also promotes interaction 
and dialogue on supervisory practices in the member states. And as I’m sure you all know, it 
is currently headquartered in London. So if the UK voted to leave the EU, the EBA wouldn’t 
only have to find a new home; it would also have to rebuild the prudential cooperation with 
the UK from scratch. 
So  a  “leave”  vote  throws  up  a  vast  number  of  planning  issues  and  raises  considerable 
uncertainty.  But  even  if  the  electorate  came  out  in  favour  of  “remain”,  there  would  still  be 
some  loose  ends  to  deal  with  in  the  relationship  between  the  UK  and  the  rest  of  the 
European Union. Just consider, for instance, the question as to how the revision of the EU 
rules that were agreed in the event the UK remains in the EU actually affects economic and 
political dynamics within the EU. 
Strengthening crisis resistance: the long-term outlook for the EU 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the outcome of the referendum is something that Britain will have to 
resolve on its own – it is not something we will be able to influence. What we can influence, 
though,  is  the  EU  itself,  and  its  ability  to  function.  And  this  is  where  I  see  the  far  more 
consequential issues affecting Europe’s future. 
For the UK referendum should be understood less as the result of the anticipated benefits of 
exiting – earlier on, I gave you an insight into some imponderables and risks of leaving the 
union  –  but  more  as  the  outcome  of  widespread  dissatisfaction  with  the  European  Union. 
And, should the UK vote to remain in the union, the referendum will most likely not represent 
a resounding commitment on the part of Britons to the EU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In addition, as we all know, dissatisfaction with the EU is not a purely UK phenomenon, but 
instead  has  grown  significantly  in  many  member  states.  Support  for  Eurosceptic  parties  is 
mounting.  A  UK  vote  in  favour  of  Brexit  could  also  launch  a  movement  in  other  member 
states to look into ways of leaving the EU. Moreover, even if the UK votes today to remain, 
we cannot expect underlying attitudes towards the European Union to change overnight. 
Motives  for  dissatisfaction  may  partly  be  found  in  domestic  politics.  On  the  other  hand, 
however, a search for causes also needs to include the European Union’s specific actions, 
such  as  how  it  has  dealt  with  refugees,  the  euro  crisis,  and  the  general  cost-benefit 
considerations of harmonised rules and an “ever closer union” – at this juncture, I will not go 
into detail on individual topics, as that would be beyond the scope of my mandate. 
What reverberates everywhere, however, is the question of whether the European Union is 
capable  of  taking  decisions  effectively  and  efficiently.  The  EU  has  yet  to  demonstrate  its 
ability to deal with diversity – cultural or economic – and to channel it in the right directions. 
Let me explain this now in view of the euro area and outstanding reforms. 
The challenge of channelling diversity in the right directions has come up quite prominently in 
monetary union. In a large economic area, it is quite natural for individual regions to evolve in 
a variety of different ways; owing to the structures of their economies and societies, they will 
not respond to change in the same way. The underlying question is this: how can the system 
as a whole respond to such asymmetrical shocks? Put differently: how can the EU be made 
more crisis-resistant? 
In a single monetary area such as the euro area, there are no more exchange rates to adjust; 
therefore, other channels are needed to cushion imbalances, such as adjustments to prices 
in the factor markets, sufficient labour force and capital mobility, or also, of course, a stability-
oriented economic and fiscal policy. 
Despite a variety of efforts at harmonisation, there are still 19 different sets of economic and 
fiscal  policy  in  the  euro  area.  Yet  these  states  are  not  all  necessarily  addressing  their 
respective  structural  problems  in  an  appropriate  manner  because  EU-level  sanctioning 
mechanisms are either non-existent or, to put it mildly, being underused. It has also occurred 
in the past that, in dealing with their structural issues, governments have fobbed off part of 
the negative fallout of national policy measures on the rest of the euro area. Over the course 
of the euro crisis, this became clear in connection with sovereign debt. 
Other policymaking areas, too, are exposed to the threat that other member states will be 
forced to pay the consequences for individual member states’ policy errors. The European 
Union is consequently increasingly being viewed as a synonym for a lack of will to reform 
and as a dumping ground for national risks. 
Let  me  frame  the  reform  problem  this  way:  Europe  is  facing  the  challenge  of  overcoming 
obstacles to reform along the route to a sustainable and coherent community order. There is 
certainly  more  than  just  one  solution.  The  option  of  reforming  the  common  economic  and 
financial  framework  towards  stronger  European  liability,  however,  is  predicated  upon 
transferring  more  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level.  If  we  look  at  the  discontent 
about  “ever  closer  union,”  it  appears  as  if  this  option  is  currently  a  political  non-starter. 
However, another way for the European order to ensure synchronicity between actions and 
liability for their consequences is that these consequences are borne where the vast majority 
of  scope  for  action  is  located:  by  national  decision-makers.  This  means  that  they  need  to 
take responsibility for their actions and have convincing incentives to eliminate the structural 
problems. 
I would like to illustrate this now by citing two topical areas of financial reform: first, sovereign 
debt,  and  second,  European  deposit  insurance.  Both  reforms  are  related  to  the  nexus 
between sovereigns and their domestic banks. And, in both cases, as obviously apparent as 
the problem is, enthusiasm for reform still remains to be demonstrated. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  excessively  close  sovereign-bank  nexus  is  a  primary  example  of  a  factor  which  can 
make  sovereign  debt  a  structural  problem,  as  it  can  engender  an  unhealthy  mutual 
interdependence. It is precisely the large stocks of sovereign bonds on the books of domestic 
banks which is creating dependencies. 
The  Bundesbank  was  one  of  the  first  to  point  out  the  role  of  the  preferential  regulatory 
treatment  of  government  bonds  as  a  key  aspect  of  the  problem.  Banks  are  currently  not 
required  to  set  aside  any  capital  against  loans  to  euro-area  sovereigns,  unlike  loans  to 
enterprises  or  households.  Nor  are  there  any  caps  or  ceilings  on  their  lending  to  these 
borrowers.  Banks  therefore  have,  at  least  in  the  short  term,  a  huge  incentive  to  invest  in 
government  bonds.  Sovereigns  likewise  benefit  over  the  short  term  since  they  can  easily 
obtain  funding  through  the  artificially  inflated  demand  for  government  bonds  –  yet  at  the 
same  time  this  lessens  the  pressure  to  reform,  to  consolidate  government  finances  and 
achieve debt levels which are sustainable over the long term. 
The crisis showed more than clearly that even euro-area government bonds may be exposed 
to risk. This is why, in my view, risk-based capital requirements need to be extended to cover 
banks’ on-balance-sheet lending to sovereigns. 
I also believe it still makes sense to limit banks’ exposures to individual sovereigns – much 
like the large exposure limits for private-sector borrowers. That way, even if these borrowers 
were to default, banks would still have enough capital at their disposal. 
If  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  were  done  away  with,  this  would 
also increase investors’ incentives to take greater account of the differing risk profiles of the 
individual  states,  which  in  turn  would  thus  strengthen  the  disciplinary  function  of  capital 
markets. Countries that pursue unsustainable policies would then face rising risk premiums. 
Where  political  action  needs  to  be  taken  is  known  –  however,  the  EU  now  needs  to 
demonstrate that it is, in fact, willing to act. 
There is a similar political constellation regarding the topic of deposit protection. Under the 
European Commission’s current proposal, existing national protection schemes – which are 
already  operating  under  standards  which  have  been  harmonised  across  Europe  –  will 
gradually be replaced by a European deposit protection scheme. 
Although  we  have  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  in  Europe  under  which  banks  are 
supervised  according  to  uniform  European  guidelines  and  harmonised  rules,  as  well  as  a 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  to  go  with  it,  the  financial  situation  of  the  supervised 
institutions hinges on the state of the economy, as well as, of course, the legal framework of 
the  affected  country.  Insolvency,  for  instance,  is  still  governed  by  a  patchwork  of  very 
different national regimes. Rushing all too madly to introduce a European deposit insurance 
scheme would not only create an unfair situation in which some banks would be more likely 
to dig quite deeply into the shared pot; it would also tend to reduce the pressure on member 
states to conduct reforms. 
Let me once again reiterate the guiding theme of my foregoing remarks: there is an in-built 
conflict between short-term relief and the balance between actions and responsibility for their 
consequences, and thus also the basis for a rules-based order that can function in the long 
run. It is not only at the EU level but also, and in particular, member states where unpleasant 
structural reforms have to be undertaken in order to make the EU less vulnerable to crises. 
Time  is  of  the  essence  and,  given  the  challenges  we  are  facing  in  the  EU,  should  not  be 
wasted. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
at this hour, the UK’s future in the EU is balanced on a knife edge. We won’t have to wait 
longer than tomorrow to learn how the UK has voted: whether it wishes to remain a member 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  of the EU or to leave. However, we should not worry only about the immediate impact of the 
referendum – be it “Brexit” or “Bremain”. What will be more decisive over the medium to long 
term,  however,  will  be  to  find good  solutions  to  the  problem  of  chronic dissatisfaction  with 
Europe’s  institutions. We  have  to  confront  the  detected  deficiencies  in  a  decisive  manner. 
Europe must demonstrate its ability to conduct credible political reforms. 
This task is necessary irrespective of today’s referendum in the United Kingdom. Should the 
UK vote to leave the EU, however, one thing is certain: Europe’s political landscape will be 
missing  a  voice  of  caution  and  a  proponent  of  stability  and  the  market  economy.  That  is 
something  I  would  highly  regret;  however,  it  is  my  hope  that  Britain’s  known  penchant  for 
pragmatism will prevail this evening. 
Thanks you very much for coming, and I would now be pleased to join you in a discussion. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
