   Patrick Njoroge: Transforming Kenya’s financial sector 
Speech  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  launch  of 
Barclays Centennial Celebrations, Nairobi, 12 February 2016. 
 Good morning! 
I am honoured by your invitation to witness this epic milestone. Today I proudly join Barclays 
Bank  of  Kenya  (BBK)  in  celebrating  100  years  in  Kenya,  a  century  of  transformative 
contribution to the financial sector. It is indeed no mean feat and I congratulate you on this 
historic occasion. I envision the courage and tenacity of your founders on Nkrumah Road in 
Mombasa, armed with no more than capital and belief in the promise of this then remote frontier 
territory with rudimentary links to the rest of the world. This celebration is indeed a vindication 
of  the  faith  and  vision  of  those  pioneers,  from  which  later  generations  have  benefitted 
enormously. 
Over these 100 years, the world has changed, Kenya has changed, and Barclays has changed. 
From an enterprise largely geared towards serving the interests of the British colonial settlers, 
Barclays has grown into a modern and integrated financial services provider. In your middle 
age during the 1960s, you witnessed Kenya take its initial steps towards self-determination 
and eventual independence. Today, you serve a wide clientele through products and services 
that exemplify innovation and support the Kenyan entrepreneurial spirit. 
At end-2015, Barclays was ranked fifth out of 42 banks, with a market share of 6.83 percent. 
Today the bank has more than 100 branches and 180 agents through strategic partnerships. 
These  indicators  capture  the  long  and  winding  path  that  Barclays  has  traversed  from  its 
beginnings  a  century  ago.  I  salute  the  board,  management,  staff  and  indeed  all  Barclays’ 
customers, for these remarkable achievements.  
To survive and thrive, Barclays has had to cope with global turmoil and numerous shocks. 
When your founders landed in Kenya, the First World War was raging, and the Second War 
would break out 23 years later. More recently, we have had to deal with the Global Financial 
Crisis, refugees, and terrorism. 
But the world has also shrunk with globalization and advances in technology. When Barclays 
opened its first office, the Wright brothers had flown the first powered airplane in 1903, but the 
first non-stop transatlantic flight was still more than 10 years away. Since then, we have broken 
the speed of sound, put a man on the moon, and landed a robot on a comet after a 10-year 
journey covering 6.4 billion kilometres. Barclays has kept pace with the changing world and 
now has a truly global reach through its interaction with a network of other banks around the 
world. 
As we celebrate the 100-year journey, we ask what the next 100 years will bring. Will Barclays 
continue to be inspired by the spirit and vision of its pioneers, or will it fizzle leaving behind no 
more than a memory of its glory days? Today more than ever, the spirit of the pioneers is 
needed. Paraphrasing Prince Faisal in the movie “Lawrence of Arabia,” young men make wars, 
and the virtues of war are the virtues of young men – courage and hope for the future. Old men 
make peace. And the vices of peace are the vices of old men – mistrust and caution. Kenya is 
at a turning point, with vast opportunities but also significant risks. The banking sector has a 
critical role to play in taking a long-term bet on the country and supporting Kenya’s economic 
transformation. This epic occasion offers the Barclays family an opportunity to recommit to a 
shared future, with hope and courage. 
The financial sector in Kenya and in the region is at a critical juncture, and the challenges that 
it will face in the 21st century are truly herculean. Will Barclays rise to these challenges with 
the responsibility of a leader, treading boldly where others have not trodden? Today, questions 
abound  about  the  cost  of  borrowing  and  banking  services,  enhancing  transparency  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   information  disclosures,  strengthening  corporate  governance  and  business  models. 
Appropriate responses to these questions require courage and hope for the future, not mistrust 
and caution.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the age of average is over. A globalized world is unforgiving and there 
is no room for mediocrity. A single rogue trader can bring about the collapse of a hundred-year 
institution. A globalized world allows only the thinnest of margins, and each customer has to 
be dealt with as if this was the only customer in the world. Each of us and our institutions have 
to be the best that we can be, renewing ourselves relentlessly as the pioneers did. We have 
to be nimble, quick to adapt to the rapidly changing world. In this, I again underscore the need 
for innovation. But you know you are in the right place – Kenya is and should remain a hotbed 
of innovation. 
Ultimately, the greatest asset that Barclays has is its staff. Most of them are unsung heroes in 
the  backrooms,  cleaning  crews,  far-flung  branches,  etc.  All  dedicate  themselves  with 
professionalism, integrity, and a spirit of service. This is what all our institutions, including those 
in our banking sector, need to see and adopt. I applaud Barclays for its excellent staff and 
anchoring its business on a set of strong values, without which it would have been impossible 
to sustain growth and stability over a century. 
Before I finish, I would be remiss if I did not mention that the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) will 
this year mark its 50th anniversary. At this juncture, the Central Bank is at a point of reflection 
on its past successes and challenges in delivering on its key mandates including promoting 
the stability, access, efficiency and integrity of the banking sector. CBK will continue to take 
steps to further strengthen prudential regulation and supervision, with a view to supporting the 
continued safety, soundness and growth of the banking sector. This is in line with Kenya’s 
aspirations under Vision 2030 of promoting a sound, safe and inclusive financial system to 
progress towards a regional financial services hub. 
As I close, I see Barclays standing with two roads diverging in front of it, and the last verse of 
Robert Frost’s poem “The Road Not Taken” comes to mind: 
I shall be telling this with a sigh 
Somewhere ages and ages hence: 
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I –  
I took the one less traveled by, 
And that has made all the difference. 
I wish once again to congratulate Barclays on this milestone and look forward to many more 
successful years ahead. I wish you fruitful centennial celebrations. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
