  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building inclusive growth for migrant workers 
through multi-sectoral partnerships 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Financial  Inclusion  Summit  2016,  Manila,  28  April 
2016. 
 As host partner, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are pleased to welcome you to the 
Financial  Inclusion  Summit  2016.  This  summit  is  yet  another  milestone  in  our  journey  to 
improve the lives of our people through financial inclusion, under the collaborative platform of 
the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion or NSFI as our roadmap. With this Summit, we 
focus on “Building inclusive growth for migrant workers through Multi-Sectoral Partnerships.” 
SFI: A collaborative platform for financial inclusion 
Drafted  by  13  government  agencies  including  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  the  NSFI 
provides  the  platform  for  public  and  private  sectors  to  work  together  toward  expanding 
access to financial services to all Filipinos. 
With  such  partnerships,  there  is  a  wealth  of  complementary  experience,  expertise  and 
resources  that  can  be  matched  to  generate  alliances  that  will  result  in  greater  financial 
inclusion. 
Ladies and gentlemen. As we move forward together, let us always keep the NSFI vision in 
mind:  We  aim  for  a  financial  system  that  is  accessible  and  responsive  to  the  needs  of 
Filipinos. 
Among our primary targets are what we now call our modern-day heroes: Overseas Filipinos 
(OFs) and their families. Their remittances have been a dependable source of strength for 
the Philippine economy. In the last 10 years, from 2005 to 2015, they have sent over $228 
billion in remittances (personal and cash) to our country. In 2015, more than 10 million OFs 
sent over $28.5 billion in personal remittances, higher by 4.4% than the 2014 figure of over 
$27.3 billion. This is equivalent to roughly 10% (9.8% actually) of our GDP 1  
In fact, sustained increases in family and work-related migration of Filipinos have resulted in 
the steady growth in remittance flows into the country.2  
As  a  result,  the  Philippines  has  been  consistently  ranked  among  the  top  recipients  of 
remittances. Early this month, a World Bank report on 2015 remittances said the Philippines 
ranks  third  among the  top  remittance-receiving  countries,  next  to  India  and  China,  both  of 
which have over a billion in population. 
Financial inclusion and remittances 
Indeed,  there  are  many  challenges  –  and  opportunities  –  in  providing  access  to  financial 
services to migrant workers and their families. 
The remittances sent home are mostly used for consumption expenditures – 97.3% of OF 
households used the remittances to purchase food and other household needs. This helps 
drive our economy. 
                                                
1   BSP Department of Economic Statistics (2015) 
2   More than 10 million OFs sent $25.8 billion worth of cash remittances in 2015, up by 4.6% from $24.6 billion in 
2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Another positive development, as indicated by a BSP survey (CES), is the rising proportion 
of households directing remittances received to savings – from 7.2% in 2007 to 43.4% in the 
first quarter this year. This is one of the many reasons why Philippine bank deposits have 
been hitting record high levels - it was P8.5 trillion in December 2014 and over P9.2 trillion as 
of December 2015. 
Nevertheless,  the  challenge  and  the  opportunity  is  to  encourage  more  investments  by  OF 
households; it continues to lag way behind savings. As indicated by our survey, households 
that allocated part of their remittances for investments, increased from 2.3% in 2007 to only 
6.5% in the first quarter this year. That is over a period of nearly nine years! 
For institutions, the challenge is to develop and promote products suited to the needs of OFs. 
Financial  education  is  essential  for  OFs  to  realize  the  opportunities  -  as  well  as  possible 
pitfalls  -  in  investments.  Equally  important,  financial  institutions  should  consider  it  their 
responsibility to inform OFs of their rights and protection as financial consumers. 
The importance of remittances for enhancing the financial stability of OFs and the economic 
growth of our country cannot be overemphasized. 
As part of the BSP’s program to develop a more inclusive financial system, we have put in 
place policies and programs to enable the development of a wide range of products that can 
cater  to  the  needs  of  OFs  and  their  beneficiaries.  We  also  continue  to  implement  a 
nationwide  Economic  and  Financial  Learning  Program  where  we  have  a  special  focus  on 
OFs. 
In  fact,  the  BSP  won  the  Global  Forum  on  Remittances  and  Development  Public  Sector 
Award for 2015 in recognition for what it described as outstanding commitment, innovation 
and  impact  in  promoting  remittances  for  social  and  economic  development  through  our 
Economic and Financial Learning Program. 
Challenges 
However, while we have positives, there are concerns that we need to address. 
Foremost is the adverse impact on remittance costs and flows of the closure of accounts of 
several  money  transfer  operators  (MTOs)  by  correspondent  banks  who  are  limiting  their 
exposure to possible channels for money laundering and other financial crimes. This is a de-
risking strategy largely driven by business decisions of foreign banks, weighing the risks and 
benefits of dealing with remittance companies. This has been going on in recent years and 
has not been helped by the present money laundering case here. 
Since the closures limit the players that can competitively operate in the remittance market, 
this  has  the  potential  to  reverse  the  steady  gains  we  have  made  in  reducing  remittance 
costs. De-risking may also result in movement by OFs toward informal remittance channels 
and subsequent financial exclusion. In the end, this may exact an even larger toll on the OFs 
and their families in terms of deprivation of access to safe and reliable financial services. 
We are therefore addressing this issue. As early as 2014, we started raising our concerns on 
the  adverse  impact  of  de-risking  with  relevant  international  institutions.  This  includes  the 
Financial  Action  Task  Force,  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion,  the  Global  Partnership  for 
Financial Inclusion of the G20, the US Department of Treasury, the Financial Stability Board, 
and the World Bank. 
In addition, we are gathering data and closely coordinating with concerned stakeholders for a 
more  evidence-based  response.  Among  others,  we  have  an  ongoing  National  Risk 
Assessment  (NRA)  which  is  an  inter-agency  effort  to  evaluate  the  country’s  money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing  vulnerabilities  and  weaknesses.  This  will  enable  us  to 
sharpen  our  focus  in  ensuring  effective  enforcement  of  international  standards  against 
money laundering and terrorist financing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  On the other hand, there is a silver lining: technological innovations from the market promise 
more  cost-effective  remittance  channels.  In  today’s  language,  these  are  called  “disruptive 
innovations”, the act of creating new value chains from existing markets or value chains. 
The  advent  of  more  affordable  smart  phones  has  encouraged  new  players  (e.g.,  financial 
technology  companies  or  FinTechs)  and  new  business  models  to  address  the  problem  of 
cost. There are now online money transfer services that are linking international remittances 
to Facebook.3 Customer acceptance of these developments seems likely. In a recent global 
survey that studied 7 remittance corridors including US-Philippines, it was gathered that 83% 
of consumers are willing to shift to mobile money for international transfers.4 
Indeed,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  create  enabling  and  proportionate  policy  and  regulatory 
space  for  these  innovations  while  balancing  inherent  operational  risks  –  such  as  business 
interruptions,  network  vulnerabilities,  as  well  as  concerns  related  to  data  privacy  and 
security. 
We  are  also  working  on  the  creation  of  a  National  Retail  Payment  System  where  all 
commercial  electronic  payment  channels  can  effectively  inter-operate  through  appropriate 
clearing and settlement arrangements. With this in place, the delivery of remittances to the 
beneficiaries will be safe, convenient and affordable. 
When such balance of policy objectives is achieved, it is exciting to imagine the acceleration 
of global uptake of technology-enabled remittances that can ultimately drive down the cost of 
remittance while providing a faster and safer channel. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen. This Summit is a unique opportunity to increase awareness, catalyze 
multi-sectoral partnerships, and promote financial inclusion for our migrant workers and their 
families.  And  I  congratulate  BPI  Foundation  and  ASKI  Global  for  organizing  such  an 
important  venue  to  further  our  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  I  hope  therefore  that  we  will 
generate  practical  solutions  and  tangible  steps  to  address  its  challenges  and  to  seize  its 
opportunities. 
Together, let us make the lives of our migrant workers and their families better through multi-
sectoral partnerships to financial inclusion. Let our National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
serve as our roadmap to a better future for all. 
Thank you all and Mabuhay!  
                                                 
3   Examples are Azimo and fastacash. See CGAP (2014). Does Facebook Represent the Future of International 
Remittances? 
4   Entitled ‘Mobile Financial Services Consumer Survey: International Remittance,’ the survey questioned nearly 
3,000 members of migrant communities in the US, UK, and Germany. The survey was conducted by Juniper 
Research on behalf of Amdocs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
