  R Gandhi: Information technology – new gauntlets for banks 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
12th  IDRBT  (Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology)  Banking 
Technology Excellence Awards function, Hyderabad, 18 July 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri S Ganesh Kumar, CGM is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Honourable  Governor  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  members  of  the  Governing  Council  of 
IDRBT,  Chiefs  of  banks,  Heads  of  IT  departments  of  banks,  Director,  IDRBT,  Faculty 
members, students, Ladies and Gentlemen. It gives me great pleasure to be present at the 
12th IDRBT Banking Technology Awards. 
2. 
I am glad to be back to be directly dealing with the subject of technology yet another 
time. I  have  the  unique honour  of  having  been and  being  associated  with  IDRBT  in  every 
possible role – as a recipient of training, as a faculty, as an invitee to the General Council, as 
the Director, as a member of the General Council and as the Chairman of the Council; that’s 
a special privilege that I cherish a lot. 
If one thing that changed the face and the inner core of banking and continuing to 
3. 
change, it is technology. Banking and finance lend themselves eminently suitable for such 
continuous  application  of  technology;  every  new  development  in  technology  has  been 
gleefully opted for by banking and finance. The ever increasing volume of transactions and 
ever  changing  customer  expectations  are  the  key  differentiating  drivers  for  such  an 
extraordinary use. Of course the need to increase efficiency and quality, and reduce cost is 
also there, like any other vocation. 
4. 
The Reserve Bank has been very aware of the potentialities of technology for gainful 
use within the banking system. Given the then prevailing adverse environment for free use of 
technology  in  the  banking  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  carefully  crafted  an  acceptable 
foundation  and  path  for  its  adoption  and  increasing  usage,  thanks  to  the  Rangarajan 
Committee 1 and Rangarajan Committee 2 in 1980s, Saraf and Barman Working Groups in 
1990s and 2000s, besides establishing the IDRBT in 1996. Recently, the Reserve Bank has 
established a new institution, the Reserve Bank Information Technology (ReBIT) Pvt Ltd, as 
its wholly owned subsidiary, for increasing, advanced level focus on cyber security and for 
building  cutting  edge  capabilities  for  supervising financial  technology  usage  in  the  banking 
sector. Reserve Bank has also now constituted a Working Group on Financial Technology, to 
fully understand the new paradigm of Fin-Tech and to chart out the best way of using it. 
5. 
financial sectors in recent times. I would like to highlight five of them. 
6. 
First  is  the  Cyber  Security.  Banks  deal  with  hard  cash  and  money  and  therefore 
have always been targets of crime; while the banks make good use of IT for protecting cash 
and  money,  ironically  use  of  IT  by  criminals  have  also  increased  substantially.  Today,  IT 
systems  of  banks  are  the  prime  target  for  cyber  crimes  and  if  one  were  to  judge  by  the 
volume and value of incidents, the menace is steadily growing. It is of great concern –some 
of the recent incidents at Bangladesh Bank and several persistent instances in many banks 
are just the proverbial tip of the iceberg. If we need to provide safe and secure banking, then 
providing for  safe  IT  systems  is  an  undeniable  requirement.  It  is  essential  that  in  every  IT 
based initiative, security is addressed as a vital component. Banks need to bestow greater 
attention  on  Cyber  security.  The  role  of  the  Chief  Information  Security  Officer  (CISO) 
assumes great significance. It is heartening to note that all banks have a well anointed set up 
in  the  CISO.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  criminals  have  become  IT  savvy;  cyber  attacks  are 
becoming  highly  sophisticated,  use  specialized  analytical  techniques  and  exploit  minute 
vulnerabilities  which  had  hitherto  gone  unnoticed.  Continued  vigilance  and  concerted 
Technology  has  thrown  several  gauntlets  simultaneously  on  to  the  banking  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  proactive protective actions are warranted. We have a CISO forum under the aegis of the 
IDRBT; this forum, along with the ongoing research in IDRBT in cyber security should help 
banks  exchange  information,  react  quick  enough  to  outsmart  the  perpetrators  of  cyber 
incidents and build in workable security related enhancements. 
7. 
Second  are  the  new  technologies  that  are  fast  developing.  One  of  the  important 
characteristics  of  the  IT  world  is  that  it  is  ever  changing  and  dynamic.  Cloud  based 
computing,  block  chain processing  technologies  and  virtualization  of  IT systems  are  a few 
examples which hold potential for being used in a big way. The fruits of these would be in the 
form  of  safe,  trackable  and  secure  digital  currency,  distributed  ledger-keeping  and 
homogenous  IT  systems  –all  of  which  would  ultimately  result  in  better  customer  service. 
Banks and IDRBT can work together to study these, test them out and adapt for best use. 
8. 
Third  are  the  Fin  Tech  companies  –  the  new,  non-conforming  disruptors.  For  too 
long, banks thought their competitors are their fellow bankers; then they accepted the other 
financial institutions as their competitors. They always thought the technology companies are 
their enablers; with their help, the banks have been differentiating themselves from the rest 
of  the  crowd.  The  banks  never  thought  the  technology  companies  will  be  their  direct 
competitors. I have been sounding way back in early 2000s itself about this possibility; I used 
to say in this very platform that banking knowledge is no longer with the bankers and it is with 
the techies. The techies have now grown as Fin-Tech companies and are emerging as the 
direct  competitors  in  the  identified  chunks  of  banking  businesses;  technology  has  today 
dissected  the  entire  value  chain  of  banking  and  finance  and  bundled  out  the  chunks  in 
innovative ways that it is they who intermediate between savers and investors, or between 
sender  and  receiver  of  funds.  Banks  need  to  handle  them  carefully  without  inhibiting 
innovations;  banks  have  to find  ways  to  cooperate,  co-opt  and  compete  with  the  Fin-Tech 
companies. 
9. 
Actually,  these  Fin-Tech  innovations  are  knocking  at  the  doors  of  competition  for 
central  banks  as  well.  We  have  all  along  been  maintaining  that  there  is  no  competitor  to 
central  banks  for  issuing  currency.  But  this  is  being  challenged  by  the  developments  with 
regard to e-currency. However, I still maintain, as I did way back in 2001, that e-currency is 
no substitute for currency; if at all, it can only be a better alternative to any other payment 
instrument.  But,  researchers  and  innovators  on  the  field  are  and  will  be  continuing  their 
attempt  to  develop  an  e-currency.  Despite  my  misgiving  about  is  success,  I  do  support 
research on this subject. 
10. 
Fourth  is  the  Payment  Revolution  engineered  by  technology.  One  of  the  major 
beneficiaries of the large scale use of IT in the banking industry is payment systems. India 
can  now  boast  of  having  perhaps  the  world’s  best  and  state-of-the-art  payment  and 
settlement systems; and it is handling ever increasing volumes. While it is satisfying to note 
that there are new initiatives in payment systems aimed at providing better customer comfort, 
it  is  also  essential  to  ensure  that  these  systems  are  safe  and  result  in  overall  efficiencies 
including  reduced  costs  to  the  common  man.  How  to  take  full  advantage  the  payment 
revolution is a challenge. 
Fifth are the varied choices of technology for financial inclusion. Financial Inclusion 
11. 
is an achievable reality, and the role of IT in this initiative is very significant and fundamental. 
More  needs  to  be  done  here.  We  need  to  integrate  account  opening  and  KYC  related 
requirements  with  other  systems  such  as  AADHAR,  allow  use  of  funds  without  actual 
movement  of  cash,  and  ensure  that  the  common  persons  have  access  to  banking  and 
financial services at their door steps. Varied technical solutions have the potential to achieve 
this and at reduced costs. Finding the right mix and adapting them for achieving the financial 
inclusion in the shortest possible time is a big challenge. 
12. 
If the  banking  system  has  to meet these  challenges  squarely,  the  academics, the 
industry and banking professionals have to work together. IDRBT provides perfect settings 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for such a joint action. The CIOs Forum and CISOs Forum coordinated by IDRBT are the 
right channels. I am sure that these coordinating fora will be successful. 
13. 
Finally, as regards this Award Function, as we will all fully endorse, recognition of 
good work done is always a successful motivating factor. IDRBT has been continuing to host 
these awards. I would also congratulate all the winners and hope that they will ever increase 
the bar; I look forward to more banks joining the pride of place in the years to come. 
14. 
Thank you all for your patient attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
