  
 
Geoff Bascand: Inflation pressures through the lens of the labour market 
Speech  by  Mr  Geoff  Bascand,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Operations  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, to Otago University, Dunedin, 7 April 2016. 
 I wish to thank my colleagues at the Reserve Bank whose research on the labour market I have drawn upon in 
preparing  these  remarks,  and  in  particular  Miles  Parker  and  Evelyn  Truong.  References  can  be  found  in  the 
footnotes. 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today. It was a pleasure speaking as part of the Visiting 
Executives Programme last year, and even more so to have been invited back. Today I want 
to consider inflation pressures through the lens of the labour market. We have seen some 
extraordinary developments in the New Zealand labour market over the past three years and 
these pose challenges to our modelling of inflation pressures. 
Employment in New Zealand has increased by 180,000 or 8.3 percent over the past three 
years. In previous periods of very strong employment growth, such as the mid-2000s and the 
mid-1990s, wage growth accelerated. In the current cycle it has remained moderate. Even in 
Canterbury,  with  the  demand  pressures  from  rebuilding  Christchurch  and  unemployment 
falling to around 3 percent last year, wage growth has been modest. 
Over  the  same  period,  we  have  experienced  the  largest  recorded  surge  in  immigration  in 
more than 100 years, but without the generalised inflation pressures that accompanied the 
previous  migration  wave. The  proportion  of the population  participating  in  the  labour force 
reached  record  levels  in  2015  and  labour force growth  has  averaged  about  2  percent  per 
year since 2012, well above expectation (Figure 1). 
 
The Reserve Bank has undertaken considerable research over the past year on the impact 
of migration, labour market slack, and wage bargaining by New Zealand businesses. I will 
discuss what we have learned and the implications for monetary policy. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
To cut to the chase, recent low consumer price inflation can be mostly explained by falls in 
commodity prices and the high New Zealand dollar. However, the higher productive capacity 
of the economy from rapid growth in the labour force, much of which was unexpected three 
years ago, explains some of the remaining weakness in inflation.1 Strong labour force growth 
has had a moderating influence on wage inflation, and the migration cycle, in particular, has 
had lower inflationary impact than expected. 
I’ll begin by discussing how developments in the labour market affect inflation and monetary 
policy. 
Labour supply, demand and monetary policy 
Monetary policy  works to meet our inflation target by setting interest rates to keep current 
economic  activity  close  to  its  long  run,  sustainable  level  (i.e.  potential  output).2  When  the 
level  of  output  exceeds  potential  –  that  is  to  say  there  is  a  positive  output  gap  –  inflation 
tends  to  accelerate.  Similarly,  inflation  tends  to  fall  when  the  level  of  output  is  below 
potential. 
There are a number of measures of the output gap, but the balance of labour demand and 
supply  is  a  central  feature  in  most  of  them.  It  determines  the  cyclical  impact  on 
unemployment, wages and consumer prices (this relationship, known as the Phillips curve, 
was  originally  specified  between  wages  and  unemployment  but  is  now  often  modelled 
between consumer price inflation and output).3 
There is always some unemployment since it takes time to find a new position and the skills 
of  job  seekers  may  not  match  up  with  current  vacancies.4  For  example,  many  part-time 
workers in hospitality and retail were made redundant following the Canterbury earthquakes, 
whereas the vacancies arising from the rebuild are typically full-time construction jobs.5  
When the level of unemployment deviates from its long-run “natural rate” it puts pressure on 
wages, in a similar fashion to the output gap and prices. When unemployment is below its 
natural  rate,  additional  workers  are  relatively  scarce  and  businesses  will  have  to  increase 
wages  to  entice  people  to  seek  work  (from  non-participation)  or  to  move  from  other 
businesses.  These  higher  wages  increase  business  costs  and  put  upward  pressure  on 
output  prices.  Indeed,  labour  costs  are  the  factor  most  likely  to  cause  price  changes 
                                                
1   See McDermott, J (2015), “The dragon slain? Near-zero inflation in New Zealand”, Assistant Governor and 
Chief Economist, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, speech delivered to the Waikato Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry and Waikato branch of the Institute of Directors, Hamilton, 23 April. 
2   Potential  output  and  monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand  is  discussed  at  length  in  McDermott,  J  (2014), 
“Realising our potential: Potential output and the monetary policy framework”, Speech by John McDermott, 
Assistant Governor and Chief Economist, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 9 July. 
3   McDermott (2015), op cit. 
4   These frictions are modelled in more detail for New Zealand in Albertini, J, Kamber, G and Kirker, M (2012), 
“An  estimated  small  open  economy  model  with  frictional  unemployment”,  Pacific  Economic  Review,  17(2): 
326–353. 
5   Furlanetto, F and Groshenny, N (2012), “Matching efficiency and business cycle fluctuations”, Reserve Bank 
of  New  Zealand  Discussion  Paper,  2012/06,  study  the  impact  of  changes  in  matching  efficiency  on  US 
business cycles, finding that the impact can vary depending on the type of hiring costs faced by firms. Craigie, 
R, Gillmore, D and Groshenny, N (2012), “Matching workers with jobs: how well is the New Zealand labour 
market doing?”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 75 (4, December): 3–12, discuss the New Zealand 
situation, highlighting the increased matching inefficiency in Canterbury following the major earthquakes there 
in 2010 and 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
according to a recent survey of New Zealand businesses.6 Conversely, high unemployment 
puts downward pressure on wages and prices. 
With that framework in mind, we can look more closely at the factors driving the market and 
the consequences for inflationary pressure. 
Labour supply 
The  labour  that  is  available  to  be  employed  (labour  supply)  is  determined  by  three  main 
factors.7 First, is the working age population, itself a function of demographics and migration. 
Second, is the share of the working age population that participate in the labour force, either 
by working or by actively seeking work (the participation rate). Third, is the amount of time 
(number of hours) that people in the labour force are willing to work. 
Average hours worked per person have changed little recently. The main drivers of the rapid 
growth in labour supply are participation and population increase (figure 2). 
  
Many of the underlying demographic trends affecting the labour force are slow moving, and 
do not tend to affect monetary policy decisions from quarter to quarter. They do, however, 
have bearing on the conduct of policy, affecting long-run supply capacity, potential growth 
and  neutral  interest  rates,  so  generally  it  is  appropriate  to  consider  both  structural  and 
cyclical forces. 
Not  so  long  ago,  the  then  Government  Statistician8  projected  the  coming  decades  would 
exhibit  much  slower  growth  in  the  labour  force  and  painted  a  picture  of  rising  labour 
                                                
6   See Parker, M. (2014), “Price setting behaviour in New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion 
Paper, 2014/04. 
7   Abstracting from considerations about skill levels or the quality of labour input. Given increasing educational 
attainment,  labour’s  contribution  to  growth  has  been  stronger  than  aggregate  hours.  See  Statistics  NZ, 
(2008),” Accounting for changes in labour composition in the measurement of labour productivity”. 
8   See G. Bascand (2012), “Planning for the future: Structural change in New Zealand’s population, labour force, 
and productivity”, Government Statistician, Statistics New Zealand, Paper presented at Affording Our Future 
Conference, Wellington, NZ, December 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
shortages – albeit over a fifty year horizon. In contrast, labour supply has been growing very 
rapidly, with cyclical forces dominating the longer-term lower trend. 
Participation 
The  share  of  the  population  participating  in  the  labour  force,  either  by  working  or  actively 
seeking  work,  has  trended  higher  over  the  past  15  years,  reaching  around  69  percent  in 
2015.  The  main  influences  on  this  trend  have  been  the  ageing  population,  increased 
participation of older workers, and increased participation of women (figure 3). 
Figure 3: Contributions to change in labour force participation since 20019 
 
As  in  many  advanced  economies,  our  population  is  ageing.  Because  older  cohorts,  and 
particularly  those  past  retirement  age,  have  a  lower  participation  rate  than  the  rest  of  the 
working-age  population,  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  older  cohorts,  all  else  equal, 
decreases the aggregate participation rate. 
We’ve  also  experienced  a  significant  increase  in  the  participation  of  older  workers,  due  to 
improved health and changes to retirement policies that encourage people to remain in the 
workforce for longer. The participation rate of the over-60s has increased from 14 percent in 
2001, to 35 percent currently. This greater participation of older workers has exceeded the 
negative impact of the ageing population. 
Over the past 15 years, the participation rate of females has trended upwards, as social and 
cultural  factors  are  seeing  more  women  enter  the  workforce  across  all  age  groups.  By 
contrast, the participation rate of men has been broadly stable. 
Participation  can  be  cyclical  because  strong  employment  and  wage  growth  encourage 
people  to  seek  work,  who  otherwise  would  not  choose  to  participate.  Similarly,  during 
downturns when unemployment rises and people spend longer time out of work, some are 
                                                
9   The  chart  shows  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  participation  rate  since  the  March  2001  quarter 
attributable  to  each  of  the  factors.  The  contribution  from  demographic  change  is  calculated  by  holding  the 
average  participation  rate  of  each  age  cohort  fixed,  and  varying  the  relative  size  of  each  cohort.  The 
contribution from youth participation is calculated by multiplying the change in the participation rate of male 
15–19 year olds by the share of both sexes in that age cohort in the working age population in 2001. The 
contribution from the change in prime-aged (20–59) and older (60+) workers is calculated equivalently. The 
contribution from female participation is calculated by multiplying the increase in female participation beyond 
the change in the male participation rate by the share of females in the working age population. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
discouraged from seeking work and no longer participate in the workforce. A recent example 
of  cyclical  impact  is  Canterbury,  where  the  strong  rebuild  activity  encouraged  additional 
workers to join the labour force. Participation in Canterbury rose from 67 percent at end-2011 
to around 72 percent at the end of 2015, 4 percentage points above the rest of the country.10  
Research underway at the Bank has identified there are large flows of people from outside 
the labour force directly into employment. This flow from non-participation into employment is 
much  higher  than  that  witnessed  in  other  countries.11  Around  two  thirds  of  the  newly 
employed – those who are employed in the current quarter but who were not employed in the 
previous  quarter  –  come  from  non-participation,  while  only  a  third  of  the  newly  employed 
were unemployed in the previous quarter. 
One  implication  is  that  participation  is  potentially  more  sensitive  to  cyclical  variation  than 
previously  thought.  Another  is  that  the  unemployment  rate  is  a  weaker  indicator  of  labour 
market  slack  and  inflationary  pressure  than  previously  assumed.  I  will  return  to  the 
measurement of slack later. 
Population 
In recent years, the main driver of population growth has been immigration, which is running 
at its highest rate for a century (figure 4). Net immigration has added about 130,000 people 
(3.5 percent) to the working age population in the past three years, and is projected to add a 
further 120,000 by 2018. Given its importance, I want to explain how migration affects the 
economy. 
                                                  
10   The Canterbury rebuild is discussed in more detail in Wood, A, Noy, I and Parker, M (2016) “The Canterbury 
rebuild  five  years  on  from  the  Christchurch  earthquake”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Bulletin,  79 
(3, February). 
11   See, for example, Elsby, M,  Bart Hobijn, B and Sahin, A (2013),  “On the importance of the participation 
margin for market fluctuations”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series, 2013–05 and 
Gomes,  P  (2009),  “Labour  market  flows:  facts  from  the  United  Kingdom,  Bank  of  England  Working 
Paper, 367. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Migration  increases  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  New  arrivals  require  goods  and 
services,  and  their  household  spending  puts  upward  pressure  on  inflation.  With  housing 
supply fixed in the near-term, higher demand for housing increases rents and house prices 
and  eventually  encourages  residential  investment.  The  boost  to  demand  from  migrant 
spending and increasing activity generates additional demand for labour. 
However, recent work at the Reserve Bank12 suggests that the current migrant inflow may be 
having a smaller impact on demand and inflation than in previous cycles, partly due to the 
higher share of young migrants (figure 5). The study finds that younger migrants (17 to 29) 
have a smaller impact on inflation and real house prices than older migrants. This is probably 
because younger migrants arrive with fewer financial assets, spend less, and are less likely 
to purchase a house. 
 
Migration also boosts labour supply. In this cycle, fewer families and more work visas are 
likely to have boosted migrant participation. While students usually have lower participation, 
the recent relaxation of rules allowing migrants on student visas to work up to 20 hours per 
week may have boosted participation. 
Since migrants boost both supply and demand in the economy, the net effect on inflationary 
pressure  can  be  ambiguous.  Our  historical  experience  has  been  that  migration  increases 
inflationary  pressures  in  product  and  housing  markets.  In  the  current  cycle,  however,  the 
migration  drivers  have  been  very  different  and  recent  research13  suggests  that  these 
differences matter for labour market outcomes. 
In particular, when migration is caused by weakness in the Australian economy (or the rest of 
the  world),  it  increases  labour  supply  at  a  time  when  our  businesses  are  facing  lower 
demand,  and  hence  need  less  labour.  This  results  in  higher  unemployment  and  lower 
inflationary pressure. 
                                                
12   Vehbi, T, “The macroeconomic impact of the age composition of migration”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Analytical Note 2016/03. 
13   Armstrong, J and McDonald, C, “Why the drivers of migration matter for the labour market”, Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand Analytical Note 2016/02. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Much  of  the  current  surge  in  net  immigration  is  explained  by  weakness  in  the  Australian 
labour market that has made New Zealand a relatively more attractive place to live. 
Fewer  New  Zealanders  are  departing  for  Australia,  more  are  returning  home,  and  foreign 
migrants who may have considered migrating to Australia are coming to New Zealand. The 
flow of net emigration to Australia has reversed over the past 12 months, and is the largest 
net inflow for 25 years.14  
The differences in the composition and drivers of migration in the current cycle help explain 
why inflationary pressures have been more muted than expected. 
Labour demand and employment 
Following the 2007–08 global financial crisis, employment fell by over 55,000 in 2009. Since 
then, labour demand has recovered strongly (figure 6) and employment increased by over 
8 percent in the past three years, well in excess of historical average growth rates. Higher 
household  consumption  arising  from  strong  population  and  tourism  growth  and  the 
Canterbury rebuild were major drivers of the employment growth, with jobs in construction 
accounting for more than a quarter of total jobs growth over the past three years. 
Labour market slack, wages, and inflation 
Having  discussed  the  underlying  causes  of  the recent  strong  growth  in  the  labour force,  I 
would like to conclude by discussing the implications for monetary policy. 
The labour market most directly influences consumer price inflation through wage outcomes. 
This  is  particularly  true  of  non-tradables  goods  and  services,  where  labour  represents  a 
higher  share  of  the  total  cost  of  production.15  Broadly  speaking,  wage  outcomes  are 
                                                 
14   Over  the  last  35  years,  New  Zealand  has  lost,  on  average,  16.5  thousand  people  per  year  through  net 
emigration to Australia, In the past 12 months New Zealand gained 1600 people from Australia. 
15   Dunstan,  A,  Matheson,  T  and  Pepper,  H  (2009),  “Analysing  wage  and  price  dynamics  in  New  Zealand”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, 2009/06. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
determined  by  three  factors:  labour  productivity,  inflation  expectations  and  the  balance 
between the demand and supply for labour. 
In the long run, growth in real wages – that is, wage growth beyond the change in consumer 
prices – should reflect labour productivity. Labour productivity in New Zealand has averaged 
only  0.8  percent  per  year  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  thereby  limiting  the  increase  in 
wages due to this factor. 
Wages affect consumer prices, but the relationship is complex and flows in both directions. 
Current  and  expected  rates  of  consumer  price  inflation  are  factored  into  wage-setting. 
Recent  research  by  the  Bank  highlights  this  relationship,  with  the  majority  of  businesses, 
weighted  by  employees,  reporting  a  direct  or  indirect  link  between  inflation  and  wages.16 
Other  work  has  found  that  wage  inflation  expectations  bear  a  closer  relationship  to  past 
inflation outcomes than previously thought.17 In the March 2016 MPS, we expressed concern 
that  recent  declines  in  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  could  become  embedded  in  low 
wage settlements, thereby subduing inflation outcomes. 
Over the business cycle, a key driver of wage growth is the balance of supply and demand, 
or  labour  market  “slack”.  However,  the  unemployment  rate  is  an  inadequate  indicator  of 
labour  market  slack,  particularly  when  the  participation  rate fluctuates.  Researchers  at the 
Bank have recently constructed a labour utilisation composite index, or LUCI, to help address 
this  problem.  Such  indices  combine  the  information  in  a  large  number  of  labour  market 
variables into a single series of labour market tightness, and are used internationally to help 
gauge labour market pressures.18 The New Zealand index uses official statistics such as the 
HLFS and survey measures of the difficulty of finding labour, such as the QSBO.19  
By construction, the LUCI has an average value of zero. A LUCI value above zero indicates 
greater  labour  market  tightness  than  usual  –  a  value  below  zero  indicates  greater  labour 
market  slack  than  usual.  Our  research  shows  that,  historically,  a  higher  LUCI  has  been 
associated with stronger wage growth. 
The LUCI suggests there was a large degree of slack in the labour market at the trough of 
the 2008–09 recession. The LUCI then gradually returned to zero, and has been around that 
level since early 2014 (figure 7). This movement is consistent with the range of the Bank’s 
suite of output gap indicators.20 With labour market conditions broadly in balance since 2014, 
there has been little additional upward pressure on wages recently. 
Nominal wage growth is currently around 1.6 percent per annum, noticeably below the rates 
witnessed  in  the  mid-2000s  (figure  8).  Current wage  growth  is  consistent  with  our  models 
                                                
16   See  Armstrong,  J  and  Parker,  M  (2016),  “How  wages  are  set:  evidence  from  a  large  survey  of  firms”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, 2016/03. 
17   Lewis, M., McDermott, J., and Richardson, A., (2016), “Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary 
policy in New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 79 (4, March). 
18   See  Yellen,  J  (2014)  “Labour  market  dynamics  and  monetary  policy”,  Chair,  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal Reserve System, Speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, 
Jackson Hole, for the use of an LUCI in the context of monetary policy discussions in the United States. The 
construction of the US LUCI is detailed in Hakkio, C and Willis, J (2013), “Assessing labor market conditions: 
the level of activity and the speed of improvement”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The Macro Bulletin, 
July 18. 
19   See Armstrong, J, Kamber, G and Karagedikli, O (2016), “Developing a labour utilisation composite index 
for New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2016/04. Preliminary analysis of Statistics 
NZ’s  new  experimental  monthly  filled  job  series  suggests  it  improves  the  LUCI  and  provides  an  earlier 
indication of changes in labour market slack. 
20   See Armstrong, J (2015), “The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s output gap indicator suite and its real-time 
properties”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2015/08. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
and  the  outturns  we  have  experienced  for  productivity,  inflation  expectations  and  labour 
market slack. 
 
   
That current wage growth is lower than we expected two years ago reflects a slower than 
anticipated  reduction  in  slack  due  to  the  unexpected  increase  in  the  labour  force  from 
migration, weak productivity growth and lower than expected headline inflation, particularly 
from oil and other tradable prices. 
Despite the lower nominal wage growth, real wage growth has been historically high. Given 
the sluggish performance of labour productivity, this high real wage growth likely reflects the 
downward surprises to headline inflation. In the absence of higher labour productivity growth, 
these recent increases in real wages are unsustainable in the long run. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Concluding remarks 
In the past four years, New Zealand’s population has grown by a quarter of a million people, 
with  over  half  that  number  coming from  overseas. The  migration  surge  has  contributed to 
housing and consumer demand but had less impact on inflation than in previous migration 
cycles. 
The  New  Zealand  economy  has  expanded  steadily  since  2011,  with  strong  employment 
growth.  Notwithstanding  the  180,000  extra jobs,  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  only 
modestly. 
The surge in net migration, together with higher labour force participation from women and 
older workers, has led to rapid labour force growth and an increased supply capacity of the 
economy. A new measure of labour market slack (the LUCI) suggests that labour supply and 
demand are broadly in balance. 
Unexpectedly strong growth in labour supply, along with the characteristics of the migration 
cycle,  substantially  explains  why  wage  and  non-tradables  inflation  pressures  have  been 
weaker  than  expected.  Stronger  than  expected  labour  supply,  and  greater  than  expected 
slack, has been a factor in in our assessment that it has been appropriate to keep monetary 
policy accommodative. 
In view of the close relationship between labour market dynamics and inflation pressures, we 
will  continue  to  monitor  a  broad  range  of  labour  market  indicators  to  help  inform  our 
monetary policy decisions. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
