  Sharon Donnery: Micro data for monetary policy decisions 
Discussion by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
Eighth ECB Statistics Conference “Central bank statistics: moving beyond the aggregates”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 July 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to be here to discuss the topic of “Micro Data for Monetary Policy Decisions” 
and the contributions of Governor Stournaras and Director General Bindseil.1 I spent much 
time, early in my career as an economist and as a member of the Working Group on Money 
and Banking Statistics for the Central Bank of Ireland.2 The work of the group at that time 
was focused, amongst other things, on developing the monetary aggregates which would be 
used to underpin Eurosystem monetary policy. Therefore, it is of great interest to return to 
this issue at a time when the policy environment has become so much more complex and 
challenging. 
The primary objective of monetary policy is simple – maintaining inflation rates of below, but 
close to, two per cent over the medium term. Achieving that objective is far more challenging. 
Whilst Governor Stournaras and Ulrich approach the importance of micro data for monetary 
policy  decisions  from  quite  different  perspectives,  their  contributions  can  be  regarded  as 
mutually reinforcing as well as containing some interesting unique insights. 
Information enhancement for policy 
Governor Stournaras is right to emphasise that monetary policy is still mainly about broad 
aggregates  rather  than  distributional  issues  and  this  implies  that  the  role  of  micro  data  is 
complementary.  But  the  recent  crisis  and  turmoil  in  financial  markets  means  that  detailed 
distributional  information  is  increasingly  important  in  understanding  the  transmission 
mechanism.  As  Governor  Stournaras  so  eloquently  puts  it,  what  motivates  our  interest  in 
micro data is that it allows us to “go beyond and behind” aggregate information in our quest 
to better understand what the aggregates are telling us about the transmission mechanism. 
This is a point also made by Ulrich who provides details about how this happens in practice. 
Monetary policy makers have almost always combined information from various sources to 
improve  their  understanding  of  macroeconomic conditions.  And  in  these  more  volatile  and 
complex times (with even noisier signals than usual) micro and granular data has become an 
increasing part of this process of combining information. 
In  terms  of  “going  behind  the  aggregates”,  Governor  Stournaras  elaborates  on  the  role of 
granular data in identifying structural changes in important economic relations that underpin 
monetary policy decision making. He uses the case of how “Goodhart’s Law” frustrates policy 
makers  using  a  specific  monetary  aggregate  as  a  policy  instrument  –  because  the 
relationship between the instrument and policy objectives become unstable. He asserts that 
micro data can help us in this situation. Granular data allows policy makers to observe the 
financial innovation that causes the instability in the instrument-target relationship. With the 
additional  information  from  micro  data  it  is  possible  to  correct  for  the  biases  arising  from 
financial innovation. 
In a similar vein, nonlinearities in responses to monetary policy actions due to debt overhang, 
wealth effects, credit constraints, information asymmetries and other imperfections in funding 
                                                
1  
I would like to thank Joe McNeill, Rory McElligott, Peter Dunne, and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contributions to 
this speech. 
2   Donnery,  Sharon  (2003)  “Money  Supply  in  Ireland”,  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Quarterly  Bulletin,  2003  
Q3:73–95. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
and  lending  markets,  could  all  be  better  tracked  and  understood  using  micro  data.  In  this 
regard, micro data from the Household Finance and Consumption Survey allows us to better 
assess how household spending will respond to monetary policy actions. And the Household 
Finance and Consumption Network is a good example where standardisation of the survey 
across  countries  greatly  enhances  the  data.  Similar  points  can  be  made  about  other  data 
initiatives  by  the  ECB,  for  example  AnaCredit.  AnaCredit  should  contribute  to  our 
understanding of the response to monetary policy actions, for example the incidence of credit 
default, and to the coordination of macroprudential and monetary policies. 
In the spirit of “going beyond and behind the aggregates” I can add an example where micro 
data  has  been  invaluable  in  broadening  the  information  set  of  researchers  and  policy 
makers. Securities holdings data has improved our understanding of the linkages between 
holders and issuers of securities. A recent ECB Case Study demonstrated that the recently 
developed  Securities  Holding  Statistics  database  can  be  used  to  calculate  the  effect  of 
interest rate changes on the market value of government debt broken down by segments of 
the  holder  population.3  So  we  can  now  identify  many  detailed  components  of  the  balance 
sheet channel of the monetary policy transmission mechanism as never before. 
Designing,implementing and monitoring standard and non-standard monetary policy 
Ulrich and his colleagues examine the increased need, the expanding use and the increasing 
challenges  associated  with  micro  and  granular  data  in  three  main  contexts.  The  first  is  in 
monitoring  and  assessing  the  workings  of  the  money  markets.  The  second  is  in  dynamic 
monitoring, recording and assessment of collateral and counterparty eligibility for monetary 
policy  operations.  The  third  is  in  the  design,  implementation  and  assessment  of  the 
effectiveness  of  non-standard  measures  –  specifically 
the  various  Asset  Purchase 
Programmes. All of these areas have either become more acutely relevant, or arose directly 
as a consequence of the financial and sovereign debt crises and for various reasons these 
areas have become more challenging in recent years as Ulrich describes. 
Despite  rapid  changes  in  the  structure  of  interbank  markets  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  the 
monitoring and assessment of money markets was not a well-researched topic. The reasons 
for this are probably many and varied but one crucial ingredient was absent – high quality 
and comprehensive granular data about how monetary policy operations and money market 
behaviour  interacted.  Since  the  financial  crisis  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  have  not 
been  slow  in  responding  to  the  data  gaps  and  Ulrich  points  out  many  new  promising 
developments (particularly the Money Market Statistical Reporting) that will allow us to see 
developments  at  a  high  frequency  and  eventually,  through  research  efforts,  to  understand 
when these markets are not functioning well. This topic has been addressed at many recent 
ECB (and other central bank) conferences and it has begun to generate substantial research 
dedicated to gaining an understanding of money market developments before and during the 
crisis.4  
An important development here is the expansion of monitoring beyond the unsecured money 
market. The crisis led to a significant switch in activity to collateralised repo trading and the 
                                                
3   ECB  Economic  Bulletin  (2015)  Issue  2 –  Case  Study  5  “The  effect  of  interest  rate changes  on  the  market 
value of government debt holdings”. 
4   Useful references include; (a) Dunne, Peter G., Michael J. Fleming & Andrey Zholos (2013) “ECB Monetary 
Operations  and  the  Interbank  Repo  Market”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Reports  No  654, 
(b) Mancini,  Loriano,  Angelo  Ranaldo  and  Jan  Wrampelmeyer  (2016)  “The  euro  repo  market”,  Review  of 
Financial Studies 29(7): 1747–1779, (c) Frutos, Juan Carlos, Carlos Garcia-de-Andoain, Florian Heider and 
Patrick Papsdorf (2016) “Stressed Interbank Markets: Evidence from the European Financial and Sovereign 
Debt Crisis”, ECB Working Paper No 1925. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
peculiarities of these markets need to be monitored and understood better. It is also good to 
hear  that  Money  Market  Statistical  Reporting  data  will  be  disseminated  in  an  aggregated 
form at a “reserve maintenance frequency”. This will make it easier to assess the interaction 
between monetary policy operations and the behaviour of banks within the interbank market. 
This brings the discussion naturally around to the second main area identified by Ulrich and 
his  co-authors;  that  is,  the  monitoring,  eligibility  and  use  of  collateral  and  the  dynamic 
assessment of counterparty quality. This area was also brought to the fore during the crisis 
when there were episodes of collateral hoarding that contributed to problems in the secured 
interbank markets and also in access to official operations. It is also important to extend this 
analysis to the use and availability of collateral within the wider interbank market. In the pre-
crisis period there was significant growth in the lending of collateral. This facilitated improved 
access to funding and it increased the efficiency in the use of collateral and the management 
of reserves. But the contraction in availability of this type of collateral was most probably due 
to hoarding by security lenders. We still have limited knowledge of this activity.5  
Last, the use of micro-data in the context of the design and assessment of the effectiveness 
of Asset Purchase Programmes (and other non-standard measures such as the TLTRO) is 
clearly  of  interest from a  monetary  policy  perspective.  It  was  interesting  to  hear  about  the 
challenges in implementing the Asset Purchase Programmes. It appears that micro-data and 
technical developments have been combined very efficiently to help in  identifying the best 
timing of purchases and what should be purchased in order to have a good outcome for the 
Asset  Purchase  Programmes.  At  the  same  time,  this  aims  to  avoid  structural  damage  to 
important  markets 
the 
“announcement”, “stock” and “flow” effects of asset purchases is underway in the ECB and 
some  NCBs  to  ensure  that  we  are  well  informed  about  the  deeper  consequences  of  the 
programme but there remains a challenge regarding how this programme interacts with other 
aspects  of  monetary  policy  for  example  the  behaviour  of  banks  in  Ordinary  and  Targeted 
monetary  policy  operations  as  well  as  in  regard  to  use  of  the  ECB’s  deposit  facility.  The 
Money Market Statistical Reporting and Asset Purchase Programmes data could be usefully 
combined to provide insights in these areas. 
liquidity  and  market  efficiency.  Research  on 
terms  of 
in 
Perspectives from the Irish experience 
Allow me to briefly give you some perspectives from Ireland, which is a good example of how 
micro data may have helped in the past and is currently being used to assess the effects of 
monetary  policy.  In  the  pre-crisis  period,  credit  demand  in  Ireland  was  stronger  than 
elsewhere in the euro area due to a variety of factors.6 On the supply side, the absence of 
exchange rate risk encouraged banks to expand their use of plentiful external funding. This 
combination caused an excessive build-up in the level of indebtedness across all sectors of 
the economy. Understanding the effects of the distribution of this indebtedness across the 
household and corporate sectors (and the legacy in terms of the health of the banking sector) 
is not possible from aggregate data. 
Research using the Household Finance and Consumption Survey has shown that differences 
in  initial  wealth  and  indebtedness  affect  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real 
economy.7  We  have  also  found  evidence  that  factors  such  as  the  variability  in  access  to 
                                                
5   Hördahl, Peter, & Michael R. King (2008) “Developments in Repo Markets During the Financial Turmoil” BIS 
Quarterly Review pp 37–53. 
6   See  Lane,  Philip  (2006)  “Real  Effects  of  European  Monetary  Union,”  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives, 
20(4):47–66. Also see Honohan, Patrick and Philip Lane (2003) “Divergent Inflation Rates in EMU,” Economic 
Policy 18(37):357–394. 
7   Arrondel, Luc, Pierre Lamarche and Frédérique Savignac (2015) “Wealth effects on consumption across the 
wealth distribution: empirical evidence.” ECB Working Paper 1817, June 2015. Also see, Mian, Atif, Kamalesh 
Rao  and  Amir  Sufi  (2013)  “Household  balance  sheets,  consumption  and  the  economic  slump.”  Quarterly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Household sector, 
 
 
funding by banks due to their different levels of impairments and provisions, or in the type of 
mortgage  products  being  offered  to  borrowers,  can  be  crucial  for  distortions  in  monetary 
policy transmission.8  
Other examples from our experience of using granular data during the crisis include; 
(i) 
Bank  economists  have  studied  the  effects  of  credit  conditions  on  property  prices  using 
granular data from a combination of  sources.9 This work involved loan-level data matched 
against a sample of households from a household income survey. This revealed excessive 
tolerance of high loan-to-income ratios by Irish financial institutions in advance of the crisis. 
(ii) 
The effect of debt overhangs related to the property market for the case of small and medium 
sized enterprises (SMEs) was studied using a unique granular dataset on the property and 
core enterprise debts of Irish SMEs.10 The authors highlight the extent to which Irish non-
real-estate  SMEs  borrowed  for  property  investment  purposes.  This  reveals  details  of  an 
additional channel through which credit-driven property booms can have long-lasting harmful 
effects on economic growth prospects. 
(iii) 
The pass through of the ECBs policy rate to Irish commercial bank variable interest rates has 
been studied at a granular level to help understand the pre-crisis build up in indebtedness 
and  its  overhang.11  Until  the  end  of  2008  variable  rates  for  all  lenders  closely  followed 
changes in the ECB’s policy rates, short-term wholesale rates and tracker rate mortgages. 
Thereafter,  the  relationship  breaks  down,  in  part  due  to  banks’  increased  market  funding 
costs, and this clearly restricts the transmission of looser monetary policy. 
Financial institutions, 
Enterprise sector, 
Security & confidentiality 
The  less  commonly-held  ground  covered  by  our  speakers  was  just  as  interesting  and 
arguably  just  as  important  as  the  common  themes.  Governor  Stournaras  highlighted  the 
issue of data security and the fear of a loss of privacy. This is certainly an important issue 
since a reversal of public opinion could reduce many of the benefits we hope to enjoy from 
micro data availability. It is imperative, therefore, that strategies are put in place to safeguard 
personal confidentiality while allowing maximum use of data for research and analysis. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Economics, 1687–1726. Lydon, Reamonn (2013) “Do households with debt problems spend less?” 
Irish Central Bank Economic Letters Series, 2013, No. 2. 
8   See (a), Holton, Sarah, Martina Lawless, and Fergal McCann (2014) “Firm credit in the euro area: A tale of 
three  crises”,  Applied  Economics  Volume,  46(2):190–211,  (b)  Holton,  Sarah,  Martina  Lawless,  and  Fergal 
McCann, (2013) “SME Financing Conditions in Europe: Credit Crunch or Fundamentals?”, National Institute 
Economic  Review,  225:R52,  (c)  Gerlach,  Petra,  Brian  O’Connell  and  Conor  O’Toole  (2015)  “Do  Credit 
Constraints  Affect  SME  Investment  and  Employment?”,  Economic  and  Social  Review,  46  (1),  51–86, 
(d) Casey,  Eddie  and  Conor  O’Toole  (2014)  “Bank-Lending  Constraints,  Trade  Credit  and  Alternative 
Financing during the Financial Crisis: Evidence from European SMEs”, Journal of Corporate Finance, 27 (C), 
173–194. 
9   McCarthy,  Yvonne,  and  Kieran  McQuinn  (2013)  “Credit  conditions  in  a  boom  and  bust  property  market”, 
Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper 8/RT/13. 
10   McCann, Fergal, and Tara McIndoe-Calder (2014) “Property debt overhang: the case of Irish SMEs”, Central 
Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper 14/RT/14. 
11   Goggin, Jean, Sarah Holton, Jane Kelly, Reamonn Lydon and Kieran McQuinn (2012) “The financial crisis and 
the  pricing  of  interest  rates  in  the  Irish  mortgage  market:  2003–2011”,  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Research 
Technical Paper 1/RT/12. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
However,  having  such  high  levels  of  security  and  restrictions  on  our  micro  data,  that  we 
obtain very few of the benefits, would be an extremely inefficient outcome. Making such data 
available  to  the  wider  scientific  community  –  in  a  suitably  anonymised  manner  –  is  also 
important  to  maximise  the  policy  benefits  of  granular  data.  This  point  is  elaborated  on  by 
Ulrich  and  his  colleagues,  who  emphasise  how  even  when  data  are  confidential,  external 
researchers  can  temporarily  work  in  central  banks,  but  subject  to  the  same  confidentiality 
requirements. 
Granular or big data represents the future. Policy makers must also respond to challenges by 
further integrating granular data into evidence based policymaking. Otherwise we risk falling 
behind the private sector which has not delayed tapping the value of this resource. We all 
recognise  that  micro  data  is  viewed  broadly  as  a  great  opportunity  to  deepen  our 
understanding of economic behaviour and to identify new sources of risks arising in a rapidly 
changing financial environment. Big and exciting challenges lie ahead for both compilers and 
users of data, and we must embrace these with enthusiasm and skill. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
