   François Villeroy de Galhau: Ultra-low interest rates and challenges for 
central banks 
Welcome address by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
Farewell Symposium for Honorary Governor Christian Noyer, held by the Bank of France and 
the Bank for International Settlements, Paris, 12 January 2016. 
 Bienvenue à Paris and to the Banque de France (BDF) … I’ve switched to English so as to 
welcome you all to this new Conference Center created by you, dear Christian. What better 
way to wish you farewell after 12 years as Governor of the BDF and six years as President of 
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS)? And what better way for me to welcome for the 
first  time  this  unique  community  of  actors,  academics  and  observers  who  are  together 
genuinely contributing to a better understanding of monetary policy and financial stability?  
To quote a few numbers, some 200 VIPs are gathered here, representing more than 80 central 
banks (CBs), governments and international organizations, as well as about 50 universities, 
think tanks and financial institutions. It’s no surprise, as Christian enjoyed meeting all of you at 
international gatherings and research conferences.  
The Symposium title, chosen jointly by the BDF and the BIS, relates to the prevalence of very 
low interest rates for the past 7 years in advanced economies and, by contagion, around the 
world. Even in the USA after the FED lift-off, interest rates still qualify as historically low and 
the tightening cycle has been announced as “gradual”.  
Now why should we, as central bankers, care about ultra-low rates? For many reasons, notably 
because  they  can  lead  to  a  misallocation  of  resources  or  bubbles,  and  because  they  are 
currently associated with persistently low inflation or “lowflation” – shall I even say “noflation”? 
The latter is of particular concern given the costs resulting from price or wage rigidities and 
distortions, as well as the risk that we might fall into deflation.  
My role as “opening speaker” is modestly to stress some puzzles and challenges we face. You 
will then have the whole day to provide the best answers. To kick off, I’ll focus on where we 
stand, with two puzzles, and then on what monetary policy should/can do, with four 
challenges.  
Where do we stand? And to start with, what is ultra-low?  
I. 
A lot of what matters for CBs is low or ultra-low compared to history, notably in advanced 
economies (AEs): first, inflation, be it headline or core, realized or expected; second, interest 
rates on safe assets, whether short or long, nominal or real, ex post or ex ante; third, term 
premia in spite of measurement uncertainties. And all variables have been decreasing and are 
now low at the same time which is new.  
Spreads  and  volatility  have  also  been  lower  for  longer,  although  there  is  some  market 
discrimination between agents and between emerging market economies (EMEs), as well as 
periodic spikes in volatility, especially recently.  
Next, why are inflation or interest rates so low and how does this impact policy?  
First puzzle: inflation remains low in countries where unemployment is close to the NAIRU, 
like the USA, or where the output gap has been sharply reduced, like Germany; this may imply 
that the Phillips curve has a lower slope too. Yet, various studies by the IMF or the BDF show 
that, even if slopes have tended to flatten since the early 1990s, there has been no clear-cut 
change over the last years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   There are two possible explanations. The benign one is that transitory disinflationary shocks, 
e.g. due to commodity prices, temporarily shift the Phillips curve downwards. The worrying one 
would be a disanchoring of long-term inflation expectations, threatening the objective of price 
stability; such a disanchoring is suggested by the surprising correlation between spot oil prices 
and market expectations derived from inflation-linked swaps up to 5 years in 5 years. People 
can reasonably differ in their interpretation; hence the scope for healthy policy debates.  
As regards low policy or market rates, these are mainly seen as reflecting lower equilibrium, 
or neutral, interest rates. This leads us to the second puzzle: does the lower neutral interest 
rate result from cyclical or structural factors?  
On the one hand, the factors may be cyclical (or mainly demand-driven); indeed, we are 
currently seeing low levels of global demand and trade. After a financial crisis, cyclical factors 
may  persist  for  a  long  time:  for  example,  with  the  deleveraging  of  agents  and  hence  the 
reduction in their spending. In this case, aggregate demand policies, including monetary policy, 
have an important role to play.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  factors  may  be  structural  (or  mainly  supply  driven):  e.g.  lower 
productivity growth, higher inequalities or population ageing which pushes the savings rate 
higher. The other usual suspects behind secular stagnation include globalization, which boosts 
price/wage competition, or the savings glut. And the latter may be involuntarily compounded 
by  liquidity  regulations  which  can  permanently  raise  demand  for  safe  liquid  assets,  driving 
down risk free rates. In this case, the neutral rate may have become so negative that monetary 
policy alone may not suffice to raise inflation.  
The jury is still out; but faced with this uncertainty, CBs’ mandates push them to avoid the risks 
of the first type, related to inaction, rather than those of the second type, related to pro-action; 
in other words, be ready to risk doing too much rather than too little. Moreover, lower supply 
may  well  stem  from  persistently  lower  demand,  e.g.  with  some  hysteresis  resulting  in 
disqualified workers and higher structural unemployment.  
Now let’s turn to what monetary policy should/can do  
II.  
I would like to mention four challenges: 
First challenge: if the factors at play are global, what can domestic policies do?  
CBs have domestic mandates whereas the prevalence of lowflation and low rates suggests 
that some common or external factors may be at play. This is especially problematic for smaller 
open economies. And the existence of a “global financial cycle” à la Rey highlights the limits 
of flexible exchange rates in insulating those economies.  
Ultra-accommodative policies in AEs have definitely had spillover effects on EMEs, including 
the  often-forgotten  –albeit  welcome-  reduction  of  spreads  in  the  latter,  as  shown  by  IMF 
research. Nevertheless, the formulation and stance of policies in one country can take account 
of feedback effects from others. And it goes without saying that the world at large would have 
been even worse off if AEs had fallen into deflation.  
Aside from building and using forex reserves, domestic policies should therefore contribute 
towards making the domestic real economy and its financial system more resilient to external 
shocks.  In  this  regard,  prudential  policy  aimed  at  building  buffers  or  protecting  financial 
institutions may complement monetary policy, provided these measures do not conceal a form 
of protectionism or an attempt at deglobalization.  
Second challenge: what should the inflation target and its horizon be?  
Some  economists  have  called  for  adjusting  the  inflation  target,  although  in  opposite 
directions: a few have argued for a higher target to avoid testing the Zero Lower Bound often 
(ZLB); others have called for a lower target, assuming lowflation is the New Normal. In both 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   cases,  hasty  changes  may  only  affect  the  CBs’  credibility  and  the  expectation  channel  of 
monetary policy.  
We have more flexibility on the target horizon. This is the medium term and should not be 
confused with the 3-year horizon of the forecasts published by the ECB for instance, which 
may fall short of the target level; what matters is being on a path that is consistent with this 
medium-term mandate. Forward guidance and the announcement that rates will be “lower for 
longer” should provide reassurance over the CB’s determination to do “whatever it takes” to 
fulfill its mandate within this mandate.  
True, uncertainty about the causes of lowflation and low rates leads to uncertainty over the 
neutral rate and the need for accommodation; but the more uncertain our environment, the 
more  important  and  useful  it  is  that  we  be  clear  and  predictable  in  order  to  reduce  this 
uncertainty. According to simulations carried out within the Eurosystem and the BDF, clarifying 
that the future stance will remain accommodative for many years enhances the efficacy of 
Quantitative Easing (QE).  
Third challenge: how effective can non-conventional monetary measures be?  
The ZLB has proved not to be the effective lower bound. Going negative has sharply lowered 
and flattened the yield curve in the euro zone, which is especially relevant given the importance 
of long-term financing. And so far the substitution for cash has also remained negligible. Yet, 
there are limits on how far one can go. Thus lower key interest rates should be combined with 
other non-conventional measures.  
In short, CBs have innovated a lot, both in terms of rates and quantities. We knew CBs could 
do a lot and they have actually done a lot, even if they cannot do everything.  
In  the  main  advanced  economies,  the  precise  macroeconomic  effect  of  large-scale  asset 
purchases is still under discussion. But I can summarize the Eurosystem’s shared analysis and 
Mario’s recent statement: our purchases will add around half a point to inflation in 2016 and 
almost the same to growth. In the US case, the QE2 launched in late 2010 is the most similar 
to our QE. Controlling for its size, roughly half of ours, it has had a broadly comparable impact, 
even if published estimates differ somewhat.  
Fourth challenge: how to deal with the risk of a mismanaged exit from the ZLB and 
financial instability?  
Staying too low for too long would be counterproductive: ultra-low margins may discourage 
financial intermediation and lending to the real economy, while addiction to forward guidance 
may silence contrarians and hamper market information on fundamentals. Yet the exit may be 
bumpy and, hence, postponed or even aborted. Worse, as regularly pointed out by the BIS, 
staying too low for too long may fuel the next financial crisis as liquidity addiction and excess 
risk taking eventually lead to bubbles and financial instability while macro-prudential policy may 
be too slow to help.  
Even if monetary and macro-prudential policies are two distinct instruments serving two distinct 
objectives, they impact each other; but it is hard to integrate one when formulating the other: 
e.g. to integrate a sustainable “output gap à la Borio” (BIS) into a monetary rule, insofar as the 
business and financial cycles do not often coincide.  
On the other hand, an ill-timed exit or its premature expectation may also put some financial 
institutions at risk, depending on their maturity mismatch. But as the major CBs will not all exit 
simultaneously,  the  impact  should  be  mitigated.  Thus,  what  is  sometimes  depicted  as  the 
“great divergence” between monetary policies on the contrary reflects, in my view, a “great 
wisdom”:  as  domestic  cycles  differ,  exits  will  be  spread  over  time.  This  moment  of  exit  is 
obviously further away for the euro zone. Yet when it does come, we shall all be as innovative, 
as ready to learn from each other and as decisive when acting to exit as we have been when 
entering into non-conventional territory.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    For  the  sake  of  time,  I  will  not  elaborate  on  whether  ultra-low  rates  alter  the  monetary 
transmission channels and their interactions with financial stability. As I already said, we have 
the whole day to discuss these tricky issues thanks to our speakers who are not only prominent 
but also open and humble; I noticed and appreciated these qualities in their recent speeches 
exploring the new territory we are in.  
Instead, let me conclude on the limits of the scope for action by CBs. Indeed, I prefer to 
stress that central banks cannot be the only game in town and, more precisely, that monetary 
and  macro-prudential  policies  are  not  conducted  in  a  vacuum.  Structural  problems  require 
structural answers; in particular, only structural reforms can raise potential growth; aggregate 
demand policies cannot provide a substitute. What they can do –and it’s precious— is to help 
better manage time.  
Speaking of managing time, I think mine is up now and I shall give the floor to Christian who 
can give us all the benefit of his experience and wisdom.  
Short bibliography:  
R. Baldwin, C. Teulings, 2014: Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, CEPR Press; in 
particular, Chapter 8 by O. Blanchard et al., Chapter 9 by R. Caballero and E. Farhi, Chapter 
11 by R. Koo.  
BIS Annual Report, 2014: “Debt and Financial Cycle” (Chapter IV).  
O. Blanchard, E. Cerutti and L. Summers, 2015:“Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and 
their Monetary Policy Implications”, IMF Working Paper No 15/230.  
N. Chatelais, A. D. Gaye and Y. Kalantzis, May 2015: “Low inflation in the euro area: import 
prices and domestic slack”, Rue de la Banque 6, Banque de France (showing no clear-cut 
change in the slope of the Phillips curves in the Eurozone and France over the last 10 years).  
M. Draghi, the Economic Club of New York, Dec. 4, 2015, based on work by a Eurosystem 
task 
including  BDF  staff:  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/ 
sp151204.en.html.  
E. Engen, T. Laubach and D. Reifschneider, 2015: “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal 
Reserve’s  Unconventional  Monetary  Policies”,  Finance  and  Economic  Discussion  Series 
2015-005. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (and references therein).  
S. Guilloux-Nefussi, March 2015: “Globalization, Market Structure and the Flattening of the 
Phillips  Curve”,  Banque de  France Working  Paper  No  539,  (proposing  a  theoretical  model 
explaining a possible flattening of the Phillips curve since the 90s).  
IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April 2013 (Chapter I).  
H.  Rey,  Nov.  2014:  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Global  Financial  Cycle”,  BDF  International 
Symposium  on  “Central  Banking:  The  Way  forward”  and  Jackson  Hole  Symposium 
Proceedings, Sept. 2013.  
force, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
