  Manuel Sánchez: The United States and Mexico – a lasting bond 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Mosbacher 
Institute,  Bush  School  of  Government  and  Public  Service,  Texas  A&M  University,  College 
Station, Texas, 15 September 2016. 
 It is a pleasure and an honor to participate in the series “Conversations in Public Policy” held 
by  the  Mosbacher  Institute  at  the  Bush  School  at  Texas  A&M  University.  The  occasion  is 
important  for  at  least  two  reasons.  Texas  A&M  is  a  world-renowned  educational  and 
research center, with a 140-year history, and it is located in the state with the most significant 
social and economic connections to Mexico. The longstanding relationship between the Lone 
Star State and Mexico is deeply rooted in a common cultural and social heritage. 
Today, I would like to talk first about the long-term economic ties between the United States, 
in  particular  Texas,  and  Mexico.  Second,  I  will  focus  on  financial  markets  and  challenges. 
Third,  I  will  examine  recent  economic  developments  and  the  outlook,  and  finally,  discuss 
inflation and monetary policy in Mexico. 
As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of 
Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Long-term economic ties 
Mexico has long been in a process of increasing economic integration with the United States, 
encompassing goods and services, capital, and labor markets. These links, reinforced by the 
North American Free Trade Agreement, have yielded substantial benefits on both sides of 
the border, including more competition, efficiency, job creation, and consumer wellbeing. The 
most  significant  bond  with  any  state  is  with  Texas,  given  its  place  as  the  tenth  largest 
economy in the world and the extensive border it shares with Mexico. 
In  terms  of  trade  of  goods,  the  United  States  is  Mexico’s  most  important  partner  in  both 
imports and exports, while Mexico is second in exports and in imports for the United States. 
Texas, however, is number one in both categories for Mexico – and vice versa. 
The  backdrop  to  bilateral  merchandise  trade  is  a  long-term,  growing  industrial  integration 
between  the  two  countries.  In  particular,  Mexico’s  manufacturing  production  holds  an 
extraordinarily high correlation with U.S. manufacturing output. 
Also,  the  United  States,  and  Texas  in  particular,  are  important  providers  of  foreign  direct 
investment  to  Mexico,  transferring  technology  and  knowhow,  while  exploiting  mutually 
advantageous  business  opportunities.  In  fact,  Mexico  is  the  second  most  important 
destination for Texan foreign direct investment, following only Canada.1 
Finally,  Mexico’s  net  labor  migration  to  the  United  States  and  Texas  has  been  significant 
over  the  years.  However,  Mexican  net  labor  flows  to  the  United  States  have  diminished 
notably since 2008 and have been negative in some years. Several factors may be behind 
this phenomenon, including falling fertility rates and cyclical factors, such as low growth in 
U.S.  economic  sectors  which  typically  have  been  Mexican  labor  absorbers  –  for  example, 
construction – as well as rising employment in Mexico.2 
                                                
1  See Texas Wide Open for Business (2016). Texas Foreign Direct Investment 2016. 
2  See  Pew  Research  Center  (2015).  More  Mexicans  Leaving  Than  Coming  to  the  U.S.,  Washington,  D.C.: 
November; and Orrenius, P. M. (2016). “The End of Mass Migration from Mexico,” presented at The Political 
Economy of Texas-Mexico: Common Bonds, Shared Challenges, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Worker  remittances  from  the  United  States  dropped  amid  the  global  financial  crisis,  and 
since 2010 have exhibited a discontinuous recovery, reaching nominal pre-crisis levels only 
recently.  These  money  transfers  contribute  substantially  to  the  standard  of  living  of  many 
families in Mexico, helping them to meet basic needs, such as longer schooling and better 
housing.3 
Going  forward,  it  is  only  natural  that  social  and  economic  integration  between  the  two 
countries augment. An increasing array of opportunities will continue from the current reform 
agenda undertaken by Mexico. Telecom and energy reforms are already making themselves 
felt. The latter is especially important for an energy power house such as Texas.4 
there 
Financial markets and challenges 
Since the middle of 2014, risk aversion has increased, hitting emerging markets especially 
hard.  A  reflection  of  this  has  been  a  decline  in  the  prices  of  many  commodities  and 
emerging-market  financial  assets,  including  some  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates,  but 
more persistently, widespread downward pressure on currency levels against the U.S. dollar. 
Behind  this  shift  are  various  factors,  beginning  with  worries  over  the  state  of  the  Chinese 
economy  and  policy  moves 
to  handle  any  deterioration.  Also,  geopolitical 
developments such as Brexit may have had a part. However, the most important by far has 
been uncertainty over imminent U.S. monetary policy normalization. 
Market expectations and the beginning of normalization have had significant implications for 
financial  flows  to  emerging  economies.  Around  the  world,  U.S.  monetary  accommodation 
fueled the search for yield through significant portfolio capital inflows to emerging markets. 
Since 2014, however, these flows have slowed, turning negative in some recent quarters.5 
Furthermore,  data-driven  U.S.  monetary  policy  has  generated  financial  volatility.  Portfolio 
capital  flows  are  highly  sensitive  to  revised  expectations  of  changes  in  U.S.  policy  rates. 
Additionally,  asset  prices  react  rapidly  to  any  economic  news.  If  the  perception  is  of  a 
stronger-than-expected economy, they tend to fall in anticipation of tighter policy, and vice 
versa.6 
Mexican financial markets have adjusted to this environment mainly through the exchange 
rate.  Long-term  interest  rates,  low  by  historical  standards,  have  remained  relatively  stable 
since an upward adjustment in 2013 in the wake of the infamous taper tantrum. 
Along with other emerging-market currencies, the Mexican peso has depreciated significantly 
since 2014. However, during the present year, the weakening of the currency has been more 
substantial than  in  other  emerging  economies.  In  addition  to fears  surrounding  U.S.  hikes, 
other aspects more specific to Mexico seem to be at play. 
A  first  contributing  factor  is  Mexico’s  weak  fiscal  position.  Over  the  last  several  years,  the 
historical  balance  of  public-sector  borrowing  requirements  relative  to  GDP  has  been 
persistently rising, to reach around 50 percent in 2016. Also, financial deterioration in state-
owned  oil  company  Pemex,  due  in  large  part  to  lower  international  oil  prices,  has  been  a 
                                                
3  See Alcaraz, C., et al. (2012). “Remittances, Schooling, and Child Labor in Mexico,” Journal of Development 
Economics, 97(1). 
4  For  an  exposition  on  the  energy  reform  in  Mexico,  see  Torres-Barron,  B.  (2016).  “Mexico’s  Energy  Sector: 
Trends  and  opportunities,”  presented  at  The  Political  Economy  of  Texas-Mexico:  Common  Bonds,  Shared 
Challenges, April. 
5  See Koepke, R. and S. Farnham (2016). “August 2016 EM Portfolio Flows Tracker,” The IIF Portfolio Flows 
Tracker, September. 
6  See  Koepke,  R.  (2016).  “Fed  Policy  Expectations  and  Portfolio  Flows  to  Emerging  Markets,”  IIF  Working 
Paper, September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  concern.  The  fiscal  gap  has  been  mirrored  in  a  widening  current  account  deficit,  mainly 
reflecting the oil trade account. 
Mexico’s fiscal finances may be on an unsustainable path, and the public debt ratio appears 
to have reached a limit, at levels that may not be healthy. Relative government indebtedness 
is already higher than in many other emerging markets. Also, Mexico’s sovereign credit risk 
perception, as measured by CDS premiums, has remained above that of other countries with 
the same rating. Furthermore, rating agencies have given Mexico a clear warning this year in 
the form of a downward change in perspective. 
A second contributing factor to peso depreciation may be markets’ disappointment on lower-
than-expected growth in Mexico. A third cause may stem from uncertainty on the forthcoming 
U.S.  presidential  election  and  its  implications.  Finally,  given  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  the 
peso market, and the fact that derivatives are used to hedge peso positions and as a proxy 
for other emerging-market asset investments, price swings for the Mexican currency may be 
exacerbated. 
Volatility could easily increase in the future, in light of so many unknown global geopolitical 
and financial variables. This situation could be even more risky in the face of Mexico’s high 
exposure  to  foreign  holdings  of  peso-denominated  government  debt.  These  holdings 
represent one of the highest proportions of the total outstanding of local currency debt in the 
emerging-market group, decreasing somewhat during the last two years, at close to a third, 
with  the  drop  concentrated  mainly  in  short-term  securities.  The  still  high  ratios  of  foreign 
holdings  could  be  interpreted  as  a  positive  sign.  The  tables  could  rapidly  turn,  however,  if 
perception of strength evaporates. 
Therefore, it is absolutely urgent that Mexico strengthen its fiscal stance in an unambiguous 
way, cutting public expenditures significantly in order to stabilize, and eventually reduce, total 
government debt to GDP. Obviously, monetary policy should also continue to carry its weight 
in the effort to fortify macroeconomic fundamentals. 
Recent economic developments and outlook 
Since  2014,  GDP  has  risen  at  a  relatively  stable  rate  of  around  2.3  percent  year-on-year, 
including a dip in the 2016 second quarter. Two offsetting forces have contributed: expansion 
in  services  and  decelerating  industrial  production.  Recently,  the  pace  has  slowed  in  both 
sectors. 
The  main  drag  on  industrial  output  has  been  a  contraction  in  mining,  driven  by  a 
longstanding  decline  in  oil  extraction.  Manufacturing  production  has  also  been  slowing  to 
almost  no  growth  recently.  To  a  large  extent,  these  developments  have  resulted  from  a 
falling trend in U.S. manufacturing production and a contraction in manufacturing exports to 
the United States since 2015, despite the significant real depreciation of the Mexican peso 
against the dollar.7 
Less Mexican manufacturing dynamism seems to have begun to affect important segments 
of  the  services  sector,  such  as  commerce  and  transportation,  highly  correlated  with 
manufacturing,  a  worrisome  event  given  that  the  services  sector  has  been  a  key  growth 
engine in the past few years. On the demand side, Mexico’s economic slowdown is evident 
in  lower  increases  in  private  consumption,  and  especially  a  decelerating  trend  in  total 
investment. 
                                                
7  Statistical data  point  towards a  stable  relationship  between  Mexican  non-auto  manufacturing exports  to  the 
United States with U.S. manufacturing production, U.S. exports to the world, and the bilateral real exchange 
rate. Banco de México (2016). Informe Trimestral Abril-Junio 2016, August, Box 2, pp. 30–33. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Analysts’ consensus forecasts are for a transitory loss of vigor in the Mexican economy this 
year, followed by a growth figure slightly below the historical average in 2017. The economic 
scenario, however, faces risks, among which those to the downside seem to prevail.8 
In  the  short  term,  possible  negative  effects  include  a  deeper  deceleration  for  the  global 
economy and U.S. manufacturing production, additional reductions in Mexican oil extraction, 
and  softer  business  confidence  and  private  investment.  In  the  medium  term,  dangers 
encompass  obstacles  to  adequate  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  where  education 
stands out, as well as growing international protectionism. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
Since  2015,  inflation  in  Mexico  has  exhibited  benign  behavior.  In  annual  terms,  it  has 
converged  to  the  3  percent  target  established  by  the  Bank  of  Mexico  more  than  10  years 
ago. Furthermore, and in stark contrast with previous trends, inflation has been continuously 
below the target. 
Subdued  headline  inflation  has  been  supported by  unusually  reduced  rises  in  the  noncore 
component  of  the  CPI.  Specifically,  since  the  middle  of  last  year,  noncore  inflation  has 
averaged  only  2.3  percent,  contrasting  with  the  roughly  6  percent  average  during  this 
century. 
On  the  other  hand,  core  inflation  has  been  growing  gradually  this  year,  largely  reflecting 
moderate  pass-through  from  currency  depreciation  to  tradable  goods  prices.  So  far,  this 
effect  has  been  relatively  mild,  and  core  inflation  has  not  breached  3  percent.  In  addition, 
exchange rate pass-through to merchandise prices has been somewhat compensated for by 
lower telecom prices, reflecting more competition in the sector. 
Two warning signals that would argue against continued consumer price stability are a rising 
trend  in  producer  price  changes,  which  could  be  partly  translated  to  final  goods,  and  an 
interruption in convergence of medium-term inflation expectations to the target, as measured 
by analysts’ surveys.9 
Upside risks to inflation appear to dominate. The largest concern relates to the possibility of 
higher contagion from Mexican peso weakening, which could generate deviation of inflation 
and expectations from the target. Sudden increases in pass-through cannot be ruled out. 
Two  other  risks  are  the  reversion  of  noncore  inflation  to  its  historical  mean,  with  possible 
second-round  effects.  The  potential  emergence  of  aggregate  demand  pressures  are  also 
important, given uncertainty regarding the true level of potential GDP. 
Throughout recent years, monetary policy has been conducted in alignment with the primary 
objective of sustained price stability. Consistently, since December 2015, the policy rate has 
been raised three times, for a total of 125 basis points. These moves were preemptive, as 
inflation  has  remained  under  control.  The  hikes  sought 
fortify  macroeconomic 
fundamentals  in  conjunction  with  announced  government  expenditure  cuts,  and  to  avert 
deviation of inflation expectations from the target that may arise from pass-through. 
Going  forward,  the  implications  of  exchange-rate  developments  will  remain  an  important 
input in monetary policy decisions. But let us be clear: the Bank of Mexico does not target 
any  exchange-rate  level  and  hence,  there  does  not  exist  a  benchmark  value  at  which 
monetary  policy  would  react.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  effects  of  currency 
to 
                                                
8  Analysts’ average estimates for Mexico’s GDP growth are 2.2 percent in 2016 and 2.5 percent in 2017. See 
Blue  Chip  Economic  Indicators  2016,  September.  From  1994  to  the  2016  first  half,  annual  GDP  growth 
averaged 2.6 percent. 
9  See Banco de México (2016). “Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector 
Privado: Agosto de 2016,” September. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  behavior  are  irrelevant. They  will  continue  to  be  taken  into  account to the  extent that they 
may impact inflation and expectations. 
Other  factors  considered  by  monetary  policy  include  the  state  of  the  economy  and  the 
relative  monetary  stance  vis-à-vis  that  of  the  United  States,  especially  important given  the 
close nature of the U.S.-Mexican relationship. 
In short, monetary policy must remain on guard. Its lags are long and variable. It will continue 
to  be  implemented  with  all  the  flexibility,  timeliness,  and  independence  required  to 
consolidate price stability. 
Concluding remarks 
As with the United States as a whole, Texas and Mexico continue to enjoy longstanding and 
profound  cultural,  social,  and  economic  ties.  Mutual  benefits  accrue  on  both  sides  of  the 
border  from  bilateral  trade,  as  well  as  capital  and  labor  investments.  Ongoing  structural 
reforms in Mexico should enhance this process. 
Significant not only for Mexico, but for the larger emerging-market universe, is the influence 
of  U.S.  monetary  policy.  Shifting  expectations  for  U.S.  policy  moves  have  tended  to  fuel 
volatility  in  global  financial  assets,  with  prices  tending  to move  in  the  opposite  direction  of 
economic  news.  Mexican  markets  have  adjusted  to  changes  in  views  on  U.S.  monetary 
policy normalization mainly through the exchange rate. The Mexican peso has depreciated 
more  than  other  emerging-market  currencies  this  year,  with  idiosyncratic  factors  partly 
responsible for this trend. 
Mexico’s economic dynamism faces downside risks, particularly those coming from slowing 
U.S.  manufacturing  production.  Also,  given  a  context  of  greater  risk  aversion,  which  could 
become worse, Mexico needs to reinforce its fiscal stance. Monetary policy, for its part, will 
continue  to  be  implemented  with  flexibility  and  timeliness,  keeping  at  bay  dangers  to 
sustained convergence of inflation to the permanent target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
