  Cecilia Skingsley: A new playing field for monetary policy – what can a 
small, open economy expect? 
Speech  by  Ms  Cecilia  Skingsley,  Deputy  Governor  of 
Kammarkollegiet capital market day, Stockholm, 19 May 2016. 
the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
 I would like to thank Mikael Apel for his help in writing this speech, Goran Katinic for help with the diagrams and 
Claes  Berg,  Hans  Dellmo,  Gabriela  Guibourg,  Ulf  Söderström  and  Anders  Vredin  for  useful  comments.  Any 
remaining errors are strictly my own responsibility. 
 As  difficult  as  it  is  to  believe  today,  it  was  only  ten  years  ago  that  monetary  policy  was 
considered  to  be  a relatively  straightforward  and  uncomplicated  business.  It  was  assumed 
that  essentially  all  that  the  central  bank  needed  to  do  was  to  set  the  policy  rate  so  that 
inflation  ended  up  close  to  the  target  at  the  same  time  as  production  and  employment 
developed  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  There  was  a  widespread  perception  that  the  central 
banks had finally gotten a grasp of how monetary policy should best be conducted, and this, 
it was assumed in turn, was an important explanation for the “Great Moderation
” – the fairly 
long period of unusual macroeconomic stability that preceded the financial crisis.  
How  different  the  situation  is  today.  Conducting  monetary  policy  is  now  rightly  seen  as 
anything  but  easy  by  both  central  bank representatives  and  economic analysts  in  general. 
Despite heavy monetary policy stimulation, inflation is far below target in many countries and 
the recovery from the global financial crisis is still going slowly in most places after seven or 
eight years. A number of central banks have been forced to switch to conducting monetary 
policy by other means than policy rate adjustments, as this rate has now been cut as far as is 
deemed possible. Monetary policy seems to have lost its magic touch, at least for the time 
being. 
Today, I  intend  to  describe  a few  reasons for  why  it  has  become more difficult to  conduct 
monetary policy than in the period prior to the global financial crisis. I also intend to describe 
which further tools monetary policy decision-makers will need to consider if these difficulties 
persist. In between, I also intend to give my view on how much room for manoeuvre a small 
country has to deviate from developments in large countries and their monetary policy.  
Low global level of interest rates  
In recent decades, the level of interest rates has shown a falling trend, both in Sweden and 
internationally (see Figure 1). Long-term real interest rates, which is to say nominal interest 
rates minus inflation, have fallen by about 4.5 percentage points around the world over the 
past 30 years. The reasons for the downturn are not fully understood. One example of an 
explanation  is  that  global  saving  has  increased  in  recent  decades  due,  for  example,  to 
demographic factors, at the same time as investments have decreased due, for example, to 
a falling relative price for capital and lower public investments.1 
 
                                                 
 
1  See Rachel and Smith (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Figure 1  
Low interest rates in Sweden, Germany  
and the United States 
 Note. Yields on 10-year government bonds. 
Source: Macrobond. 
 In that the level of interest rates is lower today than it was previously, central banks’ room for 
manoeuvre has decreased. It has become more difficult for them to stimulate the economy 
when economic activity is weak or inflation is below target. This is partly because when the 
level of interest rates is low, policy rates are also low, on average. This reduces scope for 
cutting the policy rate, as this cannot be decreased indefinitely but will reach its lower bound 
more  frequently.2  A  low  nominal  interest  rate  situation  will  also  reflect  the  low  level  of 
inflation.  All  other  factors  being  equal,  when  average  inflation  is  low,  it  is  more  difficult  to 
achieve  the  really  low  or  even  negative  real  interest  rates  that  are  sometimes  needed  to 
stimulate the economy.  
Reduced lower boundary for the policy rate and unconventional monetary policy have 
increased scope for action 
In  principle,  the  central  banks  have  managed  the  reduced  scope  for  action  in  two  ways. 
Some central banks, including the Riksbank, have cut their policy rates to below zero, which 
had  previously  been  generally  perceived  as  the  lower  bound.  In  the  wake  of  this,  a  fairly 
intense international debate has started on the advantages and disadvantages of negative 
interest  rates,  in  which  certain  debaters  are  positive  and  others  almost  paint  doomsday 
scenarios. This debate has been somewhat overblown. It seems reasonable to assume that 
negative  interest  rates  are  less  problematic  to  implement  and  function  better  in  certain 
countries than in others, depending, for example, on the degree of cash usage. The theory 
here is that, at a certain interest rate level, probably negative, deposit customers will start to 
withdraw  their  money.  At  this  interest  rate  level,  it  could  thus  be  said  that  interest  rate 
stimulation will cease. If the banks are unwilling to cut their deposit rates below zero, their 
                                                
2  The Bank of Canada estimates that the real neutral interest rate fell from about 3 per cent in 2005 to about 
1.5 per cent in 2015. Model simulations suggest that this has increased the probability that the interest rate will 
hit its lower bound from 5 per cent to 15 per cent (see Kryvtsov and Mendes, 2015).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  profitability will become impaired. The banks’ possibilities to compensate for this, for example 
via increased lending margins, are thus another important factor. There is no uniform answer 
as to where the policy rate’s lower bound lies, as it varies from country to country. 
The Swedish debate has also been stormy. Something that I feel is often disregarded in this 
debate, or at least underestimated, is that the Swedish repo rate is not set in a vacuum. We 
must  take  account  both  of  the  fact  that  global  real  interest  rates  are  very  low  and  that 
monetary  policy  abroad  is  highly  expansionary.  Both  of  these  factors  put  restrictions  on 
which monetary policy it is possible to conduct. I shall return to this shortly.  
Of  course,  it  should  also  be  remembered  that  the  introduction  of  negative  interest  rates 
means a fairly marginal increase of monetary policy scope – when all is said and done, it is 
hardly possible to cut the rate into negative territory by several percentage points. 
Many  central  banks  have  also  attempted  to  increase  scope  for  monetary  policy  by 
purchasing  various  securities.  It  seems  highly  likely  that  this  has  contributed  towards 
preventing considerably weaker economic development. But it is still not easy to determine 
how efficient this kind of policy actually is. Above all, it is uncertain whether it can form an 
adequate  alternative  to  adjustments  of  the  policy  rate  if  the  global  level  of  interest  rates 
should remain very low for an extended period. 
I will return to the low global level of interest rates soon. Until then, allow me just to observe 
that  this  is  an  important  reason  for  why  monetary  policy  is  more  difficult  to  conduct  today 
than it was a decade ago.  
Globalisation and monetary policy autonomy 
In recent years, there has also been discussion of whether the globalisation of the world’s 
financial markets has led to a situation in which the actions of large central banks, such as 
the Fed and ECB, restrict the smaller central banks’ possibilities for taking action. Thus, the 
latter should also, in this way, have seen their scope for action decrease and their monetary 
policy autonomy be curtailed. 
In brief, the background is that the ongoing integration of global financial markets means that 
large volumes of capital can be quickly moved to where the return is expected to be relatively 
higher.  One  of  the  driving  forces  behind  these  capital  flows  is  assumed  to  be  the  policy 
conducted in large, leading countries. These flows can make it difficult to conduct monetary 
policy in other, smaller countries and may have consequences for the macroeconomic and 
financial stability there. 
Trilemma or dilemma? 
To  be  rather  more  concrete,  let  me  proceed  from  what  is  known,  in  international 
macroeconomics, as the “trilemma” (see Figure 2). The idea is that countries are assumed to 
strive  for  three  circumstances  that  are  usually  all  desirable:  free  movement  of  capital, 
monetary policy autonomy and a stable exchange rate. The problem is that all three cannot 
be attained simultaneously. If you want to conduct a monetary policy of your own and, at the 
same time, have a stable exchange rate, the movement of capital must be regulated. Without 
regulation, a country would find it difficult to conduct a monetary policy resulting in an interest 
rate deviating substantially from those of other countries. Differences in return would lead to 
large currency flows that would exert pressure on the exchange rate. If you want to allow free 
movement  of  capital  but  still  have  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  you  cannot  conduct  a  monetary 
policy  of  your  own.  This  was  the  case  in  Sweden  before  we  transitioned  to  a  floating 
exchange rate: monetary policy was aimed at ensuring that currency flows were balanced so 
that  the  desired  krona  exchange  rate  was  not  exposed  to  pressure.  Finally,  having  free 
movement  of  capital  and  your  own  monetary  policy,  like  Sweden  does  today,  requires  a 
floating exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Figure 2 
The trilemma in international economics 
Fixed exchange rate
Free capital movement
Autonomous monetary policy
 Some  argue  that,  in  light  of  the  present  large  international  capital  flows  and  globalised 
financial markets, not even a floating exchange rate can always sufficiently guarantee that a 
country will be able to conduct its own monetary policy, or at least that the capital flows make 
such  a  policy  considerably  more  complicated. One  hypothesis  that  has  gained  attention  is 
that  the  capital  flows  can  be  regarded  as  part  of  a  global  financial  cycle.  This  cycle  also 
consists of asset prices and credit growth and it covaries with measures of uncertainty and 
risk aversion on the financial markets.3 It also appears that the most important driving force 
behind the cycle is the monetary policy conducted in large countries, particularly the United 
States. 
Free capital movement makes it more difficult to isolate a country from the rest of the world – 
and  indirectly  thereby  from  monetary  policy  in  large  countries  –  even  if  it  has  a  floating 
exchange rate. Some go so far as to say that developments on the financial markets have 
meant  that  the  exchange  rate  is  no  longer  a  parameter  for  action  in  the  trilemma.  The 
trilemma has instead been reduced to a choice between only two alternatives – a dilemma: 
either  one  has  free  capital  movement  and  accepts  that  it  is  then  difficult  or  impossible  to 
conduct  a  monetary  policy  of  one’s  own,  or  one  conducts  one's  own  monetary  policy  but 
counteracts the free movement of capital.4 
My main hypothesis: countries with floating exchange rates still have monetary policy 
autonomy 
However, this is probably going a bit too far as a general description of the actual situation in 
small open economies like Sweden. In a globalised world, developments abroad will always 
have great significance for what happens in your own country. Nevertheless, however, the 
situation seems to be that the choice of exchange rate regime plays an important part in how 
great the impact will be. Most empirical studies indicate that countries with floating exchange 
rates  have  greater  possibilities  to  dampen  the  effect  on  their  own  economies  of  global 
financial and monetary forces than countries with fixed exchange rates do.5 In this sense, the 
trilemma still stands. 
                                                
3  See Rey (2013). 
4  See Rey (2013). 
5  See, for example, Aizenman et al. (2015) and Obstfeld (2015). For a current review of empirical research, see 
Anaya and Hachula (2016). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There  may  also  be  reason  to  reflect  over  what  is  actually  meant  by  monetary  policy 
autonomy. A high degree of covariation in countries’ interest rates may be an indication that 
small countries must follow the monetary policy of larger countries. But it could also mean 
that all central banks, large and small, react to synchronised economic conditions – that the 
covariation is largely due to fundamental factors that all are exposed to. In the latter case, it 
would be misleading to suggest that monetary policy in small countries is not autonomous – 
it  does  react  to  circumstances  in  the  home  country,  even  if  these  greatly  coincide  with 
international developments.  
A  more  relevant  definition  of  restricted  autonomy  would  be  a  situation  in  which  monetary 
policy in large countries forces small countries to respond in a way that is not compatible with 
their own economic development. It is thus important to try to find out to which degree an 
observed  covariation  in  interest  rates  depends  on  restricted  monetary  policy  autonomy  in 
small  countries  according  to  this  definition  or  on  synchronised  economic  circumstances. 
Unfortunately, this is also difficult.6  
Weaker interest rate channel but stronger exchange rate channel? 
One  interesting  hypothesis  in  research  into  monetary  policy  and  globalisation  is  that 
globalisation  has  not  necessarily  led  to  a  weakening  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism, as could spontaneously be suspected, but rather that the impact has changed 
character.  More  specifically,  monetary  policy’s  interest  rate  channel  can  certainly  be 
expected  to  become  weaker  as  financial  integration  increases,  as  domestic  actors  find  it 
easier to smooth their consumption over time by borrowing abroad. On the other hand, the 
exchange rate channel may become more effective. One reason for this is that the increased 
integration has also made it more common for domestic actors to hold foreign assets. When 
the exchange rate changes, the value of these assets also changes. The central bank can 
therefore  also  influence  demand  in  the  economy  this  way.  An  interest  rate  rise  that 
strengthens the exchange rate leads to a decrease in the value of these foreign assets – a 
wealth effect that strengthens the normal exchange rate channel with reduced exports and 
increased  imports.  Some  analysts  claim that  it cannot  be  ruled  out that  the  net  effect  of a 
weaker  interest  rate  channel  and  stronger  exchange  rate  channel  has  been  to  make 
monetary policy more efficient, rather than less.7  
One implication of a relatively stronger exchange rate channel may be that, in the future, it 
may  become  even  more  important  to  small,  open  economies.  This,  in  turn,  may  entail  a 
number  of  complications,  as  exchange  rate  adjustments  are  sometimes  associated  with 
attempts  to  manipulate  the  value  of  a  country’s  own  currency  and  “beggar-thy-neighbour” 
policies.  However,  as  I  have  said,  this  is  only  a  hypothesis  so  far,  and  more  empirical 
evidence  is  needed  regarding  how  globalisation  has  affected  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism. 
The  debate  on  how  much  large  central  banks’  actions  affect  monetary  policy  in  small 
countries  will  continue,  as  will  the  general  discussion  of the  effects  of globalisation  on  the 
possibilities for monetary policy. However, at present, it seems reasonable to assume that 
the  low  global  interest  rate  poses  a  greater  challenge  when  it  comes  to  which  monetary 
policy can be conducted in countries such as Sweden. 
                                                
6  Caceres  et  al.  (2016)  define  autonomy-restricting  effects  of  foreign  interest  rates  as  the  response  in  the 
domestic  interest  rate  above  and  beyond  what  is  justified  by  domestic  economic  circumstances.  They  find 
that,  with  this  definition,  the  empirical  analysis  indicates  significantly  greater  monetary  policy  autonomy  in 
small,  open  economies  than  more  traditional  estimates  suggest.  See  also  Disyatat  and  Rungcharoenkitkul 
(2015). 
7  See Meier (2013) and Georgiadis and Mehl (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Temporarily restricted autonomy when the inflation target is defended 
Although  small  countries  with  variable  exchange  rates  normally  have  a  certain  degree  of 
monetary  policy  autonomy,  this  does  not,  however,  prevent  specific  situations  arising  in 
which their central banks become highly dependent on the actions of larger central banks. 
Recent developments in Sweden provide an example of this.  
A  little  less than  a  year ago,  at  the  start  of  2015,  the  Riksbank  was  in a  difficult situation. 
Inflation had long been below the target of 2 per cent, while long-term inflation expectations 
were showing a falling trend and were below target. The Executive Board of the Riksbank 
considered it particularly essential to get inflation to rise towards 2 per cent, as there was a 
risk that continued low inflation would lead to inflation expectations continuing to fall and to 
confidence  weakening  in  the  inflation  target  as  an  anchor  for  the  formation  of  prices  and 
wages.8 The monetary policy easing that had been introduced earlier therefore continued.  
The situation was complicated because the Riksbank needed to take into account the fact 
that  monetary  policy  was  very  expansionary  in  many  other  countries.  Large  differences 
between monetary policy in Sweden and in other countries could lead to a rapid and strong 
appreciation of the exchange rate. This, in turn, could impede rising inflation and also have 
negative  consequences  for  the  real  economy.  In  this  context,  it  was  particularly  important 
that  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  initiated  very  large  asset  purchases,  which  led,  for 
example  at  the  end  of  February  and  beginning  of  March  2015,  to  the  krona  appreciating 
strongly against the euro. Against this background, it has been particularly important to follow 
the ECB’s actions and it is probably in this light that we should consider the fairly common 
claim in the Swedish debate that “the Riksbank is forced to follow in the ECB’s footsteps”.  
However,  this  is  a  special  case  in  many  ways.  When  we  start  to  approach  a  situation  in 
which we feel more certain that the inflation target is again well-anchored among economic 
agents,  we  will  be  able  to  take  a  more  tolerant  attitude  towards  the  development  of  the 
exchange rate. This means that it will again become possible to conduct monetary policy with 
a greater degree of freedom. 
In  situations  in  which  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  has  to  be  defended,  it  is  not  only 
autonomy that is temporarily weakened, in the sense I have just described. This also applies 
to  the  possibility  of  conducting  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  policy,  which  is  to  say  taking 
account of factors other than inflation. This also reduces the degree of freedom for monetary 
policy, compared with a situation in which confidence in the target is completely solid. In such 
situations, the central bank needs, in both word and deed, to put inflation first, in the same 
way as the Riksbank needed to do when the inflation target had recently been introduced at 
the start of the 1990s and confidence in the target needed to be built up. Of course, back 
then, the situation was the reverse – what was needed was to restrain inflation, not make it 
increase. 
So,  to  summarise  my  comments  so  far.  A  number  of  factors  have  led  to  the  scope  for 
monetary policy now seeming to be more limited than it was ten or so years ago. The most 
obvious of these is that the global real interest rate, that has long shown a decreasing trend, 
has now reached very low levels. There is also an ongoing debate on whether the actions of 
large,  dominant  central  banks  place  clear  restrictions  on  which  monetary  policy  can  be 
conducted  in  small  countries.  The  main  line  of  inquiry  so  far,  at  least  for  industrialised 
countries  with  floating  exchange  rates,  is  that  a  sufficient  degree  of  monetary  policy 
autonomy  exists  in  normal  cases.  But  under  certain  circumstances  –  such  as  when  an 
                                                
8 
I am not going to discuss in any more detail why it is important to defend the inflation target. This has been 
discussed  in  depth  elsewhere,  both  by  me  and  by  other  representatives  of  the  Riksbank,  for  example  in 
Skingsley (2015) and Flodén (2015). Briefly, it is because it is important both to have a credible anchor for 
price and wage formation and for this anchor to be far enough above zero that the policy rate does not hit its 
lower bound too frequently. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  excessively rapid and powerful appreciation of the exchange rate could be problematic – it 
can  be  difficult  for  a  central  bank  in  a  small,  open  economy  to  allow  large  interest  rate 
differentials towards the rest of the world.  
The way forward – what can we expect and what kind of preparedness should we 
maintain? 
If it has now become more difficult to conduct monetary policy, what can the Riksbank and 
other central banks do? Now that Swedish inflation is starting to approach the target, it may 
be time to lift our gazes and start thinking about the conditions for monetary policy over a 
slightly longer perspective. How should we consider these in the period ahead – what kind of 
preparedness should we maintain?  
I intend to focus on the consequences of the low global real interest rate, as I deem these to 
be  potentially  the  most  sweeping.  So  far,  the  influence  of  large  central  banks  on  the 
monetary policy of smaller countries such as Sweden seems not to be something we need to 
be  too  concerned  about  under  normal  circumstances,  as  long  as  we  have  a  floating 
exchange rate. This also applies to the temporarily restricted autonomy and flexibility when a 
central bank must act resolutely in certain situations to maintain confidence in the inflation 
target. So far, it is my assessment that this is something transitory.  
Different theories behind the weak recovery from the financial crisis 
One notable theory for the reasons behind the low interest rates and the sluggish recovery 
from  the  financial  crisis  is  the  hypothesis  of  secular  stagnation  advanced  by  Summers 
(2013).  The  concept  here  is  that  a  chronic  surplus  of  saving  has  arisen  in  the  world  for 
various reasons, and that this has pushed the interest rate down. The problem, however, is 
that not even the current low level of interest rates creates a balance between supply and 
demand. The result of this is the risk that many countries will become stuck in a situation with 
too low aggregate demand, resource utilisation below normal and inflation that tends to be 
much too low.  
Rogoff  (2015)  instead  argues  that  growth  is  being  restrained  by  the  world  being  in  an 
adjustment phase of an unusually large debt cycle, a “debt supercycle”. Even if the level of 
interest rates is unusually low, this needs not mean that countries are stuck in a situation of 
chronic  demand  deficit.  Demand  and  growth  will  start  to  pick  up  when  the  debt  situation 
again normalises. Unlike a case of secular stagnation, which can be regarded as a structural 
phenomenon, the problems are thus assumed to be of a basically cyclical, albeit long-term, 
nature. Both opinions have high-profile advocates. As yet, we do not know who is closer to 
the  truth  and  it  will  probably  be  some  time  until  it  will  be  possible  to  say  with  any  great 
certainty.9  
The global level of interest rates will probably remain low for a long time 
Regardless of how the sluggish recovery from the financial crisis can best be explained, a 
central issue is that of how long the level of interest rates will be low. If the global interest 
rate  were  to  start  to  rise  fairly  soon,  this  would  increase  scope  for  monetary  policy  –  the 
problem would “solve itself”, so to say. However, empirical estimates suggest that the forces 
that  pushed  the  global  interest  rate  down  will  be  relatively  persistent  and  that  the  level  of 
                                                
9  One further hypothesis is that growth is being restrained by a decrease of productivity-enhancing innovations 
combined with various restraining forces (‘headwinds’) (see Gordon, 2102, 2015). Like secular stagnation, this 
is expected to affect the economy for a long time to come. However, unlike secular stagnation, there is no 
chronic deficit in the aggregate demand (no negative output gap), as it is the growth of potential output that is 
assumed to have slowed down. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  interest rates will remain low for a fairly long time to come.10 For example, Rachel and Smith 
(2015) estimate that the global real interest rate will be about or just below 1 per cent in the 
medium to long term. In other words, it does not seem as though we can expect monetary 
policy scope to increase that way very soon. 
It  is  primarily  for  this  reason  that  I  believe  we  need  to  think  about  how  we  will  be  able  to 
conduct monetary policy over the next ten to fifteen years or so. I would like to stress that my 
discussion is general and looks forward over a relatively long perspective. It should not be 
interpreted as dealing with contemporary policies. As regards such policies, my conviction is 
that we will succeed in bringing Swedish inflation up to target and in anchoring the long-term 
expectations – as I’m sure you know, we are almost there. 
Preparedness for a different monetary policy playing field 
But at the same time, we must be prepared for it perhaps not being possible, in the future, to 
conduct  monetary  policy  in  the  way  and  with  the  impact  we  have  previously  been 
accustomed  to.  For  example,  we  should  include  in  the  calculation  that  the  policy  rate  will 
probably be unusually low when the next recession occurs. A recession is certainly not on 
the cards at the moment, but we know that, sooner or later, one will inevitably arrive. When 
the financial crisis broke out, we were able to cut the repo rate from a level of almost 5 per 
cent. The Riksbank’s latest forecast indicates that, in the middle of 2019, the repo rate will be 
0.7 per cent. If a recession should occur within, say, the next five years, our scope for cutting 
the repo rate would probably be very limited. Neither is this anything unique to the Riksbank 
– it is true for more or less all central banks. 
What, then, can central banks do to attempt to increase their degree of freedom in the period 
ahead?  Earlier,  I  mentioned  two  types  of  measure  that  some  central  banks  have  already 
implemented  and  that  more  could  possibly  start  to  use.  Firstly,  a  number  of  central  banks 
have cut their policy rates to below zero. However, I noted that this, for various reasons, may 
work  less  well  in  some  economies  and  that,  in  any  case,  it  would  only  lead  to  a  fairly 
marginal increase in monetary policy scope. 
Helicopter money and more stabilisation via fiscal policy? 
Secondly,  many  central  banks  have  started  to  conduct  various  types  of  unconventional 
monetary policy, primarily purchases of various securities. There is reason to further consider 
whether this is something that could be developed and perhaps take new forms. One idea 
that  has  seen  lively  discussion  recently,  albeit  perhaps  more  among  academics  and 
economic debaters than among central bank representatives, is what is known as helicopter 
money.  Briefly,  this  means  that  the  central  bank,  in  various  ways,  more  or  less  directly 
transfers money to the actors in the economy. One way is to increase public expenditure or 
lower taxes and fund this by increasing the money supply.11 Of course, there are a number of 
practical  and  legal  challenges  inherent  in  this,  such  as  integrating  such  measures  into  an 
operational  monetary  policy 
framework  and  ensuring  an  appropriate  division  of 
responsibilities  between  the  central  bank  and  the  government  or  parliament.  It  is  also 
probably  something  that  should  not  be  tried  until  other  possibilities  have  been  exhausted. 
However,  considering  the  difficulties  that  are  still  weighing  many  of  the world’s  economies 
down, I think that it is wise to discuss the different possibilities, without closing any doors. 
If  monetary  policy  in  the  period  ahead  will  be  less  effective,  it  may  be  that  fiscal  policy  in 
general may have to play a greater part in a wider stabilisation policy role than has been the 
case  in  recent  decades.  Of  course,  this  primarily  means  more  traditional  fiscal  policy,  not 
funded with helicopter money.  
                                                
10  See, for example, Rachel and Smith (2015) and Laubach and Williams (2015).  
11  See, for example, Bernanke (2016) and Turner (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Higher inflation target? 
One suggestion that has also been discussed but which no country has yet implemented is 
to  raise the  inflation target.12  The  average  level  of  the  policy  rate  largely  depends  on  how 
high the inflation target is. The higher the inflation target and average inflation are, the higher 
the average policy rate is too. And the greater, therefore, is the “buffer” monetary policy can 
use to stimulate the economy if necessary – the risk is smaller that the policy rate will reach 
its lower bound and, if average inflation expectations are higher, it will be easier to bring the 
real interest rate down.  
One practical objection towards attempting this in the near future is that there would hardly 
be any point in announcing a new, higher target when inflation has long been below the old 
target and this target already seems difficult to reach. In theory, it could certainly be the case 
that a raised inflation target in itself would create expectations of higher future inflation and 
that this, in turn, would lower the real interest rate and stimulate demand and inflation. But, in 
practice,  it  would  probably  be  at  least  as  likely  that  raising  the  inflation  target  in  such  a 
situation would not be perceived as a particularly credible measure. In addition, if the target 
is  raised,  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  will  initially  have  to  be  conducted  to  get 
inflation to rise. This will be difficult if the policy rate level is already very low. Assuming that it 
is decided to raise the inflation target, one probable precondition for this will thus be that it is 
carried out in a situation that is relatively normal and where inflation is not too far from the 
earlier target. 
It may also be difficult for an individual central bank to raise the inflation target alone as long 
as  an  international  debate  is  underway  on  whether  or  not  a  higher  target  would  be 
advantageous.13 There may be reason to wait for a reasonable degree of consensus among 
central banks and in the research community. If the conclusion were reached that raising the 
inflation  target  would  be  justifiable,  this  would  probably  also  increase  the  possibility  that 
several  central  banks  would  simultaneously  decide  to  do  so.  This  would  probably  further 
increase confidence for such a measure.  
Greater acceptance of falling short of the target? 
If monetary policy should now turn out to be less effective in the period ahead than it has 
been historically, one consequence could be that the central banks would be forced to accept 
below-target inflation for longer periods of time. This would make it important to try to create 
acceptance for this among households, companies and market participants, so that these do 
not start to believe that the central bank has abandoned the inflation target. 
Expectations among economic agents would thus play a completely central part in this. The 
problem can be illustrated, in a stylised manner, with the use of Figures 3–5. To maintain the 
credibility  of  an  inflation  target,  inflation  cannot  be  allowed  to  deviate  from  the  target 
indefinitely. Economic agents can tolerate a deviation in the short term, but, the more time 
that passes, the closer to target inflation has to be to maintain confidence. It can be imagined 
that inflation (the red curve) must lie within the interval marked by the broken blue lines in 
Figure  3  if  inflation  expectations  are  not  to  drift  away.  This  interval  thus  depends  on  the 
agents’ expectations and is not something that can be observed. If inflation lies below the 
interval,  expectations  will  fall,  sooner  or  later,  and  will  pull  actual  inflation  down  too,  as 
illustrated in Figure 4. If the central banks now have fewer possibilities to bring inflation back 
to the target as quickly as before, they must find ways to “extend” the interval, as in Figure 5.  
                                                
12  See,  for example,  Blanchard et  al.  (2010),  Ball  (2014)  and  Krugman  (2014).  In  the  review  of  the  monetary 
policy framework which the Bank of Canada publishes every five years, for example, an increase in the target 
is one of the areas to be examined – see Côté (2014) and Kryvtsov and Mendes (2015). 
13  For arguments against raising the inflation target, see, for example, Yellen (2015), footnote 14. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  This will probably be a fairly serious challenge. It will not just be a matter of trying to convince 
economic  agents  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  more  “flexible”.  It  will  also  involve 
conveying the message that the flexibility, in this case, is not due to the central bank taking 
account  of  the  development  of  the  real  economy,  for  example,  but  to  monetary  policy  not 
being as efficient as many, both in academia and in the central banks, had counted on ten 
years ago.   
The way I see it is that central banks will have to create credibility in this kind of flexibility. I 
feel optimistic about the possibilities, as this has been done before. One parallel that strikes 
me is with the regime changes in the central banking world in the 1980s and 1990s, when 
ideas  about  an  independent  authority  with  clear  tasks  and  a  mandate  for  monetary  policy 
became  a  successful  recipe  for  stabilising  the  development  of  inflation  and  boosting 
confidence in monetary policy in a large number of countries.  
To  sum  up  my  speech:  my  message  today  is  that  monetary  policy  has  become  more 
complicated than most researchers or central bank representatives had counted on before 
the financial crisis. The impact of monetary policy on economies may have changed and, if 
so, in a way that will mean that the exchange rate will have a greater effect than before. The 
lower  global  interest  rates  have  squeezed  monetary  policy’s  room  for  manoeuvre  in  both 
small  and  large  economies.  And,  finally,  we  need  to  continue  to  examine  conceivable 
measures if these global difficulties turn out to be persistent.  
Figure 3 
Inflation and interval for maintained  
confidence in the inflation target
Inflation
t
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Inflation below the interval lowers expected and actual inflation 
Figure 4 
Inflation
 t
 Figure 5 
The central banks need to find ways to extend  
the interval and maintain confidence 
Inflation
t
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  References 
Anaya,  Pablo  and  Michael  Hachula  (2016),  The  Dilemma  or  Trilemma  Debate:  Empirical 
Evidence. DIW Roundup 95, German Institute for Economic Research (DIW). 
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito (2015), Monetary Policy Spillovers and the 
Trilemma  in  the  New  Normal:  Periphery  Country  Sensitivity  to  Core  Country  Conditions. 
NBER Working Paper No. 21128. 
Ball,  Laurence  M.  (2013),  The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four  Percent.  IMF 
Working Paper WP/14/92. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2016), What Tools Does the Fed Have Left? Part 3: Helicopter Money. 
Blog  entry,  Brookings,  11  April,  http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/ 
2016/04/11-helicopter-money. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2010), Rethinking Macro Policy. 
IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, International Monetary Fund. 
Caceres,  Carlos,  Yan  Carrière-Swallow  and  Bertrand  Gruss  (2016),  Global  Financial 
Conditions and Monetary Policy Autonomy. IMF Working Paper (forthcoming). 
Côté,  Agathe  (2014),  Inflation  Targeting  in  the  Post-Crisis  Era.  Remarks  at  Calgary  CFA 
Society, Calgary, Alberta, 18 November. 
Disyatat,  Piti  and  Phurichai  Rungcharoenkitkul  (2015),  Monetary  Policy  and  Financial 
Spillovers: Losing Traction? BIS Working Papers No. 518. 
Flodén,  Martin  (2015),  Sweden  needs  its  inflation  target.  Speech  at  Fores,  Stockholm, 
13 October. 
Georgiadis,  Georgios  and  Arnaud  Mehl  (2015),  Trilemma,  Not  Dilemma:  Financial 
Globalisation  and  Monetary  Policy  Effectiveness.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas 
Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 222. 
Gordon, Robert J. (2012), Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the 
Six Headwinds. NBER Working Paper No. 18315. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  (2015),  Secular  Stagnation:  A  Supply-Side  View.  American  Economic 
Review, 105(5), 54–59. 
Krugman,  P.  (2014),  Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered.  Essay  presented  at  ECB  Sintra 
Conference, May 2014. 
Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Mendes, Rhys R. (2015), The Optimal Level of the Inflation Target: A 
Selective Review of the Literature and Outstanding Issues. Discussion Paper 2015-8, Bank 
of Canada. 
Laubach,  Thomas  and  John  C.  Williams  (2015),  Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest 
Redux. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015–16.  
Meier, Simone (2013), Financial Globalization and Monetary Transmission. Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 145. 
Obstfeld, Maurice (2015), Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization. BIS 
Working Papers No. 480. 
Rachel,  Lukasz  and  Thomas  D.  Smith  (2015),  Secular  Drivers  of  the  Global  Real  Interest 
Rate. Staff Working Paper No. 571, Bank of England. 
Rey, Hélène (2015), Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence. NBER Working Paper No. 21162. 
Rogoff,  Kenneth  (2015),  Debt  Supercycle,  Not  Secular  Stagnation.  Column  VOX, 
http://voxeu.org/article/debt-supercycle-not-secular-stagnation. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Skingsley,  Cecilia  (2015),  Inflation-targeting  policy  after  the  financial  crisis.  Speech  at 
Almega, Stockholm, 22 May. 
Summers, Lawrence (2013), Why Stagnation Might Prove to be the New Normal. Financial 
Times, 15 December. 
Turner, Adair (2015), The Case for Monetary Finance – An Essentially Political Issue. Paper 
presented at the 16th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, IMF, 5–6 November.  
Yellen,  Janet  L.  (2015),  Inflation  Dynamics  and  Monetary  Policy.  Remarks  at  The  Philip 
Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, 24 September, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
