  Norman T L Chan: What does it take to build a “Hong Kong Brand” for 
financial services? 
Welcoming  remarks  and  keynote  speech  by  Mr  Norman T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of the 
Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  Treasury  Markets  Summit  2016,  Hong  Kong,  6 
September 2016. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
Today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  building  Hong  Kong  as  a  “Brand”  for  financial 
services. So what is a “Brand” made up of? For merchandise goods, “quality” and 
“credibility” are two major components of a “Brand”. 
Quality 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Quality means the product or services are suitably designed, structured and built to 
meet  the  needs  of  consumers/customers.  In  the  field  of  fashion  or  luxury  goods, 
customers’ taste is evolving all the time but very often the “Brand” actually takes the 
lead in shaping the trend. 
In the context of financial services, the concept of “quality” entails the availability of a 
wide range of financial products that can adequately and effectively meet the needs 
of  customers  with  vastly  different  financial  needs.  For  individual  customers,  such 
products  range  from  the  basic  banking  services  for  the  mass  market,  to  very 
sophisticated private wealth management services for high net worth customers. For 
corporate customers, quality products range from the basic transactional banking for 
the SMEs, to the very diverse and sophisticated services in treasury, hedging, and 
equity and debt financing for the very large corporates. 
If Hong Kong is to become a “Brand” for financial services, it must be able to offer 
“quality”  financial  products  and  services.  This  means  that  we  should  have  ample 
supply of financial products and services that: 
(a) 
(b)  are competitively priced; and 
(c) 
can effectively meet the needs of customers, be they individuals or corporates; 
are  efficiently  distributed  through  a  network  of  intermediaries  that  treat 
customers fairly. 
So where does Hong Kong stand now in terms of “quality”? If we benchmark Hong 
Kong against any of our regional peers, I would say Hong Kong stands out as one of 
the  best  in  this  regard.  It  is  hard  to  pinpoint  any  key  areas  in  which  Hong  Kong 
would have a material gap in offering a suitable and competitive product to meet the 
financial needs of the customers. 
That  said,  it  is  wrong  for  us  to  feel  complacent.  The  fact  that  we  are  good  and 
competitive now does not mean we will remain so in the future. It is like “逆水行舟，
不進則退”, “rowing a boat upstream, you either move forward or you drift backward”, 
but this principle is becoming even more relevant and important lately  because of 
three recent trends: 
(a) 
the world’s financial landscape is changing very fast, especially in the context 
of the China’s growth story and the internationalisation of RMB and the Belt 
and Road Strategy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 7. 
 (b)  huge  technological  leaps  in  digital  and  internet  application  have  drastically 
transformed  the  ways  in  which  commercial  and  financial  transactions  are 
conducted. 
competition from neighbouring financial centres has intensified. 
(c) 
I would like to talk briefly along these three recent trends and how they may impact 
our  effort  to  develop  the  quality  aspect  of  “Hong  Kong”  as  a  “Brand”  for  financial 
services. 
China’s growth story: reaching out and RMB internationalisation 
8. 
This is a trend very familiar to most of you. It has very far reaching impact on Hong 
Kong’s positioning as the premier financial hub in Asia. China’s growth story, which 
began  in  1980,  has  evolved  from  simply  attracting  inward  direct  investments  and 
technology for manufacturing and processing trade, to becoming a major source of 
export of capital and technology abroad. In the last few years, the amount of China 
ODIs has grown very fast, reaching levels comparable to those of FDIs. This trend is 
likely to continue and intensify as China is embarking on an ambitious but necessary 
“Belt and Road” strategy. At the same time, the internationalisation of RMB, which 
began in 2009, is making very significant progress. Against this backdrop, there is 
an  increasing  demand  from  companies  and  individuals  for  high  quality  financial 
services to support newly developed cross-border trade, commercial and investment 
links  arising  from  the  growth  story  of  China.  The  crucial  issue  for  Hong  Kong  is 
whether it can develop and provide the products and services that suit the needs of 
the customers in this new era. 
In this regard, I am pleased to say that Hong Kong has done reasonably well so far. 
Within  a  few  years,  Hong  Kong  has  become  the  global  hub  for  offshore  RMB 
businesses, with the largest RMB liquidity pool and being the largest offshore RMB 
bond issuance and asset management centre in the world. As for the Belt and Road 
Strategy,  Hong  Kong  as  an  IFC  is  uniquely  well  positioned  to  play  a  crucial  role. 
However, since it is a new strategy aiming to cover markets that are less familiar to 
most  of  us,  there  will  unlikely  be  too  many  “low  hanging”  fruits.  Putting  it  bluntly, 
Hong  Kong  must  work  doubly  hard  to  get  into  the  game  and  stay  ahead  of  the 
others.  In  this  connection,  the  launch  of  the  Infrastructure  Financing  Facilitation 
Office  (IFFO)  by  the  HKMA  in  early  July  is  a  concrete  step  to  help  Hong  Kong 
capture the business opportunities that may lie ahead. This is only the beginning of 
a challenging process to build Hong Kong as the preferred platform for implementing 
the  Belt  and  Road  Strategy.  Please  rest  assured  that  the  HKMA  stands  ready  to 
collaborate with the industry and the practitioners on this important mission. 
The first panel of today’s Summit will discuss Hong Kong’s value proposition in the 
Belt and Road Strategy, including the facilitating role to be played by IFFO. 
Technological advancement and financial services 
10. 
The  second  emerging  trend  that  I  highlighted  earlier  relates  to  technological 
advancement in recent years, which has drastically transformed the ways in which 
banking and finance can and should be conducted in the real world. Technology has 
provided  many  new  and  very  convenient  means  to  conduct financial  transactions, 
ranging  from  the  basic  payment  and  banking  services  to  the  more  sophisticated 
trading  and  investment  activities.  While  very  few  people  would  dispute  the 
convenience  and  speed  in  which  new  technology  can  offer  in  financial  services, 
there is an important catch that no regulators should and could overlook. The issue 
is whether the new technology is safe enough for the consumers and investors. 
There  are  two  aspects  of  safety:  the  operational  dimension  and  the  investor 
protection dimension. Just like the physical  world, the digital space is full of risks. 
There  is  no  lack  of  hackers  and  fraudsters  who  spare  no  time  in  stealing  money 
9. 
 11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 12. 
13. 
 from the innocent people. More fundamentally, the use of new technology does not 
in any way alter the nature of financial transactions. For example, the marketing and 
selling  of  financial  or  wealth  management  products  through  the  internet  or  mobile 
devices  carry  the  same,  if  not  higher,  risks  as  those  sold  through  face-to-face 
channels. Does the public accept less or no consumer or investor protection, such 
as suitability test and product due diligence, simply because new digital technology 
is being used? I don’t think so, judging from the strong investor reactions after the 
collapse  of  many  internet-based  crowd  funding  platforms  on  the  Mainland  and 
overseas. 
While  regulators  like  the  HKMA  must  exercise  care  when  new  technology  is 
introduced  in  financial  services,  there  are  understandable  concerns  amongst  the 
Fintech  industry  that  overly  rigid  or  conservative  regulations  may  stifle  new 
technology and innovation. So how do we in the HKMA deal with this issue? Let me 
say this: the regulatory philosophy of the HKMA is that we adopt a risk-based and 
technology neutral approach. Specifically, we would endeavour to see through the 
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  risks  involved  in  a  financial  transaction  or  product 
without  positive  or  negative  discrimination  on  whether  a  new  technology  is  used. 
However,  it  is  important  not  to  misinterpret  this  “technology  neutral”  approach  as 
one that is insensitive to the contributions that Fintech and innovation can bring to 
the  financial  sector.  The  more  correct  narrative  is  that,  without  compromising 
consumer  and  investor  protection,  the  HKMA  embraces  the  use  of  Fintech  and 
innovation. A practical demonstration of our effort in supporting Fintech development 
in  Hong  Kong  is  the  setting  up  of  the  “Fintech  Facilitation  Office”  (FFO) by  the 
HKMA earlier this year. In May, the FFO launched its first major initiative, namely, 
the “Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative”. It is a major endeavour involving the key 
stakeholders in the banking as well as the Fintech industry. In the interest of time, I 
do not propose to say much about this important initiative today. 
What I would like to say is that, in order to further facilitate Fintech development in 
Hong Kong, the HKMA has decided to launch two new initiatives today. 
Fintech Innovation Hub 
14. 
First,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  HKMA  will  collaborate  with  the  Applied 
Science  and  Technology  Research  Institute  (ASTRI)  to  set  up  the  “Fintech 
Innovation  Hub”.  It  will  be  equipped  with  all  necessary  system  and  support 
resources to enable players of the banking and payment industry to conduct proof of 
concept trials of products and services through the use of new technologies, and do 
it  safely  –  as  this  controlled  environment  is separated from their internal systems. 
Also, the Fintech Innovation Hub allows regulators to provide early inputs to the trial 
works before the actual implementation. While some of the largest banks have built 
their  own  laboratories,  this  new  Fintech  Innovation  Hub  will  cater  for  the  big  and 
small institutions alike such that the industry as a whole would be able to adopt new 
technologies more speedily and in a more collaborative manner. 
Among its potential uses, this Fintech Innovation Hub, as a neutral testing ground, 
will be ideal for two types of activities. First, industry players can test new Fintech 
solutions which involve the collaboration of multiple parties and are intended to be 
commonly adopted in the industry. A good example is biometric authentication. New 
concepts in various facial or voice recognition techniques could be demonstrated by 
the  developers  in  the  Fintech  Innovation  Hub  to  gather  feedback  from  potential 
users and to receive regulatory guidance from supervisors at an early stage. This 
should help shorten the time-to-market of useful industry-wide solutions. Second, I 
envisage that the Fintech Innovation Hub will also benefit the HKMA. In this place, 
we could explore with innovators options and possibilities of using new technologies, 
such as Big Data Analytics and other “regtech” initiatives, to achieve our objectives 
15. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  more effectively without creating undue risks or burden for our internal systems or 
databases. 
Fintech Supervisory Sandbox 
16. 
Meanwhile, there is also a quite commonly-held perception that the development of 
Fintech  in  the  financial  services  sector  in  Hong  Kong  has  been  slow.  I  do  not 
subscribe  to  this  view,  at  least  insofar  as  the  banking  sector  is  concerned.  In  the 
past few months, banks and stored value facility operators have already launched 
new  payment  facilities  built  on  smart  phones  and  Near  Field  Communication 
technology.  These  facilities  have  the  potential  of  altering  fundamentally  the  way 
consumers  make  payments.  Many  banks  have  also  reported  to  the  HKMA  their 
intention to roll out very soon new technology with a view to providing more secure 
and  efficient  services  to  customers.  I  mentioned  earlier  biometrics  authentication 
technology  involving  voiceprints  and  fingerprints.  This  is  indeed  something  that 
many  banks  are  planning  to  roll  out.  Additionally,  blockchain,  robotics  and 
augmented  reality  are  also  being  explored  by  banks  to  improve  their  services  or 
streamline their operations. 
To further support the development of Fintech in the banking sector, I am pleased to 
announce  today  the  launch  of  HKMA’s  second  initiative,  which  is  the  “Fintech 
Supervisory Sandbox”. This Sandbox allows banks to conduct testing and trial of 
newly developed technologies and applications on a pilot basis. Within the Sandbox, 
banks  can  try  out  their  new  Fintech  products  without  the  need  to  achieve  full 
compliance with the HKMA’s usual supervisory requirements. This will enable banks 
to gather real-life data and user feedback on their Fintech products or services more 
easily and in a controlled environment, so that they can make suitable refinements 
to their products before the full launch. The HKMA does not intend to stipulate an 
exhaustive list of the supervisory requirements that may potentially be relaxed within 
the Sandbox. Examples of these requirements include security-related requirements 
for  electronic  banking  services  and  the timing  of  independent  assessment  prior  to 
launching of new technology services. Banks intending to access the Sandbox are 
advised to get in touch with the HKMA early. 
My  HKMA  colleagues  stand  ready  to  discuss  with  the  banks  individually  on  the 
appropriate  supervisory  flexibility  that  can  be  made  available  to  them  within  the 
Fintech Supervisory Sandbox. 
Further details of the Fintech Innovation Hub and the Fintech Supervisory Sandbox 
will be announced by the HKMA later today. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  spent  quite  some  time  talking  about  Fintech  today. 
Now  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  third  emerging  trend  that  will  impact  the 
development  of  Hong  Kong  as  a  “Brand”  for  financial  services,  which  is  the 
intensification of competition amongst financial centres. We all recognise that money 
managers and asset owners are very smart and extremely mobile. They do have a 
choice on where they park and manage their money and wealth, and they know it 
very well. Therefore, it is not a question of whether Hong Kong is good or not. Even 
if we are good, it is a question of whether we are better than our competitors, many 
of whom have high aspirations and are catching up fast. Hong Kong as a Brand for 
financial services does not enjoy a monopoly or franchise. We must remain vigilant 
and diligent at all times if we wish to continue to maintain a competitive edge. 
In this connection, I am pleased to say that, after several years of concerted effort 
between the HKMA, the TMA and the financial industry, we have finally succeeded 
in changing our tax regime to help make Hong Kong a more attractive platform for 
multinational  corporates  to  conduct  their  group  cash  management  and  treasury 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
17. 
 18. 
20. 
4 
 Competition from neighbouring centres 
19. 
  functions  here.  However,  a  good  product  in  itself  is  not  good  enough.  A  good 
product  still  requires  good  and  effective  marketing.  This  is  what  any  world  class 
brands always do. So the HKMA  will, in the months and years ahead, collaborate 
with  the  industry  to  reach  out  to  the  corporates  on  the  Mainland  and  overseas  to 
promote Hong Kong as the hub for corporate treasury centres. This is an ongoing 
endeavour for which the support of the TMA and its members is greatly needed. 
Credibility 
21. 
As  I  am  running  out  of  time,  I  just  wish  to  have  a  brief  word  on  the  second 
component of a Brand, and that is credibility. It is not enough just to sell good quality 
products  to  customers.  Like  any  world  class  brands  in  cars,  watches  and  luxury 
goods,  post-sale  maintenance  or  support  service  is  equally  important.  In  other 
words,  the  success  of  a  “Brand”  also  rests  on  establishing  a  reputation  for  being 
credible – to deliver a product that stands up to what it is sold for. 
Credibility  is  even  more  important  when  it  comes  to  financial  services.  This  is 
because financial products usually have a finite life, and very often customers need 
to renew or purchase similar or different products from time to time. To develop into 
a  long-lasting  and  successful  “Brand”,  Hong  Kong  must  be  able  to  provide  a 
platform  for  offering  products  that  can  effectively  meet  the  changing  needs  of 
customers. While  such  needs  are  always  evolving,  one  thing  never  changes,  and 
that  is  “fair  treatment  of  customers”.  In  the  context  of  pricing,  consumer/investor 
protection, distribution, dispute handling and resolution, the interests of the financial 
firms  or  intermediaries  must  not take  precedence  over  those  of the  consumers  or 
investors. This is a difficult mission to accomplish as it requires not only a robust and 
yet user-friendly regulatory regime, but also a corresponding change in the culture, 
values,  mind-set  and  behaviour  of  the financial firms  and  their  staff.  As hard  as  it 
seems, I strongly believe that we cannot afford not to accomplish this mission. We 
must try harder and harder until we have got it right. 
I  simply  cannot  envisage  how  a  financial  centre  can  thrive  and  sustain  its 
competitiveness  over  time  if  it  cannot  build  a  credible  reputation  for  treating 
customers and investors fairly. 
22. 
 Conclusion 
23. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  quality  products  credibility  of  fair  treatment,  trust  of 
customers  will  follow  naturally.  Customers  who  use  Hong  Kong  for  their  financial 
needs would feel safe because they know, and trust, that their moneys and wealth 
are in good hands and that their interests are being looked after. If you earn the trust 
of the customers, you have won their loyalty as well. With the reputation and words 
of  mouth,  more  customers  would  wish  to  use  Hong  Kong  as  the  hub  for  their 
financial  transactions.  However,  the  regulators  and  the  Government  cannot  do  it 
alone.  The  private  sector,  the  industry  and  the  practitioners  must  also  own  this 
mission  and,  most  importantly,  join  hands  with  the  public  sector  to  do  it  together. 
This is how we can build “Hong Kong” as a world class brand for financial services. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
