Haruhiko Kuroda: “Comprehensive Assessment” of the monetary easing 
– concept and approaches
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Kisaragi-kai meeting, 
Tokyo, 5 September 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak at the Kisaragi-kai meeting. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  at  end-July,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to 
enhance monetary easing by increasing its purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and 
by  ensuring  smooth  funding  in  foreign  currencies  by  Japanese  firms.  At  the  same  time, 
against  the  backdrop  of  heightened  uncertainty  over  the  outlook  for  prices,  with  a  view  to 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, it also decided to 
conduct at the next MPM to be held in late September a comprehensive assessment of the 
developments in economic activity and prices, as well as of the policy effects, over the past 
three  years  since  the  introduction  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE). 
Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  concept  of  and  approaches  to  this  comprehensive 
assessment. 
Background 
I. 
The  Bank  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  During  the  more  than  three  years  since  then, 
Japan’s economic activity and prices have improved substantially, and Japan’s economy is 
no longer in deflation. However, the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved 
yet,  despite  the  unprecedented  large-scale  monetary  easing.  How  monetary  policy  has 
functioned during these years and what factors have possibly hampered achievement of the 
2 percent target is the first issue to be analyzed. The second issue is regarding “QQE with a 
Negative Interest Rate,” which was introduced more than half a year ago. Under the negative 
interest rate policy, various interest rates, including Japanese government bond (JGB) yields 
as well as rates for lending and corporate bonds, have declined substantially; thus, the policy 
already has exerted remarkable effects. At the same time, however, it has had an impact on 
financial  markets’  liquidity  and  financial  institutions’  profits.  The  effects  and  impact  of  this 
policy also need to be assessed. 
The Bank will examine these issues in an objective manner, by carefully analyzing observed 
facts and checking them against the theories underpinning the Bank’s policy. With the results 
of the assessment, the Bank will discuss what should be done in order to make sure that the 
price stability target of 2 percent is achieved at the earliest possible time. Let me emphasize 
that  the  assessment  is  conducted  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  2  percent  target  at  the 
earliest possible time. A reduction in the level of monetary policy accommodation, which is 
being called for by some market participants, will not be considered. 
II.
Japan’s economy since the introduction of QQE, and its effects
Economic activity and prices during past three years 
To  start  with,  I  would  like  to  take  a  look  back  at  economic  activity  and  prices  since  the 
introduction of QQE. 
First,  in  the  corporate  sector,  profits  increased considerably,  including  those  of  small firms 
(Chart  1).  Corporate  profits,  measured  by  the  ratio  of  current  profits  to  sales,  marked  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  record  high  level  in  fiscal  2015.  Profits  are  expected  to  decrease  slightly  this  fiscal  year, 
especially those of manufacturers, but remain high. 
Second,  in  the  household  sector,  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  improved 
significantly.  The  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing  steadily.  The  unemployment 
rate has declined recently to 3 percent, which is virtually full employment. As for wages, the 
annual labor-management wage negotiations in 2014 resulted in base pay rises for the first 
time in two decades; base pay rises have continued for three consecutive years. 
Third, the underlying trend in inflation has clearly improved (Chart 2). As a result of the fall in 
crude oil prices of more than 70 percent since summer 2014 until the beginning of this year, 
the  latest  figure  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all 
items less fresh food) is minus 0.5 percent. Nevertheless, on a basis excluding fresh food 
and  energy,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  which  had  been  in  the  range  of 
around minus 0.5 to minus 1.0 percent before the introduction of QQE, became positive in 
autumn 2013, and thereafter has remained in positive territory for two years and ten months. 
This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy fell into deflation, that the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has been in positive territory for such a long period. 
Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a situation where 
prices are declining in a sustainable manner. 
Of  course,  these  changes  are  not  brought  about  merely  by  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing 
policy.  The  government’s  flexible  management  of  fiscal  policy,  as  well  as  its  initiatives  for 
structural  reform  to  enhance  growth  potential,  have  contributed  to  the  recovery,  and  the 
private  sector’s  initiatives  for  promoting  innovation  have  played  a  big  role  in  bringing  the 
changes. That said, it is unquestionable that the Bank’s unprecedented large-scale monetary 
easing measures, such as QQE and the subsequent “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” 
have contributed significantly to the positive turnaround in Japan’s economy. 
Factors that hampered achieving 2 percent price stability target 
However,  despite  the  Bank’s  large-scale  monetary  easing,  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent has not been achieved. I would like to point out three exogenous factors that seem 
to  have  had  a  negative  impact:  (1)  substantial  and  sequential  declines  in  crude  oil  prices 
since summer 2014; (2) weakness in demand, particularly in private consumption, following 
the consumption tax hike in April 2014; and (3) the slowdown in emerging economies from 
summer 2015 and volatile developments in global financial markets reflecting that situation. 
However, what is more important is the mechanism through which these exogenous factors 
hampered achieving the 2 percent target. A key factor here is inflation expectations; that is, 
firms’  and  households’  outlook  for  prices.  To  highlight  the  importance  of  inflation 
expectations, let me remind you about the transmission mechanisms of QQE. QQE aims to 
raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving the 
price stability target of 2 percent and through large-scale monetary easing that underpins the 
commitment  (Chart  3). At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  exerts  downward  pressure  on  nominal 
interest rates across the entire yield curve through purchases of JGBs. These two channels 
together  bring  about  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates.  This  decline  boosts  firms’  and 
households’  economic  activity,  which  in  turn  leads  to  higher  inflation  rates,  supported  by 
higher  inflation  expectations.  As  people  actually  experience  inflation,  inflation  expectations 
will rise further. 
Inflation expectations represent the core element of the mechanism of the Bank’s monetary 
easing.  Against  this  backdrop,  we  have  the  dynamics  of  inflation  expectations:  how  they 
have  been  increased  by  the  Bank’s  policy  and  how  the  aforementioned  three  exogenous 
factors have hindered a rise in inflation expectations. This is the first issue to be analyzed in 
the comprehensive assessment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Developments in inflation expectations 
Let  us  take  a  look  at  the  developments  in  inflation  expectations  (Chart  4).  Inflation 
expectations can be measured by market-based indicators including those calculated using 
yields  of  inflation-indexed  JGBs  as  well  as  indicators  based  on  the  results  of  surveys  of 
households, firms, and economists. Although developments in each of these indicators vary, 
reflecting  their  own  characteristics,  those  in  inflation  expectations  since  the  introduction  of 
QQE can be divided into three phases. 
The  first  phase  is  the  period  after  the  introduction  of  QQE  through  summer  2014.  In  this 
period, indicators of inflation expectations rose clearly. The introduction of QQE appears to 
have had a significant impact on inflation expectations. The second phase is from summer 
2014  through  summer  2015.  During  this  period,  many  indicators  of  inflation  expectations 
were largely unchanged. The fall in crude oil prices since summer 2014 and weak demand 
after  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014  seem  to  have  pushed  down  inflation 
expectations.  In  order  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  a  risk  that  conversion  of  the 
deflationary mindset – which had shown steady progress until then – might be delayed, and 
to  maintain  the  momentum  of  expectation  formation,  the  Bank  expanded  QQE  at  end-
October 2014. Thanks to this response, inflation expectations managed to remain elevated 
despite the strong headwinds. The third phase is the period since summer 2015 up until now. 
Many  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  have  weakened  during  this  phase.  This  is 
attributable  to  the  slowdown  of  emerging  economies,  continued  volatile  developments  in 
global financial markets amid such a situation, and a further decline in crude oil prices. The 
Bank  introduced  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  in  January  2016,  but  this  has  not  been 
enough to offset negative effects on inflation expectations amid continued volatility in global 
financial markets. 
Mechanism of inflation expectation formation 
These experiences suggest that the mechanism of inflation expectation formation in Japan is 
still  largely  “adaptive,”  meaning  that,  when  the  observed  inflation  rate  shows  sluggishness 
due  to  factors  such  as  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the  temporary  weakness  in 
demand,  inflation  expectations  tend  to  decline  accordingly,  following  the  course  of  the 
observed inflation rate. It is widely accepted that people’s inflation expectations are formed 
by  two  factors:  a  “forward-looking  formation  mechanism”  and  an  “adaptive  formation 
mechanism.” The “forward-looking formation mechanism” points to the view that, even if the 
observed inflation rate fluctuates from time to time due to a variety of factors, it eventually will 
revert to the price stability target set by a central bank, which is 2 percent in many countries. 
On the other hand, the “adaptive formation mechanism” points to the view that the inflation 
rate will continue to be around the current level. For instance, if the observed inflation rate 
has  been  around  0  percent,  people  believe  that the  inflation  rate  will  be  around  0  percent 
going forward. 
In  cases  where  the  “forward-looking  formation  mechanism”  prevails  in  a  sufficiently  strong 
manner, even if the observed inflation rate somehow deviates from the price stability target 
either upward or downward, people expect it to revert to close to the 2 percent target in due 
course,  and  prices  and  wages  are  set  based  on  such  expectation.  Therefore,  the  actual 
inflation  rate  will  gravitate  toward  the  target.  This  situation  is  phrased  as  inflation 
expectations being “anchored,” and this is preferable for central banks having a mandate of 
price  stability.  In  countries  such  as  the  United  States,  inflation  expectations  have  been 
anchored  at  around  2  percent;  in  Japan,  however,  as  the  price  stability  target  has  been 
missed under prolonged deflation, the effects of the “adaptive formation mechanism” seem to 
have  dominated.  In  other  words,  the  view  is  entrenched  among  people  that  inflation  will 
continue to be sluggish because it has been so for a long time. The Bank, by continuing with 
QQE, has been trying to enhance the “forward-looking formation mechanism” and thereby to 
anchor people’s inflation expectations to the price stability target of 2 percent. Unfortunately, 
however,  before  the  “forward-looking  formation  mechanism”  became  strong  enough,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  observed inflation rate declined due to a variety of factors such as the significant decline in 
crude  oil  prices,  and  inflation  expectations  also  have  declined  again  through  the  “adaptive 
formation mechanism.” 
Going forward, the underlying trend in inflation is expected to rise as the economy continues 
to grow at a rate above the potential growth rate and the effects of the decline in crude oil 
prices  are  expected  to  dissipate.  Therefore,  the  observed  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  rise 
gradually.  Under  these  circumstances,  inflation  expectations  will  be  pushed  up  by  the 
“adaptive formation mechanism.” For the time being, however, the observed inflation rate is 
unlikely to accelerate, hovering at slightly negative or about 0 percent. As a result, there is 
considerable uncertainty about the extent to which inflation expectations will rise through the 
“adaptive  formation  mechanism.”  Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  for  the  Bank  to 
firmly  maintain  its  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the 
earliest possible time from the viewpoint of the “forward-looking formation mechanism.” 
III. 
Effects and impact of the negative interest rate 
Effects of the negative interest rate 
Now, let me move on to the second point; that is, the negative interest rate policy, which the 
Bank decided to adopt this January. The negative interest rate policy, in combination with the 
Bank’s JGB purchases, has produced substantial effects in lowering interest rates on JGBs 
across the entire yield curve (Chart 5). It has become clear that the Bank can affect the entire 
yield curve through an appropriate combination of the negative interest rate policy and JGB 
purchases. The framework of QQE with the negative interest rate has proven to be extremely 
powerful. 
Before the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, some argued that lower risk-free 
rates, or JGB yields, would not lead to a decline in banks’ lending rates as well as interest 
rates on corporate bonds and CP, as room is limited for a decline in rates on deposits, the 
main source of funding for financial institutions. In fact, however, after the introduction of the 
negative interest rate, banks’ lending rates, as well as interest rates on corporate bonds and 
CP, fell significantly, each marking historical lows. The pass-through of the decline in JGB 
rates  to  these  funding  rates  since  the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  has 
been  roughly  similar  to  changes  in  previous  episodes  of  interest rate cuts.  Moreover,  new 
developments  relating  to  corporate  finance  have  been  taking  place  recently;  both  the 
issuance of corporate bonds with a maturity of over ten years and firms’ borrowings through 
subordinated loans have increased. The negative interest rate policy thus far seems to have 
succeeded  in  lowering  funding  costs  of  firms  and  households.  According  to  the  results  of 
surveys such as the Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan (Tankan) and the 
Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending  Practices  at  Large  Japanese  Banks 
(often dubbed the Loan Survey), financial institutions’ lending attitudes have continued to be 
proactive.  Thus,  we  are  not  in  a  situation  where  their  intermediary  functions  are  impaired 
because their profits are squeezed as a result of the negative interest rate. 
That said, there are two issues we need to consider. The first is that the policy effects that I 
have just mentioned are what have been observed thus far, and one cannot tell the extent to 
which such interest rates as banks’ lending rates can be lowered further. The second is that 
the  significant  fall  in  lending  rates  with  a  marginal  decline  in  rates  on  deposits  has  been 
achieved at the expense of financial institutions’ profits. This point is closely related to the 
first one, in that the policy effects on lending rates will also depend on financial institutions’ 
lending attitudes. 
Impact on financial intermediation 
Let me put this in more general terms. In assessing the effectiveness of the negative interest 
rate  policy,  the  potential  impact  on  the  financial  intermediation  due  to  its  influence  on  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  profits  of  financial  institutions  needs  to  be  taken  into  account.  Considering  that  the  profits 
affect  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  in  a  cumulative  manner,  the  impact  can  vary 
depending on the duration of the policy. 
Generally speaking, financial institutions raise short-term funds and invest them in long-term 
assets as their basic business model. Given that the rates on deposits – which are the main 
funding tools – rarely become negative, the decline in yields throughout the entire yield curve 
or  the  narrowing  of  the  spread  between  short-  and  long-term  yields  will  lead  to  smaller 
spreads  between  deposit  and  lending  rates,  thereby  negatively  affecting  the  profits  of 
financial institutions. For Japan in particular, the impact of the negative interest rate policy on 
the  profits  of  financial  institutions  tends  to  be  relatively  large,  due  to  such  factors  as  the 
amount outstanding of deposits far exceeding that of lending, and to the spreads between 
deposits  and  lending  rates  already  being  extremely  small  following  prolonged  competition 
among financial institutions. 
As long-term and super-long-term rates have declined significantly since the introduction of 
the negative interest rate policy, the rates of return on investments of insurance and pension 
products are expected to decline. Under these circumstances, the sales of some saving-type 
products are suspended. Some business firms have revised down their profit forecasts due 
in  part  to  the  increase  in  the  net  present  value  of  retirement  benefit  obligations.  Although 
direct  impacts  of  these  developments  on  the  entire  economy  may  not  be  substantial,  we 
should take account of the possibility that such developments can affect people’s confidence 
by causing concerns over the sustainability of the financial function in a broad sense, thereby 
negatively affecting economic activity. 
In sum, in proceeding with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” the Bank should make an 
appropriate  policy  judgment  by  taking  account  not  only  of  its  powerful  impact  on  the  yield 
curve but also its impact on the financial intermediation in a broad sense. Needless to say, 
there is still ample space for further cuts in the negative interest rate and for an increase in 
size  in  the  “quantity”  dimension.  The  Bank  has  a  broad  range  of  policy  options.  It  will 
continue to choose the most appropriate policy actions among those options, depending on 
the situations for economic activity, prices, and financial conditions. 
Conclusion: mechanism of monetary policy 
I have explained several issues related to the forthcoming comprehensive assessment. The 
ones  I  have  mentioned  here  are  just  some  of  the  issues  to  be  analyzed  toward  the  next 
MPM. The Policy Board members will have an in-depth discussion at the next MPM on these 
issues, as well as other relevant topics. 
I will conclude my speech by touching on my views on the challenges in monetary policy. 
The basic mechanism of monetary policy, whether it is conventional or unconventional, is to 
drive the real interest rate higher or lower than the “natural rate of interest,” which is the level 
of the real interest rate neutral to economic activity and prices. In normal times, this can be 
achieved by adjusting short-term rates; namely, simply lifting or lowering them. But given that 
monetary  accommodation  with  virtually  zero  short-term  rates  did  not  produce  sufficient 
stimulative effects, central banks around the world have devised a variety of unconventional 
policy measures to overcome this “zero lower bound.” For instance, “forward guidance” and 
the “purchases of long-term government bonds” to lower the nominal medium- to long-term 
rates have been adopted by the central banks in Japan, the United States, and Europe. The 
“negative interest rate” policy started in Europe, followed by Japan. Measures to lower the 
real interest rate by raising inflation expectations directly through monetary policy have been 
introduced  as  “QQE”  in  Japan,  where  inflation  expectations  have  long  been  at  a  very  low 
level. 
In  conducting  monetary  policy,  what  measures  should  be  adopted  and  how  they  are 
implemented depends on the economic and financial situations of the country concerned. For 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  implemented.  As  a 
the  aforementioned  measures  have  actually  been 
instance, in the United States, where money market mutual funds (MMMFs) play a pivotal 
role in financial markets, a negative interest rate policy has not been adopted; instead, the 
main  measure  for  monetary  easing  has  been  to  push  down  long-term  rates  through  the 
purchases of long-term government bonds. It also has been stressed that monetary easing 
does not affect inflation expectations because they already have been well anchored. 
On the other hand, in Japan, where deflation has been persistent for a prolonged period, the 
most powerful monetary easing measures are needed among advanced economies, and all 
of 
result, 
unprecedented  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions  across  the  major  economies 
have  been  achieved.  I  expect  firms  and  households  to  make  the  most  of  such 
accommodative financial  conditions for  proactive  economic  activity,  and  for that  purpose, I 
would  like  to  reiterate  the  importance  of  raising  the  “natural  rate  of  interest”  I  explained 
earlier;  namely,  raising  the  potential  growth  rate  by  undertaking  initiatives  for  structural 
reform. 
It is often argued that there is a “limit” to monetary easing, but I do not share such a view. 
Needless  to  say,  there  is  a  limit  in  the  sense  that  there  are  things  that  “cannot  be  done 
legally”  or  “should  not  be  done,”  such  as  directly  underwriting  government  bonds  and 
monetizing fiscal deficits. As I said earlier, however, even within the current framework, there 
is ample room for further monetary easing in either of three dimensions – quantity, quality, 
and the interest rate – and other new ideas should not be off the table. 
What  we  should  bear  in  mind  when  conducting  monetary  policy  is  not  its  “limit”  but  a 
comparison between its “benefits” and “costs,” as is the case with any public policy. There is 
no  free  lunch  for  any  policy.  Given  that  we  have  been  implementing  such  large-scale 
monetary  easing,  any  additional  monetary  easing  entails  “costs,”  which  negatively  affects 
some sectors. That said, we should not hesitate to go ahead with it as long as it is necessary 
for Japan’s economy as a whole; namely, if its “benefits” outweigh its “costs.” Furthermore, 
what is important is that a balance between “benefits” and “costs” can change depending on 
the  situation.  Monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  in  a  flexible  manner.  There  may  be  a 
situation  where  drastic  measures  are  warranted  even  though  they  could  entail  “costs,” 
depending  on  the  situations  for  economic  activity,  prices,  and  financial  conditions.  The 
central bank should always prepare policy options to address such situations. 
I would add that the “benefits” of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest 
possible time are enormous as Japan’s economy is finally overcoming deflation that lasted 
for a prolonged period of time. The Bank will continue to make its utmost efforts to achieve 
this commitment. 
Thank you. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
