  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Rheinische Post 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  Rheinische  Post,  conducted  by  Ms  Birgit  Marschall  and  Mr  Georg  Winters  and 
published on 13 February 2016. 
 Share prices are sharply down on the world’s stock markets. Why?  
There are several compounding factors, each calling for different answers. First, it’s a global 
phenomenon.  Investors  are  generally  anxious  about  a  slowdown  in  growth  worldwide, 
especially in the emerging markets, and above all in China. Second, there’s great uncertainty 
about the global effects of the low oil price. Initially, it was thought the low price  would  be 
good for global growth, but now some negative effects can be seen, particularly in emerging 
markets.  Third,  market  participants  are  questioning  how  profitable  banks  are  and  whether 
they have successful business models for the future.  
How affected are Europe’s banks? 
They are in a much better position today than they were at the height of the debt crisis in 
2011 and 2012. Thanks to the banking union they are now much more resilient. They have 
very  significantly  built  up  their  capital  and  liquidity.  One  challenge  they  face  is  their  low 
profitability, which is also related to the current level of economic growth. Also, some banks 
have a high level of non-performing loans on their books, as a legacy of the crisis. None of 
these challenges are new: they have been clearly identified, they require forceful action and 
they will be solved over time.  
What about Germany’s banks? Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank have lost a lot of 
trust.  
I can’t talk about individual banks. Generally speaking, European banks are in a transitional 
phase  and  are 
technological 
developments. They also face a new regulatory environment. We have had a new framework 
for  the  resolution  of  banks  only  since  the  beginning  of  January.  Together  with  the  single 
supervision, this system will make them stronger and better protect taxpayers, but banks and 
investors are still learning about it. 
their  business  models,  also  concerning 
rethinking 
Is a new financial crisis more likely?  
No.  Today  in  the  euro  area  we  have  economic  growth  of  between  1%  and  1.5%  and 
accelerating, while a few years ago it was negative. This growth is helping the banking sector 
to recover. Provided we stay on this path I’m optimistic that the crisis will not return.  
Low interest rates and rising share prices normally go together. Why is this 
mechanism no longer working? 
As explained earlier, there are other reasons for the recent market movements. Looking back 
over a longer period, the low interest rates have clearly given a boost to stock markets.  
How much longer will the period of low interest rates last?  
As long as needed. Rates will have to stay low until we see that the inflation rate in the euro 
area is moving towards our objective of just below 2%. We at the ECB don’t want this phase 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of low rates to become normality either. But we still have a pressing need for the low rates so 
as to get inflation firmly back to 2% and to protect the euro area recovery. 
But we are a long way from 2% inflation because of the low oil price. The ECB will 
have to lower its inflation forecast.  
Our next staff inflation projections are due in March. Already in January we said that inflation 
will only very slowly move back towards 2%. Compared with the situation in December we 
are seeing new downside risks. The main causes are the falling price of oil and a decline in 
global  growth.  In  the  past  few  days  we  have  also  seen  greater  volatility  on  the  financial 
markets. If that continues for too long, it can also increase the risk of a rise in inflation being 
delayed.  
The continued low interest rates are unsettling savers, especially in Germany. What’s 
your advice to savers?  
We have to get inflation to below, but close to, 2% again; that has been our definition of price 
stability  for  a  long  time. Why  are  interest  rates  so  low?  Because  the return  on capital  has 
declined in the economy. To keep the low interest phase as short as possible we need more 
private investment as well as government policies which create the conditions for profitable 
projects to emerge. Meanwhile we can help savers best by keeping policy interest rates low. 
Do governments have to do more to protect savers from losses in the value of their 
assets, for instance by cutting taxes?  
Our  advice  to  euro  area  governments  is  to  use the  savings  gained from  the  lower  cost  of 
debt  refinancing  in  a  growth-friendly  way  to  help  their  citizens.  They  could,  for  example, 
reduce taxes on labour, create more incentives for private investment, or reduce their deficits 
where required. In many euro area countries the investment climate is too unfavourable.  
Does the ECB need to become even more expansionary in order to prevent deflation? 
This depends a lot on global developments. If necessary, we stand ready to use all of the 
instruments at our disposal. That includes the key interest rates and the size, composition 
and duration of our securities purchases. We will take a decision on this in March. 
How will the ECB ever manage to move away again from its expansionary monetary 
policy? 
Technically speaking, it’s not hard to do. The US central bank is currently demonstrating how 
it’s done. What is more important is that our environment – and by that I mean government 
policies – should support us sufficiently in generating more growth. If this does not happen, 
we will have to keep rates low for a very long time. So it’s not just up to us whether the low 
interest rate phase can be brought to an end, it also depends on the pace of reform in euro 
area countries. 
But the refugee crisis means that we’re also facing a new challenge right now. Is this 
going to affect economic developments? 
It is a huge challenge, not only in Germany, but for Europe as a whole. But the refugee crisis 
is also a great opportunity for Europe if the refugees can be successfully integrated into the 
labour  market.  The  more  Europe  stands  together  in  the  refugee  crisis,  the  greater  is  the 
likelihood  that  it  can  be  overcome.  As  a  European  citizen,  I  believe  that  we  are  now  at  a 
historic moment when the EU must demonstrate that it is able to reach a European solution. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Is that realistic? 
Europe  has  already  overcome  similar  situations, for  example  during the  debt crisis.  In  this 
case,  given  that  we  are  talking  about  millions  of  people  who  are  fleeing  to  Europe,  I 
personally believe that the EU has a moral obligation to find a joint European solution. The 
European project is not first and foremost a financial project. Europe always  was, and  will 
continue to be, about bringing people together, not about dividing them.  
The euro area countries cannot even agree on whether or not there should be a 
common limit on payments in cash. What would you advocate? 
This is a matter for the EU finance ministers to decide on, not the ECB. There are countries 
in Europe where cash is very important, and there are others where cash plays a lesser role. 
But the ECB is responsible for withdrawing the €500 note. 
We have direct responsibility for this because of course we print the banknote. The ECB’s 
Governing  Council  is currently  considering  very carefully  the question  of  whether  or  not  to 
withdraw  the  €500  note.  We  hear  from  the  competent  authorities  that  the  €500  note  is 
increasingly being used to finance terrorism and launder money. We take this warning very 
seriously in the Governing Council.  
What is your personal view? 
Personally I think that we now have fewer reasons for keeping the €500 note than we did 
when the euro was first introduced, because electronic payments have become much more 
important.  We  have  been  told  that  the  banknote  is  increasingly  being  used  for  criminal 
activities. That’s why I believe that the €500 banknote will eventually be withdrawn, but it has 
to be done carefully. Let me emphasise that this does not mean that we should do away with 
cash in general. Cash is crucial in our everyday lives. So even if the €500 note no longer 
exists, people will still be able to use all of the other banknotes. Given the high importance of 
cash for the citizens, there is no discussion whatsoever about getting rid of it in general. 
Greece is under strain from the thousands of refugees who arrive on its shores each 
day, and it is also going through a severe crisis at the same time. Is the refugee crisis 
weighing on Greece’s recovery? 
We should not mix up the question of whether Greece will meet the requirements of the third 
financial assistance package with the refugee issue. It is in the interest of the Greek people 
that their economy becomes stronger, irrespective of the refugee issue. For example, Greece 
must in any case sustainably reform its pension system. 
What is your view of the progress made on reforms in Greece? 
The experts from the European Commission, the ECB and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) had productive discussions in Athens, but we are not yet where we want to be. It is no 
longer  about  the  fundamental  aims,  it  is  about  the  implementation.  On  this,  Greece  must 
stick to the agreement reached in August 2015 on the third assistance package. And at the 
ECB we want the International Monetary Fund to continue to support this initiative.  
When will the Greek crisis be over? 
The  Greek  crisis  is  over  provided  that  everyone  sticks  to  the  commitments  made  last 
summer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
