  Denton Rarawa: 2016 Solomon Islands Money Day theme “Take Part. 
Save Smart!” 
Speech  by  Mr  Denton  Rarawa,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands,  at  the 
opening of the Solomon Islands Money Day Program, Honiara, 27 June 2016. 
 Permanent  Secretary  of  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources  Development, 
Commercial banks CEOs, Primary Schools represented here this morning, representatives of 
Government  Ministries,  State  Owned  Enterprises,  Members  of  National  Financial  Inclusion 
taskforce, Ladies and gentlemen. 
A good morning to all of you. You all look so colourful. Thank you for waking up early and 
also for taking part in the parade from Honiara Town Council to this venue. 
Today we are gathered celebrate two events. 
First is the 40th Anniversary of central banking in Solomon Islands. CBSI turned 40 on 21st 
June  2016,  after  the  Solomon  Islands  Monetary  Authority  began  its  operation  as  a  legal 
entity  in  1976.  Solomon  Islands  Monetary  Authority  changed  name  in  1983  to  the  Central 
Bank of Solomon Islands as we know it today. 
The  second  and  an  important  reason  why  we  gather  here  is  to  participate  in  our  national 
financial inclusion public education drive, which is normally celebrated on CBSI anniversary 
day.  We  now  decided  to  call  this  event  the  Solomon  Islands  Money  Day.  We  hope  that 
Solomon Islands money day will continue to be organized each year to promote the financial 
education to the general public each year. 
This  year’s  Solomon  Islands  Money  Day  theme  “Take  Part.  Save  Smart!”  This  theme  is 
adopted from this year’s Global Money Week; which we were not able to hold during the first 
quarter of this year. 
We are very excited about this theme because it carries the message that it is time that we 
empower our children and youths by encouraging them to take part and save their financial 
resources smartly. For the Central Bank and the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, this 
is the first ever program that is focused on financial education for our children and youth, and 
it is one of our National Financial Inclusion Goals. 
As a matter of fact, Solomon Islands has commitments both regionally and internationally to 
facilitate  financial  education  in  collaboration  with  the  Government  to  integrate  financial 
education in our school curriculum. Regionally we have the 2020 Money Pacific goals and 
internationally the Alliance for Financial Inclusion  Maya Declaration  where Central Bank of 
Solomon  Islands  is  committed  to  champion  financial  education  through  close  collaboration 
with the Government to integrate financial education in the existing Solomon Islands national 
school curriculum from class 1 to Form 3 by year 2013. Work to integrate financial education 
in  our  school  curriculum  has  started.  We  will  hear  more  about  the  progress  made  by  the 
Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development on achieving this goal when our 
Key-note Speaker delivers his address later this morning. 
Let  me  share  with  you  the  outcome  of  the  financial  education  we  facilitated  through  our 
Primary  School  Adoption  Program  with  our  three  commercial  banks  and  the  six  primary 
schools to teach financial education in their schools with a set of lesson outlines supplied by 
the Child and Youth International Group. The outcome has been very positive. 
Teachers,  who  taught  financial  education  to  their  students,  reported  that  the  learning 
objectives in the lessons taught not only impacted the attitudes of their students but on them 
as  teachers  as  well.  They  also  observed  a  marked  change  in  their  children’s  habits  of 
spending their allowances. They note children see the value of savings, and have allocated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  their  allowances  towards  their  own  bank  saving  accounts  with  a  commercial  bank,  rather 
than spending them all. 
Something else too is happening. A parent who attended the feedback session reported that 
the  children  also  returned  home  and  taught  their  parents  about  savings  and  other  topics 
learnt from their classes. The parent noticed changes in children’s attitude towards money. 
Further  the  adopted  school  teachers  reported  that  member  of  classes  in  their  schools 
extended  their  acquired  knowledge  on  goal  setting  and  savings  towards  a  common  goal. 
They  all  contribute  an  agreed  sum  of  money  towards  a  common  ‘piggy  bank’  or  ‘monkey’ 
money boxes each week towards an amount for their end year school function. Indeed, the 
idea  to  save  little  over  time  has  caught  on  to  these  children  and  I  encourage  parents  to 
support their children to achieve their saving goals. 
Today the children from these adopted primary schools will, demonstrate on stage in their 
respective stalls what they have learnt in dramas and songs about financial education. 
These positive outcomes from the teachers and students in applying what they have learnt 
over  the  past  six  weeks  encourage  us  to  complete  the  mapping  of the financial  education 
learning  objectives  in  the  school  curriculum.  This  indicates  that  if  we  can  start  teaching 
financial education in our schools, we could have a new generation of economic citizens that 
are better informed about financial matters than we are today. 
Before I end my opening remarks, let me get back to this four-word theme “Take Part. Save 
Smart!” Let me say that this theme is not all about money. It also encourages and empowers 
our children and youth to manage other resources as well. We make decisions on the use of 
resources  each  and  every  day  of  our  lives.  Therefore,  we  need  to  start  empowering  our 
children and youth with the knowledge to develop the habits of cost avoidance and resource 
control. 
For example, the wise use of power or electricity; controlling the amount of water we use; or 
taking good care of public properties; All these are about cost avoidance and savings. Even 
the throwing of our garbage in proper rubbish bins avoids the costly exercise of hiring people 
to clean up our towns and villages. 
It is time that all of us; the government, financial institutions, schools, teachers, parents and 
family to empower our children and youth  with knowledge and experience to participate in 
resource saving habits and avoid habits that can incur costs. Let us empower them to take 
part and save smart! 
Finally, let me take this opportunity to thank all of you who are part of this event today. Let 
me especially thank the six primary schools; namely Burns Creek Adventist Primary School; 
Florence  Young  Christian  Primary  School;  Saint  Nicholas  Primary  School,  Chung  Wah 
Primary School, Saint John Primary School and Bishop Epalle Primary School, for accepting 
our  invitation  to  be  part  of  the  program  and  to  teach  your  primary  school  students  about 
financial education over the course of the past 6 weeks. I hope your schools will continue to 
help spread the gospel of ‘Take Part, Save Smart!’ and take the lead in teaching financial 
education in your schools in years to come. 
I  must  thank  our  three  commercial  banks  who  were  very  happy  to  be  the  schools  foster 
banks  for  sparing  time  today  to  come  and  give  real  life  examples  of  translating  what  has 
been  taught  in  the  classrooms  to  being  able  to  open  bank  accounts  and  learn  about  the 
many saving products and services that commercial banks offer to the communities. I hope 
that  the  relationship  that  you  have  forged  with  the  school  and  children  will  grow  in  many 
years ahead. 
Also big thanks to all our stakeholders who are here to encourage all of us to ‘take part and 
save  smart!  Finally,  let  me  thank  our  CBSI  40th  Anniversary  Committee,  who  had  been 
planning this event. Without their effort we will not be celebrating this event today. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Learning is about having fun and I am sure there is so much to learn from the stalls of our 
stakeholders today. I urge all of you to take part and save smart! 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
