   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Unlocking finance, expanding impact 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Responsible  Finance  Summit  “Unlocking  Finance,  Expanding 
Impact”, Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 30 March 2016. 
 It  is  my  distinct  honour and  pleasure to  welcome  you  to  Malaysia  and  to  this  Responsible 
Finance Summit for 2016, with the theme "Unlocking Finance, Expanding Impact". The theme 
gives strong recognition to the essential role of finance in driving sustainable development and 
growth in the world today. 
 It  is  now  almost  a  decade  since  the  eruption  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Despite  the 
challenges, much progress has been made to forge a vision for a stronger post-crisis world. 
Whilst  having  to  strike  a  balance  between  pursuing  financial  stability  and  the  potential 
increased costs to financial intermediation, efforts have been made through the global financial 
reforms towards more sustainable financial systems. This includes the recalibration of financial 
regulations  to  curb  tendencies  for  excessive  leveraging,  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory systems that are forward looking and responsive to risk, as well as provisioning 
standards  that  reduce  procyclicality  and  that  restrain  the  build-up  of  risks.  In  addition, 
advancing consumer protection, furthering financial education and literacy as well as improving 
access to financial services have remained important long-term items on the agenda. 
In tandem with these efforts to strengthen financial stability, the role of finance is also being 
re-examined to enhance its positive impact. This entails focusing our sights on the path ahead, 
towards re-building a global financial architecture that will facilitate and secure our economic 
prospects.  With  the  considerable  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  now  know  that  finance,  if  not 
anchored to the aim of creating sustainable value in the real economy, will become inherently 
unstable and destabilising to the ultimate goals of greater shared prosperity. There is thus a 
compelling  need  for  finance  to  have  a  greater  role  in  shaping  responsible  behaviour  that 
underpins a stable and well-functioning economy, and advances the goals of a progressive 
society and sustainable environment. This is the underlying objective of responsible finance. 
Of significance, aligning business practices towards responsible finance entails a paradigm 
shift away from the conventional thinking of finance - the most important distinction being the 
need to recognise and appreciate that responsible finance delivers value by focusing on its 
ultimate outcomes, rather than its immediate returns. 
Responsible finance at its core strives to serve wider objectives that is consistent with, but 
goes beyond, the predominant objective of enhancing shareholder value. In delivering long 
term sustainable value, allocative efficiency is achieved in a manner that promotes stability 
and  prosperity  in  the  broader  economy  and  sustainability  of  the  environment.  Above  all, 
responsible finance aims to optimise its positive impact on society, economic wellbeing and 
development. 
Over  the  recent  decade,  the  heightened  advocacy  for  ethical  and  socially  responsible 
investments has also seen the proliferation of financial instruments that cater for both financial 
and societal objectives. More importantly, this has moved beyond negative screening, to more 
impactful  approaches  involving  the  adoption  of  environmental,  social  and  corporate 
governance (ESG) considerations in investment and business practices. These have served 
to align risk and reward in a more sustainable manner. Indeed, some global banks and insurers 
have begun to incorporate sustainability considerations, including environmental concerns in 
their lending and investment decision-making processes via the adoption of international risk 
management  frameworks  such  as  the  Equator  Principles  and  the  UNEPFI  Principles  for 
Sustainable Insurance. These positive forms of finance are increasingly becoming powerful 
market forces, driving focus into the kind of productive activities needed for long-term growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Islamic  finance,  a  well-established  component  of  responsible  finance,  is  similarly  gaining 
significant growth and prominence in the global financial system due to its inherent orientation 
towards promoting societal welfare. This includes the propagation of strong ethical values that 
engenders accountability and trust in its intermediation function, as well as the promotion of 
risk sharing that fosters entrepreneurship and equitable distribution of wealth. By virtue of its 
requirement for financial transactions to be supported by genuine productive activities, Islamic 
finance is also deeply rooted to the real economy. All these are hallmarks of Islamic finance 
that underpin greater market discipline and stronger focus towards building sustainable and 
long term value in capital allocation. Collectively, these characteristics enable Islamic finance 
to also serve as an effective model for responsible finance. 
On  the  path  to  achieve  stronger,  more  balanced  and  sustainable  growth,  the  potential  of 
responsible finance has therefore become greater than ever. Most important is for finance to 
be aligned towards its ultimate goal of serving humanity and of uplifting social wellbeing. Thus, 
more than merely performing its role as a passive intermediary of funds, finance today has the 
distinct potential of catalysing and shaping social outcomes. As mobilisers of funds towards 
socially  empowering  activities  in  the  economy,  the  financial  sector  can  act  as  a  "social 
multiplier", significantly expanding the impact of positive finance. 
This is what responsible finance can achieve. Infrastructure financing, with its focus on long-
term and socially impactful considerations, is an area of finance that can be instrumental in 
filling the vast development needs of many emerging economies, with an estimated global 
funding demand of about USD57 trillion by 2030, or about USD1 trillion a year. Recognising 
this, greater attention has been focussed on infrastructure finance, both at the national and 
international levels. The evolution of the sukuk market, in particular, has been an effective 
avenue  in  bridging  this  financing  gap.  Since  2003,  an  estimated  USD115  billion  of 
infrastructure sukuk has been issued by more than 10 different countries, which has been vital 
in contributing towards the long-term development of these economies. In Malaysia, the sukuk 
market  has  similarly  been  pivotal  in  supporting  infrastructure  financing,  with  Malaysia-
domiciled  infrastructure  sukuk  accounting  for  79  percent  of  global  infrastructure  sukuk 
issuances in 2015. The positive response by investors of these issuances with maturities of up 
to 30 years is reflected by its oversubscription of up to 10 times. 
A relatively recent form of finance that has been gaining attention recently is green financing. 
The market for green bonds tripled in size in from 2013 to 2014, with over USD100 billion of 
issuances expected this year . Of significance, the signing of the "Paris Agreement", a global 
action plan on climate change, by 195 countries in December of 2015 will serve to further 
accelerate  the  momentum  of  green  financing.  As  the  principles  of  Islamic  finance  share 
substantial synergies with the concept of environment-friendly and sustainable development, 
there  is  also  tremendous  opportunity  for  Islamic  finance  to  develop  instruments  that  can 
support the global demand for green projects.  These forms of finance can be embraced and 
brought  together  to  leverage  in  a  mutually  reinforcing  manner  to  enhance  their  collective 
impact. 
Socially responsible investments in the West began as far back as the 18th century, while 
Islamic finance evolved in the Middle East and Asia since the 7th century, in which lending 
based on Sharia or Islamic principles included moral directives in the conduct of business. 
Reinforced by globalisation, society today is no longer defined only by national boundaries. 
Finance,  and  indeed  responsible  finance  has  also  evolved  to  be  global.  The  need  for 
responsible  and  sustainable  form  of  finance  is  recognised  -  and  even  deeply  desired  - 
throughout  the  world.  Nonetheless,  while  responsible  finance  has  flourished  in  many  local 
communities, its next phase of development requires responsible finance to be brought into 
the global mainstream, to become a core building block in our efforts towards forging a more 
sustainable financial architecture going forward. Similarly, decisions and solutions to finance 
need to also be considered on a global scale and not confined to any community or nation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Of  equal  importance,  the  benefits  of  finance  should  be  extended  across  all  segments  of 
society. Despite the size and scale of our financial sectors in the global financial system, many 
households and businesses still remain excluded from formal financial services. Globally, as 
many as 2 billion adults do not have access to a bank account . Perhaps even more revealing 
are  the  findings  that  financial  exclusion  is  not  limited  solely  to  developing  or  low-income 
economies. Even in advanced countries such as Japan, 3.4% of adults remained financially 
excluded, while in the United States, over 8% of households are unbanked and 20% remain 
underbanked . There is thus a still much important impact that finance can bring about. 
Indeed,  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  such  greater  access  is  already  making  a  significant 
impact, particularly for small and medium enterprises, with its market size estimated to double 
to almost USD14 billion by 2019 from USD7 billion in 2015 . There is, however, still scope for 
such access to be expanded to bring about more balanced and sustainable growth in the global 
economy. 
Finally, an important aspect of responsible finance requires strong and effective governance. 
John Locke, one of the most prominent 17th century theorists, refers to the concept of a "social 
contract" in describing the origin of society and its inherent need for governance. The erosion 
of this social contract and of governance would drastically weaken the foundations of society, 
setting the stage for its eventual decline in the future. 
This was evident during the global financial crisis. The experience serves as a strong indication 
that the own version of the "social contract" in finance should not be overlooked. This extends 
not only to governance but also to trust, which has traditionally been the social bond between 
finance and humanity. Central to this is the realisation that financial markets cannot operate in 
the absence of trust, which in turn necessitates minimum standards for governance, ethics and 
integrity. This involves not only heightened expectations on the fiduciary duty of boards, but 
the alignment of compensation packages from short-term personal gains towards long-term 
value  creation.  In  addition,  corporate  culture  also  have  an  important  role  in  entrenching 
financial goals with ethical values, through the promotion of sound risk taking cultures and 
ethical codes of conduct. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude my remarks. Often at its most defining moments in history, the rise of 
society has been intricately marked by the strength of its leadership and its people. Indeed, 
the global financial crisis witnessed unprecedented levels of global cooperation as the world 
came together to pursue a common interest of restoring stability and building more sustainable 
financial systems. In the same manner today, the future of finance demands strong leadership 
and  cooperation  in  fostering  collective  will  towards  achieving  the  necessary  positive 
transformation. 
The  Responsible  Finance  Institute,  as  a  think  tank  connecting  various  responsible  finance 
practices and expertise around the world, is in a unique position to contribute towards realising 
this aspiration. But for responsible finance to gain real traction, this cannot be an undertaking 
of a single institution. 
Finance, with its potential to serve society, is capable of so much more. As responsible global 
financial participants, the opportunity to come together again to rebuild trust and provide the 
foundations of a more stable and sustainable long-term economic growth can be achieved 
through our commitments to responsible finance. The call is for greater global cooperation and 
leadership to unlock the future of finance and expand its positive impact in the global economy. 
With that, I wish you an engaging and impactful summit. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
