Yves Mersch: The next steps in the evolution of the Eurosystem’s
market infrastructure
Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Eurosystem community session at Sibos, Geneva, 26 September 2016.
Introduction
 One  year  ago,  the  Eurosystem  shared  some  initial  reflections  on  the  strategy  for  the  future
development of its market infrastructure. The rationale behind these strategic reflections was the
need  to  keep  pace  with  technological  developments  in  line  with  the  mandate  of  our  Treaty  to
promote the smooth operation of payment systems.
Digitalisation of financial services
The  digitalisation  of  financial  services  could  result  in  new  business  models  or  products  with
disruptive potential in the financial sector. In particular, distributed ledger technology (DLT) has
the  potential  to  fundamentally  change  securities  and  payments  business.  However,  this
technology  is  still  in  its  infancy.  There  are  substantial  functional,  operational,  governance  and
legal aspects which need to be carefully looked at before thinking about possible mass adoption.
Hence, the Eurosystem cannot, at this stage, consider using DLT in the market infrastructure.
Nevertheless, we are exploring whether its possible future use could bring benefits.
A multitude of different DLT approaches and models could jeopardise financial market integration
by increasing fragmentation. Undue periods of market consolidation and standardization could
hamper the smooth functioning of a Single Payments Area. We could be in a situation similar to
the one that lead to the establishment of T2S.
The next steps in the evolution of the Eurosystem’s market infrastructure
The  Eurosystem’s  strategic  reflections  on  the  future  development  of  its  market  infrastructure
centre around three components:
1.  the consolidation of TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities (T2S);
2.  settlement services to support instant payments;
3.  a Eurosystem collateral management system.
Now, these strategic reflections have entered into the next phase. Last week, the Eurosystem
decided  to  launch  the  investigation  phase  into  these  three  components.  The  aim  is
to ascertain whether there is a business case for each, to agree with the users on the scope
of services and to prepare a cost-benefit analysis.
Let me say a few words now on each of the three components.
1. Consolidation of TARGET2 and T2S
TARGET2  and  T2S  are  the  cornerstones  of  the  Eurosystem’s  market  infrastructure  for
payments and securities settlement. But as they were developed at different points in time, they
operate on separate platforms and use different technical solutions and environments. Hence, it
is  logical  to  seek  to  draw  on  the  synergies  between  both  systems.  Modernising  TARGET2,
leveraging the possibilities which are already available in T2S and consolidating the technical and
functional components of TARGET2 and T2S services are the primary objectives. The Governing
Council strongly supports these objectives.
 1 / 3
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
In addition, consolidating TARGET2 and T2S provides an opportunity to further improve cyber
resilience, to enhance the services offered to users and to establish a single access channel.
During the investigation phase of the project, which will run throughout 2017, we will follow up on
this year’s market consultation that was launched in February with the release of a consultative
report on real-time gross settlement (RTGS) services.
2. Settlement services to support instant payments
For the Eurosystem, the biggest challenge of digitalisation in the payments industry is to ensure
that  the  introduction  of  innovative  payment  products  and  services  that  are  developed  by  the
market  does  not  reintroduce  fragmentation  into  the  European  market.  That  is  why  the
Eurosystem fosters the development and implementation of pan-European solutions.
One of the most prominent of these innovative services is instant payments. By November 2017
end-user solutions for instant payments in euro should be made available at pan-European level
by payment service providers. This means that by November 2017 the European financial market
infrastructure  has  to  be  ready  to  clear  and/or  settle  instant  payments  on  a  pan-European
scale. The  Governing  Council  has  decided  that  it  will  launch  and  closely  monitor  an
investigation  with  market  participants  on  the  necessity  of  extending  settlement
operating hours for a subset of its regular settlement services up to 24/7/365 to allow for
real-time settlement of instant payments.
Instant clearing will be supported by the delivery of an enhanced TARGET2 functionality for the
automated clearing houses. The project per se does not question the efforts of the ACHs to offer
instant  clearing.  This  is  because  instant  clearing  and  instant  settlement  are  complementary
services (since the availability of instant settlement can make instant clearing less costly). It is
true  that  they  are  also  alternative  services  (since  instant  clearing  may  replace  the  need  for
instant settlement and vice versa).
Furthermore, the project is the best guarantee that a pan-European solution for the processing of
instant payments will be available since TARGET2 is already a pan-European solution.
If  deemed  feasible,  it  is  understood  that  real-time  settlement  of  instant  payments  would  be
offered  by  the  Eurosystem  at  full  cost  recovery.  As  this  is  a  pressing  topic,  the  aim  of  the
investigation is to reach a decision on whether to go ahead with this by the end of the first quarter
of 2017 in order to not delay the go-live of announced market initiatives.
3. Eurosystem collateral management system
As the euro area’s banking and financial markets become increasingly integrated, demand for
more  efficient  collateral  management  arrangements  within  the  Eurosystem  central  bank
community  is  increasing.  To  date,  collateral  management  in  the  Eurosystem  is  rather
fragmented as each national central bank has its own procedures and systems in place. As a
consequence,  some  collateral  management  services  are  not  provided  in  a  fully  harmonised
manner.
As we look to the future, the Eurosystem will strive to drive harmonisation forwards, particularly
regarding  Eurosystem  operations  for  the  mobilisation  of  marketable  assets,  as  well  as  the
handling  procedures  for  non-marketable  assets,  which  still  vary  across  the  central  banks.
Furthermore, the Eurosystem will investigate, throughout 2017, the business case for and
the scope and cost of a possible common Eurosystem collateral management system for
managing eligible assets used as collateral in the Eurosystem credit operations.
Conclusion
The three components of the Eurosystem’s strategy for the evolution of its market infrastructure
 2 / 3
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
are interconnected, such as shared software components, shared network infrastructure, shared
hardware components, the use of the future Market Infrastructure Single Gateway. At the end of
the investigation into the business case for and the scope and cost of each one, a decision will
be taken as to whether they will be developed into projects with different durations. You may rest
assured  that  throughout  the  investigation  and  decision,  we  will  live  up  to  the  Treaty  and  our
mandate.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
