   Andreas Ittner: Accounting is all about trust 
Speech  given  by  Mr  Andreas Ittner,  Vice Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of the  Republic of 
Austria,  at  the  fifth  ECB  conference  on  Accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate 
governance for central banks, Frankfurt am Main, 21 June 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
At a dinner party one should eat wisely but not too well, and talk well but not too wisely. Bearing 
these words of William Somerset Maugham in mind, I will do my best to neither bore you with 
technical stuff, nor to spoil your appetite with too wise remarks. But if I may just stay with that 
quote  for  a  moment:  Shakespeare  lovers  among  you  may  have  recognized  that  it  is  a 
paraphrase of a speech by Othello, in which he describes himself as “one that lov’d not wisely 
but too well”. His tragedy is that he allows his reading of reality to be coloured by jealousy (and 
Iago’s deceit), which destroys his trust in his wife’s love and fidelity. 
I hope you won’t find it too heroic a leap from here to the observation that the financial markets 
in which central banks, commercial banks and other players operate are crucially dependent 
on trust. Trust in the basic integrity of the institutions and corporations that make up the market, 
in the rules by which they play, and in the information that they disclose to the market. 
Central banks 
1. 
So let me start with some thoughts about the evolution of central banking and the importance 
of financial reporting in this process. 
Central banks have always been confronted with changing in economic and legal conditions 
in their activity. These changes are often the result of crisis and the danger of financial and 
economic collapse. 
Permit me, in its 200th anniversary year, to cite the example of the Austrian central bank, one 
of the oldest central banks in Europe, which was created in a crisis situation after the long 
years of the Napoleonic wars to stabilize the troubled economic and financial situation of the 
Austrian Empire, and in particular to restore trust in the national currency. 
Public trust in the national currency was the starting point for the need to publish financial 
statements of the Austrian central bank. Our bank was founded after the Napoleonic Wars and 
the  Congress  of  Vienna  in  June  1816,  as  a  better  trusted  agent  and  intermediate  with 
commercial banks after the Austrian-Empire had issued paper money on a grand scale. The 
first monthly financial statements were published in 1848 (so called Revolution Year in Austria 
and much of Europe) a year of public riots against the government in the Austrian Empire. The 
purpose of the publication was to reassure the public that the paper money was covered by 
adequate silver holdings. After some years of prosperity the first significant financial crisis then 
also triggered the publication of the central bank’s balance sheets from 1863 onwards. The 
legal necessity to publish weekly balance sheets in order to prove the coverage of the national 
currency by adequate assets like gold holdings and foreign currency holdings of the Austrian 
central bank continued until 1999, when we joined the Eurosystem. From that point on the ECB 
continued with this task for all National central banks of the Eurosystem by its consolidated 
weekly financial statement until today. 
Nowadays,  the  tasks  of  a  central  bank  in  the  framework  of  the  European  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  are  well  defined. They  include  both the general  aim  of price  and financial 
stability, and the development, the implementation and the monitoring of compliance with, new 
regulations. To secure the objective of price stability, the independence of the central bank, 
especially with regard to monetary and macroprudential policy, is a major prerequisite. It has 
been recognized that the “leaning-against-the-wind” function requires a central bank that is not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   subject to the pressures of day-to-day politics. For the government and/or parliament to cede 
this power to the central bank, they need to have the assurance of extensive central bank 
accountability and transparency; always tempered, of course, by the amount of confidentiality 
necessary in order to remain effective, and indeed independent, for example with regard to the 
voting behaviour of individual monetary policy committee members. 
A central bank’s monetary policy decisions are discussed in the mass media and the general 
public, and not only the decisions themselves but also their financial results. Financial results 
have become more important – and more difficult to earn – in a “new normal” environment of 
ultra low interest rates and rising costs stemming from increasing tasks of central banks, and 
also in the context of issues like income and loss sharing which are typical for currency systems 
consisting of many countries, like the Eurosystem. 
Central banks’ capital adequacy and the definition of financial buffers are usually caught in a 
tension between, on the one hand, domestic laws, which vary considerably in their definitions 
of capital and its components, and, on the other hand, systemic balance sheet growth, which 
is a necessary consequence of central banks‘ interventions in the financial and economic crisis. 
As central banks are mostly government institutions or publicly owned companies, their capital 
is mostly limited by domestic laws. In cases of substantial balance sheet growth, existing rules 
might not fit anymore. At such times the financial reporting framework might have to provide 
possibilities for new appropriate solutions. 
One such solution might be for recapitalisation by domestic governments after losses, or for 
potential future losses, to be made mandatory, however such requirements are often difficult 
to get approved by parliament and by public opinion. 
Designing the adequate level and composition of the capital of a central bank is a sensitive 
challenge. One has, among a number of other internal and external factors, to take account of 
the central bank‘s legal environment, the relationship to the government, and its special tasks, 
like lender-of-last-resort function, or a fiscal agent-function vis-à- vis the state. In any event, a 
central bank’s capital must be sufficient to maintain its independence from the political sphere, 
and to provide a buffer for the inevitable price volatility resulting from the current investment 
environment. 
The  individually  adequate  balance  for  each  central  bank  between  a  suitable  accounting 
framework, profit distribution rules and the ability to hold or reserve adequate amounts for loss 
coverage is the key for financial independence. When you apply the accounting rules to arrive 
at the annual financial result, you are then confronted with the question of applying rules for 
the  distribution  of  profits.  These  rules  can  be  classified  in  six  general  legal  profit  and  loss 
schemes according to a recent ECB study on profit distribution and loss coverage of central 
banks (by Werner Studener and his colleagues). 
The  study,  based  on  the  experience  of  57  central  banks  that  provided  data  for  the  ECB 
analysis, confirms what the BIS found in 2013, namely that there is no one-size-fits-all solution 
for central banks, neither for the level of capital and financial buffers nor for profit distribution 
and loss coverage; nor, indeed, for recapitalisation rules. However, there is evidence that these 
topics are interconnected and a set of guiding principles have been identified, which help to 
find an individual balance. 
Commercial banks and corporates 
2. 
As I said earlier, financial reporting is a key issue, not only for central banks, but for all kinds 
of businesses and, of course, commercial banks as well.  Modern historians agree that the 
invention of double entry bookkeeping in the fifteenth century was a major driver for modern 
economic pursuit and capitalism, as it first introduced the maxim “Increase your equity!” Or, in 
the words of Charlie Munger (of Berkshire Hathaway): “Double entry bookkeeping was a hell 
of an invention.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Now even more than it did back then, accounting poses a considerable challenge and uses 
huge  resources.  The  need  to  provide  a  true  and  fair  view  of  ever  more  complex  and 
sophisticated transactions, to the satisfaction of an ever wider range of stakeholders, has led 
to rather complex accounting rules nowadays. As Sir David Tweedie, the former chair of the 
IASB once said, “anyone who thinks he understands IAS 39, has not read it properly.” 
But time will tell if IFRS 9 is capable of doing a better job. 
The  new  impairment  model,  with  its  paradigm  change  from  allowances  based  on  incurred 
losses to risk provisions based on expected losses, will have a huge impact on financial reports 
of banks and their analysis. It can be expected to lead to considerably increased impairments 
at initial application, and over time to a higher degree of volatility. 
Will IFRS 9 add to the trustworthiness of accounts? The primary aim of IFRS 9 is to establish 
a significantly improved accounting standard for presenting users of financial statements with 
information that is relevant, useful, and more comprehensive in assessing the amounts, timing 
and uncertainty of a firm’s cash flows from financial instruments. Provisions for bad debts will 
be larger and maybe more volatile, and adopting the new rules will require a lot of time, effort 
and money. As of today, I understand, it is unclear if the new accounting rules will strengthen 
the trustworthiness of accounts because of the complexity of the standard. 
Banking supervision 
3. 
Another demanding issue, especially in the context of European integration, and of banking 
supervision in the Banking Union, is the variety of legal bases for accounting rules. On the one 
hand, certain jurisdictions oblige preparers to base their financial statements entirely on IFRS. 
On  the  other  hand,  several  member  states  still  rely  on  their  national  GAAPs,  at  least  for 
financial statements on solo level. 
Nowadays we find advocates of both approaches. The ones argue that uniform accounting 
rules are key in an economic union. The others favor the retention of national GAAPs which, 
compared to IFRS, in several ways incorporate a greater degree of prudence. 
In  the  context  of  European  supervision,  we  are  currently  seeing  efforts  to  overcome  this 
diversity in accounting rules for the purpose of developing a set of key risk indicators for cross-
sectoral and cross-country comparisons, by translating national-GAAP numbers of banks to, 
for the lack of a better word, fictitious IFRS data. 
Therefore, as supervisors we are moving in an area of conflict between the goal of achieving 
a level playing field and of avoiding the use of inaccurate data based on vague translations 
from nGAAP to IFRS. The trade-off can also be seen as that between the attempt to capture 
“reality” as faithfully as possible against the need to develop and apply a robust – even if not 
perfect – signalling tool for European supervisory action. This seems to be rather dangerous. 
Eventually it can be used to identify trends in the industry but certainly not to trigger supervisory 
action on a single bank. 
Accountants and auditors 
4. 
I cannot conclude these remarks without at least touching on an essential component of a 
trust-based environment, and that is the accounting profession. The accounting frameworks, 
as we have seen, attempt to reconcile the information needs of a variety of stakeholders and 
will  change  along  with  those  needs  and  with  the  economic  setting.  What  remains  in  all 
circumstances, though, is the need for accountancy practitioners and audit professionals who 
have the skills to understand the transactions and relationships underlying the financial reports, 
and who can manage their conflicts of interest to the highest standard of international practice. 
(I may add, from my particular vantage point as a prudential supervisor of banks, that we are 
frequently amazed at the fragility of audited bank accounts under supervisory scrutiny, and at 
what are often accepted as plausible assumptions.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   In  order  to  support  confidence  in  the  statutory  audit,  it  has  been  necessary  to  implement 
different  reforms  at  the  European  level.  These  include  the  mandatory  external  rotation  of 
auditors to avoid dependencies in companies of public interest and the restriction of non-audit 
services  by  the  auditor  during  the  audit  mandate.  Additional  measures,  which  lead  to  an 
increase in the quality of audit were also necessary. This applies to the mandatory application 
of International Standards on Auditing by the auditors and quality assurance checks by national 
authorities.  An  increased  audit  quality  will  also  strengthen  the  confidence  in  financial 
statements and audit reports, that are able to withstand inspection by enforcement bodies. 
Conclusion 
5. 
And so we see that for the financial system to have the trust of those inside it and those outside, 
we need four things to be in place to a significant degree: 
• 
• 
• 
Transparency of methodology and outcomes; 
Well designed tools and rules; 
Well  balanced  institutional  checks  and  balances,  including  self-correcting  and 
learning mechanisms. 
And finally, personal integrity of practitioners. This is key. In the end, both the auditors and the 
financial directors who sign off on financial reports, and their supervisors, must be constantly 
aware of their fiduciary duty to the public and to the continued functioning of the delicately 
balanced, fragile, trust-based system they operate in. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
