  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Monde 
Interview  with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  Le  Monde,  conducted  by  Ms  Marie  Charrel  on  27  June  2016,  and  published  on 
1 July 2016. 
 Does the victory for Brexit in the referendum of 23 June put the European project at 
risk? 
No, I do not think so. The British vote raises questions for Europe, of course, but first of all 
let’s read it for what it is – a decision of the British people. It’s up to them to be the first to 
draw lessons from it, and that will take time. 
But  Brexit  highlights  the  dysfunctioning  of  the  European  Union.  How  can  it  be  put 
right? 
Let us be realistic: the urgent thing today is to clarify the timing and the method, as prolonged 
uncertainty would have an economic cost first of all for the United Kingdom but also for the 
European Union. 
It’s  also  vital  that  responses  are  guided  by  the  collective  interest  of  Europe  and  not  by 
national or sectoral interests. For example, knowing who would benefit from any relocation of 
British financial activities is not for me the most burning issue. 
We shouldn’t overly chastise ourselves either. Europe is an extraordinary political construct 
which has brought peace and prosperity to a continent which has known division, war and 
poverty.  Its  raison  d’être  has  evolved  but  it  remains  more  necessary  than  ever.  It  has 
become a tool for managing globalisation through the implementation of common rules that 
protect employees and consumers. Is this protection imperfect? Let’s discuss it and reinforce 
it. But we won’t achieve this by rejecting Europe. Without Europe, a country such as France 
would find itself alone and without weapons in the face of ruthless global markets. 
But concretely, what message could give renewed confidence to Europeans won over 
by eurosceptic movements? 
There’s no shortage of long-term projects for Europe. I can’t imagine the future of monetary 
union without a more complete banking union and elements of fiscal union. But things have 
to be done in the right order. Let’s start by reconciling people with Europe by taking concrete 
initiatives that create growth and jobs. The Juncker plan, which invests in European projects, 
is one such initiative. Others are necessary. The ECB, in its field, is also contributing, for its 
monetary policy is one of the main factors in the current recovery. 
The other priority is to restore confidence between European countries. Today each country 
doubts its neighbour’s ability to reform its economy and willingness to move forward together. 
Which country would want to share its budget with another one that is permanently testing 
the limits of common rules and is proud of doing so? Governments are continually adopting 
new rules while claiming they are exempt from them. We cannot move forward under these 
conditions. Once confidence returns, it will be time to integrate further. 
What form should this stronger integration take? 
Some  issues  are  essential  but  do  not  fall  within  the  remit  of  the  ECB:  such  as  defence, 
security,  border  control  or  climate  change.  Within  a  Union  of  27  countries,  different 
configurations are possible, but that mustn’t be done at the expense of the single currency! 
The  euro  is  a  reality  and  it  must  be  protected.  That  assumes  going  further  towards 
integration  in  financial  and  fiscal  matters,  centred  on  common  euro  area  institutions 
accountable to the people. Without this, our capacity to react to new crises will be limited and 
once again it will be the most vulnerable and the youngest who stand to lose. The experience 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
of the crisis has convinced me that an intergovernmental Europe, where fiscal and financial 
decisions  are  taken  by  governments  alone  would  condemn  the  euro  to  long-term  fragility. 
The Greek crisis has shown the limits of such a process: the decisions are too slow and incur 
a high cost for everyone. 
If the political response is a long time coming, should we fear a return of the sovereign 
debt crisis, as in 2012? 
Since 2010, whenever the integrity of the single currency was threatened, European political 
leaders have taken the necessary decisions. A year ago, they confirmed that Greece would 
remain  in  the  euro  area.  If  new  vulnerabilities  were  to  appear,  I  am  confident  that 
governments would pull together again. 
Is the turmoil on the markets caused by Brexit going to continue? 
The  adjustments  have  been  significant,  but  there  has  been  no  dislocation  of  the  financial 
markets, which have continued to function normally. Central banks will continue to monitor 
these developments closely and be ready to intervene if financial stability is threatened by 
providing, for example, the necessary liquidity both in euro and foreign currency. 
On the subject of central banks: doesn’t resorting to negative rates, by penalising the 
banking sector, risk making monetary policy less effective in supporting growth? 
Negative  rates  are  only  one  of  the  tools  of  our  policy.  They  reinforce  the  effectiveness  of 
asset purchases and thus increase the positive impact of our actions on growth. So far the 
negative consequences feared by some, such as the rise in bank charges or reduced lending 
have not been corroborated by the facts. On the contrary, lending is increasing everywhere 
in the euro area. Banks generally have benefited from this increase and from the improved 
solvency of their clients. Similarly, returns on savings, once adjusted for inflation, are near 
their historical average. Finally, we don’t currently see any financial bubbles. 
Let’s  not  delude  ourselves:  some  of  these  criticisms  are  also  the  expression  of  vested 
interests. When the ECB raised its rates in the past, it was criticised by exporters who feared 
being penalised by a euro that was too strong. When the ECB lowers rates, it is blamed by 
savings  managers  and  the  banking  sector.  It’s  precisely  for  that  reason  that  the  ECB  is 
independent – to stand up against those special interests. 
Why is the ECB now taking the risk of buying private sector assets? 
These purchases make it possible to increase and spread the reduction in borrowing costs to 
all enterprises, including those whose securities we do not buy. We only buy bonds rated as 
investment grade by at least one of the four credit rating agencies that we recognise. 
What is missing in the euro area to revive strong growth? 
A  pick-up  in  activity  is  certainly  there. It  is  healthy  because  it  is  being  driven  by  domestic 
demand and investment. But it is still restrained by high unemployment rates and debt levels 
and  it  will  inevitably  suffer from  the “uncertainty  shock” created  by  the British  referendum, 
even if that impact is difficult to quantify at the moment. There is worse: “potential” growth, 
i.e. the growth the euro area could attain in the long term has dropped dangerously. In 1992, 
according to the European Commission, it was 2.6 % per annum, compared with 2.8% in the 
United States. Today, it is approximately 1%, i.e. half the US figure. This fall endangers the 
sustainability  of  the  European  social  model  –  and  underlines  the  need  to  reform  our 
economies  so  that  they  create  more  growth  and  jobs.  If  everyone  plays  their  part,  trust 
between countries will return, and Europe will move forward again. This shows at the same 
time that the solution to the problems of Europe lies in Paris, Berlin and Rome as much as in 
Brussels and Frankfurt. 
What should be the reforms in France? 
The ECB doesn’t tell governments what they should do! What we can do is to compare what 
works or not in European countries. Reforms which open up goods and services markets are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
just as important for growth as labour market reforms because they redistribute purchasing 
power. During the crisis, most countries gave priority to cutting labour costs in order to regain 
competitiveness and that has been beneficial to employment. But it has meant that the bulk 
of the cost of adjustment has been borne by employees. Although the sequence of reforms 
clearly depends on political constraints, those which succeed are those which are part of a 
comprehensive strategy. 
In that context, is the El Khomri labour law a missed opportunity or a step forward? 
Seen from Frankfurt, the aims of this reform are balanced, including greater flexibility but also 
decentralisation, while strengthening the rights of employees. That’s good for jobs, especially 
for young people. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
