  Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Annual  address  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), to the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 18 February 
2016. 
Accompanying charts can also be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
In  late  autumn  1857,  a  steamship  left  Christiania  bound  for  Hamburg  carrying  a  cargo  of 
silver from Norges Bank to be deposited in one of Hamburg’s finance houses. In only a few 
months, 20 tonnes of silver worth 800 000 speciedaler were shipped south as collateral for 
the  redemption  into  silver  of  bills  and  notes  issued  by  Norges  Bank.  There  was  to  be  no 
doubt that the speciedaler was worth its face value in silver. 
Europe had just been hit by a financial crisis. Norges Bank intervened to maintain confidence 
in  the  country’s  currency.  The  Bank  remained  faithful  to  the  social  mission  it  had  been 
assigned 40 years earlier. 
This  year  is  Norges  Bank’s  200th  anniversary.  Under  the  Constitution,  control  of  the 
monetary  system  was  given  to  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament).  The  establishment  of 
Norges Bank in 1816 gave the authorities a tool to restore confidence in the country’s means 
of payment. Norges Bank had a monopoly on the issuance of currency, but the amount of 
currency in circulation was limited by the stock of silver. 
The organisation of Norway’s monetary system was inspired by the note-issuing banks that 
had emerged in Europe since the end of the 1600s. One hard-won lesson was particularly 
important: the central bank must keep the crown and government at arm’s length and must 
not  extend  credit  to  government.  Control  of  the  printing  press  would  promote  economic 
stability and prevent unrestrained money printing to finance spending by the crown. 
Two hundred years later, safeguarding the value of money remains monetary policy’s main 
task. Responsibility for monetary policy rests with Norges Bank, but today policy is geared 
towards  maintaining  stable  inflation  rather  than  a  stable  currency  backed  by  a  precious 
metal. The Bank’s role has also changed in other areas. From being the country’s only bank, 
Norges Bank took on the role of the bankers’ bank, with the new responsibilities that entailed. 
The central bank also has a responsibility to promote robust financial markets. The core of 
Norway’s payment system is housed in this building. 
Two hundred years as a central bank in a small open economy 
The Norwegian economy has changed over the past 200 years. In the early 1800s, eight in 
ten  Norwegians  worked  in  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries  compared  with  one  in  forty 
today. But some important features have not changed. Norway is a small open economy and 
developments abroad have an impact at home. Our foreign trade is largely based on natural 
resources. In the early 1800s, fish, timber and shipping were the mainstays of our economy. 
In  recent  times,  oil  and  gas  sales  have  accounted  for  a  large  share  of  Norway’s  export 
revenues. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   With only a few large export industries, changes in Norway’s terms of trade have a greater 
impact  on  our  economy  than  on  other  economies  in  our  region.  In  the  early  2000s, 
international prices moved in our favour. The fall in oil prices over the past couple of years 
has changed the picture. We are now faced with the negative implications of a largely oil-
dependent Norwegian economy. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  not  the first time  Norway’s  terms  of  trade have  taken  a turn for  the  worse. The  same 
thing happened after the First World War and in the 1980s, with severe repercussions for the 
Norwegian economy both times. The experience gained from these periods has contributed 
to shaping today’s monetary policy framework. The road from the silver standard to today’s 
inflation targeting regime has not been without bumps. 
 It is fair to say that monetary policy in the Bank’s first 100 years was fairly successful. The 
prevailing environment of hyperinflation and a loss of confidence in the value of the currency 
posed a challenge, but after full silver redemption had been established in 1842, the Bank 
was able to stand by its promise to honour its own banknotes, first in silver, then in gold. This 
policy  had  a  stabilising  effect  on  prices.  The  period  is  referred  to  as  the  heyday  of  stable 
money. 
This period of stability came to an abrupt halt when the First World War broke out. The war 
generated  substantial  profits  for  the  shipping  industry  and  fuelled  speculative  behaviour 
resulting in a credit and asset price boom. Monetary policy did not contribute to dampening 
these developments. There was a sharp increase in the money supply and inflation soared. 
Between 1914 and 1918, the price level more than doubled. 
After the war, exports fell and the krone depreciated to about half of the statutory exchange 
rate.  At  the  same  time,  the  economy  was  faced  with  a  banking  crisis  and  recession.  This 
created a dilemma for monetary policy. The prevailing view was nonetheless that the krone 
had to be brought back to parity. 
The  task  fell  to  Nicolai  Rygg.  The  active  deflationary  policy  pursued  proved  to  be  costly. 
However, Rygg stood firm in his belief that breaking the promise made in 1816 to preserve a 
stable value of money would entail more serious consequences: 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  “The hardships we are facing in the transition to normal, ordered conditions are 
transient. No one can close their eyes to the fact that they are very serious, but 
the life of the people is eternal and the consequences of this decision will remain 
with us for generations.” 
Those were Rygg’s words in his annual address in 1927. 
A year later, in 1928, the policy of gold parity had achieved its objective. Consumer prices 
had  fallen  by  more  than  40  percent  since  1920.  But  the  gold  standard  would  only  survive 
three years. In the wake of the Great Depression, the UK abandoned the gold standard and 
Norway followed suit. 
After  the  Second  World  War,  there  was  a  substantial  shift  in  economic  policy.  Direct 
regulation and an active fiscal policy were regarded as more effective instruments than the 
interest rate, also in terms of promoting price stability. This was an international trend, but 
few countries supported the new thinking more than Norway, spurred to a large extent by the 
negative legacy of the policy of parity. 
In  practice,  the  interest  rate  was  thereafter  to  be  set  by  the  government,  and  as  a  main 
principle  the  interest  rate  was  to  be  kept  low.  Norges  Bank’s  discount  rate  was  set  at 
2.5 percent in 1946 and was changed only once over the next 23  years.1 Credit would be 
channelled to promote policy priorities and kept in check by means of regulation and foreign 
exchange controls. 
The policy regime eventually started to falter. In the 1970s, domestic inflation spiralled out of 
control,  as  it  did  in  many  other  countries.  In  Norway,  the  government  responded  with 
stimulus measures, wage and price freezes and devaluations, but the measures had limited 
effect. High inflation had become entrenched. 
A  policy  change  was  needed  to  bring  down  inflation.  The  low  interest  rate  policy  was 
discontinued in the wake of the oil price collapse in 1986. Norges Bank was given broader 
responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy. With freer international capital movements, 
the interest rate level had to be raised substantially to defend the krone exchange rate. 
In  the  period  that  followed,  the  Norwegian  economy  took  a  tough  cure.  Unemployment 
reached  its  highest  levels  since  the  interwar  years  and  the  banking  industry  was  mired  in 
problems.  The  challenges  of  operating  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  in  an  oil  economy 
became  increasingly  evident.  In  1992,  the  policy  of  setting  a  specific  target  for  the  krone 
exchange  rate  was  abandoned.  Monetary  policy  would  still  aim  to  maintain  exchange  rate 
stability, but the absence of a clear and verifiable objective was a weakness. 
Internationally, a new approach to monetary policy was gaining ground. Through the 1990s, 
a  growing  number  of  central  banks  were  tasked  with  pursuing  the  goal  of  low  and  stable 
inflation. 
The introduction of the inflation target in 2001 was an important milestone for Norges Bank. 
The  inflation  target  gave  monetary  policy  an  effective  nominal  anchor  in  a  world  of  free 
capital movements. Inflation had been under control since the early 1990s and confidence in 
the value of money strengthened further in the years thereafter. 
Economic restructuring in Norway 
During  the  first  15  years  of  inflation  targeting,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  in  a  unique 
position.  But  the  upswing  could  not  last  forever.  The  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  since  summer 
2014  will  put  the  economy  to  the  test  in  the  period  ahead.  The  Norwegian  economy  has 
enjoyed an exceptionally long summer. Winter is coming. 
                                                
1  Norges Bank: Historical monetary statistics for Norway. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Norwegian economy is well equipped to tackle the challenges. The defence mechanisms 
of economic policy are better suited today than when oil prices fell in the mid-1980s. 
At that time, current oil revenues were largely spent over the government budget. When oil 
prices plummeted, the budget was severely tightened. Today we have accumulated savings 
of more than five times the government budget. 
In the 1980s, the banks had little equity capital. Many of them failed when faced with loan 
losses, which in turn amplified the economic downturn. In recent years, banking regulation 
has  been  enhanced.  Banks  have  built  up  their  capital  levels,  which  puts  them  in  a  better 
position to fulfil their role as providers of credit during a downturn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
  Towards the end of the 1980s, both interest rates and unemployment reached a high level at 
the same time. There is little likelihood that this will happen again. Since the inflation target 
was introduced, it has been easier for monetary policy to have a countercyclical effect. When 
inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  monetary  policy  should  also  be  geared  towards 
stabilising output and employment. Inflation has been low and stable for a quarter century. 
This is now of benefit to us all. 
 The  oil  price  collapse  in  the  1980s  led  to  a  substantial  current  account  deficit. 
Competitiveness  had  to  be  strengthened.  In  May  1986,  the  krone  exchange  rate  was 
devalued  by  around  10  percent.  The  repeated  devaluations  in  the  preceding  years  had 
undermined credibility. The gains were short-lived. Price and wage inflation soared. It was 
only after several years of high unemployment that the relative wage level came down. 
The current account deficit rapidly turned into a surplus. The Norwegian economy grew out 
of recession, supported by external growth impulses and the development of the Norwegian 
oil sector. 
This time, we cannot rely on those sources of impetus. The Norwegian economy will need 
more legs to stand on in the future. The time to restructure has come. 
A necessary adjustment of the cost level can occur via two channels, either through lower 
wage growth relative to other countries or a weaker krone exchange rate. 
In the past few years, the krone exchange rate has depreciated more than in the 1980s. And 
this  time,  the  krone  depreciation  has  fed  through  to  relative  labour  costs  in  a  common 
currency.  In  a  short time,  the  relatively  high  level  of  cost  inflation  over  the  past  decade  in 
Norway has been wiped out. 
The  main  responsibility  for  developments  in  relative  wages  lies  with  the  social  partners.  A 
durable  improvement  in  competitiveness  is  dependent  on  Norwegian  wage  earners’ 
willingness  to  accept future  wage  settlements  without  a  substantial  increase  in  purchasing 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  power. This will make it easier for non-oil exposed industries to grow, which will create new 
and viable jobs. 
The krone depreciation has helped start the restructuring process. After a decade of higher 
growth in imports than mainland exports, export growth is now outpacing import growth. The 
tourism industry is one of many industries experiencing an upswing. 
Many export firms have announced plans to increase investments in 2016, which will likely 
entail an increase in production and market shares. 
Oil  service  companies  are  also  benefitting  from  the  krone  depreciation.  So  far,  around 
75 percent  of  the  field  development  contracts  for  Johan  Sverdrup  have  been  won  by 
Norwegian companies, a clearly higher share than in recent years2. 
The effect of the sharp fall in demand from oil companies is nevertheless predominant in the 
oil service industry. 
Both the oil production industry and the oil service industry must now go through a process of 
restructuring. Costs at many stages appear to have followed oil prices upwards. High prices 
may  have  created  a  sense  of  complacency.  The  profits  from  petroleum  activities  have 
nevertheless been substantial. 
Most of the economic rent has flowed into government coffers via the special taxation of oil 
production. But wages in oil production and oil services have also been relatively high. The 
                                                 
2  Statoil (2015): Press release of 9 December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  rise in input prices and investment in the petroleum industry have been significantly higher 
than for other industries. The excess costs have reduced the economic rent. 
At today’s oil price, it seems that virtually none of the new field developments planned on the 
Norwegian shelf can be realised at a profit. But cost calculations may change. Oil prices are 
not the only prices trending downwards. The cost level on the Norwegian shelf is also drifting 
down. 
  
This  is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by  developments  in  rig  rates.  The  rates  followed  oil  prices 
upwards,  but  have  fallen  in  recent  months.  At  the  same  time,  oil  companies  are  slashing 
costs.  The  development  of  the  Johan  Sverdrup  field  is  now  profitable  even  at  oil  prices 
around USD 30 per barrel. For the Castberg field development in the Barents Sea, the break-
even price has been reduced from more than USD 80 to below USD 45 per barrel.3  
Norway’s oil age is not over. Proven crude oil reserves are larger today than 10 years ago 
despite substantial sales over the period.4 Our gas resources are even larger. So far, only a 
third  of  the  estimated  exploitable  Norwegian  gas  resources  have  been  produced.5  Oil  and 
gas  prices  will  to  a  large  extent  determine  the  quantity  that  will  be  extracted.  That  is 
something we can do little about. 
What  we  can  do  is  to  optimise  production  efficiency  on  the  Norwegian  shelf  as  far  as 
possible. There is still potential in this respect. Increased productivity and lower costs in the 
oil industry will contribute to sustaining activity on the Norwegian shelf, which will also benefit 
the oil service industry. The economic rent should benefit society as far as possible. 
                                                
3  Statoil (2016): Results for fourth quarter 2015 and capital market update 2016. 
4  Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (2015): Evaluation of reserve growth for oil – 2005–2014. 
5  Norwegian Petroleum Directorate and Ministry of Petroleum and Energy: www.norskpetroleum.no. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Employment  has  been  high  in  Norway  for  many  years.  Compared  with  other  countries, 
unemployment has been low. In the competition for labour resources, oil production and oil 
service companies drew the longest straw. The situation has now changed. Unemployment 
is on the rise. Norway’s oil regions, which have long reaped the benefits of the upswing, are 
now struggling. The downswing is proving painful for many. 
But the situation is far different from the adverse conditions that prevailed in the 1980s, which 
resulted  in  a  deep  economic  crisis  in  Norway.  But  unemployment  must be  expected  to  be 
higher than we have been accustomed to in recent years. Closing a business takes less time 
than developing a new one. Restructuring takes time. 
Restructuring must start in the business sector. Economic policy can only help set the stage. 
Monetary  policy  can  facilitate  the  restructuring  process  by  supporting  a  weaker  krone 
exchange  rate  and  thereby  expedite  adaptation  to  a  lower  cost  level.  In  addition,  reduced 
interest expenses will contribute to income growth for many households. There is still room 
for manoeuvre in monetary policy. 
When  unemployment  rises,  as  is  the  case  today,  it  may  be  appropriate  to  use  the  fiscal 
space  available.  We  must  avoid  a  self-reinforcing  decline  in  output  and  employment  and 
hence a decline that is more pronounced than necessary. But an increase in the spending of 
petroleum revenues should primarily be used to finance temporary measures that are easy to 
reverse. Fiscal policy must also take into consideration that lower oil prices will reduce the 
government’s spending capacity in the longer term. 
In recent years, we have sold large volumes of oil and gas at good prices. The transfers to 
the government’s savings account have been substantial. The picture is now quite different. 
If oil prices remain at today’s level, government revenues will fall sharply. The present value 
of future income can in that case be estimated at a fourth of today’s oil fund, the Government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Pension Fund Global (GPFG).6 That means that most of the government’s petroleum wealth 
may already have been deposited in the GPFG. 
 
The year 2015 may stand as the last year of net transfers to the GPFG. Already when the 
budget  for  2016  was  presented,  there  were  prospects  that  the  spending  of  oil  revenues 
would exceed actual income from petroleum activities. 
 
                                                 
6  The estimate is based on impact calculations in the National Budget for 2016 (page 31) based on a long-term 
oil price of NOK 400 per barrel at constant 2016 NOK. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At today’s oil price, it may be necessary to use about NOK 80 billion of the GPFG’s return to 
finance the structural non-oil budget deficit.7  
In the course of three years, spending of oil revenues has increased by as much as in the 10 
previous years. In the budget for 2016, spending of oil revenues is estimated at more than 7 
percent of mainland GDP. Spending is well below 4 percent of the GPFG’s value, which is 
the assumed – but highly uncertain – real return. The 4-percent fiscal rule no longer functions 
as an effective long-term guideline for fiscal policy. 
The  fall  in  oil  prices  will  reduce  Norway’s  national  wealth.  The  GPFG  may  be  close  to  its 
peak. Future returns are also uncertain. Against this background, increased spending is not a 
viable path to follow. 
Management of the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) 
It is now 20 years since Minister of Finance Sigbjørn Johnsen made the first capital transfer 
to  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  as  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  was  aptly 
named at the time. 
 
  Since  its  establishment,  NOK  3.5  trillion  has  been  transferred  to the GPFG. GPFG capital 
has almost doubled, and is now the equivalent of around NOK 1.3 million per inhabitant. The 
return on investments accounts for a substantial portion, close to a third, of GPFG capital. 
Nearly every year, Norges Bank’s management of the GPFG has outperformed the market 
average. It would appear that the pattern is too consistent to be due to chance. 
All  the  key  variables  that  are  essential  for  the  GPFG’s  long-term  performance  have  been 
specified by the Ministry of Finance and approved by the Storting, and this is how it should 
be. This financial wealth belongs to the Norwegian people. Norges Bank’s role is to manage 
it and to advise the Ministry of Finance on investment strategy. 
                                                
7  The estimate is based on impact calculations in Table 2.4 in the National Budget for 2016 based on an oil 
price of NOK 270 per barrel in 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    There  is  no  return  without  risk.  As  a  long-term  investor,  the  GPFG  is  especially  well-
positioned  to  weather  short-term  volatility  in  securities  markets.  This  is  the  reason  for  the 
GPFG’s relatively high allocation to equities of 60 percent. Rebalancing the GPFG towards a 
fixed  equity  allocation  has  also  enabled  the  GPFG  to  benefit  from  buying  low  and  selling 
high. Sitting tight has been a profitable strategy. 
The GPFG’s investment universe has been expanded to include unlisted real estate. Its size 
and long time horizon are an advantage in real estate investing. The real estate portfolio has 
grown to more than NOK 200 billion. The GPFG is becoming a big real estate investor in a 
number of major cities. 
Norges Bank recently recommended increasing the GPFG’s real estate allocation to between 
5 and 15 percent. We are also prepared to invest in foreign infrastructure. The return on real 
estate and infrastructure tends to follow a slightly different pattern than the return on equities 
and  bonds.  Investing  in  these  asset  classes  is  therefore  expected  to  improve  the  GPFG’s 
risk-return trade-off. 
Looking ahead, the GPFG will likely reduce its allocation to bonds from today’s weight of 35 
percent.  For  a  long-term  investor,  this  is  a  sensible  adjustment.  At  the  same  time,  it  will 
signal that the authorities are willing to accept considerable fluctuations in the return and size 
of the GPFG, at least on a par with the volatility seen during the financial crisis. 
Even  though  a  number  of  countries  hold  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserves,  Norway 
stands  out.  In  almost  no  other  country  does  the  central  bank  manage  such  a  large  and 
diversified  investment  fund.  The  GPFG  has  delivered  solid  results,  and  its  management 
model  has  been  shown  to  be  robust  despite  periods  of  rough  weather.  Transparency, 
accountability and the safety of capital invested are paramount. The organisation has been 
enlarged to manage a steadily growing and more diversified portfolio. 
Changes in the organisation of the GPFG may come. But whatever the future solution may 
be, the primary objective of investment management must remain firm: the highest possible 
return for the benefit of current and future generations. The GPFG should remain a financial 
investor. If the government were to use the GPFG for other purposes, it would limit the scope 
for achieving good returns and thereby Norway’s fiscal space. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Central banks in new and uncharted territory 
Major  shifts  in  export  prices  have  not  been  alone  in  posing  challenges  to  the  Norwegian 
economy through history. Financial turbulence and banking crises created their own set of 
challenges. 
Central banks play a particular role in the event of financial turbulence. As the bankers’ bank, 
the central bank acts as lender of last resort. The first time Norges Bank undertook this role 
was  during  the  Christiania  Crash  in  1899  –  Norway’s  first  debt-driven  real  estate  bubble. 
When the most recent financial crisis hit Norway in 2008, our role as lender of last resort was 
again put to the test. Access to short-term funding dried up. This also affected Norwegian 
banks.  Norges  Bank  had  to  provide  liquidity  support,  and  the  government  implemented 
extraordinary measures to safeguard the financial system. 
For Norway, the real economy effects of the financial crisis were short-lived. Other countries 
have had a more difficult time. Since the financial crisis, monetary policy in many countries 
has been stretched close to the limit with the aim of putting economies back on their feet and 
keeping inflation above zero. Many countries are still experiencing weak growth. This is not 
unusual in the wake of a financial crisis. A post-crisis economic downturn may prove to be 
deep, and it may take a long time to reverse the negative trend. In a number of countries, 
little support from other policy areas has made the job particularly demanding. 
 
Never before in recent history have global interest rates been as low for as long as they are 
today. The interest rate level was moving down long before the 2008 financial crisis. What 
lies  behind  this  is  an  enduring  decline  in  long-term  real  interest  rates.  The  decline  is 
attributable  to  structural  changes  that  have  weakened  the  growth  capacity  of  many 
economies, low productivity growth and weaker growth in the labour force. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    
In the wake of the financial crisis, interest rates fell from an already low level to even lower 
levels. Central banks slashed policy rates to counter the downturn. 
The room for further rate cuts was gradually exhausted. In this situation, central banks have 
shown  a  capacity  for  new  thinking.  They  have  purchased  securities  on  a  large  scale.  The 
purchases  have  continued  to  push  down  long-term  rates.  In  addition,  a  barrier  has  been 
broken. In a number of countries, the policy rate is now negative. 
Negative  policy  rates  can  affect  the  economy  via  lower  bank  lending  rates  and  a  weaker 
exchange rate. These are well-known channels. But the effect of further policy rate cuts may 
weaken when rates fall below zero. 
An important reason is that banks are reluctant to set negative deposit rates, especially for 
households.  For  many  retail  customers,  substituting  cash  for  bank  deposits  is  fairly 
inexpensive.  If  banks  hold  back  on  deposit  rates,  lending  rates  can  only  fall  to  a  limited 
extent before banks’ earnings are reduced. A lower policy rate may thus have less effect on 
lending rates than normal, weakening the impact of monetary policy. 
Over the past year, inflation among many of Norway’s trading partners has approached zero. 
For many years monetary policy  was aimed at  preventing high inflation,  while it must now 
seek to avoid inflation that is too low. Central banks are in new territory. 
A period of low inflation is not necessarily a problem as long as confidence in the inflation 
target  remains  firm.  But  when  the  room  for  further  policy  rate  cuts  is  close  to  being 
exhausted,  steadily  falling  inflation  could  lead  to  a  dangerous  downward  spiral.  For  every 
notch  that  expected  future  inflation  falls,  real  interest  rates  rise.  This  has  a  contractionary 
effect on the economy. 
In recent years, concerns about falling inflation expectations have prompted central banks to 
cut  policy  rates  further  and  to  deploy  unconventional  measures.  It  has  been  argued  that 
these monetary policy measures are necessary to avoid a further fall in inflation as a result of 
a stronger exchange rate. 
Interest rate cuts that lead to a currency depreciation push up inflation. But countries cannot 
all  weaken  their  currencies  at  the  same  time. If many  countries  cut  interest  rates  to  boost 
inflation via a weaker currency, the benefit may not materialise, while interest rates remain 
too low with respect to other considerations. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
The  financial  crisis  created  unusually  strong  headwinds  in  the  global  economy.  The 
persistent  decline  in  long-term  rates  has  been  accompanied  by  a  sharp  increase  in  debt 
levels in many countries. Heavily indebted firms, households and government had to embark 
on  an  extensive  deleveraging  process.  Weak  growth  prospects  have  restrained  the 
willingness  to  invest.  Heightened  uncertainty  following  the  crisis  may  have  reduced  risk 
appetite. The result is that the effect of policy rate cuts has diminished. 
For the countries that took the lead, a loose monetary policy appears to have worked. In the 
US,  the  recovery  has  been  on  track  for  a  while  and  unemployment  has  declined.  Before 
Christmas,  the  Federal  Reserve  raised  its  policy  rate  for  the  first  time  in  nine  years.  In 
Europe, the recovery remains hesitant. In emerging economies growth is slowing. Since the 
beginning  of  the  year,  global  financial  markets  have  been  marked  by  considerable 
turbulence, likely owing to increased uncertainty about global economic prospects. 
The period of low interest rates is likely far from over. The headwinds from the financial crisis 
are still being felt by many large economies. With both interest rates and inflation close to 
zero, room for manoeuvre in monetary policy is limited. Central banks will have little left in 
their arsenal in the face of a new downturn. Other policy areas will then have to take on a 
greater role. 
A solid financial system over time 
An environment of persistently low interest rates may pose challenges to financial stability. 
Low interest rates are still driving up debt levels, making economies vulnerable to shocks. 
Just as monetary policy represents the first line of defence in managing the business cycle, 
regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  must  be  the  first  line  of  defence  in 
maintaining financial stability. 
It is not sufficient for individual banks to be solid. Banks are closely interlinked. They obtain 
funding from common sources and from one another, and large portions of loan exposures 
are  in  the  same  markets.  High  credit  growth  can  result  in  financial  imbalances  that  have 
system-wide  effects.  System-wide  risk  is  therefore  far  greater  than  the  risk  of  individual 
banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  The  financial  crisis  showed  the  severe  damage  that  can  be  caused  when  insufficient 
attention  is  paid  to  system-wide  financial  risk.  Banking  regulation  has  therefore  been 
strengthened by including a macroprudential component. The instruments employed are not 
new, but an important difference is that banks are required to hold more equity capital than 
previously.  The  required  level  is  based  on  the  overall  risks  to  the  financial  system.  Some 
requirements may vary over time, such as the countercyclical capital buffer. 
The  regulation  of  the  Norwegian  financial  sector  is  in  line  with  international  standards.  In 
recent years, a number of instruments have been implemented in Norway to mitigate risk in 
the banking system. In response to the sharp rise in real estate prices and household debt, 
the countercyclical capital buffer has been increased and bank lending standards tightened. 
Moreover, capital surcharges have been introduced for systemically important banks. 
Norwegian banks have made good use of the solid earnings and low loan losses of recent 
years. Banks have built up their capital and adapted to new buffer requirements. The buffers 
can be used in the event of a pronounced economic downturn. Banks will then be able to 
absorb loan losses without a significant reduction in new lending. 
The  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  can  be  difficult  to  identify.  Financial  crises  can  occur 
suddenly and unexpectedly. When they do occur, the banking system must be solid. Most 
regulatory  components  should  be  as  stable  as  possible.  The  aim  of  macroprudential 
supervision cannot be to fine-tune the economy over the business cycle. But when financial 
turbulence occurs, the authorities must be prepared to act quickly and in concert. 
In  Norway,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  has  the  overriding  responsibility  for  macroprudential 
supervision. It is natural that the political authorities make decisions regarding the framework 
and permanent regulations. It would be an advantage to delegate the responsibility for time-
varying  instruments  to  an  independent  authority  with  a  view  to  ensuring  effective 
implementation and predictability over time. 
Conclusion 
After  two  decades  that  can  be  described  as  a  golden  age,  the  Norwegian  economy  is 
heading for a demanding period. We have always known that the long oil-driven expansion 
would come to an end, either because the activity level would pass the peak, or because oil 
prices would fall. We have now reached that juncture. 
The challenges are twofold. One challenge consists of further developing the technology and 
expertise gained in oil production and oil services. Costs have been brought down at many 
stages to strengthen competitiveness in response to lower oil prices. If we succeed in this 
endeavour, the oil industry will continue to be a pillar of the Norwegian economy for many 
decades ahead. The other challenge lies in paving the way for growth in other industries and 
replacing the revenue shortfall and jobs shed in the oil industry owing to lower activity levels. 
The  groundwork  is  in  place.  In  recent  years,  the  Norwegian  financial  system  has  been 
strengthened.  During  a  period  of  restructuring,  it  is  crucial  that  banks  are  in  a  position  to 
channel credit to projects and businesses that will generate new growth. We have more fiscal 
policy muscle than most countries, but it must be used sensibly. The social partners seem to 
understand the gravity of the situation and are prepared to do their share. Monetary policy 
can be geared to facilitate the necessary structural changes. 
Norges  Bank  is  in  its  200th  year.  As  a  central  bank,  we  have  a  responsibility  to  promote 
economic  stability.  In  addition,  the  Bank  is  responsible  for  managing  Norway’s  collective 
financial wealth. The responsibility we have been given cannot be taken for granted. It is a 
mission that must be merited. Under the parity policy of the 1920s, the economic downturn 
was amplified by the desire to return to parity. In hindsight, that policy was described as one-
eyed.  If  today’s  inflation  targeting  regime  is  to  avoid  the  same  label,  it  must  be  practiced 
flexibly so that it fosters economic stability over time. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Confidence in low and stable inflation remains firm. That must always be the main task of 
monetary policy. Yet our own history and the recent experience of other central banks have 
shown  that  the  system  can  come  under  pressure.  When  circumstances  change,  central 
banks must also be capable of adapting and new thinking. We must learn from the past, be 
prepared for sudden shifts and seek out new solutions. 
Come what may. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
