   Andreas Dombret: Digitalisation – repercussions for banks and their 
supervisors 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the 16th Norddeutscher Bankentag “Digitalisation – (r)evolution in the banking industry” at 
Leuphana University Lüneburg, Lündeburg, 8 June 2016. 
 Professor Baxmann 
Ladies and gentlemen 
People love simple stories. There is evidence to show that we find it easier to follow a speech 
and  memorise  its contents  if  we quickly  pick  up  the thread  and  the message that  is  being 
conveyed. 
The picture isn’t much different where the digitalisation of the financial sector is concerned. 
Digitalisation is often portrayed as a huge opportunity, as a grave threat, as the first step into 
a world without banks or as a decades-long gradual process of evolution. But if you ask me, 
we need to suppress the urge to only ever want to tell, or have ears for, just one of these 
narratives. We will only be able to grasp what digitalisation means for the banking sector if we 
are willing to view it with very different sets of eyes and acknowledge the existence of highly 
disparate aspects. Bearing this in mind, my speech today here at Leuphana University will 
seek to paint a nuanced picture that does justice to the genesis and growth of digitalisation 
and how it will impact on banks and their supervisors. 
General digitalisation trends 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, technical innovation isn’t exactly a novelty in the banking sector. As 
you will know, credit institutions were often among the early adopters of information technology 
in their administrative operations, at the customer interface or in trading. Hardly a day goes by 
without digitalisation grabbing the headlines, and that’s probably because it’s come to be seen 
as a force that will shake the structure and internal functional make-up of the banking industry 
to its core, just as it has done in other industries. 
But it’s not just the technical capabilities of digitalisation that make it so special; the social 
upheaval it is expected to trigger – and already has done – also makes it something to be 
reckoned  with.  There  is  already  evidence  aplenty  of  this  phenomenon  worldwide.  Even  in 
Germany, which isn’t a pioneer in this regard, most bank customers now usually conduct their 
banking affairs online, and mobile banking is also on the rise there. There are already some 
institutions which use smartphones as the sole channel for their entire service package. As 
habits  change  and  technical  innovations  emerge,  so,  too,  will  people  expect  the  banking 
industry to evolve and adapt. There is also a growing desire among customers to use bank 
services whenever they want, however they want. 
Researchers and policymakers have launched a variety of initiatives in an effort to categorise 
technological advances and uses and to quantify the impact on the economy and society. Yet 
we need to keep in mind that there’s very little, if anything, we can say with any certainty about 
how financial technologies (“fintechs”) will evolve going forward. After all, the sky’s the limit for 
technology – many ideas are refined and tweaked, others are discarded. Whether or not an 
application is worth pursuing depends in part on how well it goes down with customers, and 
many other developments in the market. For me, any attempt to realistically predict whether 
an innovative app will stand the test of time is a little like trying to predict how climate change 
will impact on the Lüneburg Heath bird population ten years from now. 
That  being  said,  it  does  no  harm  to  say  that  digitalisation  has  unleashed  an  irreversible 
process.  Few  of  us  these  days  shed  a  tear  over  the  demise  of  analogue  photography, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   typewriters or credit transfer slips. And that’s why all stakeholders in the banking industry would 
be well advised to embrace digital change, and do so sooner rather than later. I would now like 
to  explore  the  challenges  faced  by  two  of  the  parties  mainly  affected  by  the  advent  of 
digitalisation: supervised credit institutions, and the financial supervisors and standard-setters 
themselves. 
Digitalisation – a challenge for traditional banks 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen, speaking as a banking supervisor, I would boil the challenges facing 
credit institutions down to a straightforward formula. The jury is still out on whether banks can 
cope with the wave of innovations and remain both profitable and safe in the brave new digital 
era. 
Remaining profitable is a tall order for a number of reasons. First, the competitive landscape 
in the digital era is a more colourful, more global and faster-moving place. Fintech companies 
touting groundbreaking, IT-based business ideas are making inroads into the market. In 2014, 
fintech start-ups attracted a total of more than US$12 billion in funding worldwide.1 The hyped-
up exuberance seen in the last few years and the spectre of new competitors carving up the 
banking business between them may appear to have given way to a period of sounding out 
which business ideas stand to be feasible, there’s no getting around one simple fact. The influx 
of new rivals, combined with the advent of more efficient technology and a more discerning 
customer base, hasn’t exactly eased the pressure on the sector as a whole to consolidate. 
Second,  many  forward-looking  ideas  still  need  to  show  what  they’re  made  of.  The 
entrepreneurial balancing act, as it were, is to get to the bottom of developments early on and 
put together a broadly balanced business franchise. 
Blockchain technology, an innovation that has repeatedly grabbed the headlines, illustrates 
this  challenge  well.  Its  potential  for  slashing  costs,  boosting  efficiency  and  streamlining 
turnaround  times,  it  is  said,  is  immense.  This  projection  comes  as  no  surprise,  seeing  as 
blockchain does indeed promise to revolutionise ledgers and settlement processes by making 
accounts  for  financial  transactions  available  to  all  parties  simultaneously  as  original 
documents, so to speak, and virtually in real time. Blockchain technology thus has the potential 
to drive down costs, reduce processing times and possibly even boost the accuracy of not just 
payments, but securities trading and complex contracts as well. On the other hand, blockchain 
applications are not a trivial matter in either technological or legal terms. 
Whether or not this technology, on balance, is worth it for a value chain in the banking industry 
thus hinges on a large number of concrete questions. The particular challenge for institutions 
lies in the fact that successful blockchain applications and other innovations could, thanks to 
network effects, potentially quickly become the new standard. 
In other words, technology can have a disruptive impact on individual business models. That 
is why it is advisable to confront technological and societal change proactively and to develop 
a strategy. 
Quite  apart  from  this,  the  banking  industry  should  also  use  the  opportunity  presented  by 
digitalisation  to  become  more  profitable  than  before.  Digitalisation  must  on  no  account  be 
reduced to a zero-sum game in which players aim to divide up a cake without changing its 
overall size. Costs can be cut significantly in the medium term, and fees justified by innovative 
services.  
But whether it’s a multi-channel bank, a purely smartphone-based bank or a niche institution: 
as a banking supervisor, it is not my place to evaluate business models and strategies. Nor do 
I wish to have the final say on how banks can and must be as innovative as fintechs. That is 
                                                
1   Accenture (2015): The future of fintech and banking: digitally disrupted or reimagined? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
up  to  the  market,  at  the  end  of  the  day.  But  supervisors  have  an  interest  in  sustainably 
profitable  institutions.  If  they  don’t  have  a  strategy  relating  to  the  digital  age,  however, 
institutions do not have a sustainable position as far as I’m concerned. The entire business 
organisation,  from  the  IT  architecture  to  long-term  staff  management,  hinges  on  the  digital 
strategy. Digitalisation therefore has to be addressed by senior management as a matter of 
priority. 
The flipside of digitalisation is the security and reliability of banking business. Here is where 
digitalisation  disrupts  the  story,  if  not  beforehand.  Operational  risk  in  IT  is  becoming 
increasingly  important,  and  the  digitalisation  of  banking  has  transformed  financial  crime.  A 
large  number  of  reasons  can  motivate  cyber  attacks,  which  range  from  simple  attacks  by 
amateurs to meticulously planned attacks with an economic or political background. At the 
same time, new hacking methods are spreading through the net at lightning speed and are 
constantly evolving. A global study conducted in 2015 revealed that 61% of CEOs believe that 
cyber risks present a key threat.2 Financial institutions were therefore ranked first out of all 
sectors in 2014 as the main purchasers of insurance against cyber risks, with average limits 
of US$57 million.3  
Banking supervisors have been bringing IT risk and cyber risk more into focus for many years 
now, for precisely these reasons. After all, their importance can’t be estimated highly enough. 
In the digital age, trust in banks is particularly synonymous with trust in IT. Hence, IT and cyber 
security remain one of the priorities for the Single Supervisory Mechanism in 2016. 
As financial supervisors, we therefore call on credit institutions explicitly to manage their IT and 
cyber risks just as diligently as they would the traditional risks in banking business. An end-to-
end system of cyber defences cannot be created from the bottom up by the IT department – I 
am certain it is, at its roots, a management task. And it is crucial, not just for the institutions, to 
evolve in tandem with these developments. I would therefore like to turn my attention now to 
banking supervision. 
Banking supervision must evolve in tandem with developments ...
3.
Naturally,  supervisors  cannot  provide  an  exact prescription for  IT  and  cyber  security,  as  IT 
applications and the cyber environment are so changeable these days that technical details 
become  outdated  extremely  quickly.  Moreover,  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  solution  for  the 
multitude of different institution types and sizes. In the end, we should face up to the fact that 
there is often no perfect defence against individual threats either. So, instead of absolute cyber 
security,  the  focus  is  shifting  towards  the  concept  of  resilience  to  cyber  risk  and  the  best 
possible balance between the costs and benefits of various security measures. 
That is why German banking supervisors have formulated risk management principles for the 
institutions we oversee, creating fixed terms of reference, despite rapid developments. There 
are, of course, specific elements, such as those for cyber defences, that form part of a checklist 
for all institutions: (1) Network plans with appropriate and (2) multi-level security areas, (3) 
contingency plans and (4) a well-conceived update management system. 
Cyber defences, in particular, shine a light on the fact that security requires more than just a 
well-functioning first line of defence in the enterprise. Defence against cyber risks is by no 
means  trivial;  it  actually  requires  a  great  deal  of  foresight  and  ingenuity.  The  threats  are 
constantly evolving. And people – whether customers or staff – are often the weak link in the 
2   PwC (2015): A marketplace without boundaries? Responding to disruption. 18th Annual Global CEO Survey. 
3   The figure relates to the total limits of cyber insurance policies purchased in 2014 by enterprises with turnover 
of at least US$1 billion. Source: Marsh (2015): Benchmarking trends: As cyber concerns broaden, insurance 
purchases  rise.A  Turner  (2015),  Between  Debt  and  the  Devil:  Money,  Credit,  and  Fixing  Global  Finance, 
Princeton University Press 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
   security chain, including at banks and savings banks. Ultimately, this calls for intelligent risk 
management,  above  and  beyond  the  technical  measures.  Long-term  cyber  security  thus 
requires responses to new, and sometimes unknown, circumstances, which simultaneously 
ensure that the institution reliably fulfils the tasks it is entrusted with. Because after all, and 
how can it be otherwise: enterprises and organisations are constantly evolving and growing. 
Managing the various responsibilities is therefore of paramount importance. This also involves 
breaking through the responsibility “firewall”, where no one is willing to assume responsibility 
for  the  many  interlinked  aspects  of  cyber  risk.  Banks  often  outsource  sections  of  their  IT 
provision, such as servers and software. The cloud is playing an ever greater role, as we all 
know. But ultimately, banks retain responsibility for any malfunctioning. As a supervisor, I am 
therefore calling on institutions to be fully aware of what’s at stake and to have a plan as to 
how  they  intend  to  tackle  risks.  Finally,  a  security  culture  must  be  set  up  and  pursued, 
anchoring the  awareness  and  willingness to  act  responsibly  in  the  digital  bank,  above  and 
beyond individual business units. 
... but not reinvent the wheel 
4.  
In  light  of  the  rapidly  changing  environmental  conditions  –  and  by  these  I  mean  new 
technologies,  new  behavioural  patterns,  new  competitors  and  new  dangers  –  the  question 
arises for many as to whether the current regulatory approach will still be viable in future. In 
my opinion, this question is the logical consequence of a superficial perception of technology, 
on the one hand, and banking on the other. 
We associate technologies with positive characteristics such as the 24-hour availability of the 
internet, the transparency of comparison websites, the convenience of smartphone apps and 
the seemingly free services of many online providers. However, I think it is very important that 
we  also  take  a  look  at  the  downsides.  Indeed,  technology  remains  error-prone  and  obeys 
economic incentives. Indeed, the manipulated issuing practices of an American loan brokerage 
platform have come to light just recently. And then there are self-regulating or self-supervising 
financial technologies such as distributed ledgers, whereby genuine bookings are confirmed 
by  countless  numbers  of  computers  carrying  out  thousands  of  crosschecks  on  the 
bookkeeping  of  other  computers.  While  these  technologies  may  significantly  reduce  the 
likelihood of errors and fraud, they do not eliminate it altogether. Faith in a thoroughly better 
technology-based world therefore seems to me to be a further expression of the yearning for 
simple realities and narratives that I mentioned at the outset. 
Technology does not, therefore, obviate the need for a critical view from the outside. It is my 
firm  belief  that  the  state  cannot,  and  must  not,  withdraw  from  its  surveillance  function. 
Moreover, technology does not in any way alter the fundamental tasks and risks that justify the 
existence of both banks and banking supervisors. The financial system needs monetary policy 
intermediaries, as well as agents that enable essential services such as lending, deposits and 
payments.  The  existence  of  banks  is  therefore  intrinsically  linked  to  the  mechanics  of  our 
economic and financial system. And, what’s more, key aspects of the financial sector such as 
risk taking cannot be left to computers because financial decisions are, by their very nature, 
associated  with  uncertainty.  Therefore,  both  banks  and  their  supervisors  will  retain  their 
significance in a digital financial market order. 
Neither the systematic favouring of new technologies, nor discrimination against them, can be 
justified from a regulatory perspective. In my view, what we need instead is a regulatory regime 
that treats technology neutrally and intervenes at the very moment instruments and institutions 
produce disproportionate risks. The principle of “same business, same risk, same rules” – to 
which international regulation already subscribes – will therefore remain the guiding principle 
now and in future. 
There is therefore no need to reinvent the wheel as far as regulation is concerned. The risk-
oriented supervisory approach in Germany continues to provide the proper foundation and also 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   has the necessary supervisory tools at its disposal to take action, for example, against illicit 
unlicensed innovative financial products and services. 
The  task  today,  and  in  future,  therefore  consists  in  consistently  applying  this  risk-oriented 
approach  to  new  developments  and  business  models.  For  which  financial  instruments  is 
automated investment advice or robo-advice really to be classified as advisory business within 
the meaning of the German Banking Act? Where should the line be drawn between third-party 
brokerage activities and proprietary lending or proprietary deposit-taking? Here we need to 
scrutinise grey areas of the law, which in effect can only be assessed on the basis of individual, 
specific business models of financial start-ups. The many enquiries that fintechs are sending 
to  authorities  therefore  currently  represent  a  demanding  and  time-consuming  task  for 
supervisors in Germany. This procedure is, by the way, far from new. It has been the case for 
decades that financial innovations are examined in great detail as part of individual audits and 
evaluated for the presence of risks that might be subject to supervision requirements. 
If we wish to be consistent in terms of our risk orientation, we need to look beyond the existing 
and  functioning  supervisory  apparatus  and  keep  an  eye  on  possible  new  risks  that  could 
endanger the stability of the financial system. In this context, we will probably need to take a 
closer look, in particular, at data protection and consumer protection in the coming years. 
What about the competitive framework in the digital financial sector? Our regulatory objective 
should consist in establishing a framework in which the risks taken are defined as the measure 
of fair competition between all market participants. The debate on the level playing field is 
being  distorted  by  comparing  unregulated  and  regulated  competitors  without  taking  into 
consideration the financial risks involved. Regulatory and supervisory requirements are seen 
by institutions as one-sided cost factors and by unlicensed fintechs as barriers to entry. But 
from the regulatory perspective, the competitive framework should serve neither of them, but 
instead the economy as a whole. 
With regard to the regulatory view of digitalisation, I would, in conclusion, like to make one 
more remark on the relationship between supporting innovation and ensuring stability. Both 
objectives are, without a doubt, desirable from an economic standpoint. But while it may appear 
necessary for banks and savings banks to be simultaneously innovative and reliable, from the 
perspective of law enforcers and rule makers the various tasks should be clearly separated, 
where possible institutionally, in order to avoid conflicts of interest. 
Conclusion 
5.  
The way one assesses digitalisation in the financial sector depends to a large extent on the 
pair of glasses one is looking through and the hat one is wearing. 
• 
For  banks,  it  represents  a  mandate  and  an  opportunity  to  remain  profitable  and 
secure. Each institution requires a carefully balanced, yet clear, digital strategy. 
Supervisors are faced with the challenge of ensuring, amidst a changing environment, 
that confidence in institutions is always maintained. This means keeping pace with 
developments and requiring entrepreneurial responsibility wherever significant risks 
arise. 
Regulators should, however, take care not to reinvent the wheel given the advent of 
new competitors and new technologies. Specific business models and innovations 
should be regulated precisely where they produce risks for the financial system. 
  If all aspects of digitalisation are sufficiently taken into account, I am confident that the history 
of digitalisation of the financial sector will, in a few years’ time, be extolled as a success story 
by all parties involved. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now happy to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
