  Patrick  Njoroge:  Instilling  confidence  in the financial  sector 
Remarks by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the stakeholders 
workshop on deposit insurance  “Instilling confidence in the financial sector”, Nairobi, 20 July 
2016. 
 Good morning! It gives me great pleasure to be here with you this morning to take stock on 
the role of the Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation (KDIC) in the financial sector. 
At  the  outset,  I  am  very  grateful  to  KDIC  for  organizing  this  workshop.  I  also  thank  the 
Cabinet  Secretary,  National  Treasury,  for  finding  time  to  be  with  us  this  morning.  I  also 
acknowledge each one of you for your attendance. 
The role of the financial sector in every economy need not be overemphasized. It performs a 
lubricating role in every economic activity just as oil does in machinery. A critical ingredient 
for  the  financial  sector  to  effectively  perform  its  roles  is  financial  stability,  which  also 
underpins public confidence in the sector. 
This brings me to the role played by KDIC in the financial sector. By being an insurer of bank 
deposits,  its  existence  encourages  depositors  entrust  their  hard-earned  savings  to  the 
deposit-taking  institutions. Unlike the traditional Deposit Protection Fund, KDIC as currently 
constituted has an additional mandate of ensuring the going concern of its premium payers, 
the banks. This explains the close working relationship between CBK and KDIC. They both 
have complementary mandates of financial stability. 
Kenya’s  financial sector remains sound and resilient, supported by strong macroeconomic 
fundamentals.  This  is  evident  from  the  positive  trend in key performance indicators of the 
banking system: 
• 
The  net  assets  grew  by  5.6  percent  from  Ksh.3.6  trillion  in  June  2015  to 
Ksh.3.8 trillion in June 2016. This has been driven by increased lending. 
The total capital to total risk weighted assets ratio for the banking system stood at 
18.1 percent as at the end June 2016, above the statutory minimum of 14.5 percent. 
The liquidity ratio for the sector has improved to 40.4 percent as at the end of June 
2016 from 38.7 percent in June 2015. This is above the statutory minimum limit of 
20 percent. 
The sector’s profit before tax increased by 2.1 percent from Ksh.76.9 billion in June 
2015 to Ksh.78.5 billion in June 2016. 
   Nevertheless,  despite  the  sector’s  resilience,  some  difficulties  emerged over the last year 
culminating in the placement under receivership of three banks (Dubai Bank, Imperial Bank, 
and Chase Bank). It is worth noting that none of these three banks was systemic, and the 
causes of the difficulties were unique to each of these banks. 
CBK, in liaison with KDIC, has been working towards resolution of these banks. Additionally, 
the CBK seized this opportunity to further strengthen the banking sector. These efforts have 
placed us in “the New Normal” which is premised on three pillars: 
First,  greater  transparency  on  the  part  of  banks.  The  CBK  is  requiring  greater 
transparency  on  the  part  of banks to ensure public confidence. This entails among others 
ensuring  that  banks’  financial  statements  are  credible  and  reflect  a  true  and  fair  view. 
Transparency also extends to other disclosures by banks on their corporate governance and 
risk management structures. In this regard, CBK has enhanced the disclosures by banks on 
their  significant  shareholders.  Banks  are  now  required  to  disclose  details  of  significant 
shareholders who own 5 percent or more shareholding on their websites. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Shareholders are at the core of instilling corporate governance in banks. The disclosure of 
bank  shareholders  signals  adherence  to  corporate  governance  as  well  as  instilling 
confidence  and  stability  in  specific  banks  and  the  sector  as  a  whole.  At  a  minimum,  the 
names,  shareholding  levels,  composition  of  local  and  foreign  ownership  as  well as group 
structures, for banking groups, should be disclosed. 
Second, stronger governance with clearly demarcated responsibilities. It is only when 
all  stakeholders  of  banks  (shareholders,  board  of  directors,  management  and  external 
auditors) play their roles effectively that the performance of banks will continue on a positive 
trend. CBK has therefore insisted on clear demarcation of roles among bank stakeholders. 
On  its  part,  CBK  has  been  strengthening  its  supervisory  practices  including  off-site 
surveillance  to  ensure  that  banks  are  truly  practicing  effective  corporate  governance.  In 
2015,  CBK  directed  external  auditors  of  banks  to  review  the  effectiveness  of  banks’  ICT 
infrastructure  as  well  as  insider  lending  practices.  The  feedback  from  these  reviews  has 
formed a good base for focused supervision on the sector. 
Further,  CBK  will  shortly  be  issuing  a  consultative  paper  for  review  and  comments  on 
proposals to limit tenures of non-executive directors and Chief Executive Officers of banks. 
We all appreciate that unlimited tenures may breed complacency. We therefore encourage 
banks and all stakeholders to review our proposals when released, to ensure that the final 
guidelines are well-placed, useful and relevant to the sector. 
Third, encouraging effective business models. Continued resilience of banks can only be 
realised  when  banks  ensure  that  their  business  models are sound. The business models 
should be strengthened to accommodate new business lines and innovations rolled out by 
the  banks.  This  informs the drive by CBK to ensure that they maintain sufficient capital to 
cater  for  existing  and  potential  risks  they  are  exposed  to  and  their  market  niche.  This 
informed the introduction of a 2.5 percent capital conservation buffer effective January 2015. 
CBK  also  required  banks  effective  2013  to  develop  Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Processes 
(ICAAP) to inform their capital management. Though most of the banks have embraced the 
requirement, we have noted that there is wide disparity on the ICAAP documents submitted 
to  CBK.  To  this  end,  CBK  will  shortly  be  issuing  a  proposed  ICAAP  Guidance  Note  for 
comments.  The Guidance Note is expected to strengthen ICAAP management with capital 
holdings that are aligned to banks’ risk profiles and business requirements. 
As I conclude, it is also worth touching on Brexit. While the economic impact thus far has 
been muted, Brexit has created a lot of uncertainty in the financial markets globally. We are 
also aware of the likely impact on trade, since countries such as Kenya may be required to 
negotiate new bilateral agreements with the United Kingdom once it exits the EU. This may 
have an impact over the medium term, with reduced foreign direct investments as well as 
export  earnings  from  the  UK  and  EU. CBK is keenly following these developments and is 
ready to take appropriate actions to safeguard the stability of our economy and the banking 
sector in particular. 
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my distinct honour to invite the Cabinet 
Secretary, National Treasury, Mr. Henry Rotich to officially open the Workshop. 
Karibu Bwana Waziri! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
