  
 
Jens Weidmann: Digitalisation, financial regulation and low interest rates 
Dinner speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman 
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  6th  Frankfurt 
Finance Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 11 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dr Raettig 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good evening, and a very warm welcome to you all at the conference dinner of this year’s 
Frankfurt Finance Summit here at the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
I am speaking this evening not as a host but as a guest speaker, but I think that has little 
bearing on what I have to say. So thank you very much for your invitation and for giving me 
the opportunity to share my thoughts. 
Once a year, Frankfurt Main Finance e.V. brings together decision-makers from commercial 
banks, insurance companies, stock exchanges, regulatory authorities and central banks as 
well as academic experts to discuss the latest issues in the financial business. 
As you all know, Frankfurt is Germany’s leading financial centre and the euro area’s foremost 
financial hub. However, some of you might not be aware that we are gathered this evening at 
this city’s nucleus as a financial centre after the Second World War. 
The  old  part  of  this  building  complex,  which  today  houses  the  Bank’s  Regional  Office  in 
Hesse, was once the domicile of the Bank deutscher Länder. And the establishment in 1948 
of the newly founded German central bank in Frankfurt is widely seen as marking the start of 
Frankfurt’s emergence as Germany’s leading financial centre. 
The  establishment  of  Germany’s  post-war  central  bank  ignited  a  fierce  debate  among  the 
English-speaking  Allies.  While  the  Americans  preferred  a  decentralised  central  banking 
system rather like the Federal Reserve System, the British authorities were more in favour of 
a centralised set-up with a central bank in Hamburg. 
With hindsight, we now know that the British gave in on this particular point. But what, in an 
alternate history, would have happened if the British had prevailed on this issue? Would you 
perhaps  be  attending  the  “Hamburg  Finance  Summit”  tomorrow  –  indeed,  what  would 
Frankfurt  look  like  today  if  all  the  skyscrapers  had  not  been  built?  That’s  something  we’ll 
never know. 
Ladies and gentlemen, fear not. In the following, I will neither delve into historical anecdotes, 
nor  will  I  present  you  with  any  further  hypothetical  questions.  Rather,  I  would  like  to  talk 
about the current challenges facing the financial sector. 
The financial industry is indeed “on the move”, as the title of this conference suggests. I am 
quite  confident that market  processes  will  move  us  in  the  right  direction,  though I  am  well 
aware  that  the  “market  road”  can  sometimes  be  a  bumpy  and  curvy  one.  Yet  it  is  worth 
keeping  an  eye  on  developments  –  from  a  supervisory  perspective  and  also  from  a 
regulatory angle. 
Digitalisation 
2. 
Digitalisation is certainly one of the major challenges the financial sector is facing. Fintechs, 
big  data,  blockchain  technology  and  the  like,  it  is  rumoured,  have  the  potential  to 
revolutionise  the  financial  business,  including  central  banks.  And  like  every  revolution,  it 
could have the potential to reshape the establishment – as some people say. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Every financial institution is therefore well-advised to adapt to new technologies where there 
is a sound business case for doing so. On the other hand, I don’t expect banks to become 
redundant. All the more so as it wouldn’t be the first time in history that a supposed revolution 
turns out to be nothing more than evolution. 
You  may  remember  the  song  “Video  Killed  The  Radio  Star”.  I’m  not  expecting  “Fintechs 
Killed  The  Retail  Bank”  to  become  a  hit  –  simply  because,  rather  than  being  substitutes, 
fintechs and banks actually complement each other. From a bank’s perspective, it’s a classic 
“make or buy” decision whether to make use of internal development resources or to harness 
the innovative power of financial technology start-ups. 
In the digital era, it may appear irrelevant where business partners are located, but even in 
times of bits and bytes and the ultra-fast exchange of data, proximity is still an advantage. So 
providing a supportive business environment for such newcomers can give financial centres 
a  decisive  competitive  edge.  The  Frankfurt  financial  centre  will  certainly  benefit  from  the 
recent fintech initiative launched by the Hessian Ministry of Economics and Deutsche Börse 
AG. 
And  even  central  banks  –  which  don’t  normally  rank  amongst  the  early  adopters  of  new 
technologies  –  are  doing  experimental  work  of  their  own.  As  Yves  Mersch  from  the  ECB 
recently told an audience, “From a central bank perspective, in the context of our strategic 
reflections on the future of the Eurosystem’s market infrastructures, we are certainly open to 
new  technologies  and,  like  many  market  players,  have  launched  some  experimental  work 
with the distributed ledger technology.” 
Overall, the new digital age opens up huge opportunities for the financial sector. At the same 
time,  however,  it  is  an  increasing  source  of  risk  –  I  am  referring  here  to  the  ever-greater 
reliance on technical infrastructures and the considerable growth of cyber risks. 
Europe’s banking supervisors have identified IT and cybercrime risk as one of the key risks 
banks  are  confronted  with  –  and  rightly  so.  Digitalisation  therefore  poses  a  challenge  to 
supervisory authorities, too. Cyber-attacks and system failures can tarnish the reputation of 
banks and undermine confidence in the financial system as a whole. 
As for fintechs, regulators also need to keep an eye on the potential risks to financial stability 
originating  from  fintechs  without  impeding  their  innovative  power.  John  Williams,  the 
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco said, and I completely agree with 
him, that “it’s important that we have a level playing field, regardless of how institutions prefer 
to describe themselves or what kind of charter they hold. As a matter of principle, if it walks 
like a duck and quacks like a duck, it should be regulated like a duck.” 
Financial regulation 
3. 
He did not literally mean the regulation of ducks, of course, but that of banks. 
The regulatory and supervisory environment for banks has been transformed over the past 
few years, and this process of improvement has not been completed yet. Basel III and the 
respective European rules are forcing banks to hold more liquid assets, and better and more 
capital.  A  bank  resolution  regime  has  been  established,  and  banks  will  be  asked  to  hold 
capital instruments which, in a resolution event, can be converted into liable capital. 
Financial  stability  and  a  resilient  banking  system  benefit the  entire  economy,  including  the 
banks. The objective of regulatory reforms, then, is not to upset the financial industry, but to 
strengthen the resilience of the banking sector and to prevent the taxpayer from bailing out 
banks  in  the  future  –  which  is  in  my  view  crucial  for  the  public  support  of  our  market 
economy. 
There is a nice aphorism on this issue by Nassim Nicholas Taleb, the author of The Black 
Swan: “The main difference between government bailouts and smoking is that in some rare 
cases the statement ‘this is my last cigarette’ holds true.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Translated  into  the  language  of  economics,  that  quip  is  a  typical  example  of  time 
inconsistency. Governments might promise to refrain from bailouts in order to prevent moral 
hazard behaviour. But when financial stability is at stake, they have an incentive to deviate 
from their previous commitment. 
So, do higher capital ratios and the bail-in regime resolve the time inconsistency problem? 
No, but they do mitigate it substantially. 
While  the  revamping  of  the  Basel  framework  has  not  been  finished  yet,  its  completion  is 
scheduled  for  this  year.  A  further  significant  tightening  of  the  capital  requirements,  in  the 
sense of a “Basel IV”, is not on the agenda. I feel that’s something that needs to be said in 
order to prevent the financial industry from facing needless regulatory uncertainty. 
There  is  one  field  of  regulation,  however,  where  too  little  has  been  done  so  far  –  the 
treatment of sovereign exposures in banks’ balance sheets. A banking system can only truly 
be  stable  if the fate  of banks  does  not  hinge  on  the  solvency  of their national  sovereigns. 
Thus,  I  have  been  advocating,  for  quite  some  time  now,  a  phasing-out  of  the  preferential 
treatment of sovereign borrowers over private debtors. 
In the euro area, the introduction of non-zero risk weights and a large exposures regime for 
sovereign bonds would also help to inject greater credibility into the “no bail-out clause” of 
the EU Treaty if banks were then able to digest a sovereign debt restructuring. 
Appropriate capital rules are the best and most important contribution which financial market 
regulation can make to the stability of the banking sector. In this respect, it is good to see 
that, in Germany, the average Tier 1 capital ratio rose from 9.1% at the beginning of 2008 to 
15.6% in mid-2015, and that the quality of capital has improved substantially. 
All in all, I wouldn’t say that banks are being overburdened by regulation. 
Nevertheless, for small and medium-sized banks, the burden is relatively heavy. In keeping 
with  the  principle  of  proportionality,  we  should  reflect  on  an  adjustment  of  regulatory  and 
supervisory  standards  to  the  size  of  banks  –  provided  that  financial  stability  is  not  at  risk. 
There is no doubt, however, that the new regulatory environment poses a challenge for all 
banks. 
Low interest rates 
4. 
Another challenge facing banks is the current low-interest-rate environment. 
Ultra-low  interest  rates,  or  even  negative  rates,  and  an  unusually  flat  term  structure  are 
squeezing banks’ profits. Particularly affected are those banks whose profits mainly originate 
from net interest income. 
From the perspective of a central banker, bank profitability is not an objective per se. Yet in 
financial stability terms, dwindling profitability is an unfavourable development as it impedes 
banks’ ability to bolster their equity by retaining earnings. 
However, while bank profitability may be a necessary condition for financial stability, it is not 
a  sufficient  condition.  Recent  BIS  calculations  for  a  group  of  large  euro-area  banks  show 
that,  over  the  period  from  2007  to  2014,  accumulated  retained  earnings  could  have  been 
75% higher if banks had not paid out dividends.1 On the other hand, I would not deny that a 
no-dividends policy could impair a bank’s ability to raise capital. 
                                                
1  See  Hyun  Song  Shin,  Bank  capital  and  monetary  policy  transmission,  Panel  remarks  at  The  ECB  and  its 
Watchers XVII conference, Frankfurt, 7 April 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Banks’ ability to cushion shocks also affects the transmission of monetary policy. Thus, low 
profitability tends to make it more difficult, not easier, for monetary policymakers to fulfil their 
mandate. Our mandate is to maintain price stability. 
While the Treaty does not precisely say what price stability actually means, the Governing 
Council of the ECB has clarified that it aims to maintain the inflation rate at a level below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Measured by this yardstick, the ECB is currently navigating difficult waters. Inflation is close 
to  zero  and  projected  to  accelerate  only  very  gradually.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  an 
expansionary monetary policy stance is justified for now. 
But we must not over-extend the period of ultra-loose monetary policy because various risks 
and side-effects are part and parcel of the current policy stance. 
Just to give you one example: The longer a central bank pursues an ultra-loose monetary 
policy,  meaning,  for  example,  the  longer  forward  guidance  is  in  place  and  the  more 
aggressively  quantitative  easing  is  pursued,  the  greater  the  risk  that  a  slight  tightening  of 
policy,  or  even  expectations  of  a  slight  tightening  of  policy,  will  send  market  interest  rates 
sharply higher. 
Morris and Shin, for example, argue that asset managers cannot afford to be the last ones to 
notice a switch in monetary policy, because their financial loss increases if many others try to 
sell  their  securities  before  them.2  Consequently,  they  might  become  increasingly  nervous, 
the longer monetary policy tries to maintain the low-interest-rate policy. This, in turn, could 
raise the probability of a sudden increase in risk premiums. 
It is crucial that the zero interest rate policy does not remain in place for longer than is really 
needed to restore price stability, and that the benefits and costs of monetary accommodation 
are  carefully  weighed  against  each  other  against  the  background  of  our  price  stability 
mandate. In the meantime, monetary policymakers need to take care of their independence. 
And they should avoid being taken hostage by financial markets or fiscal policies. 
Of course, monetary policy has contributed to the unusually low  level of long-term interest 
rates. Not only the forward guidance, but also the purchase of long-term bonds – issued by 
sovereigns, banks or enterprises – aimed at lowering long-term rates. 
But  long-term  interest  rates  are  not  only  determined  by  monetary  policymakers.  They  are 
also a reflection of nominal growth expectations, and if potential growth is slowing, it has a 
depressing impact on the real rate of return. 
Making  our  economies  more  prosperous  would  therefore  pave  the  way  for  higher  real 
interest  rates.  There  are  plenty  of  growth-enhancing  measures  –  like  strengthening 
competition  in  product  markets  or  making  labour  markets  more  flexible  –  and  all  of  these 
measures go beyond the central bank’s sphere of influence. 
Blaming  savers for  saving too  much  is therefore,  in  my  view,  just  as  mistaken  as  blaming 
investors  for  investing  too  little.  Both  accusations  have  been  levelled  at  this  country  very 
frequently  indeed:  Germans  invest  too  little,  it  is  claimed,  and  they  save  too  much.  And 
sometimes, the conclusion is drawn that Germans themselves are to blame for the low level 
of interest rates. 
The high current account surplus and the purportedly too low investment ratio in Germany 
would  appear  to  back  up  this  accusation.  However,  while  it  is  true  that  a  current  account 
surplus of more than 8% of GDP is certainly not sustainable, let us not forget that its most 
                                                
2  See  Stephen  Morris  and  Hyun  Song  Shin,  Risk  Premium  Shifts  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Coordination 
Approach,  Princeton  University  –  William  S.  Dietrich  II  Economic  Theory  Center  Research  Paper 
No. 075_2016, 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  recent  rise  owes  a  great  deal  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  and  the  strong  decline  in  oil 
prices. 
Moreover, Germany is an ageing society, so it has good reason to engage in precautionary 
savings. If those savings were invested in other euro-area economies – or even outside the 
euro  area  –  everyone  would  benefit  –  provided  the  funds  were  invested  in  projects 
generating an adequate return. 
Should  more  funds  be  invested  in  Germany?  That’s  something  I  would  wholeheartedly 
welcome, but the disclaimer remains the same: the funds should only be invested in sensible 
projects. 
However, the question of whether or not private investors deem an investment project to be 
sensible very much depends on the future economic prospects of the euro area and Europe. 
And nobody would deny that uncertainty is rife in this regard at the moment – the “Brexit” risk 
is just one source of uncertainty. 
Is  this  the  right  time  for  German  fiscal  policy  to  step  in  –  for  example,  by  lifting  public 
investment? 
While I would not deny that there is scope for some more public investment in infrastructure 
or education, it is worth noting that fiscal policy in Germany is already in expansionary mode 
due to the cost of accommodating the refugees while the long-term sustainability of public 
finances calls instead for Germany, with its demographic burden, to run a structural surplus. 
In  any  case,  the  sound  state  of  the  German  economy  does  not  necessitate  an  additional 
deficit-financed fiscal stimulus and – if such a measure were taken nonetheless – its positive 
spillover effects on other euro-area economies would be marginal at best. 
A  simulation  exercise  conducted  by  Bundesbank  economists  found  that  temporarily 
increasing public investment by 1% of German GDP over two years would lift GDP in the rest 
of the euro area by a mere 0.2% in the second year. Hence, a deficit-financed fiscal stimulus 
would be neither necessary nor helpful. 
That said, it is clear that banks need to adapt to the low-interest-rate environment. To use a 
metaphor coined by my colleague Sabine Lautenschläger, they “should not try to just hold 
their breath until they surface from the low-interest-rate phase. They could rapidly run out of 
air.” 
Banks should scrutinise their business models, they should harness the benefits offered by 
digitalisation, and they should continue to improve their cost efficiency. With regard to banks’ 
business models, I firmly believe that it is in banks’ own interest to strive for high standards. 
Banks should refrain from running questionable business models – those based squarely on 
exploiting  tax  loopholes,  say.  Banks  have  to  make  sure  that  their  businesses  conform  not 
only  with  the  law,  but  also  with  ethical  standards  –  indeed,  just  because  something  is  not 
explicitly prohibited doesn’t mean it’s necessarily allowed. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
If you’re facing a strenuous challenge you should at least make sure your energy intake is 
adequate. So on that note, I will refrain from keeping you from enjoying the main course. 
The  conference  tomorrow  will  undoubtedly  provide  many  opportunities  to  delve  into  the 
topics which I have just touched upon. 
May I conclude by wishing you all a very fruitful conference day tomorrow and of course, a 
pleasant evening today. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
