   Guy Debelle: The global code of conduct for the foreign exchange 
market 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the FX Week Australia conference, Sydney, 17 March 2016. 
 Today, I will talk about the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign exchange market. I will 
reiterate the motivation for the work we are doing, then update you on where we are at with 
the process and outline the way forward.  
Why is the work going on? As I have stated on previous occasions, the foreign exchange (FX) 
industry is suffering from a lack of trust in its functioning. This lack of trust is evident both 
between participants in the market, but at least as importantly, between the public and the 
market. The market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow 
participants to have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.  
A  well-functioning  foreign  exchange  market  is  very  much  in  the  interest  of  all  market 
participants. This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants 
but also as the exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a 
globalised world, the foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial 
plumbing.  
The Global Code is aiming to set out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange 
market to provide a common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is 
a degree of uncertainty about what sort of practices are acceptable, and what are not. This 
should help to address the lack of trust as well  as promote the effective functioning of the 
wholesale FX market.  
To  that  end,  one  of  the  guiding  principles  underpinning  our  work  is  that  the  Code  should 
promote a robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers and sellers, 
supported by resilient infrastructure, should be able to confidently and effectively transact at 
competitive prices that reflect available market information and in a manner that conforms to 
acceptable standards of behaviour.  
The  work  to  develop  the  Global  Code  commenced  in  May  last  year,  when  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  Governors  commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets 
Committee of the BIS to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the 
wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the 
code.1  
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it's a single code for the whole industry 
and second, it's a global code. It's intended to cover all of the wholesale FX industry. This is 
not a code of conduct for just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank 
participants  and  the  platforms;  its  breadth  is  both  across  the  globe  and  across  the  whole 
structure of the industry. The Code is intended to apply to all aspects of the wholesale foreign 
exchange market. In the Code itself, we spell out what we actually mean by the wholesale FX 
market. The one noteworthy part of the FX industry to which the Code generally doesn't apply 
is the retail market, as that is generally governed by retail-specific regulation in the relevant 
jurisdiction.  
I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading 
the  work  on  developing  the  code  and  Chris  Salmon  of  the  Bank  of  England  leading  the 
adherence work. Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the 
                                                
1   http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   major FX centres, drawing on the membership of the Markets Committee which is comprised 
of heads of the market operations areas of the 15 major currency areas.2 Given our roles, we 
are all very much interested in the effective functioning of the FX market. Again, it is very much 
a global effort reflecting the global nature of the foreign exchange market.  
This work is also very much a public sector-private sector partnership. In that regard, we are 
being ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by 
David  Puth,  CEO  of  CLS.  The  group  contains  people  from  all  around  the  world,  including 
Australia, on both the buy side, including corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, 
along  with  trading  platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank  participants,  drawing  from  the  various 
Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) and beyond. Hence all parts of the market are being 
involved in the drafting of the code to make sure all perspectives are heard and appropriately 
reflected.  
At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. The 
first phase is the material we intend to put out in two months' time in May. It covers areas such 
as ethics, information sharing, execution (including mark-up) and confirmation and settlement. 
The second phase will cover topics such as governance, risk management and compliance, 
as well as further aspects of execution including e-trading and platforms (including last look), 
prime brokerage, and the unique features of FX swap, forward, and option transactions.  
One factor influencing our choice of which topics to cover in the first phase was our assessment 
of what issues the market was looking for clarity on sooner rather than later.  
One  example  of  this  is  around  information  sharing,  where  many  market  participants  have 
highlighted that they are unsure what information can be conveyed to counterparties and other 
market participants. While it is clear (or at least should be) that disclosing the details of a client's 
order book to a counterparty is not acceptable, market participants have noted that there is 
much less clarity around what level of aggregation, say, is necessary in order to convey market 
colour appropriately.  
As  a  result,  it  appears  some  market  participants  are  being  very  conservative  in  sharing 
information, which can have implications for the effective functioning of the market. This is 
notwithstanding the guidance provided in this area in the Global Preamble put out by the global 
Foreign  Exchange  Committees,  including  the  Australian  Foreign  Exchange  Committee 
(AFXC), in March last year.3 The Global Code takes the material in the Global Preamble and 
fleshes  it  out  a  bit  more,  including  with  some  examples  of  what  is,  and  isn't  appropriate 
communication, and why.  
Similarly, there have been diverse opinions around what is appropriate behaviour in terms of 
order handling. While there have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviour 
around order handling which have come to light in recent years, in other areas, the market is 
seeking  greater  guidance  as  to  what  principles  should  be  followed,  including  the  different 
standards that may apply depending on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal or 
agent.4  
This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes of conduct that the 
various FXCs had endorsed for the FX market. It is an area where we are aiming to provide 
the  sought-after guidance.  But  we  are  not  writing  a  procedures manual for  order-handling. 
Rather we are articulating principles that need to be taken into account. Individual firms may 
then  take  these  principles  and  reflect  them  in  their  own  procedures  manual.  Our  aim  in 
                                                
2   http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm. 
3   Available at http://www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf. 
4  
I am not using these terms in the legal sense that is sometimes the case in particular jurisdictions, but rather in 
terms of common market parlance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   articulating these principles is to provide market participants with the framework in which to 
think about how they handle stop-loss orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word 
‘think’. The Global Code will not provide the answers to all your questions, but it should help 
you ask the right questions.  
In a similar vein, I will repeat a point that I have made a number of times in the past. One of 
our most central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so, but for me, an important reason is that 
the more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage 
than principles. If it's not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay 
seems to be the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise 
the code is, the less people will think about what they are doing. If it's principles-based and 
less prescriptive then, as I just said, market participants will have to think about whether their 
actions are consistent with the principles of the Code.  
So where we are up to in the process? 
Last week we circulated for comment the second draft of phase one of the Code via the various 
FXCs including the Australian FXC (and central banks in those countries on the Working Group 
without an FXC). This second draft incorporates comments on the first draft of the Code that 
we had circulated at the beginning of February. The first draft attracted over 1,400 comments. 
The  comments  were  almost  universally  constructive  and  very  supportive  of  the  whole 
endeavour. I would like to thank those who took the time to provide them.  
In writing this second draft, we and the market participants group took full account of all of 
these comments. Those who provided them can rest assured we have taken heed of them. 
But in saying that, you may not see your comment directly embodied in the redrafting. This in 
part, reflects the diversity of views on some issues in the Code. That said, we have sought to 
incorporate the overall feedback in a manner that best reflects the objectives for the Code that 
I  set  out  above,  namely  that  the  Code  should  promote  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,  open,  and 
transparent market.  
The comments on the second draft will be gathered over the next week or so. We will then 
take account of them and produce a revised draft early in April. There will be one final round 
for  ‘fatal  flaw’  comments  after  that  before  seeking  endorsement  by  the  various  FXCs  of  a 
document we can take to the Global Foreign Exchange Committee meeting in New York on 
25 May. For example, in Australia, we will be looking for the AFXC endorsement of the Code 
at  our  next  meeting  in  early  May.  Following  the  meeting  of  the  Global  Foreign  Exchange 
Committee, the first phase of the Global Code will be publically released.  
We have already started on the work of drafting the material in phase two of the Code. We will 
continue  with  that  over  the  next  year,  again  having  a  number  of  rounds  of  comment  from 
market participants through the FXC process.  
Our intention is that the complete Code will be released following the Global Foreign Exchange 
Committee meeting in London in May 2017. At the end of that process, for the code to be 
effective  and  for  it  to  achieve  what  we  want  it  to  achieve,  it  will  need  to  be  accepted  and 
endorsed by the FXCs and market participants more generally.  
That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues 
to evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it. I will have more to say about how this ongoing 
evolution of the Code might occur in due course.  
Adherence to the code 
At the same time as we have been drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable 
time and effort to develop adherence mechanisms which promote and incentivise widespread 
adoption of the Global Code by market participants. Clearly, that has been an issue with the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   various existing industry codes that have been in place in a number of markets over many 
years. It is very evident that they were often ignored, wilfully or otherwise. For an industry code 
to have value in affirming appropriate norms of behaviour, it has to become effectively adopted 
in the marketplace.  
While adherence to a single, consistent code of good practice is widely regarded to be in the 
interests of the market, the Global Code will be voluntary. As I said earlier, we are working with 
the  industry  to  produce  a  voluntary,  principles-based  code  of  conduct  rather  than  a  set  of 
prescriptive regulatory standards. It will not impose legal or regulatory obligations on market 
participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations.  
There is already a substantial body of law and regulation that applies to the FX activities of 
many  market  participants,  and  this  varies  significantly  across  jurisdictions.  This  variation, 
coupled with the diverse nature of FX markets globally, means that a ‘one size fits all’ approach 
to adherence would not be appropriate. The final framework for adherence will need to strike 
the  right  balance  between  respecting  the  existing  diversity  across  different  markets,  and 
maintaining consistency with regard to what is a global initiative.  
In that regard, we have articulated three principles which underpin our overall approach to 
adherence.  
• 
Universal:  The  Global  Code  should  apply  to  all  wholesale  FX  market  participants, 
based on the activities they undertake and subject to compliance with any applicable 
regulations. We have been working hard to incorporate the perspective of all types of 
wholesale FX market participants into the draft Code, and we want it to be widely 
applicable across the market.  
Proportionate: How wholesale FX market participants adhere, and demonstrate their 
adherence, to the Global Code should be proportionate and appropriate to the type of 
participant and the context of the local financial markets.  
Transparent: the mode of adherence should be transparent, to enable monitoring and 
market discipline.  
  It is worth stressing that the “proportionate” principle is not designed to lower the bar – it is 
designed to reflect the differences in the type and volume of market activities of certain market 
participants and the variation in FX markets worldwide.  
The concrete details of the adherence mechanisms remain a work in process. We will have 
more to say on this in New York in May. At this stage, our thinking is that there is unlikely to 
be a single adherence mechanism but rather a suite of mechanisms.  
Conclusion 
That, I trust, gives you a reasonable overview of the state of play on the Global Code.  
A lot of work has been done to get us to this point. There is still a lot of work to be done.  
The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central 
banks and market participants. All of us recognise the need to restore the public's faith in the 
foreign exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also 
in helping improve market functioning and confidence in how the market functions. I expect 
that cooperative relationship will continue as we see this process through to its conclusion in 
May next year.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
