   Mario Draghi: Delivering a symmetric mandate with asymmetric tools – 
monetary policy in a context of low interest rates 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ceremony to mark 
the 200th anniversary of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 2 June 2016. 
 Exactly 200 years ago today, Emperor Francis I issued two imperial decrees assigning the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  the  exclusive  right  to  issue  banknotes  and  to  stabilise  the 
finances of the empire. This was part of a growing realisation, across Europe, of the key role 
that central banks could play in securing monetary stability. 
In 1816, monetary stability in Austria meant bringing the currency under control in the wake of 
the ruinous Napoleonic wars. 
In the two centuries since then, the cost of not delivering stability has been painfully displayed: 
in the devastating effects of excessive inflation, such as the 1400% annual increase in prices 
recorded here in the early 1920s; but also in the terrible consequences of deflation, as in the 
1930s. 
This is why most modern central banks have price stability mandates. And it is why legislators 
have made those mandates symmetric – central banks are expected to fight persistent inflation 
undershooting as vigorously as they fight persistent overshooting. 
In the ECB’s case, our aim is to keep inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
Today, this means raising inflation back towards 2%. And the series of measures we have 
adopted in recent years – bringing policy rates into negative territory, engaging in large-scale 
asset purchases, and providing banks with long-term refinancing on conditional terms – are 
geared exactly to achieving that. 
Why 2% inflation is the right objective for monetary policy 
But if our aim is to avoid both excessive inflation and deflation, why do we not set a 0% inflation 
objective? The answer is that the rate of inflation we aim for and our ability to stabilise prices 
are intertwined. Or put another way, a steady state inflation rate of 2% inflation is itself a shock 
absorber which allows us to deliver stability. There are several reasons for this, but let me 
highlight two in particular. 
First, a moderately positive level of inflation facilitates the adjustment of relative prices, which 
helps prevent short-term shocks from morphing into longer-lasting disturbances. This stems 
from the fact that, even in the most flexible economies, nominal wages and prices are “sticky” 
and slow to adjust downwards. 
In that context, when demand falls, 2% inflation allows real wages to adjust downwards even 
if nominal wages do not. That in turn helps keep unemployment lower than would otherwise 
be the case, and prevents the consequences of the downturn from lasting longer than they 
need to – for instance, by eroding the human capital of the jobless, leading to permanently 
higher structural unemployment. 
What is true within economies is also true across regions – and this is particularly so in a multi-
country monetary union like the euro area. A 2% inflation objective means that less competitive 
countries can lower costs and prices relative to the area average, which allows them to recover 
competitiveness without destabilising consequences. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The need for such a buffer was explicitly acknowledged by the Governing Council in 2003 
when  we  clarified  our  definition  of  price  stability.1  It  has  since  helped  countries  to  adjust 
competitiveness when required. Initially, aiming at 2% allowed some core economies to lower 
relative prices in a fairly painless way, as other “catching up” economies had higher inflation 
rates  and  were  pulling  up  the  area  average.  Today,  the  positions  of  those  groups  have 
reversed. But the rationale remains exactly the same. 
The  second  reason  why  a  2%  objective  helps  absorb  shocks  is  that  it  supports  the 
implementation of monetary policy in adverse conditions. A small positive buffer creates more 
scope to support the economy through cutting nominal interest rates and reduces the likelihood 
of running up against the effective lower bound. 
This is because, for a given equilibrium real interest rate, a higher inflation objective implies 
higher nominal rates over the cycle. In line with the results from a larger research literature, 
ECB simulations made in 2003 suggested that a 2% objective would substantially decrease 
the probability of nominal rates reaching zero.2 This was also recognised by the Governing 
Council as a reason for aiming closer to 2%.3  
What was true then has become even more relevant now. The studies in 2003 assumed an 
equilibrium real rate of around 2%, so with a 2% inflation objective the equilibrium nominal rate 
would be around 4%. Evidence suggests, however, that demographics-induced high savings 
and low productivity growth have led equilibrium real rates to fall.4 Aiming for 2% inflation is 
hence even more crucial today to get nominal interest rates safely away from the lower bound. 
Yet it is also important to stress that the fall in real rates is by no means pre-determined. It can 
be reversed at least in part by structural reforms that raise productivity and participation rates. 
By increasing the potential for profitable investment opportunities, and by reducing the need 
for precautionary savings, such measures would raise the equilibrium real rate, all things being 
equal. 
Why the objective should be symmetric 
All this justifies the level of our inflation objective in the steady state. But it is equally important 
that we pursue our objective symmetrically. 
Monetary policy operates to a large extent by guiding expectations, a process which sets in 
motion a series of automatic stabilisers in the economy. For instance, if markets expect central 
banks  to  react  to  negative  shocks  by  increasing  monetary  accommodation,  when  a  shock 
actually  happens,  it  will  immediately  lead  to  lower  real  interest  rates  as  the  central  bank’s 
reaction  function  is  taken  into  account.  That  will  in  turn  result  in  higher  consumption  and 
investment, which helps offset the initial shock. 
This mechanism hinges crucially on the central bank being credible on both sides – being just 
as committed to fighting too low inflation as too high inflation. 
And while this is true generally, it is all the more so in the special circumstances we face coming 
out of the crisis – namely, where private debt stocks are high and policy interest rates are close 
                                                
1   See Evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
2   Coenen, G. (2003), “Zero lower bound: is it a problem in the euro area?”, ECB Working Paper Series No 269, 
September 2003. 
3   See Evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
4   See Draghi, M. (2016), “Addressing the causes of low interest rates”, introductory speech held at a panel on 
“The future of financial markets: A changing view of Asia” at the Annual Meeting of the Asian Development 
Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2 May 2016 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   to the lower bound. In those conditions, any perception that the central bank might tolerate 
persistent downward inflation misses would be especially costly. 
It would lead first of all to a dis-anchoring of inflation expectations, which would cause real 
yields to rise mechanically. This would be contractionary and could not be offset by lowering 
policy  rates  even  further.  And  with  fixed  nominal  debts,  lower  inflation  would  trigger 
redistribution  from  borrowers  to  creditors,  which  would  prolong  the  debt  overhang  and 
exacerbate the contraction due to the different propensities to consume and invest of those 
two  groups. This  is  not an  argument for  raising inflation targets,  as  that would  only  create 
redistribution  in  the  other  direction.  But  it  is  an  argument  for  central  banks  to  fulfil  their 
objectives. 
However, while our mandate is symmetric, and our commitment to our mandate is symmetric, 
there is an asymmetry in the tools we can use to achieve it, which stems from the existence of 
a lower bound for interest rates. 
When inflation is too high, we can always raise interest rates to a level that will rein in demand 
and  eventually  prices.  And  as  this  is  widely  understood  from  historical  experience,  our 
credibility relies only on one parameter: our willingness to fight excessive inflation. Our ability 
to do so is taken for granted. 
When inflation is too low, however, there are limits to how far interest rates can be cut, because 
of the existence of a non-interest bearing substitute for bank deposits in the form of cash. And 
since we have no intention to do away with cash, central banks fighting too low inflation may 
have to resort to tools other than policy rates – what are often referred to as “unconventional” 
tools. This is necessary to deliver price stability, but it also comes with additional complications. 
First, unconventional policies require us to operate in a broader range of markets, which means 
that  the  risk  of  unintended  distortionary  effects  is  inevitably  larger  than  when  using 
conventional tools. Does this imply we should refrain from using them when they are needed 
to restore price stability, as is the case today? The answer is clearly no, because we operate 
under a framework of monetary dominance. Our task is not to maximise the chances of price 
stability,  under  the  constraint  of  not  creating  side  effects. There  are  always  side  effects  to 
monetary policy. And we are not at liberty to choose to fail our mandate. 
But in pursuing our mandate, we ought to try and minimise distortionary effects as much as 
possible. And this is exactly what we have done through the design of our measures. This is 
one  reason,  for  instance,  why  we  concentrated  our  asset  purchases  in  the  most 
“commoditised” markets, such as government bonds. It is also why we have shifted the relative 
weight from rates towards other tools, so as to avoid as much as possible unintended adverse 
consequences for the banking sector. 
A  second  complication  associated  with  unconventional  policies  is  that  the  public  inevitably 
knows less about their transmission channels and effects. This is understandable because 
there  is  only  limited  historical  experience  of  using  such  policies.  But  the  body  of  publicly 
available research on their effects is rapidly growing. Like other central banks we have carried 
out considerable empirical work to calibrate our monetary policy stimulus. 
And  I  am  confident  that,  over  time,  our  experience  with  unconventional  tools  will  fill  the 
remaining knowledge gap. One should not forget that the ability of central banks to bring high 
inflation under control was also doubted in the past, most famously in the 1970s, until empirical 
evidence put the debate to rest. But in the meantime, central banks have to demonstrate that 
there is no discontinuity when interest rates reach zero – unconventional measures can work 
as well as conventional ones. 
How unconventional monetary policy works 
Why is this the case? Conventional monetary policy operates by steering real money market 
rates below the prevailing equilibrium real rate, which in turn stimulates demand and inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   But  when  the  equilibrium  rate  is  so  low  that  the  central  bank  cannot  bring  its  policy  rate 
sufficiently below it, the capacity to increase the degree of stimulus through moving short-term 
rates becomes limited. Unconventional tools can, however, still be effective in these conditions. 
This  is  because,  in  reality,  there  is  not just  one interest  rate  which  determines  saving  and 
investment  in  the  whole  economy.  There  is  in  fact  a  constellation  of  rates,  which  apply  to 
different  maturities,  to  different  types  of  financial  instruments,  to  different  borrowers  and 
lenders. So even without policy rates moving much, it is still possible for the central bank to 
stimulate the economy by lowering the level of all those interest rates. This can be effective in 
any  circumstances,  but  particularly  so  when  risk  premia  have  risen  due  to  market 
fragmentation or unwarranted uncertainties. 
Reflecting this broader channel of monetary transmission, we have deployed a three-pronged 
strategy to inject additional stimulus into the euro area economy. 
First, our forward guidance allows us to lower longer-term rates by steering expectations of 
future short-term rates. Having opened up the possibility that policy rates can turn negative 
has also contributed to flattening the whole yield curve, by removing the upward bias to yields 
that came from the perception that rates could only go up, not down. Indeed, we have stated 
unambiguously that policy rates would remain at current levels or lower for an extended period 
of time. 
Second, our asset purchases help us further lower yields across maturities and asset classes 
by compressing risk premia in the markets where we intervene. That in turn triggers portfolio 
rebalancing  out  of  those  markets  and  brings  down  borrowing  costs  across  the  whole 
constellation of rates, thereby producing broad stimulating effect. This is complemented by the 
negative rate on our deposit facility, which speeds up the process of asset reallocation and 
reinforces the downward pressure on financing costs. 
Importantly,  this  stimulus  reaches  the  economy  independently  of  whether  financing  is 
dominated by banks or capital markets. Just like any investor, banks have to judge the risk-
adjusted return on capital when they allocate assets, and the benchmark that is typically used 
is the return available on risk-free government bonds. So as we purchase government bonds, 
we tilt the calculation in favour of loans to the real economy: by compressing the return on the 
securities we buy, and by improving the economic outlook, hence reducing risks on loans. 
This is also supported by the third prong – our targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs) – which is specifically aimed at galvanising bank lending to the private sector. While 
the  initial  goal  of  the  TLTROs  was  to  improve  the  monetary  transmission  process,  further 
recalibrations have made it progressively more expansionary. Under the rules we introduced 
in March this year, banks that meet their lending benchmarks will be able to borrow ex post 
from the ECB at negative rates, which propagates the effects of our conventional policy more 
directly to the economy. 
Monetary policy and the economic recovery 
In the two years since our policy package was launched, we have seen the effects of these 
measures in practice. 
Events studies conducted by ECB staff find that our measures have had a major impact on 
long-term  sovereign  bonds,  and  spillovers  to  yields  of  other  asset  classes  have  been 
significant,  too,  especially  for  euro  area  financial  and  non-financial  corporate  bonds.5  Our 
analysis also finds that our policy package has had a substantial direct effect on bank lending 
                                                
5   For more on the methodology behind these estimations see ECB (2015), “The transmission of the ECB’s recent 
non-standard monetary policy measures”, Box 2, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2015 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   that  are  especially  sensitive 
rates, as well as a substantial indirect effect on lending conditions through its marked impact 
on long-term government bond yields.6 
Improved  financing  conditions  have  led  in  turn  to  higher  growth  and  inflation.  Eurosystem 
modelling shows that, without our policy measures, inflation would actually have been negative 
since 2015. In 2016 it would have been at least half a percentage point lower than we forecast 
currently, and around half a percentage point lower in 2017. And the impact of our measures 
on euro area GDP is also estimated to be sizeable, helping raise output by around 1.5% in the 
period from 2015–18.7 
The latest data show that these positive effects are only gaining in strength as our measures 
work  their  way  through  the  economy.  The  euro  area  continues  to  benefit  from  a  domestic 
demand-led  recovery,  and  we  can  see  how  our  policy  is  supporting  this  by  looking  at  the 
spending  components 
to  financing  conditions,  namely 
consumption of durables and investment. 
Last  year,  after  a  multi-year  contraction,  consumption  growth  of  durables  in  the  euro  area 
surged to a rate unseen since late 2006. The contribution of fixed capital formation to output 
growth,  which  had  been  extraordinarily  sluggish  since  the  start  of  recovery  in  2013,  also 
progressively strengthened. And in the last quarter of 2015 – the most recent observation for 
which we have a full composition breakdown – investment surpassed consumption as the main 
driver of growth. 
The recovery has also withstood a decline in external demand linked to the major slowdown in 
world trade. Over the past 20 years, the growth rate of world trade has been lower than it was 
last year on only two occasions: in the aftermath of the dotcom bubble in the early 2000s, and 
again in 2009 following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. In both episodes there was a sharp 
fall in euro area growth to close to or below zero. In 2015, however, the steep drop in trade did 
not produce a slowdown in the euro area economy. In fact, year-on-year growth even picked 
up throughout 2015, despite the slump in world imports. 
This  was  in  part  due  to  the  increasing  resilience  of  the  domestic  economy.  But  euro  area 
exporters, after a long spell of losses, were also able to regain market shares in world demand. 
Monetary  policy  was  again  a  key  factor  in  explaining  this  atypical  resilience  of  euro  area 
exports. 
Importantly, these positive effects of our measures have not been accompanied by significant 
distortions that might start to tip the cost-benefit analysis – for instance, by excessively harming 
bank profitability and so damaging the main transmission channel of our policy. This is in part 
because of the way we have designed our tools, as I mentioned above. But clearly, the best 
way to ensure that it remains the case is to get back to our objective soon. 
This point was captured well by Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker after he hiked rates 
steeply in 1980, when he noted that, “I am worried about those financial institutions, and the 
worst thing that can happen to them is [for us to] fail to do the job and get the interest rate turn 
fairly soon. But the way to get the interest rate turned is not by hastening it prematurely.8 
That is our position and, as the Governing Council underlined today, the momentum of the 
euro area’s economic recovery continues to be supported by our monetary policy. This fosters 
the return of inflation towards 2%. 
                                                
6   Altavilla C., G. Carboni, R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons from the 
euro area”, ECB Working Paper No. 1864. 
7   For information on the methodology behind this analysis see Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB’s monetary policy 
response to disinflationary pressures”, speech at the ECB and Its Watchers XVII conference organised by the 
Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt, 7 April 2016. 
8   See the Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of March 18, 1980. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   We are on the right track, but we take nothing for granted either. The Governing Council will 
closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price stability and, if warranted to achieve our 
objective, we will act – as we have always done – by using all the instruments available within 
our mandate. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
