   Philip R Lane: Macro-Financial Perspectives on the Irish Economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Institute  for 
International and European Affairs, Dublin, 2 August 2016. 
 I  thank  Mark  Cassidy,  Helen  Daly,  John  Flynn,  Geraldine  Hannon,  Aoife  Langford,  Gareth  Murphy,  Micheal 
O’Keeffe, Ray O’Connell, James O’Sullivan, Terry Quinn and Adrian Varley for their inputs into this speech. The 
views  expressed  in  this  speech  are  personal  and  do  not  represent  the  views  of  the  Governing  Council  or  the 
Eurosystem. 
Introduction 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  address  the  membership  of  the  Institute  for  International  and  European 
Affairs today. It is timely to provide a mid-year assessment of the macro-financial environment 
facing Ireland, especially in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum. The last few weeks has 
also seen the publication of a number of studies by the Bank, the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the Central Statistics Office (CSO), which 
are all relevant in forming a considered view of the current state of the Irish economy and 
financial system. 
The plan for this speech is as follows: first, I will provide a brief overview of the European and 
Irish macroeconomic environment; second, I will outline the lessons from the IMF's Article IV 
and Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) reports for Ireland; third, I will discuss the 
recent banking stress test exercises; fourth, I will examine the implications of Brexit both from 
a  macroeconomic  perspective  and  in  relation  to  Ireland’s  role  as  an  international  financial 
centre; finally, I will conclude by discussing the measurement challenges in assessing the Irish 
macro-financial environment. 
The macroeconomic environment 
In  relation  to  the  broad  euro  area  macroeconomic  environment,  the  latest  ECB  Governing 
Council  monetary  policy  meeting  on  July  21st  assessed  that  the  economic  recovery  is 
expected to proceed at a moderate pace, supported by accommodative financial and monetary 
conditions.  Given  prevailing  uncertainties,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor 
economic and financial market developments. Over the coming months, when we have more 
information,  including  new  staff  projections,  we  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  reassess  the 
underlying macroeconomic conditions, the most likely paths of inflation and growth, and the 
distribution of risks around those paths. If warranted to achieve its objective, the Governing 
Council will act by using all the instruments available within its mandate. 
Turning now to the Irish economy, it is possible to filter the noisy headline data (of which more 
later in this speech) to identify a range of domestically-focused aggregate variables including 
employment, consumer spending and a suitably-adjusted measure of investment to indicate 
that the Irish economy is performing well. Although living standards and employment remain 
below pre-crisis levels, much of the ground lost during the crisis has been recovered over the 
last three years. Even allowing for a material adjustment for the negative impact of Brexit (of 
which more later in this speech), the Bank’s latest Quarterly Bulletin still conditionally projects 
output  growth  rates  of  4.9  percent  and  3.6  percent  for  2016  and  2017  respectively,  with 
unemployment declining to 7.2 percent next year. At the same time, the legacy of high public 
and  private  sector  debt  levels  and  the  sensitivity  of  small,  highly-open  economies  to 
international  shocks  means  that  there  remain  considerable  downside  risks  to  this  central 
projection. The IMF’s recent Article IV report provides a valuable independent risk assessment, 
together  with  a range  of  recommendations to mitigate  these  downside  risks  and  support  a 
robust and inclusive medium-term growth strategy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) 
The  IMF  has  also  published  its  FSSA  report  for  Ireland.  The  FSSA  report  is  based  on  a 
comprehensive Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), which is an in-depth exercise 
to assess the resilience of the financial sector, the quality of the regulatory and supervisory 
framework  and  the  capacity  to  manage  and  resolve  financial  crises.  The  FSAP  started  in 
September 2015 and involved extensive engagement with the Central Bank, Department of 
Finance, ECB and other financial sector stakeholders. To give you a sense of the scale and 
scope of the assessment, the third and final mission visit in March 2016 involved ten IMF staff 
on the ground in Dublin, more than 130 meetings in Dublin, Frankfurt and London and the 
submission of over 300 documents, many of which were hundreds of pages long. 
The conclusion of the FSAP (and the publication of the FSSA) marks an important milestone 
for  Ireland,  since  it  is  the  first  such  review  since  the  financial  crisis  and  provides  a  timely 
assessment of our progress against international standards and best practice. In addition, it 
represents a further marker of the re-normalisation of Ireland’s relationship with the IMF. 
The Bank welcomes the broadly-positive assessment, which reflects the efforts of the Irish 
authorities in recent years to address the weaknesses in structural, regulatory and supervisory 
arrangements  that  existed  prior  to  the  crisis.  The  FSSA  recognises  the  significant 
strengthening  of Irish financial  system, the major  structural  changes that  have  taken  place 
since  the  financial  crisis  and  the  implementation  of  a  more  proactive  regulatory  approach, 
concluding that “the authorities have been effective and vigorous in strengthening prudential 
regulation  and  supervision,  implementing  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  and  keeping  up  with 
developments in European and international good practice.” In relation to the supervision of 
securities markets, the FSSA also acknowledges the Bank’s leading role in the analysis of 
collective investment activities, which is significant in view of the large scale and international 
interconnectedness of the Irish investment funds sector. 
At the same time, the IMF has also made a number of important recommendations to increase 
further the resilience of the Irish financial sector and improve the effectiveness of the Bank as 
a regulator. The Bank has already started to work on these recommendations, in conjunction 
with other Irish and European authorities. To take one example, the Bank has recently formed 
a new internal advisory committee on the design of domestic macroprudential policy measures, 
including the borrower-based mortgage rules, the counter-cyclical capital buffer and the other 
systemically 
IMF’s 
recommendation  to  improve  further  the  degree  of  public  transparency  in  relation  to  our 
decision-making  processes  and  our  own  ongoing  commitment  to  provide  evidence-based 
explanations  for  our  policy  measures,  summary  records  of  the  meetings  of  this  new 
macroprudential measures committee (MMC) will be published. 
important  significant 
(OSII)  buffer. 
line  with 
institution 
the 
In 
Stress tests 
An important element of the FSAP was a stress test exercise for the banking system. The 
forward-looking assessment of the resilience of banks to various risk scenarios is a key tool in 
informing  supervisory  actions  and  financial  stability  policies.  In  fact,  the  Bank  has  recently 
participated in three stress testing exercises: first, as part of the IMF FSAP; second, as part of 
the wider bank stress tests across the European Union, led by the European Banking Authority 
(EBA); and third, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) stress tests, which followed the 
EBA  methodology  and  ran  concurrently  with  it.  The  Bank  also  continues  to  review  and 
challenge the banks’ own stress testing approaches and outcomes. I will focus on the first two 
exercises, as the outcomes are now in the public domain. 
The Bank’s analytical framework was used to support the IMF FSAP bank stress test. The 
FSAP adverse scenario was not predictive but designed to assess the capacity of Irish banks 
to withstand a severe but plausible scenario of a simultaneous downturn in the Irish and UK 
economies, characterised by a fall in property prices and a widening of sovereign spreads that 
triggers increased funding costs for banks. The exercise confirmed that the risks within the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   banking sector are manageable at a system-wide level. Unsurprisingly, it also highlighted that 
some vulnerabilities still exist as a consequence of the recent crisis. 
The  EBA  stress  test  serves  as  a  useful  barometer  to  assess  the  health  of  the  European 
banking sector and focuses on the largest banks operating in the European Union. Relative to 
other member countries, the Irish banking system has experienced higher loan loss rates since 
2008.  Since  projected  credit  losses  in  the  adverse  scenario  are  calculated  based  on  past 
experience, the capital depletion in the adverse scenario is inevitably more pronounced for 
Irish institutions. Stronger starting capital positions coupled with ongoing balance sheet repair 
has enabled European banks, including the Irish banks, to withstand a more severe scenario 
than in the 2014 stress test exercise. As with the FSAP stress test results, the primary message 
from the exercise is that the Irish banks included in the EBA sample (AIB and Bank of Ireland) 
are adequately capitalised but remain vulnerable to a downturn, especially in relation to the 
continued workout of problem loans and the sustainability under stress of current profitability 
levels. 
The FSAP, EBA and SSM stress test results, together with additional supervisory stress testing 
work, are being combined with the full risk assessment for all in-scope banks to feed into the 
annual supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP), which is used to determine capital 
requirements and capital guidance for banks. In addition, the stress tests and SREP inform the 
risk mitigation programmes, which are focused on driving the banks to continue to reduce their 
risk profiles. As the ECB is now the competent authority for the supervision of Irish banks, the 
focus of our joint work includes ensuring that banks make further progress in the workout of 
problem  loans,  have  credible  business  strategies  and  risk  management  plans  to  increase 
resilience to deterioration in their operating environment, including any adverse consequences 
of Brexit. 
Brexit 
The short- and medium-term macroeconomic effects on Ireland of Brexit depend on several 
factors. Most directly, a slowdown in UK output growth and a depreciation of Sterling against 
the euro adversely affect UK-orientated Irish exporters. These factors explain why we have 
materially  revised  our  growth  forecasts  for  2016  and  2017.  While  the  Irish  economy  has 
become less reliant on the UK for trade over recent decades, the UK remains an important 
market for many indigenous firms, with the agri-food and tourism sectors especially exposed. 
At the same time, it is important to put the the recent depreciation of Sterling against the euro 
into context, since it can also be interpreted as an unwinding of the bilateral appreciation that 
began in Summer 2014: the current £/€ rate (0.84) is remarkably close to the average rate 
between the start of 2009 and Summer 2014 (0.85). Still, the £/€ rate remains considerably 
weaker compared to pre-crisis patterns: the average £/€ rate between 1999 and Summer 2007 
was 0.67. 
Despite some initial fears, we have yet to see the operation of more powerful transmission 
mechanisms  by  which  Brexit  triggers  a  more  general  international  decline  in  confidence 
indicators  and/or  initiates  a  "risk  off"  phase  in  the  international financial  system that  would 
involve a general repricing of risk premia, a decline in asset values and a tightening in financial 
conditions.  Rather,  the  international  markets  have  initially  focused  on  the  likelihood  of  a 
prolongation  of  low  policy  rates,  with  a  visible  drop  in  the  yields  in  many  sovereign  bond 
markets (and a related reduction in bank equity values). 
While financial contagion channels have not been strongly operative during the initial post-
Brexit period, the gradual crystallisation of the prospective new relationship between the UK 
and the EU over the coming months carries the continuous risk of triggering adverse market 
developments if a “harder” form of Brexit emerges as the more likely final outcome. Moreover, 
in view of its tight economic and financial linkages to the UK and its high levels of private and 
public sector debt, Ireland is especially vulnerable to any Brexit-related reversal in international 
financial sentiment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   There  is  also  an  active  debate  about  the  implications  of  Brexit  for  the  configuration  of  the 
European  financial  sector.  The  impact  on  the  geographical  choices  of  producers  of 
international financial services depends on a wide array of factors, including the accumulated 
track records as financial centers, the nature of national legal and tax systems, the relative 
levels of operating costs, transport links, and the relative attractiveness of different cities to the 
families of internationally-mobile financial workers. 
Since the EU has a harmonised approach to financial regulation, regulatory competition among 
member states should not be a driving factor in determining locational choices within the EU. 
This applies a fortiori to the euro area, since the ECB-led SSM provides a unified institutional 
framework for the supervision of banks. 
Accordingly,  the  Bank's  approach  to  authorising  and  regulating  financial  firms  is  firmly 
embedded in the wider European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS). In particular, the 
Bank  has  a  well-established  approach  to  authorisations,  in  line  with  the  practice  of  our 
continental peers. We implement our mission statement of “Safeguarding Stability, Protecting 
Consumers” by ensuring that the applicant comply with all relevant EU and national legislative 
and prudential requirements. These requirements protect consumers of financial services from 
the potential effects of fraud or failure and assure the various types of funders of financial 
entities  that  corporate  governance  safeguards  are  robust.  In  addition,  the  stability  of  the 
domestic  and  international  financial  systems  is  a  key  focus  for  the  Bank  and  international 
regulators,  with  well-designed  recovery  and  resolution  plans  for  financial  firms  (especially 
systemically-important institutions) an important element in limiting contagion and protecting 
taxpayers in the event that a firm goes bust. 
The Bank is committed to providing a clear, consistent, open and transparent authorisation 
process, while ensuring a rigorous assessment of the applicable regulatory standards. The 
authorisation gateway forms an important part of our supervisory model, based on assertive 
risk-based supervision in line with international standards, and underpinned by the credible 
threat of enforcement. To ensure transparent and predictable authorisation timelines for high-
volume processes, the Bank publishes on a semi-annual basis its service standards in respect 
of processing authorisations: coincidentally, the latest report in this series will be published 
later today. 
In relation to unique and complex applications, the authorisation process is inevitably more 
layered than routine cases, requiring a substantial commitment of resources and the assembly 
of  dedicated  project  teams  with  the  requisite  technical  skills  and  internal  governance 
processes. To deliver an efficient and robust regulatory regime, the Bank has expanded its 
target staffing levels in recent years, subject to the capacity to recruit and retain those with the 
required skills and experience. 
Since the establishment of the SSM, the ECB, with input from the relevant national competent 
authority (in Ireland, the Bank), is the competent authority for granting banking licences. The 
assessment  criteria  are  detailed,  rigorously  applied  and  unchanged  by  Brexit.  Equally,  the 
SSM is directly responsible for the supervision of significant institutions, with Frankfurt-based 
personnel leading the joint supervisory teams overseeing each individual significant institution, 
such that banks can locate in any member country of the euro area and receive the same 
supervisory treatment, which is an important principle of an area-wide banking union. 
Macro-financial statistics 
Finally, let me turn to the challenges involved in measuring macro-financial developments in 
Ireland. For the conduct of monetary and macroprudential policies, it is essential that there 
exist robust measures of the levels of domestic incomes and production, together with reliable 
ancillary  measures  of  sectoral  and  international  financial  accounts.  More  generally,  such 
indicators are also vital for fiscal analysis and many private-sector decisions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  highly-globalised  nature  of  the  Irish  macro-financial  system  means  that  accurate 
implementation of UN/Eurostat statistical manuals does not provide sufficient guidance, as is 
evident  from  the  debate  following  the  most  recent  CSO  official  releases.  Over  time,  it  is 
desirable that international conventions in the measurement of flows and stocks of economic 
and  financial  variables  are  redesigned  in  order  to  avoid  anomalous  national  statistical 
outcomes and provide sufficient granularity that the different domestic and external users of 
national statistics can be accommodated. 
In the near term, there are two domestic challenges. First, I welcome the initiative by the CSO 
to establish a consultative group (which I will chair) that will consider, inter alia, the potential 
for the development of supplementary statistical series that may enhance understanding of the 
Irish economy and financial system. In recent years, the CSO has published a series of high-
quality explanatory notes about the impact of multinational firms on the national accounts; it is 
timely to build on this work in order to construct useful alternative indicators on an ongoing 
basis.  Second,  policymakers  should  take  care  to  look  through  the  headline  national  and 
financial accounts data, in order to develop and communicate alternative policy targets that 
are  not  affected  by  the various  statistical  issues  that  have  been  much  discussed  in recent 
weeks. 
Conclusions 
I have covered a wide range of topics. Still, it is possible to identify some common threads that 
underpin the analysis. First, we should recognise that the baseline case remains quite positive, 
with considerable momentum supporting a broadly-based recovery. Second, at the same time, 
it is obvious that much remains to be accomplished in addressing the adverse legacy effects 
of  the  crisis  and  establishing  the  foundations  for  sustainable  and  inclusive  medium-term 
growth. Third, Ireland  continues to  be  especially  vulnerable  to  downside  shocks,  such  that 
policies to improve the resilience of the private and public sectors are vital. 
Accordingly,  the  management  of  the  macro-financial  implications  of  Brexit  should  be 
underpinned by due consideration of these three factors. For the Bank, the issues identified in 
my speech today imply a busy ongoing work programme in fulfilling our mandate: I look forward 
to leading our efforts in the coming months. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
