  Karnit Flug: The conduct of economic policy, and the various functions 
filled by the Bank of Israel and the government in conducting the policy 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the press conference marking 
the publication of the Bank of Israel’s 2015 Annual Report, Tel Aviv, 3 April 2016. 
 Summary 
The Governor of the Bank of Israel: 
• 
Accommodative monetary policy helped the economy to deal with a moderate global 
environment. The reduction of the deficit as well as several other factors supported 
the continued decline in the share of public debt in GDP, the opposite of its trend in 
most advanced economies. 
The success in dealing with short term challenges, and the reasonable state of the 
economy relative to the global environment permits an enhanced effort to reduce the 
gap between Israel and other advanced economies in several areas and to prepare 
the economic infrastructure for the future. 
The  trends  in  the  global  environment  and  the  demographic  trends  in  Israel  are 
setting  complex  challenges  for  the  future,  and  obligate  us  to  act  to  change  the 
trends  in  labor  productivity,  education,  health,  and  infrastructure,  so  that  Israel’s 
economy can fully utilize its potential. 
It is therefore important that the government formulate a set of priorities which will 
allow  it  to  focus  on  dealing  with  fundamental  problems  of  Israel’s  economy  and 
society in the long term. 
In order to deal with these, the government will have to improve the level of public 
services, to invest in infrastructures, and to support growth. 
    Today we are publishing the Bank of Israel’s 2015 Annual Report. The report presents an 
analysis  of  economic  activity  in  Israel  in  the  past  year,  the  economic  policy  that  came  to 
support it, and points of emphasis and recommendations to policy makers for future years. In 
my remarks today, I will focus on the conduct of economic policy, and the various functions 
filled by the Bank of Israel and the government in conducting the policy. 
It  is  important to  distinguish  between  policy  that  acts  in  the  short  term,  and  is  intended  to 
moderate  economic fluctuations  –  which  economists  call  “the  business  cycle”  –  and  policy 
that is geared toward achieving long terms goals. 
In  the  short  term,  policy  makers  use  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  Monetary  policy  is 
focused on maintaining price stability, and on supporting economic activity and employment 
when  there  are  shocks  that  moderate  them.  Fiscal  policy  balances  the  need  to  support 
growth  in  such  conditions  with  the  need  to  maintain  a  reasonable  deficit  and  manage  the 
public debt burden over time to minimize the burden of interest payments in the future, and to 
provide the government room to act, termed the fiscal space, in times of crisis. 
Economic policy focused on long term targets – chief among them achieving inclusive growth 
over time – acts through the budget policy on its various components (size and composition 
of  government  expenditure,  size  and  composition  of  taxes),  as  well  as  by  promoting 
structural changes and reforms. 
The  more  effective  monetary  policy  is  in  smoothing  out  the  business  cycles,  the  more  it 
allows budgetary policy the space to act in order to focus policy on dealing with the long term 
challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Economic policy is impacted by various factors, but as we are a small and open economy, 
we are affected very much by the global environment. 
The global environment facing macroeconomic policy in the short term was moderate in 2015 
as well – weak global growth which included an additional slowing in emerging markets and 
continued relatively low growth in the US and eurozone, very moderate growth in world trade, 
a  sharp  decline  in  energy  and  other  commodity  prices  due  both  to  relatively  moderate 
demand and against the background of an increase in supply. Against the background of all 
these, major central banks continued, and some even enhanced, their very accommodative 
monetary policy. 
In Israel, the main developments included of course the very low inflation rate, impacted by 
commodity  and  energy  prices  worldwide,  and  by  price  reductions  initiated  by  the 
government; the moderate growth which was impacted by the weakness of exports against 
the  background  of  moderate  world  trade,  but  also  by  specific  domestic  factors  and  the 
appreciation  of  the  shekel,  the  relatively  strong  labor  market,  and  the  rapid  increase  in 
outstanding mortgages and housing prices. 
Monetary policy operated against this background. The Monetary Committee adopted very 
accommodative monetary policy this year as well, including the reduction of the interest rate 
to  a  low  of  0.1  percent  in  March  2015,  alongside  foreign  exchange  purchases  within  the 
framework  of  two  programs  –  the  program  intended  to  offset  the  impact  of  natural  gas 
production,  and  the  program  to  moderate  fluctuations  that  are  not  in  line  with  economic 
fundamentals. In light of the fact that the effective exchange rate is appreciated relative to its 
equilibrium value according to various estimates, it continues to weigh on growth of exports 
and the tradable sector. Exchange rate policy acted in the past and will continue to act in the 
future in order to facilitate growth of exports. 
In  order  to  reduce  the  risks  in  the  mortgage  market  and  to  support  financial  stability,  the 
series  of  limitations  in  mortgages  imposed  in  recent  years  by  the  Banking  Supervision 
Department remained in place. 
One  of  the  main  channels  through  which  accommodative  monetary  policy  succeeded  in 
impacting  on  economic  activity  is  credit  to  households.  This  credit  increased,  its  cost 
declined, and the reduction of the interest rate thus led to a marked reduction in the price of 
consumer credit, and subsequently to the increase of such credit, which in the end supported 
the increase in private consumption by a relatively rapid prate in recent years, primarily  in 
2015. Private consumption, which makes up 55 percent of GDP, was the dominant factor in 
contributing to growth this year, and partly offset the weakness in activity that derived from 
the decline in exports and investments. This was also reflected in employment. 
Budgetary  policy  in  2015,  which  was  based  primarily  on  the  interim  budget,  reflected  a 
decline in the cyclically adjusted deficit – that is, the budget net of the effects of the deviation 
of growth from the long term rate – to 2.7 percent of GDP. As such, the policy reduced the 
fiscal stimulus (that is, its countercyclical effect). This is a reasonable policy given that the 
level  of  the  cyclically  adjusted  deficit  is  still  relatively  high,  and  that  the  accommodative 
monetary policy supported activity. The decline in the deficit, together with a relatively rapid 
increase  in  the  GDP  deflator,  and  the  erosion  pf  the  CPI-indexed  debt,  supported  the 
continuation  of  the  decline  in  the  share  of  public  debt  in  GDP,  the  opposite  of  its  trend  in 
most advanced economies, and of their average level. The interest payment burden remains 
high relative to the OECD average, but is in a trend of decline, which has accelerated in the 
past two years. This decline derives not only from the decline in the debt ratio but also in the 
active policy of the Ministry of Finance Accountant General’s division, which acted to roll over 
the debt at today’s low rates, and also to reduce the roll over risk by extending the duration of 
the debt. The reduction of the debt repayment burden – from about 4.5 percent of GDP in 
2010 to about 2.5 percent of GDP today frees up significant resources for other uses. The 
deficit ceiling that was set for the 2016 budget and the reduction of VAT and corporate taxes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in response to enhanced tax collection that derived to a great extent from the strength in real 
estate transactions, are liable to halt the continuation of these positive developments. 
The  success  in  dealing  with  the  short  term  challenges,  and  the  economy’s  reasonable 
situation relative to the global environment, permit an increased effort to act to reduce the 
gap, in a range of issues, between us and advanced economies, and to set the economic 
infrastructure for the future. It is important that the government formulate an order of priorities 
in  a  manner  that  will  allow  it  to  focus  on  dealing  over  the  long  term  with  fundamental 
problems of Israel’s economy and society. 
How? The economic policy for achieving the long term targets – inclusive and sustainable 
growth  –  acts  through  provision  of  public  services  at  an  adequate  level,  support  of  the 
economy’s  growth  drivers,  operation  of  policy  instruments  to  reduce  gaps,  reforms  to 
increase  efficiency  in  the  use  of  infrastructures  and  in  public  services,  and  increased 
competition in industries in which it is insufficient. 
What are the long-term challenges facing policy makers? 
A forward-looking view indicates that there are processes, some of them global and some 
domestic, serving as a headwind to growth – based on analysis by international institutions, 
the global growth rate is expected to be more moderate in coming years relative to the years 
prior to the global financial crisis, and the growth rate of world trade is expected to moderate 
even more, due to the weakening of the link between global growth and the development of 
world trade. 
Here  in  Israel,  the  combination  of  demographic  changes  (an  increase  in  the  share  of 
populations whose employment rates are relatively low, and a slowdown in the increase of 
the  prime  working  age  population)  alongside  the  exhaustion  of  the  contribution  from  an 
increase in education, as reflected in average number of years of schooling, will act to slow 
the growth rate in the future. Thus, active policy to offset these trends is required. 
Against the background of these future trends, it is important to examine recent years’ trends 
in  labor  productivity,  quality  of  public  services  and  income  gaps,  in  order  to  outline  the 
directions in which policy should act in order to deal with the challenges. 
Labor productivity – measured as output per work hour: We are not closing the gap relative 
to advanced economies, and this is correct as well in the period since the global crisis. This 
gap, between output per worker in various industries in Israel and output per worker in those 
industries  in  advanced  economies,  is  focused  at  industries  producing  primarily  for  the 
domestic  market,  and  they  are  domestic  in  their  characteristics,  and  therefore  are  not 
exposed to competition from abroad. It is important to note that these are industries that are 
producing the main component of GDP, and also employ a significant majority of workers in 
the  economy.  The  discussion  on  productivity  sounds  very  theoretical.  However,  for 
illustration, if we were to close the productivity gap vis-à-vis the OECD average, we would 
increase the standard of living by about a third, which is about the increase we would gain in 
per capita GDP. 
In this regard, we can look at, for example, the construction industry, which employs about 
7.5 percent of those employed in the business sector – a clear domestic industry – and let’s 
examine the output per worker in this industry over a long period of time. Productivity in the 
industry declined in the 1970s and 1980s, and has remained at a virtual standstill since the 
1990s,  in  contrast  to  an  increase  in  productivity  in  manufacturing,  which  was  accelerated 
since the exposure program in the 1990s, and the agriculture industry in which there was a 
moderate  increase  in  productivity  over  the  entire  period.  The  construction  industry,  which 
“benefits”  from  the  availability  of  foreign  workers,  whose  salary  is  low  relative  to  domestic 
workers  with  similar  characteristics,  suffers  from  a  significant  lag  in  technology.  The 
government’s  recent  decision,  to  allow  foreign  contracting  firms  to  enter  into  residential 
construction  projects,  if  implemented  at  a  significant  scope,  is  likely  to  contribute  to  a 
turnaround in the trend of productivity in the industry – companies that will bring advanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  technologies  to  Israel  will  force  the  local  contractors  to  increase  efficiency  too,  and  in  the 
long term will contribute to an increase in the wages of domestic workers in the industry. 
The  level  of  public  services  shows  a  mixed  picture  –  in  industries  in  which  adequate 
investment was made in recent years, whether in physical infrastructure or in an appropriate 
work force, we benefit from the return on the investment, in the form of high quality of level of 
services. Yet at the same time, in industries in which appropriate investment was not or is not 
made,  the  service  level  is  low  or  is  expected  to  be  negatively  impacted.  It  is  important  to 
emphasize that the return on public investment, or the harm from a lack of such investment, 
are not seen immediately. We currently benefit from past investments, and begin to feel the 
impact in areas in which investment was not sufficient. I will illustrate with several examples 
from various industries: 
The  current  level  of  health  services  is  good  by  international  comparison,  as  indicated  by 
public satisfaction surveys (and as reflected as well in a relatively high life expectancy, low 
infant  mortality,  etc.).  However,  various  indicators  show  that  the  physical  and  human 
infrastructures  are  very  “strained”  and  there  are  already  focal  points  of  very  extreme 
congestion. Thus, the number of hospital beds per 1,000 people is relatively low, urgent care 
occupancy is especially high, and the share of doctors below age 55 is nearly 50 percent – 
the  highest  among  advanced  economies.  Without  marked  investments  in  the  physical 
infrastructure  and  in  training  doctors  and  nurses,  the  service  level  will  deteriorate  rapidly, 
particularly in view of the expected aging of the population. 
Regarding education level, the results of years of disregard are already seen – both in terms 
of  Israeli  students’  poor  results  on  international  standardized  tests,  and  in  the  large  gaps 
between students from families at various income levels. For example, in an index examining 
the share of students from low socioeconomic conditions who achieve high scores on these 
tests, we are nearly at the bottom of the list. This index reflects the fact that affirmative action 
is not succeeding in improving the chances of a student from a weak economic background 
reaching a high attainment level. Crowded classes and a small number of computers relative 
to  the  number  of  children  (a  computer  for  every  …fourth  student)  are  only  indicators  that 
public expenditure per child is low, and the outcomes are in line with that. Thus it is important 
to note in the past two years there has been a notable increase in government expenditure 
on education services, including a marked increase in teachers’ wage, which will certainly be 
expressed over time as well in improvement in level of teachers. 
A  positive  example  of  the  result  of  investment  is  the  area  of  public  transport.  In  the 
availability of public transportation services, which deteriorated until a decade ago, a marked 
improvement has been seen over the past decade due to significant government investment 
and the opening of the industry to competition, and together with the reduction in prices of 
public transportation that was recently set in law, we expect an increase in the use of public 
transportation,  which  will  contribute  to  the  public  welfare,  and  to  an  improvement  in  the 
quality of the environment. 
In terms of inequality in the economy, the analysis presented in the report indicates that it 
is not a matter of fate, and that it can be reduced through increased use in policy tools that 
have  been  proven  effective.  It  is  worth  noting  the  decline  that  occurred  in  gross  income 
inequality (economic inequality), which today is not high in international comparison, against 
the background of a marked increase in labor force participation, which increased the share 
of  families  with  two  wage  earners,  and  thus  reduced  the  inequality  in  work  hours  per 
household.  A  decline  in  inequality  in  economic  income  occurred  despite  the  inequality  in 
wage  per  hour  remaining  high.  This  trend  is  supported  by  policy  to  reduce  the  negative 
incentives  for  employment  that  were  incorporated  in  the  past  in  the  welfare  system,  and 
some  increase  in  services  supporting  employment  such  as  making  the  Compulsory  Free 
Education Law effective from age 3 and expanding the subsidy of afternoon childcare and 
home-based prenursery facilities. As we have already shown in the report, there is a need to 
expand  the  scope  of  these  services.  In  contrast,  the  inequality  in  net  income,  after 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  allowances  and  taxation,  remains  especially  high,  and  derives  from  a  combination  of 
relatively  low  contribution  of  the  system  of  allowances  and  the  progressive  tax  system  to 
reducing  inequality.  A  main  tool  in  dealing  with  this  issue,  which  the  government  even 
expanded the use of recently, is the Earned Income Tax Credit. 
A fair share of the results we have seen regarding the insufficient level of public services, the 
moderate increase in productivity reflected in moderate growth, and the high inequality in net 
income,  are  the  consequences  of  civilian  expenditure  that  is  too  low.  After  public 
expenditure that was very high in the beginning in the 2000s, there was a marked reduction 
in  the  share  of  public  expenditure  in  GDP,  and  currently  the  gap  in  civilian  expenditure 
between us and most advanced economies is large, and thus also the public expenditure. 
Government  expenditure  on  clear  growth  drivers  such  as  R&D  is  also  low  in  international 
comparison. Broader government support can be the key to factories’ ability, not just in the 
high tech sector, to upgrade technology that will help them succeed in a competitive world, or 
active  labor  market  policy  –  relevant  professional  training,  or  making  services  that  support 
employment,  such  as  subsidizing  childcare,  more  accessible  –  can  help  in  successful 
integration  into  the  labor  market,  and  to  increase  the  entry  of  working  families  who 
nonetheless  remain  poor.  An  increase  in  the  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit  will  contribute  to 
increasing  the  earnings  of  low-income  working  families.  Steps  are  being  taken  in  these 
directions, and there is also a decision to greatly expand professional training beginning with 
this year. It is important to work assiduously in these directions. 
So  how  can  the  government  act  to  advance  the  economy’s  challenges  in  view  of  the 
challenges  we  are  facing,  in  both  the  short  term  and  the  long  term?  How  is  it  possible  to 
improve the quality and efficiency of services to the citizen, to improve the level of human 
capital and the physical infrastructure, in order to support inclusive and sustainable growth? 
As I illustrated in the beginning of these remarks, the accommodative monetary policy helps 
the economy to deal with the global business cycle, and thus allows the government to focus 
on policy challenges for the long term. In order to deal with these, the government must act 
to improve the level of public services, to invest in their increased capacity, and to support 
the economy’s growth drivers. 
If we will want to achieve these targets, it will also be necessary to increase efficiency and to 
markedly increase civilian expenditure, and thus, beyond the use of resources that open up 
from reducing the interest burden on government debt, and in order not roll over the burden 
of  this  increase  on  to  future  generations,  there  will  be  no  alternative  to  increasing  tax 
revenues,  though  canceling  tax  exemptions  that  are  not  justified  economically,  and/or  to 
increasing tax rates. 
Beyond  the  improvement  in  the  level  of  services  to  citizens,  and  to  investment  in 
infrastructure  and growth  drivers,  it  is  important  as  well  to  act to  promote  reforms that  will 
reduce the barriers to growth as they are reflected in, for example, our poor showing in the 
Doing  Business  index,  and  to  increase  competition  in  industries  where  it  is  not  sufficient, 
including the financial sector. 
The long term is already here, and to the extent that we move early to adopt a strategic plan 
focused  on  the  issues  I  have  raised,  we  will  be  better  able  to  deal  with  these  challenges. 
Adopting such a plan is critical in view of the processes that I described, both in the global 
economy and in Israel, which obligates us to do all that is possible in order to maximize our 
tremendous potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
