   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening the monetary transmission 
mechanism through the BSP’s Interest Rate Corridor System 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  MOA  Signing  for  the  BSP’s  Interest  Rate  Corridor 
System, Manila, 16 May 2016. 
 Magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! I am pleased to see all of you here at the signing of the 
Memorandum  of  Agreement  on  the  Monetary  Operations  System  (MOS).  Today’s  simple 
signing ceremony is a milestone that ushers in a new framework for the way that the BSP 
conducts its monetary operations.  
Since we first broached the idea to the public in 2013, we carefully laid down the groundwork 
for the adoption of the Interest Rate Corridor or the IRC this year. This included drawing up an 
operational  framework  through  consultations  with  the  banking  community;  establishing  the 
MOS as an IT platform for auction-based monetary operations; and developing a model for 
domestic liquidity forecasting to guide our daily monetary operations. In other words, years of 
preparation culminate in today’s MOA signing. And in a few weeks’ time, on June 3, 2016,1 we 
will bring these operational elements together to implement the IRC system.  
Our motivation  is  simple. We  would  like  to further  strengthen the  relationship  between  the 
BSP’s policy rates and money market interest rates. This, in turn, will enable the BSP to better 
manage  inflation  and  promote  long-term  sustainable  growth.  By  providing  an  operating 
framework for money market rates to move more closely with the BSP’s policy rate, the IRC 
will help enhance the link between the stance of BSP monetary policy and the real economy.  
In order to establish the interest rate corridor, the BSP interest rates will be re-calibrated as 
follows: 
First, the current overnight RP rate of 6.0 percent will be reduced to 3.5 percent when the RP 
window is converted to the overnight lending facility.  
Second, the overnight RRP rate of 4.0 percent will be adjusted to 3.0 percent. 
And third, the SDA rate of 2.5 percent will be kept steady when it is transformed to the overnight 
deposit facility.  
The new configuration effectively sets a ± 50 basis-point width around the BSP’s policy interest 
rate.  While  there  is  no  international  consensus  on  the  appropriate  width  of  the  corridor,  a 
narrow corridor provides clearer guidance for the market and also helps to limit volatility in 
short-term interest rates.  
By introducing auction-type instruments, the IRC system is intended to ensure more equitable 
access  for  all  participants.  In  addition,  we  hope  to  ultimately  aid  in  the  development  and 
deepening of the country’s capital and money markets. Over time, as more liquidity is absorbed 
by the BSP, market participants will be encouraged to be more active and more prudent in 
managing their own day-to-day and short-term liquidity positions. It is our hope that, in the 
process, we will encourage counterparties to reduce their reliance on central bank facilities 
and instead transact more with each other through interbank markets, in order to meet liquidity 
requirements.  
The more immediate benefit of the new auction-type instruments under the IRC is that the price 
discovery process will be facilitated by the bids we receive from market participants, which will 
                                                
1   By June 3, all RRPs under the current facility would have matured and all term placements under SDA would 
have been wound down to give way to the new facilities under the IRC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   provide information for the BSP and for the market on the prevailing cost of and demand for 
liquidity. In turn, better price discovery will allow the industry to establish more accurate interest 
rate benchmarks in the future.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me emphasize that the new IRC system is not a departure from the 
BSP’s  current  monetary  policy  framework.  In  fact,  the  IRC  system  is  envisioned  to  further 
support the inflation targeting framework by reinforcing the BSP’s policy stance as represented 
by the overnight reverse repurchase rate that will remain our key policy rate.  
More importantly, the shift to the IRC system does not represent a change in the BSP’s stance 
of monetary policy. The IRC reforms are primarily operational in nature and will not materially 
affect prevailing monetary policy settings upon implementation. At the same time, short-term 
liquidity conditions are expected to remain broadly unchanged, as funds will continue to be 
absorbed through monetary operations under the new IRC system. 
Moreover,  the  rate  adjustments  in  the  BSP’s  instruments  under  the  IRC  system  remain 
consistent  with  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  growth.  Our  current  domestic  environment  of 
manageable inflation, a stable financial sector and firm economic growth prospects affords us 
the flexibility to implement these IRC-related reforms at this time. 
The successful implementation over time of the IRC system will also allow for recalibrations in 
other monetary policy tools, including possible adjustments in reserve requirements in line with 
international norms.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  often  said  that  while  our  mandate  remains  the  same,  the 
environment in which we operate in remains dynamic and continues to evolve. We therefore 
continue to rise up to the challenge of rethinking the status quo and finding ways to further 
improve as a central monetary authority – a central monetary authority that promotes stability 
and fosters sustained economic growth.  
As we strive to constantly be better and to build on our strengths, we hope to be able to count 
on the continuing support of the banking and financial sectors. Indeed, for our IRC system to 
succeed, it is important that we move forward together and cooperate in making it work as 
envisioned.  
I am pleased therefore that we have with us today the Bankers Association of the Philippines 
represented by its President Nestor Tan; the Money Market Association of the Philippines with 
its President Raul Martin Pedro; the Investment House Association of the Philippines with its 
President  Manuel  Tordesillas;  the  Trust  Officers  Association  of  the  Philippines  with  its 
President  Angel  Maria  Pacis;  the  ACI  Philippines,  the  Financial  Markets  Association 
represented  by  its  Treasurer  Anthony  Paul  Yap;  and  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks  with  its 
President Rommel Latinazo. 
I would challenge our industry associations to undertake your day-to-day liquidity management 
more actively, to strive for greater participation in the interbank market and reduce reliance on 
central  bank  facilities,  and  to  continue  efforts  towards  establishing  appropriate  price 
benchmarks for financial markets. 
Finally, we also thank the media for their continuing coverage that keeps us connected with 
our stakeholders and our people.  
Maraming salamat sa inyo.  
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
