  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 9 June 
2016. 
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are pleased to be with you today to 
talk about the June issue of the Bank’s Financial System Review (FSR), which we published 
this morning. 
The  FSR  identifies  financial  system  vulnerabilities  and  monitors  how  they  evolve.  It  then 
looks  at  how  those  vulnerabilities  could  become  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Turning  vulnerabilities  into  risks  requires  a  trigger  –  an  event  that  interacts  with  the 
vulnerability and has a  magnified effect on the financial system and the economy. So, we 
measure financial stability risk as a combination of the scale of the underlying vulnerability, 
the probability that a risk will be triggered and the estimated magnitude of the fallout if it is. 
Since our last FSR in December, the global macroeconomic environment first deteriorated 
but  then  improved.  The  US  economic  recovery  gained  traction,  and  accommodative 
monetary policies helped stabilize global financial conditions. Here in Canada, the economy 
continues to work its way through the implications of low oil prices, even though prices have 
recovered some lost ground. The export recovery remains uneven, and has yet to translate 
into stronger investment spending. Nevertheless, we remain confident that those forces are 
in motion in light of continued US expansion, past monetary policy actions and announced 
fiscal plans. More recently, the devastating wildfires in Alberta pose a significant downside 
risk  for  near-term  economic  growth,  but  estimated  insurance  claims,  while  large,  do  not 
suggest a threat to financial stability. 
Today’s FSR focuses on the same three vulnerabilities as our December report: 
• 
• 
• 
We assessed these vulnerabilities in the context of four risk scenarios, namely: 
• 
• 
the elevated level of Canadian household indebtedness, 
imbalances in the Canadian housing market and 
fragile fixed-income market liquidity. 
a large increase in Canadian unemployment brought about by a severe recession; 
a sharp jump in long-term interest rates driven by higher risk premiums, globally and 
in Canada; 
a sudden rise in stress from China or another major emerging economy; and 
a prolonged period of very low commodity prices. 
• 
• 
The first two vulnerabilities, household indebtedness and imbalances in the housing market, 
have both moved higher since our last report. However, in view of the improving economic 
outlook, there is now a lower probability that the risks stemming from these vulnerabilities will 
be  triggered.  This  combination  of  higher  vulnerabilities  but  lower  probability  leaves  the 
financial stability risks related to those vulnerabilities roughly unchanged from our last report. 
Our  view  is  still  that  a  strengthening  economy  and  rising  incomes  will  reduce  these 
vulnerabilities over time for the country as a whole. 
Nevertheless,  it  was  the  view  of  Governing  Council  that  this  conclusion  merited  a  caveat, 
which  is  that  the  pace  of  house  price  increases  in  Toronto,  and  especially  Vancouver,  is 
unlikely  to  be  sustained,  given  underlying  fundamentals.  This  suggests  that  prospective 
homebuyers and their lenders should not extrapolate recent real estate price performance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
into  the  future  when  contemplating  a  transaction.  Indeed,  the  potential  for  a  downturn  in 
prices  in  these  markets,  although  difficult  to  quantify,  is  growing.  A  significant  decline  in 
house prices could have material consequences for some individuals and for some entities in 
the  mortgage  business.  However,  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  is  resilient  enough  to 
handle the potential impact. 
The  third  financial  vulnerability  featured  in  the  FSR  is  the  fragility  of  fixed-income  market 
liquidity. The empirical evidence is mixed, but there is considerable anecdotal evidence that 
fixed-income  markets  have  become  less  liquid,  in  part  as  a  consequence  of  regulatory 
reforms to safeguard the financial system. We believe that the system will eventually evolve 
in  such  a  way  as  to  make  market  liquidity  more  reliable  over  time.  Nevertheless,  we  will 
continue  to  monitor  and  study  this  issue,  both  in  Canada  and  with  our  international 
colleagues through the Financial Stability Board and the Bank for International Settlements. 
All things considered, the Governing Council is of the view that financial stability risks overall 
have not changed materially since our last report. 
Let me also mention two very interesting reports included in this FSR. The first is a portrayal 
of Canada’s pension business, focusing on the eight largest public pension funds. Canada is 
a  global  leader  in  pension  fund  management,  and  this  article  provides  a  comprehensive 
review  of  their  activities.  As  major  players  in  Canada’s  financial  system,  these  entities 
warrant the Bank’s interest, and I wish to thank those organizations for their co-operation as 
we prepared the article. The second report takes a look at the securities-financing market in 
Canada and the implications of recent developments in that space for bond market liquidity. 
With that, Carolyn and I will be happy to respond to your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
