   Turalay Kenç: Stocktaking of international financial architecture 
Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at  the  “Stocktaking  of  International  Financial  Architecture”  Conference,  organized  by  the 
Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  (RBWC),  Shanghai  Development  Research 
Foundation (SDRF), Research Institute for Banking and Finance, China (PBOC) and Korea 
Institute for International Economic Policy (KIEP), Shanghai, 26 February 2016. 
 Over the last two decades the world has witnessed substantial increases in the trade volume 
to  global  GDP  ratio,  sharply  grown  international  investment  positions  and  significantly 
deepened production supply chains in the most part of the globe. As a result, monetary and 
financial  policies  across  countries  have  become  much  more  correlated.  The  conference 
organizers rightly asked the most crucial question whether the international monetary system 
(IMS) is still sufficiently stable in this current environment with a growing interconnectedness.  
In addition to this heightened interconnectedness, the global economy and financial markets 
face  the  challenges  of  the  unconventional  and  unusual  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced 
economies as well as diverging monetary policies of these countries, uncertainty in commodity 
prices,  the  risk  of  China’s  economic  hard-landing  and  the  unintended  market  liquidity 
consequences of the recent financial sector reforms across the world.  
Large  asset  purchasing  programs  of  the  major  central  banks  have  depressed  global  bond 
markets  with  decreasing  long-term  yields  as  well  as  short-term  yields  and  their  negative 
nominal  policy  rates  further  destabilized  bond  markets  and  in  general  financial  markets. 
Heightened volatility in global financial markets can be associated with the presence of very 
low  and  even  negative  rates  rather  than  the  underlying  macroeconomic  and  external 
imbalances. In these circumstances, any change in interest rate differential across countries 
is likely to create greater impacts than otherwise. If this interest rate change takes place in the 
largest and the most significant economy in the world, then the impact will expectedly be further 
magnified. 
The Fed’s start of interest rate normalization has demonstrated that its impact on the global 
economy and financial markets indeed has been large, giving rise to significant capital outflows 
from emerging market (EM) economies, large adjustments and volatility in exchange rates as 
well as widened EM spreads and interest rates. The adverse effects of the Fed’s interest rate 
normalization has been on average larger than those occurred in previous two financial turmoil 
episodes, namely the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis and the US tapering tantrum. However, 
the disparity between the effected countries has been large too. The plummeted commodity 
prices as well as other factors led to this outcome as commodity exporters suffered from both 
the lower commodity revenues and the tightening global financial conditions. Financial markets 
also differentiated EM countries by policy frameworks and prudent policies. Those having rich 
and better policy frameworks and prudent policies have withstood the recent global financial 
turmoil better than the others.  
With  lessons  learned from  previous  episodes  and  improvements  over the  years,  emerging 
market economies on average are better positioned to withstand financial turbulences, both 
now and in the future, than in the past. They embarked on extensive structural reforms aimed 
at overhauling financial regulatory and supervisory systems, strengthening public finances and 
fiscal  discipline,  granting  central  banks  independence  and  adopting  flexible  exchange  rate 
systems. These reforms enabled them to implement more prudent and countercyclical policies. 
EM economies supported their post crisis reforms by accumulating adequate foreign exchange 
reserves as an alternative to the IMF provided financing, which carries strong conditionality, 
as well as by further deepening and broadening their domestic financial markets. As a result, 
stock and flow balances, policy frameworks, and levels of economic confidence and market 
development in EM economies have strengthened substantially and radically. Deepened and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   broadened domestic financial markets have alleviated the so called original sin problem. It is 
fair to say that they now look strong enough to render the adverse effects of external financial 
shocks manageable. Given the current IMS what EM economies can most rely on are their 
prudent policies, better policy frameworks, foreign exchange reserves and flexible exchange 
rates. 
As for the IMS related questions of the session namely  
•  “Do floating exchange rates along with largely unrestricted capital flows play their role 
of shock absorber? Are we going to witness a return of currency crises of the 
1990’s? 
•  What does China economic slowdown and its current adjustment means for capital 
markets and for the quest of renminbi internationalization? 
•  Should  and  can  the  systematically  important  countries  “internalize”  their  spillovers 
effects to mitigate negative external impacts?” 
I  organize  my  points  around  the  three  functions  of  an  IMS  –  liquidity,  confidence  and 
adjustment. 
On liquidity function, there are two areas that we require significant improvement on the current 
IMS. The first is related to excessive liquidity during normal times. What are the appropriate 
policies to curb excessive capital flows? The IMF’s approach advocates that recipient countries 
should  implement  the  capital  flow  management  measures  and  use  macro-prudential  tools. 
Hence, there is an asymmetric treatment of countries as source countries are not expected to 
do much if not at all. There is of course room for a symmetric treatment. The Holy Grail may 
exist in the IMF’s articles of agreement as it states in Section 1 that “each member shall seek 
to promote stability… by fostering a monetary system that does not tend to produce erratic 
disruptions”.  
The  second  is  about  the  existence  of  safety  nets  providing  liquidity  during  financial  stress 
times.  
Again, the optimal provision of liquidity is the main issue. To what extent it should be divided 
among  global,  regional  and  local  sources.  It  is  a  classic  efficiency  versus  moral  hazard 
problem.  Changes  in  governance  structure  of  the  global  safety  net  providing  IOs  have  a 
potential  to  alleviate  this  problem.  The  2010  IMF  quota  and  governance  reforms  are  a 
significant  development  as  they  give  greater  voice  to  EM  countries  on  governing  the  IMF 
policies and procedures. This development together with increasing awareness of sufficient 
global safety nets would strengthen IMF recourses and reduce their stigma effect. Again, there 
is a symmetry issue in the provision of liquidity during financial stress times – whether there 
should be internationally designed mechanisms enforcing countries that supplied excessive 
liquidity in the first place also to provide liquidity to all recipient countries during financial stress 
times such as through currency swap arrangements. 
The confidence function of the IMS highlights the fact that all stakeholders including financial 
markets have greatest confidence in the functioning, resources and governance of the system. 
Strengthening its recourses, improving its governance and advancing its functions will crucially 
bolster all stakeholders’ confidence in the system. What have been done recently along the 
lines of the 2010 IMF quota and governance reform, the inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR 
system and the recent increases in the IMF resources greatly improved confidence in the IMS.  
The adjustment mechanism of an IMS is mostly related to its sustainability but also affects its 
confidence function. The IMS requires a symmetric and fair adjustment mechanism. The G20 
plays a central role in the adjustment mechanism of the IMS through fostering international 
policy coordination and cooperation. The IOs, especially the IMF, largely execute this G20 
objective through bilateral surveillance and multilateral surveillance or oversight of the world 
economy. Since the global financial crisis (GFC) giant steps have been taken at the G20 to 
strengthen international policy coordination and cooperation. Overall there are two opposing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   developments affecting the IMS. On the one hand, the significant reforms since the GFC have 
strengthened the IMS. But on the other hand, growing interconnectedness especially through 
increased international investment positions together with unconventional monetary policies 
pose challenges to the IMS. 
  
In  these  global  circumstances,  having  faced  the  deterioration  in  inflation  and  its  outlook 
reflecting  the  pass-through  from  the  TL  depreciation  and  domestic  factors  and  elevated 
volatility in capital flows together with tightening global financial conditions the Central Bank of 
Turkey has been following a tight monetary policy to fight inflation, taking liquidity stabilizing 
measures for the foreign currency market and ensuring the stability of the financial system.  
This  policy  framework  was  announced  as  a  “road  map”  document  back  in  August  2015 
outlining monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity and financial stability related measures and 
aimed at alleviating policy tradeoffs.  
The key idea is to provide market making facilities to the local banks when they face financial 
stresses in the global markets. They are then allowed to borrow in foreign currencies from the 
central  bank  and  use  their  all  liquid  assets  irrespective  of  their  denominations  i.e.,  local 
currency and foreign currency denominated assets as collateral when they borrow from the 
central bank in any currency.   
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
