  Peter Praet: The European Central Bank’s fight against low inflation – 
reasons and consequences 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
Luiss School of European Political Economy, Rome, 4 April 2016. 
 I would like to thank Jonathan Yiangou, John Hutchinson and Federic Holm-Hadulla for their contributions to this 
speech. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
In  the  last  half  century  central  banks  have  come  a  long  way  in  how  they  approach  their 
macro-stabilisation functions. 
As recently as the late 1970s, views still diverged across advanced economy central banks 
as  to  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  in  delivering  price  stability.  Some,  such  as  the 
Bundesbank  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  were  already  committed  to  using  monetary 
measures to control inflation. But others, such as the Federal Reserve and various European 
central banks, remained more pessimistic in their outlook, believing that monetary policy was 
an inefficient means to tame inflation and that other policies should be better employed.1 
Illustrating  this  view,  Fed  Chairman  William  Miller  observed  in  his  first  FOMC  meeting  in 
March 1978 that “inflation is going to be left to the Federal Reserve and that’s going to be 
bad  news.  An  effective  program  to  reduce  the  rate  of  inflation  has  to  extend  beyond 
monetary  policy  and  needs  to  be  complemented  by  programs  designed  to  enhance 
competition and to correct structural problems”.2 
In this context of timidity about the effectiveness of policy, inflation expectations were allowed 
to de-anchor, opening the door to bouts of double-digit price rises. The outcome was a phase 
of so-called “stagflation”, where both inflation and unemployment rose in tandem. 
The policy  lesson that emerged from this period  was that sustainable growth could not be 
separated  from  price  stability,  and  that  price  stability  in  turn  depended  on  a  credible  and 
committed monetary policy. From late 1979 onwards – with Volcker’s assumption of the Fed 
chairmanship  –  central  banks  converged  towards  this  orientation  and  took  ownership  for 
fulfilling  their  inflation  mandates.  As  their  renewed  commitment to  control  inflation  became 
understood,  inflation  rates  fell  steeply  in  a  context  of  improved  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations.  Central  banks  abandoned  the  self-absolving  notion  that  price  stability 
depended on other, non-monetary authorities. 
As is well-known, the events that led to the 2008 crash confirmed that price stability is not a 
sufficient  condition  for  macroeconomic  stability.  Yet  it  remains  a  necessary  condition.  And 
today in the euro area we face a situation where price stability is once more under threat – 
this time not through too high inflation, but through inflation remaining too low for too long. 
In that context, the ECB has been engaged in an unprecedented expansion of its monetary 
policy  toolkit  to  bring  inflation  back  to  its  objective.  Yet  these  measures  have  not  been 
uncontroversial, and questions have been raised about their necessity. What I would like to 
talk about today, therefore, is not so much what the ECB has done, or how it works, but why 
the ECB has been so determined to raise inflation. That requires that we first take a closer 
look at the ECB’s objective. 
                                                
1  See Romer, C. and D. Romer (2013), “The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History: Monetary Policy 
Doesn’t Matter”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2013, 103(3): 55–60. 
2  Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Transcript, 21 March 1978. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The ECB’s objective 
The  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  establishes  the  ECB’s  primary 
objective  as  maintaining  price  stability.  But  unlike  some  other  central  banks,  we  have  not 
been  given  a  specific  numerical  inflation  target  by  a  legislature  or  ministry.  To  enhance 
accountability,  in  1998  the  ECB  Governing  Council  decided  that  price  stability  should  be 
defined  in  quantitative  terms,  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2%, and that it should be maintained over the 
medium-term.  Following  a  thorough  evaluation  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy  in  2003,  the 
Governing  Council  further  clarified  that,  within  this  definition  of  price  stability,  it  aims  to 
maintain inflation rates “below, but close to, 2% over the medium-term”. 
In other words, since that clarification in 2003 the numerical range for the definition of price 
stability  has  been  supplemented  with  a  focal  point  at  which  the  Governing  Council  aims, 
while  the  temporal  horizon  over  which  price  stability  has  to  be  achieved  has  remained 
flexible.  However,  as  inflation  has  consistently  been  ratcheting  down  to  the  bottom  of  the 
price  stability  range  in  the  course  of  the  past  four  years  and  our  measures,  as  a 
consequence,  have  become  more  expansionary,  how  we  interpret  our  objective  and  the 
relevant horizon for delivery have been called more into question. There have been two main 
issues raised. 
First, some have asked if the central bank should not be even more patient in trying to bring 
inflation back to levels in the proximity of the upper ceiling of the price stability range. 
In  this  line  of  thinking,  low  inflation  today  is  predominantly  being  driven  by  global  factors 
which  will  ultimately  unwind  if  given  sufficient  time  to  work  through  the  economy.  Due  to 
inertia in the wage and price formation process, there is no particular risk of bouts of very low 
or even negative inflation feeding into sustained deflation. The central bank should therefore 
emphasise its medium-term orientation and extend the policy horizon until inflation returns to 
the desired level. 
Second, others have queried whether it is justified for the ECB to be so attached to its focal 
point of below but close to 2% at all. 
Any rate of inflation between 0% and 2% would be equally consistent with our price stability 
definition, this argument goes. Indeed, when inflation is at the lower end of the range and 
conventional policy tools are close to exhausted, the costs of using unconventional measures 
to drive inflation up outweigh the benefits in terms of preparing the ground for higher inflation 
in a not so distant future. The central bank should thus not be obsessive about delivering on 
its aim of a close to 2% inflation rate. 
Let me address each of these issues in turn. 
How patient can a central bank be? 
On the face of it, the argument that central banks can tolerate periods of too-low inflation is 
correct.  Inflation  can  move  temporarily  below  –  or  above  –  our  aim  without  requiring  an 
immediate  policy  response.  That  is  the  implication  of  our  medium-term  orientation,  which 
gives  the  central  bank  discretion  over  whether  to  react  to  short-run  macroeconomic 
fluctuations. Yet that discretion is always bounded by two factors: the nature of the shocks 
hitting the economy; and the credibility of our objective in the face of those shocks. 
If  the  economy  has  been  hit  predominantly  by  demand  shocks,  there  is  no  case  for  the 
central bank to delay policy action. Both economic activity and inflation will tend to move in 
the  same  direction,  presenting  the  central  bank  with  an  unambiguous  policy  prescription, 
which  is  to  make  its monetary  policy  more  accommodative  for  a  negative  shock,  and  less 
accommodative  for  a  positive  one.  The  medium-term  in  this  case  is  the  shortest  period  in 
which we can realistically bring inflation back to our objective, which is equal to the length of 
the monetary transmission lag. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, if inflation developments are being driven by supply shocks – say, a supply-side 
induced decline in oil prices – the policy horizon can be more flexible. As activity and inflation 
move in opposite directions, if the central bank acts to counter fluctuations in prices, it risks 
exacerbating  deviations  from  steady  state  output  growth.  But  if  instead  we  extend  the 
medium-term  horizon  and  tolerate  lower  inflation  for  a  temporary  period,  there  is  no 
contradiction: we can “look through” the shock and wait until its effect on inflation fades out. 
Crucially, however, our ability to lengthen the medium-term horizon in this way depends on 
our objective remaining credible – and especially when the economy is hit by repeated one-
side shocks and inflation deviates from our objective systematically in the same direction for 
a prolonged period. 
In  such  circumstances,  the  inflation  process  can  become  subject  to  short-term  spells  of 
inertial drift3. 
But if agents remain confident that below but close 2% remains the orientation of policy, they 
will  not  factor  in  past  developments  into  their  forward-looking  price-  and  wage-setting 
behaviour, and inflation will return to our objective in the steady state. If on the other hand 
the determination to reach our inflation aim were to be questioned by the public, firms and 
households  might  start to  look  more  at  the track  record  of recent  inflation  and  incorporate 
that  in  their  behaviour  –  which  technically  would  correspond  to  a  permanent  downward 
displacement of the Phillips curve. What began as a temporary period of low inflation could 
then become persistent. 
In other words, if in a prolonged period of low inflation the central bank is so tolerant with its 
policy  that  the  public  loses  faith  in  its  ultimate  inflation  objective,  it  risks  not  just  that 
expectations destabilise from its aim, but that the economy settles into a new regime of lower 
inflation, with both inflation and inflation expectations re-anchoring towards the lower end of 
its price stability range. Faced with such a risk, the policy horizon would immediately have to 
be  shortened  to  re-establish  our  commitment  and  ensure  that  any  outbreak  of  adaptive 
expectations was transient.4 
So is this relevant for the euro area today? Certainly, we have faced a succession of one-
side global supply shocks since early 2013, and, with tangible intensity, since summer 2014 
linked to the reversal of the commodities supercycle. This requires flexibility over the policy 
horizon. 
In line with the rule-book that I just expounded, the ECB response was indeed measured in 
the early phase of rapid disinflation. Except for our announcement of forward guidance in the 
summer 2013 and a restriction of the monetary policy corridor in November of that year – 
both  measures  intended  to  insulate  our  money  market  conditions  from  the  volatility 
introduced by the dollar tantrum episode in late spring of that same year – our policy rates 
and non-standard measures were left unaltered until June 2014. We acknowledged that, in 
conditions  of  slow  recovery,  the  unwinding  of  the  previous  strong  contributions  of  energy 
prices to headline inflation would counsel patience. 
Yet, as the recovery proved more subdued and vulnerable to outside shocks than we had 
expected,  and  the  descent  of  inflation  to  the  lower  portion  of  the  price  stability  range 
accelerated  and  became  more  entrenched,  our  attention  shifted  to  a  wide  spectrum  of 
inflation  expectations.  The  risk  was  that,  unlike  in  previous  episodes  of  sharp  oil  price 
reversals,  inflation  expectations  might  lose  their  resilience,  due  to  accumulating  evidence 
that the return of headline inflation to our objective had been repeatedly put back. 
                                                
3  Gordon,  R.  (2013),  “The  Philips  Curve  is  Alive  and  well  and  the  NAIRU  During  the  slow  recovery”,  NBER 
Working Paper, No 19390, August 2013. 
4  For more on this point see Praet, P. (2015), “Price stability: a sinking will-o’-the-wisp?”, intervention during a 
panel on “The elusive pursuit of inflation” at the IMF Spring Meetings Seminar, Washington, 16 April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Indeed,  despite  a first  reduction  in  the  deposit  facility  rate  to  a  moderate  negative  level  in 
June  2014,  and  the  simultaneous  announcement  of  a  first  series  of  targeted  long-term 
operations  designed  to  unblock  the  transmission  mechanism,  during  the  summer  of  2014 
long-term inflation expectations started a gradual decline to levels unseen since the start of 
monetary union. With unabsorbed slack continuing to hold back core inflation, the end point 
of  convergence  after  the  negative  supply-side  shocks  would  fade  out  of  measurement 
remained unclear, as core inflation – not headline inflation – is a good predictor of headline 
inflation over the medium term5. 
As such, the importance of core inflation in determining long-term inflation expectations also 
appeared to be increasing. Without further decisive policy action, sized to a scale appropriate 
to arrest the process, a downward re-anchoring towards a lower inflation rate could not have 
been ruled out. 
These  considerations  led  the  Governing  Council  to  announce  in  January  2015  that  the 
private-credit asset purchase programme that had already been decided over the previous 
summer would be expended in magnitude to include sovereign securities. The programme 
has been re-scaled and re-designed in December 2015 and in March of this year. 
The costs of too-low inflation 
Let me move to the second question about our policy: even if a re-anchoring of expectations 
around levels in the lower portion of the price stability range were to take place, why is that 
fundamentally a problem? The answer to this has two parts. First are the costs that come 
from the level of inflation being too low, both in the steady state and when dealing with the 
legacies  of  the  crisis.  Second  are  the  costs  that  arise  from  transitioning  between  different 
anchors for inflation, and especially when the original objective is not being fulfilled. 
In  terms  of  the  costs  of  too-low  inflation,  there  are  three  main  issues,  each  of  which  we 
emphasised when we clarified our objective in 2003. 
First, in the presence of downward rigidities, delivering an inflation rate closer to 2% than to 
0% supports product and labour market functioning. 
On the product market side, it allows relative prices to adjust more easily across goods and 
services  in  response  to  shifts  in  aggregate  supply  and  demand,  which  improves  price 
signalling  and  resource  allocation.  At  an  average  inflation  rate  of  2%,  relative  prices  can 
realign  around  that  level  without  producers  necessarily  needing  to  cut  prices  in  nominal 
terms, whereas at lower inflation rates nominal downward rigidities are more likely to bite and 
hamper the adjustment process. On the labour market side, a 2% inflation rate provides an 
important margin of adjustment in the face of shocks. When demand falls and nominal wages 
are sticky rather than downwardly flexible, the unemployment cost is cushioned by the higher 
general rate of inflation, as this effectively lowers the real wages that firms have to pay. 
In summary: the idea that nominal wage rigidities may be an insurance mechanism against 
deflation becoming endemic – just because it mechanically prevents prices from falling – is a 
partial equilibrium fallacy. In the face of declining prices, wage rigidities shift the burden of 
adjustment onto the scale of employment, as firms attempt to recover mark-ups which are 
being eroded by high labour costs measured in inflation-adjusted terms. The higher jobless 
rate which results from this labour shedding process exacerbates the downward pressure on 
the general price level and sets the conditions for this process to become self-feeding. 
Second,  following  a  similar  logic,  an  inflation  rate  closer  to  2%  facilitates  cross-regional 
adjustments in relative prices within a monetary union. 
                                                
5  ECB (2016), “The relationship between HICP inflation and HICP inflation excluding energy and food”, Box 7, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A higher “nominal bar” allows countries to reduce inflation relative to the euro area average 
without having to run up against downward rigidities or enter outright deflation. This was an 
important consideration when the Governing Council first decided to identify the focal point 
close to 2% within its price stability range. At the time, core economies, such as Germany 
and France, were seen as being systematically driven towards the floor of the range since 
other  “catching-up”  economies,  such  as  Spain,  were  operating  at  high  inflation  rates  and 
therefore pulling up the euro area average. Letting the average increase toward the upper 
limit of the range would, it was thought, facilitate the workings of those core economies which 
were adjusting their relative competitiveness position vis-à-vis other members. 
Today we face similar heterogeneity in country-based inflation, but the positions of the core 
versus  non-core  economies  have  reversed.  Several  non-core  economies  have  had  to 
undergo large relative price corrections to reverse the intra-area imbalances accumulated in 
the boom period. At the same time, core economies have systematically operated at lower 
inflation rates, pulling down the euro area average against which non-core countries have to 
adjust. In those conditions, ensuring that the “nominal bar” remains in line with our objective 
is essential to enable a smooth and expedited adjustment process. Indeed, as we remained 
mired in the legacies of the financial crisis, it is perhaps even more pressing today than it 
was in the early life of our currency union. 
Third, an objective closer to 2% provides a crucial “safety margin” for monetary policy against 
running  into  the  lower  bound  on  policy  rates,  and  thus  provides  more  scope  to  use 
conventional instruments, rather than unconventional and still relatively untested measures, 
to respond to future shocks. This is because, for a given real interest rate, a higher inflation 
objective implies a higher nominal interest rate over the cycle. 
Just  as  for  relative  price  adjustments,  this  rationale  is  also  perhaps  more  important  today 
than  when  we  established  our  aim.  ECB  estimates  at  that  time  suggested  that,  with  an 
objective of 2%, the probability of interest rates reaching zero was close to zero.6 
We  know  now  that  this  was  likely  an  underestimate.  Moreover,  we  assumed  a  real 
equilibrium interest rate of 2% on average, which may well be lower today given the evolution 
of the secular and cyclical forces since then.7 In that context, if real rates were to continue 
their trend decline and inflation were to settle lower as well, nominal interest rates could well 
be  considerably  lower  over  future  cycles.  The  central  bank  might  then  have  to  resort  to 
unconventional measures more frequently to fulfil its mandate. 
This reveals the implicit trade-off in the argument that central banks should not fight too-low 
inflation because the unconventional measures required to do so produce more costs than 
benefits. If central banks did not use such measures to raise inflation today, they would be 
more likely to have to use them tomorrow, by which time low inflation and sluggish growth 
would have interacted to cause an even deeper slump. By contrast, by acting decisively to 
defend our objective now, we ward off more severe macroeconomic imbalances and create 
the minimal conditions for macroeconomic normalisation, which in turn is a precondition for 
policy normalisation. 
The costs of transitioning downwards 
Alongside  the  costs  of  a  low  inflation  regime,  there  are  also  costs  associated  with  the 
transition process itself. Again there are three main issues. 
                                                
6  Coenen, G. (2003), “Zero lower bound: is it a problem in the euro area?”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 269, 
September 2003. 
7  For a fuller explanation of this point see Praet, P. (2015), “The low interest rate environment in the euro area”, 
speech  at  a  Pension  Funds  Conference  organised  by  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  in  Bussum,  10  September 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The first is the impact of unexpectedly low inflation on real interest rates and debt dynamics. 
When interest rates have reached zero, a downward re-anchoring of inflation implies rising 
expected  real  interest  rates.  That  is  very  problematic  in  current  conditions  since,  with  the 
economy  still  adjusting  to  pre-crisis  investment  misallocations,  the  real  equilibrium  interest 
rate is now at very low – possibly negative – levels. A fall in inflation would thus pull short-
term  real  interest  rates  away  from  their  market  clearing  levels.  Saving  and  investment 
imbalances  would  then  have  to  be  resolved  in  another  way,  which  in  a  market  economy 
would take place through a fall in income levels, in turn compressing savings. In other words, 
in  the  environment  we  face  today,  the  transition  to  lower  inflation  rates  would  risk  the 
economy adjusting through recession. 
A parallel drop in inflation and rise in real rates would also complicate the necessary workout 
of the debt overhang bequeathed by those pre-crisis excesses.8 
Lower-than-expected inflation implies that a higher share of firms’ and households’ income 
has to be diverted to debt service than was planned when the loan was taken out. That can 
in  turn  lead  to  a  redistribution  between  borrowers  and  lenders,  which  may  have  negative 
demand effects due to their different propensities to consume and invest. Inflation turning out 
below  expectations  also  more  generally  impedes  the  process  of  deleveraging  which  is 
required to reduce high debt levels. 
Indeed,  deleveraging  can  take  place  through  two  channels,  which  are  both  important: 
balance  sheet  deleveraging  (i.e.  debt  repayment  and  write-offs)  and  macroeconomic 
deleveraging  (i.e.  growth  and  inflation).  While  it  is  sometimes  argued  that  accommodative 
monetary policy delays the former, it also supports the latter. In fact, those economies where 
central  banks  have  resorted  to  such  policies  earlier  and  more  aggressively  are  also  those 
that are most advanced with deleveraging. The reason is that by generating higher growth 
and  inflation  in  line  with  their  objectives  they  have  been  able  to  minimise  the  need  for 
balance  sheet  deleveraging  and  the  associated  credit  contraction.  That  has  in  turn 
contributed, in a virtuous circle, to a quicker elimination of slack and stronger nominal growth. 
To  illustrate,  nominal  GDP  growth  has  contributed  around  20  percentage  points  to  both 
household and corporate debt reduction in the US, and almost 30 percentage points in the 
UK, compared with just 10 percentage points in the euro area. 
Second – and more fundamentally – allowing inflation to re-anchor downwards comes with a 
high risk of credibility losses for the central bank, and especially  when the objective is not 
being met. 
Such losses create true welfare costs for society, as pointed out in the classical contributions 
by authors like Kydland and Prescott (1977) or Barro and Gordon (1983).9 
And in the current low inflation environment, it would have similarly adverse implications for 
our credibility as the admissions by some central bankers in the late 1970s that high inflation 
was an intractable problem and impervious to monetary policy action. We know from that era 
how costly this can be for central banks’ ability to deliver long-term price stability. Disavowing 
the  inflation  aim  in  current  conditions  might  also  be  perceived  especially  negatively  by  the 
public,  for  instance  as  revealing  expectations  of  “secular  stagnation”  and  associated  weak 
price pressures. 
                                                
8  See Kalemli-Özcan, S., Laeven, L., and D. Moreno (2015), “Debt Overhang, Rollover Risk and Investment in 
Europe“, mimeo. 
9  Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal 
of  Political  Economy,  85,  473–490.  Barro,  R.  and  D.  Gordon  (1983),  “Rules,  discretion  and  reputation  in  a 
model of monetary policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 101–120. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Indeed,  Eggertsson  and  Pugsley  (2006)  show  that,  in  a  fragile  post-crisis  situation  where 
monetary policy is sustaining the recovery, any perception that the central bank is adopting a 
greater tolerance towards a future regime of lower inflation can have very negative effects. 
Looking  at  the Great  Depression  period,  they  argue  that the  return  of  the  US  economy  to 
recession in 1937 resulted from a perception that the Fed had abandoned its commitment to 
reflation,  creating  pessimistic  expectations  of  future  growth  and  inflation  that  fed  into  both 
expected  and  actual  deflation.  The  economy  then  became  caught  in  an  equilibrium  of 
“contractionary beliefs”.10 
Third, once central banks let inflation expectations drift away from their previous anchor and 
fail to counteract this through forceful policy action, there is no guarantee that expectations 
will naturally settle at another desirable level. 
As Orphanides and Williams (2004) show, it is precisely by defending its inflation objective 
that the central bank facilitates the public in learning how to process the flow of information, 
and thereby influences the formation of inflation expectations.11 
Without such an orientation, expectations may continue to drift in the same direction, and a 
re-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  may  morph  into  an  outright  de-anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations  with  no  visible  end-point.  In  such  conditions,  monetary  policy  would  face  an 
uphill  battle  to  preserve  inflation  rates  compatible  with  any  reasonable  definition  of  price 
stability. 
To see this, consider a simple Phillips curve framework that relates inflation to measures of 
economic slack. Accommodative monetary policy reduces the degree of economic slack and 
thereby puts upward pressures on inflation – a move of the economy along a given Phillips 
curve.  But  when  inflation  expectations  change,  this  is  not  the  only  dynamic  pattern  taking 
place.  Instead,  a  change  in  inflation  expectations  alters  the  inflation  rate  to  which  the 
economy will gravitate when it reaches full employment. We can think of a decline in inflation 
expectations as a downward shift in the Philipps curve, leading to a lower intercept. 
Clearly, this downward shift in the Phillips curve counteracts the reflationary impact that the 
accommodative  monetary  policy  intends  to  achieve  via  the  absorption  of  economic  slack; 
and  the  downward  impact  may,  in  fact,  dominate  in  certain  conditions.  In  particular,  if  the 
relationship  between  inflation  and  slack  is  relatively  weak  –  implying  a  flat  slope  of  the 
Phillips  curve  –  a  given  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  less  likely  to  trigger  the 
upward momentum in prices necessary to compensate for falling inflation expectations. As a 
consequence,  actual  inflation  may  decline,  even  in  situations  where  monetary  policy  has 
been successful in reducing slack. 
The economy may then enter on a self-sustaining spiral: declining inflation expectations shift 
down  the  Phillips  curve,  which  puts  downward  pressure  on  actual  inflation,  which  in  turn 
translates into a further decline in inflation expectations. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Decades of experience have confirmed the importance of price stability for macroeconomic 
stability  and  sustained  economic  growth.  That  is  true  both  when  inflation  is  too  high  and 
                                                
10  Eggertsson, G. and B. Pugsley (2006), “The Mistake of 1937: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Monetary and 
Economic Studies, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 24(S1), pages 151–190, 
December. 
11  Orphanides, A. and J. Williams (2004), “Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy,” 
NBER Chapters, in: The Inflation-Targeting Debate, pages 201–246 National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Inc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  when it is too low. The prolonged period of low inflation we are in today has increased the 
risks that inflation misses might become persistent, which would be deeply damaging for the 
economy.  This  is  why  we  have  reacted  so  forcefully  to  secure  our  objective  –  and  will 
continue to do so in the future if necessary. 
To be sure, the crisis has proven that ensuring price stability is not sufficient for sustainable 
growth. It is only an enabling condition and other policies must also play their part. Still, the 
need  for  a  superior  policy  mix  is  no  excuse  for  central  banks  to  be  passive  when  their 
mandates are under threat. The ECB has demonstrated through its actions that it does not 
wait for others to move first. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
