   Juyeol Lee: New Year speech 
New Year’s address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea, 
Seoul, 4 January 2016. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Today is the first day of work in 2016, which we greet with new hopes and resolutions. I wish 
you and your families a happy new year full of good health and blessings. Let me also express 
my sincere appreciation to all of you for faithfully carrying out your duties last year. 
Looking back, we have of course never had any easy years, but last year the Korean economy 
went through many truly great difficulties. On top of the continuous slump from the beginning 
of last year in exports, which have led economic growth, we also witnessed a rapid contraction 
in consumption due to the unexpected outbreak of MERS. Financial and foreign exchange 
market volatilities increased greatly as well, driven by the uncertainties concerning the timing 
of the US Federal Reserve’s policy rate hike and by the economic unrest in emerging market 
economies (EMEs) including China. 
Against this backdrop the Bank of Korea eased its monetary policy further, by cutting the Base 
Rate on two more occasions following the cuts in 2014, and by raising the total ceiling of its 
Bank Intermediated Lending Support Facility to a large extent. We also worked actively to 
stabilize  the  markets,  by  strengthening  our  monitoring  of  financial  and  foreign  exchange 
markets at home and abroad and by making efforts to prevent any excessive expansion in the 
volatility of price variables. 
However, our economic conditions were not satisfactory, as economic growth fell short of its 
potential and inflation remained below the target range. 
The recent low growth and low inflation are worldwide trends, and are attributable largely to 
factors not easily dealt with through monetary policy such as sluggishness in global demand, 
declines in international oil prices and changes in economic structures. The Bank of Korea, 
which has the mandate of pursuing macroeconomic stability while paying attention to financial 
stability, had to be alert to the possibility of its accommodative policy stance pursued over a 
long period of time causing other adverse effects via the accumulation of financial imbalances. 
Nevertheless, we have to also look humbly back, and ask whether there was any room for 
improvement in terms of our assessments of economic conditions, our policy responses, and 
our communication efforts. 
Dear members of the Bank of Korea, 
This  year  our  economy  is  expected  to  maintain  a  modest  trend  of  growth,  thanks  to  the 
continuing  recovery  of  the  global  economy  and  to  improvements  in  our  households’  real 
purchasing power. Looking at domestic and external conditions, however, there are various 
potential risk factors that could undermine the smooth recovery of our economy. 
Externally, as international capital movements will likely expand due to both the weakening of 
economic growth in China and the continuous decoupling of monetary policies among major 
countries, EMEs having weak economic fundamentals could face economic crises. If these 
concerns are realized, the international financial markets could turn unstable again, and the 
global economic recovery could weaken. 
Domestically, our economy faces still unresolved structural problems that could undermine its 
vitality,  including  low  fertility  and  population  aging,  inter-sectoral  imbalances,  and  the  dual 
structure of the labor market. In addition, as the greatly increased household and corporate 
debts are affected by the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy normalization, they could 
cause consumption and investment sentiment to contract and work as a factor undermining 
financial system stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Under these circumstances, the main tasks for Korea to focus on, as a small open economy, 
are improving its economic fundamentals and boosting its growth potential. The prerequisite 
for this is structural reform. This is not an easy task, because it leads to pain and sacrifice in 
the  short-term  while  there  are  also  conflicts  of  interests  among  the  economic  agents 
concerned. 
If we keep pushing this reform ahead with perseverance, however, we can reap fruits that will 
compensate  us  sufficiently  for  the  pains  that  we  must  undergo.  In  particular,  a  successful 
structural reform will help our economy to achieve faster growth than others once external 
conditions improve, through the creation of new growth engines and through the restoration of 
virtuous cycles between exports and domestic demand and between growth and employment. 
Structural  reform  can  also  help  to  mitigate  the  negative  effects  on  our  economy  of  the 
expansion  in  volatility  in  the  international  financial  market.  As  you  are  all  well  aware,  one 
international credit rating agency recently upgraded Korea’s rating to the levels of advanced 
countries. And one of the main rationales for its decision was its positive assessment of our 
efforts for structural reform. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
I would like to touch now on the major tasks that we will need to focus on this year. 
First of all, since we have newly set the inflation target, in consideration of the appropriate 
inflation level for our economy in the medium- to long-term, we need to do our utmost to steer 
consumer price inflation close to this target over a medium-term horizon. The new inflation 
target has been set as a point target rather than a range, which is considered a more advanced 
method adopted by major developed countries. There are many merits to the point target: it 
not only effectively stabilizes the inflation expectations of economic agents, but also allows the 
central bank to conduct monetary policy in a more flexible manner, taking into account inflation 
as well as economic and financial conditions. We need to get the message across to economic 
agents concerning the background to this change, and the characteristics of our new inflation 
target.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  devote  every  effort  to  fulfilling  our  responsibility  of 
explaining to the public any cases where inflation deviates from the target to excessive extents 
or for excessive periods of time. 
This year, under the new inflation target, in order to sustain the trend of recovery of economic 
growth  we  will  maintain  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  while  also  paying 
attention to financial stability. Given the moderate pace of our economic recovery and our low 
inflationary  pressures,  it  is  necessary  for  the  time  being  that  we  very  closely  monitor 
macroeconomic trends, while also being mindful of the downside risks to growth and inflation. 
Secondly, we should also step up our efforts to enhance the predictability and effectiveness of 
our monetary policy. In this regard, the most important thing is increasing the accuracy of our 
economic forecasting. The unpredictability of economic dynamics has risen enormously, owing 
to changes in the cause and effect relationships among economic variables and to the rising 
interconnectedness across economies in line with globalization. We thus face limitations in 
narrowing the forecast errors. But if the accuracy of our economic forecasts is inadequate, it 
will be hard to maintain monetary policy efficiency or communication consistency. This is why 
we need to redouble our efforts to strengthen our forecasting capabilities. 
To strengthen our explanations of the backgrounds to our policy decisions, we also need to 
enrich the content of the Monetary Policy Statements and expand the scope of the Monetary 
Policy  Board  meeting  materials  released  to  the  public.  In  addition,  in  order  to  secure  the 
appropriate time horizons for deciding on our monetary policies, and to strengthen the linkage 
between monetary policy and our economic forecasts, we plan to reorganize the framework 
for Monetary Policy Board meeting operation, with effect from next year. We need to thoroughly 
prepare so that this can be achieved without delay. In particular, as the annual number of 
monetary  policy  decision  meetings  will  be  reduced,  we  need  to  devote  more  efforts  to 
strengthening our communication with the market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
We need to pay greater attention to financial stability this year. First, we should seek measures 
to  ensure  a  soft-landing  of  the  household  debt  problem,  by  cooperating  closely  with  the 
government  and  the  regulatory  authorities.  Liquidity  and  fund  flows  through  open  market 
operations should be properly managed, to prevent companies from suffering having financing 
difficulties  in  the  processes  of  restructuring.  Since  it  is  likely  that  the  high  volatility  in  our 
financial and FX markets will continue this year, we have to thoroughly monitor international 
financial  market  conditions  and  capital  flow  trends,  and  if  necessary  implement  our 
comprehensive Contingency Plan to ensure market stability, in a timely manner. 
Meanwhile, as IT and finance become integrated, FinTech, big data and the uses of blockchain 
technology are becoming global trends. In line with this, we need to carefully examine how 
these changes will affect our policy environment, and in particular the stability of our payment 
and financial systems. We also need to conduct an in-depth study of how Internet-only Banks, 
whose launch is scheduled for this year, will evolve in the future, and what changes they will 
bring to the monetary policy transmission channels and bank management environment. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
As our economy remains in a difficult situation, and the economic and social environments 
change rapidly, there have been diverse and sometimes conflicting demands from various 
areas of society regarding the central bank’s role. In this situation, in order for the Bank of 
Korea to meet the nation’s expectations and fulfill the role entrusted to it, we need to make 
ground-breaking improvements in our ways of perceiving reality and carrying out our duties, 
as well as in our methods of policy operation. 
People tend to remain complacent in keeping to what they are used to and comfortable with, 
and it is thus very difficult to break from old mind-sets and practices. I am well aware that our 
Bank of Korea staff members have made enormous efforts to adapt to the changing external 
environment. However, there does remain much room for improvement still, and so we need 
to strengthen our dynamism for change. This can of course not be done in a day. We have to 
work continuously to improve the relevant systems for increasing our recruitment of external 
talent and promoting efficiency and competition in our personnel management. 
Our society demands of us that we have much higher levels of integrity and stronger senses 
of vocation than is necessary in other workplaces. And so it is a basic responsibility of ours 
that  we  comply  fully  with  the  regulations  and  principles  regarding  our  duties.  Further,  as 
members of a central bank with strict self-discipline and a strong sense of responsibility, we 
need  to  put  the  public  interests  before  our  own  personal  interests,  and  respect  our 
organizational values. 
Meanwhile, our organizational culture of respecting and caring for each other is a longstanding 
tradition that we have cultivated ever since the Bank of Korea was established. Although the 
environment  surrounding  us  is  changing  rapidly,  we  have  to  work  to  maintain  and  further 
develop this proud tradition going forward. 
Dear fellow BOK members, 
There are substantial concerns that the Korean economy could face huge difficulties this year. 
However, a crisis that is foreseen is no longer a crisis. If we are not too absorbed in pessimism, 
and prepare for approaching difficulties with optimistic and active attitudes, we can help our 
Korean economy to overcome any troubles it may face and to take itself one-step further to a 
higher level. 
I hope that you will fully demonstrate your strong competence and potential again this year, to 
show that the Bank of Korea is indispensable to the development of our national economy. 
I look forward as well to your beginning this new year with renewed vigour and determination, 
and I wish you all happiness and fulfillment. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
