   
Norman T L Chan: The importance of soft power in international financial 
centre 
Opening keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority, at the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers (HKIB) Annual Banking Conference 2016, 
Hong Kong, 20 September 2016. 
 Dr Patrick Fung, Ms Carrie Leung, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning 
to all of you! 
Each  year,  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Bankers  (HKIB) 
1. 
focuses on the topics most relevant to the banking industry and its practitioners, and invites 
prominent speakers and experts in the relevant field to share with the audience their insights. 
I am very pleased that I am being given the opportunity to speak today at the Conference. 
Previously at the HKIB and many other banking conferences, I had talked about the importance 
of “soft power”, which in my view is the most crucial attribute that differentiates an international 
financial centre (IFC) from the rest of the crowd. If you feel bored with the theme of “soft power” 
and  think that  I  should talk  about  a  different  or more  exciting  subject today  such  as those 
suggested by the MC, then I am afraid you will be disappointed. I can well understand the 
frustrations that some of you may have, but I, after very careful consideration, feel duty bound 
to embark on the same subject again. Please allow me to explain. 
2. 
It is my strong belief that what differentiates an international financial centre (IFC) 
from the rest of the aspiring financial centres is its superior “soft power”. An IFC is not about 
how  big  your  airport  is,  how  tall  your  buildings  are  or  how  fast  your  internet  is.  The  hard 
infrastructure is important but most financial centres have equally good hardware. An IFC, just 
like a world class brand in merchandise goods, is all about good quality and high reliability. An 
IFC must be able to provide high quality and trustworthy financial services to customers in the 
neighbourhood and beyond. I should say that Hong Kong has already developed into a world 
class brand for financial services. No matter which narratives you choose to subscribe on how 
Hong Kong has come this far in the past three decades to where we are now, it is far too easy 
for us to feel complacent and lose sight of what has made Hong Kong an enviable success 
story  in  the  past.  Other  than  a  nice  harbour,  Hong  Kong  is  not  endowed  with  any  natural 
resources. Apart from people, and that’s you, we have virtually nothing. But “people” is exactly 
what it takes to build a brand for financial services. It is also “people” that can bring Hong Kong 
to the forefront in the new era in the next 10, 20 and 30 years. 
3. 
Banking  has  always  been  evolving  over  time,  but  I  have  not  seen  such  drastic 
changes in the banking scene across the board since the Global Financial Crisis in 2008. I just 
came back from Basel last week to attend a meeting of Heads of Central Bank Governors and 
Supervisors. Many highly technical but important reform measures concerning the international 
standards on capital and leverage were discussed. This is part of the long process for the 
governments and regulatory authorities to try to rein in the banking sector, having learnt from 
the  very  bitter  lessons  during  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  I  am  not  trying  to  debate  today 
whether these new international standards are justifiable or needed. The point I wish to make 
here is that all these new standards are highly complicated and require special training and 
expertise to come to grips with them. So banks have to hire, train and retrain people in order 
to fully understand and implement the rapidly changing regulatory standards and requirements. 
4. 
Apart from the badly needed capability amongst banks in capital, liquidity and credit 
risk management, the demand for enhancement and upgrading in banking conduct has also 
increased phenomenally in the last few years. Banking conduct covers a wide spectrum of 
banking businesses and I would like to focus on just three areas today: 
(a)  
wealth management; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing (AML/CFT) controls; and 
(b)  
Fintech. 
(c)  
5. 
I believe there is very little disagreement amongst the audience today that Hong Kong 
has a huge potential in capturing the wealth and asset management business in Asia. The 
demand  for  top  quality  private  wealth  management  services  arising  from  the  rapid  and 
sustainable growth of affluence on the Mainland is particularly promising. However, private 
wealth  management  requires  special  skill-set,  not  only  in  product  development  but  also  in 
customers interfacing. Of course product issuers need to possess the technical know-how on 
how best to design products that can effectively meet the changing needs of the customers. It 
is equally important that the relationship managers have the necessary technical competence 
to  fully  understand  the  products  and  be  able  to  explain  the  key  features  and  risks  to  their 
customers.  However,  technical  competence  in  understanding  the  latest  ranges  of  financial 
products is simply not good enough nowadays. This is because the society today demands a 
high standard from financial intermediaries: i.e. fair treatment of customers. This means that 
financial firms must not put their own interests above those of the customers. Financial firms 
are expected to take care of the interests of their customers, including but not limited to those 
related  to  product  suitability  and  concentration.  This  is  a  simple  principle  but  very  hard  to 
achieve.  If  the  treat  customers  fairly  requirement  is  not  demanding  enough,  there  is  the 
additional  challenge  brought  about  by  the  recent  trend  to  raise  the  global  standards  in 
combating money laundering and terrorist financing. As it is well known to all, there can be 
quite serious consequences for AML/CFT breaches and failures.  
6. 
It  is  therefore  not  surprising  to  see  that  many  international  banks  have  now  been 
engaging in the so-called “de-risking” exercises. While there might be legitimate reasons for 
doing  this,  we  have  seen  some  side  effects  detrimental  to financial  inclusion from  this  de-
risking process. In a nut-shell, to seek to de-risk using a “one size fits all” approach across all 
jurisdictions for an international bank may be easier or tidier from the compliance angle, it does 
not take into account the very diverse risk profiles of customers in different countries and in 
different business segments. The HKMA’s regulatory approach for banks in Hong Kong is one 
that  is  “risk  based”,  which  means  the  banks  should  differentiate  the  likely  riskiness  of  the 
customers  and  apply  proportionate measures for the  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  and  due 
diligence  process  in  account  opening  for  new  customers  and  in  information  gathering  for 
existing customers. As you may be aware, I issued a circular earlier this month to all banks in 
Hong Kong providing an elucidation on the HKMA’s supervisory stance and requiring banks to 
review their existing practices with a view to changing them if there are inconsistencies with 
our risk-based approach. What I hope to achieve in Hong Kong is a robust AML/CFT regime 
in which we comply with all the relevant international standards and yet provide a sufficiently 
customer-friendly environment so that bona fide businesses and ordinary citizens can have full 
access  to  basic  banking  services.  This  is  a  tall  order  because  it  requires  the  senior 
management  of  banks  to  pay  much  closer  attention  to  how  their  compliance  and  control 
systems should be structured so as to strike the right balance between de-risking and financial 
inclusion.  Even  if  there  is  an  appropriate  control  system  in  place,  it  still  requires  adequate 
training for the branch managers and frontline staff to fully understand the requirements of the 
HKMA and of the bank, and be able to exercise the necessary judgement so that customers 
can be treated fairly, thereby avoiding undue bad customer experience.  
7. 
Now a word on “Fintech”. I think there is general consensus amongst all of us here 
that  technology  has  advanced  so  much  in  the  past  decade  or  two  that  it  has  drastically 
transformed the way in which banking and financial businesses can and should be conducted. 
It is hard for bank customers to contemplate how they would manage if the internet or digital 
interface  becomes  dysfunctional  for  a  couple  of  days.  It  is  even  harder  for  bankers  to 
contemplate how they can survive for a day or just several hours if their systems are down due 
to DDoS or whatever reasons. No doubt the cyber world offers the kind of convenience and 
speed in transactions that are simply unthinkable just ten years ago. Clearly all of us must try 
our best to make full use of technology in the provision of solutions for financial services. I am 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   pleased to note that Fintech is making important headways in recent years. The bad news is, 
however, the digital world is equally, if not more, risky as the physical world. So on the one 
hand  bankers  need  to  embrace  new  technology  but  on  the  other  they  must  upgrade  their 
capability in safeguarding cybersecurity.  
8. 
This brings me back to the main theme of my talk: “soft power”. How do we develop 
and maintain superior “soft power”? It is very simple: “people”, ‘”people” and “people”. Without 
“people”,  Hong  Kong  has  nothing.  However,  as competition from  our  neighbouring  centres 
intensifies over the years, it is not only just “people’ that we need. It’s about how to turn “people” 
into “good people” and from “good people” to “great people”. In this regard, there is an ancient 
Chinese idiom that says: “it takes 10 years to grow trees but 100 years to develop people” “十
年樹木，百年樹人”. When it comes to people, there are no shortcuts and there are no quick 
fixes. We fully understand this point and that is why the HKMA, in collaboration with HKIB, has 
been working very hard in the past few years to develop new competency enhancing training 
programmes  for  the  banking  practitioners.  In  June  2014,  we  rolled  out  the  Enhanced 
Competence Framework (ECF) for private wealth management. I am glad to report that the 
programme has made very good progress with more than 1,600 private banking practitioners 
having achieved the relevant ECF benchmark so far. Today I am very pleased to announce 
that the HKMA will launch another ECF programme, which is designed for AML/CFT functions. 
The programme will be rolled out in three months’ time in December. This is a Core Level 
module for new entrants in the field of AML/CFT. A more advanced level for practitioners with 
at least 3 years of relevant experience will be launched in June 2017. This new ECF should 
go a long way in helping enlarge the pool of qualified AML/CFT professionals, who are in short 
supply at the moment. 
9. 
On  Fintech,  I  announced  in  May  this  year  that  the  HKMA  would  launch  a 
“Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative”. A core part of this Initiative is the rolling out of an ECF 
on  cybersecurity  so  as  to  enlarge  the  pool  of  talents  in  this  increasingly  important  field  of 
banking. We are making good progress and I am pleased to announce that the Cybersecurity 
ECF will also be launched in December this year. 
10. 
On  a  related  note,  I  am  pleased  to  know  that  HKIB  is  going  to  launch  a  new 
professional  qualification,  The  Certified  Banker  (CB).  Ms  Carrie  Leung,  CEO  of  HKIB,  will 
announce more details on CB in a moment. The curriculum of CB encompasses programmes 
under HKMA’s ECF and combines the up-to-date industry knowledge, practical learning and 
professional competencies that are relevant to the banking environment.  
11. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  make  no  apologies  if  you  consider  my  talk  on  “people” 
development boring. As a result of the rising complexity of the financial industry, advance in 
technology and rapid change in the regulatory landscape, it is not possible for a banker to claim 
“I know it all”! It is only through continuous training and updating that a practitioner would be 
able  to  keep  abreast  of  the  latest  developments  in  terms  of  technical  knowledge  and 
understanding of conduct and ethics requirements. While the HKMA will do whatever it can in 
promoting soft power upgrading, we can’t do it alone. We must work together with the industry 
bodies, such as the Hong Kong Association of Banks, HKIB, the Treasury Markets Association, 
and the Private Wealth Management Association so that we can have common ownership of 
mission. It is also with the support and facilitation by the financial firms, as employers, that we 
can  have  full  and  active  participation  by  banking  practitioners  in  these  training  and  talent 
development programmes. While there are costs and efforts in the short run, I am sure that 
over  time  they  will  bear  handsome  and  profitable  returns for  the  industry  and  practitioners 
alike.   
12. 
In closing, I would say that the upgrading of our people from “good” to “great” is an 
uphill  and  ongoing  campaign.  We  are  still  at  the  stage  of  promoting  awareness  and  joint 
ownership of the mission amongst the industry and practitioners. We have also made good 
progress  in  developing the  relevant  training  programmes for this  purpose. Our  supervisory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   requirement at this stage is to encourage banks and practitioners to enrol into the relevant 
membership  and  take  part  in  the  training  programmes.  At  the  next  stage  when  the 
infrastructure is more mature, the HKMA expects that banking businesses should normally be 
conducted  by  practitioners  who  possess  the  necessary  technical  competence  and relevant 
qualifications  in  the  areas  concerned.  Having  said  that,  let  me  clarify  one  point.  I  am  not 
presently  envisaging  a  need  for  a  mandatory  qualification  or  licensing  regime  for  banking 
practitioners, as such regime may not be flexible enough to cater for a fast expanding and 
changing banking business environment. All we need is for the official and private sectors to 
collaborate diligently in the joint mission of talent building. If we can get it right, which I am 
confident  that  we  would,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Hong  Kong  will  be  able  to  succeed  in 
maintaining Hong Kong’s competitive edge as a world class brand for financial services. Thank 
you very much.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
