Philip  R  Lane:  European  Central  Bank  monetary  policy  –  an
overview
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the New York University
Stern School of Business, New York City, 27 September 2016.
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to address NYU Stern’s Center for Global Economy and
Business.  Today, my aim is provide an overview of the current monetary policy of the ECB’s
Governing Council.
1
As a reminder, the press statement following the most recent monetary policy meeting of the
Governing  Council  on  September  8th  provided  the  following  summary  of  the  current  policy
stance:
“Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB
interest rates unchanged unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower
levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.
Regarding  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  confirm  that  the  monthly  asset
purchases of €80 billion are intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary,
and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with its inflation aim.”
The main elements of the policy package include:
2
A deposit facility rate of minus 40 basis points. Since the banking sector collectively must
hold  considerable  excess  reserves  with  the  Eurosystem,  money  market  rates  have  been
pushed down to deposit facility rate: hence this rate has become the most important policy
rate in the current environment.   The  deposit  facility  rate  was  cut  from  zero  to  minus  10
basis points in June 2014. It was further cut to minus 20 basis points in September 2014,
minus 30 basis points in December 2015 and the current value of minus 40 basis points in
March 2016.
A  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  that  were  initially
introduced in June 2014, with a mark-II programme announced in March 2016. The design of
the TLTRO series provides incentives to banks to expand credit provision to households and
non-financial corporates, with the interest rate on the new TLTRO-II programme set at the
3
deposit facility rate for those banks that exceed benchmark net lending targets.
A  set  of  asset  purchase  programmes.    In  September  2014,  programmes  to  buy  asset-
backed  securities  and  covered  bonds  issued  by  private-sector  entities  were  launched
(termed ABSPP and CBPP respectively); the decision to launch a public sector purchase
programme (PSPP) was taken in January 2015; and the introduction of a corporate sector
purchase programme (CSPP) was decided in March 2016.  Taken together, these form the
expanded asset purchase programme (EAPP): from March 2015 to March 2016, average
monthly  purchases  were  €60  billion;  since  then,  the  target  has  been  raised  to  average
monthly purchases of €80 billion.
The Governing Council also provides forward guidance as to the future direction of monetary
policy.  As indicated above, the stated policy is that the key ECB interest rates will remain at
current or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of the net
asset  purchases.  In  turn,  it  is  guided  that  the  monthly  asset  purchases  of  €80  billion  are
intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its
inflation aim.  Furthermore, the 8th September press statement also re-iterates the general
determination of the Governing Council to attain its inflation target by stating: “If warranted,
4
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
we will act by using all the instruments available within our mandate.”
5
The policy package that was initially launched in Summer 2014 was a response to the below-
target  outlook  for  the  inflation  rate  and  the  subdued  level  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  euro
area.   There  were  also  clear  downside  risk  scenarios  associated  with  destabilising  feedback
dynamics  between  elevated  bank  funding  costs,  significant  premia  in  lending  rates  in  those
member countries most affected by the crisis and the legacy of high private and public sector
debt  levels.  In  addition,  there  was  a  clear  risk  of  a  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,
especially if the Governing Council failed to respond to these adverse developments.
Since the shift in monetary policy in Summer 2014, financial conditions in the euro area have
markedly improved: bank lending rates have declined and there has been a marked reduction in
yields on bonds issued by sovereigns and financial and non-financial corporates.  In turn, through
mechanisms  such  as  the  easing  of  financial  conditions  and  the  positive  impact  of  the
accommodative  monetary  stance  on  confidence  levels,  it  is  estimated  that  the  ECB  policy
measures have added 50 basis points both to the 2016 inflation rate and the projected inflation
rate in 2017, while cumulatively adding 1.5 percentage points to euro area GDP over 2015-2018
(Draghi 2016a).
Still, the inflation rate remains below the target level, with inflation projected at 0.2 percent in 2016
and 1.2 percent at 2017.  While the transitory impact of the sharp drop in the oil price between
the middle of 2014 through early 2016 should be duly recognised, it remains the case that the
level of aggregate demand remains subdued and the cumulative record of below-target inflation
in recent years may also exert an adverse influence on the formation of inflation expectations. In
addition, the assessment of the Governing Council is that risks to the growth outlook remain tilted
to the downside, especially in relation to external developments. Taken together, these factors
require continued close monitoring and analysis in assessing the likely future path for inflation
and output. 
Let  me  make  a  couple  of  points  about  the  design  of  the  policy  package.    First,  it  should  be
understood that there are significant complementarities among the different individual elements. 
Most directly, the TLTRO-II programme directly connects the funding of banks that meet the net
credit growth targets to the deposit rate.  The negative deposit rate reinforces the asset purchase
programmes, with lower short-term rates further raising demand for longer-term securities.  In
addition, even if the banking system collectively must hold the extra liquidity created by the ECB’s
accommodative  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary  policies,  the  negative  deposit  rate
provides  an  incentive  for  individual  banks  to  recycle  liquidity  holdings  through  increased  inter-
bank lending, expanded lending to the real economy and the purchase of longer-term securities
(Praet 2016).
6
Second, a proper assessment of the overall contribution of the negative deposit rate facility to the
policy  package  should  be  comprehensive  in  nature.   An  important  component  in  this
assessment  is  the  impact  of  the  negative  deposit  rate  on  the  health  of  the  banking  system,
especially in view of the feedback mechanism by which the current level of bank profitability may
influence  future  credit  growth  through  its  impact  on  bank  capital,  both  directly  and  indirectly
through any impact on the market equity value of banks.
7
Of course, those banks that hold excess reserves face a direct cost from the negative deposit
rate.    In  addition,  to  the  extent  that  banks  cannot  pass  through  the  lower  rate  to  all  types  of
depositors, the net interest margin of banks is also compromised if competitive pressures mean
that lending rates fall by more than deposit rates.
That  said,  in  the  other  direction,  banks  benefit  from  lower  wholesale  funding  costs  and  the
improved ability of customers and sovereigns to service existing debts, while also booking capital
gains  on  holdings  of  fixed-income  securities.  The  importance  of  the  cash  flow  channel  is
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
reflected the reduction since 2008 in the interest payments by households by three percentage
points of disposable income and the net interest payments by corporates by seven percentage
points  of  gross  operating  surplus  (Praet  2016).   More  generally,  the  positive  impact  of  the
accommodative  monetary  stance  on  macroeconomic  prospects  supports  credit  growth  and
thereby the capacity of banks to offset lower net interest margins through expanding volumes.
8
The relative importance of these different factors inevitably varies across individual banks and
member countries, such that the aggregate picture may be obscured in analyses that have a
narrow focus on particular countries or specific types of banks.  It is also important to recognise
that the relative strength of these factors may shift over time as macroeconomic and financial
conditions evolve and the composition of the loan books and securities portfolios held by banks is
turned over.  More generally, the assessment of the cyclical and structural forces shaping the
banking  sector  is  an  important  component  in  determining  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary
policy, given its central role in the European financial system and the transmission of monetary
policy.
Side Effects
10
9
The accommodative monetary stance contributes to the current low level of interest rates across
the yield curve, even if an array of underlying structural factors (including demographic factors
and  the  rate  of  productivity  growth)  play  a  central  role  in  the  observed  downward  shift  in
equilibrium real interest rates in recent years.
A possible side effect of the low interest rate environment is that it may induce some asset and
real estate market participants to engage in excessive risk taking.  Excessive risk taking is most
likely in those markets in which asset and real estate prices are already at elevated levels and/or
rising quickly, tempting some participants to form optimistic beliefs on an extrapolative basis. 
Such  behaviour  is  especially  dangerous  if  it  triggers  a  leverage  cycle  by  which  highly-priced
assets  are  employed  as  collateral  to  back  extra  borrowing,  which  in  turn  further  fuels  price
pressures in asset markets.
11
In the European regulatory system, there are two mitigating factors that can address these risks. 
First, the lending practices of the 129 most important European banks (holding nearly 82 percent
of  bank  assets  in  the  euro  area)  are  now  directly  regulated  by  the  ECB’s  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM), providing a common, rigorous approach to banking supervision across the
euro area.
12
the 
financial  cycle 
Second, the post-crisis European financial reform programme has included the establishment of
a national macroprudential authority for each EU member country, which inter alia is tasked with
leaning  against 
the  setting  of  a  countercyclical  capital
buffer.
 Moreover, the ECB is empowered to increase the national countercyclical capital buffer,
if the level set by the national macroprudential authority is deemed inadequate. Furthermore, the
national  macroprudential  authority  in  a  number  of  countries  is  also  empowered  to  employ
borrower-based  measures  (such  as  loan-to-value  ratios  or  loan-to-income  ratios)  to  improve
resilience and lean against the financial cycle.  
through 
In  addition,  national  fiscal  policies  can  also  play  a  role  in  mitigating  the  financial  cycle,  both
through  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  channels  (Lane  2016).      Importantly,  the  recent
quantitative  model  developed  by  Philippe  Martin  and  Thomas  Philippon  demonstrates  the
complementary roles of macroprudential and fiscal policies in limiting macro-financial volatility in
the euro area, with joint deployment more effective than if either instrument were used on its own
(Martin and Philippon 2016).
In relation to the inter-relation between financial stability risks and low policy rates, it is important
to  appreciate  that  the  more  quickly  inflation  approaches  the  target  level,  the  more  quickly  will
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy rates re-normalise, allaying fears of a “low for long” stagnation scenario vis-à-vis nominal
interest rates.   Put differently, forceful accommodative monetary policy in the short run is the
best method to ensure that policy rates do not stay low for longer than is necessary.  
Conclusions
In  this  speech,  I  have  attempted  to  provide  an  overview  of  the  Governing  Council’s  current
monetary policy stance.  The Governing Council is committed to preserving the very substantial
amount of monetary support that is embedded in the ECB staff projections and that is necessary
to  secure  a  return  of  the  inflation  target  over  the  medium  term.  If  warranted,  the  Governing
Council  will  act  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate.  Meanwhile,  the
Governing  Council  has  tasked  the  relevant  committees  to  evaluate  the  options  that  ensure  a
smooth implementation of the purchase programme.
Finally, monetary policy is not the only policy instrument that should be deployed in the current
euro area environment. The Governing Council routinely points out that fiscal policy also has an
important  role  to  play  in  supporting  economic  recovery  through  a  variety  of  mechanisms,
together  with  policy  actions  that  would  enhance  medium-term  growth  prospects,  improve
resilience and strengthen the financial system.
References
Brunnermeier,  Markus  K.,  and  Yann  Koby  “The  Reversal  Interest  Rate:  The  Effective  Lower
Bound of Monetary Policy,” mimeo, Princeton University.
Buttligione, Luigi, Philip R. Lane, Lucrezia Reichlin and Vincent Reinhart (2014), “Deleveraging?
What Deleveraging,” Geneva Report on the World Economy.
Coeure,  Benoit  (2016),  “Assessing  the  Implications  of  Negative  Interest  Rates,” Speech,  Yale
Financial Crisis Forum, 28 July.
Constancio, Vitor (2016a), “The Challenge of Low Interest rates for Monetary Policy,” Speech,
The Macroeconomics Symposium: Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June.
Constancio,  Vitor  (2016b),  “European  Banking  Industry:  What’s  Next?,” Speech,  University  of
Navarra, 7 July.
Draghi,  Mario  (2014),  “Unemployment  in  the  Euro  Area,” Speech,  Annual  Central  Bank
Symposium at Jackson Hole, 22 August.
Draghi, Mario (2016a), “Delivering a Symmetric Mandate with Asymmetric Tools: Monetary Policy
in  a  Context  of  Low  Interest  Rates,” Speech, Ceremony to Mark the 200th Anniversary  of  the
Oesterreichsche Nationalbank, 2 June.
Draghi,  Mario  (2016b),  “Welcome  Address,”  Speech,  ESRB  First  Annual  Conference,
22nd September.
Geanakoplos, John (2010), “The Leverage Cycle,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24, 1-65.
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2016),  “Macro-Financial  Stability  under  EMU,”  in After  the  Crisis:  Reform,
Recovery, and Growth in Europe (Francesco Caselli, Mario Centeno and Jose Tavares, eds.),
Oxford University Press.
Martin,  Philippe  and  Thomas  Philippon  (2016),  “Inspecting  the  Mechanism:  Leverage  and  the
Great Recession in the Eurozone,” mimeo, Sciences Po and New York University.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Praet,  Peter  (2016),  “Transmission  Channels  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Current  Environment,”
Speech, Financial Times Festival of Finance, 1 July.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
 The opinions expressed are personal and do not reflect the views of the ECB Governing Council.
 The interest rate on the main refinancing operations (MRO rate), which provide the bulk of liquidity to European
banks, is currently set at zero, while the rate on the marginal lending facility is set at 25 basis points.
 Lending to households for house purchases is excluded under the definition of eligible net lending in the
TLTRO series.
 Since there were also two covered bond purchase programmes during 2009-2012, the new 2014 version was
labelled CBPP3.
 Draghi (2014) provides a comprehensive contemporary account of the mid-2014 situation.
 The PSPP buys bonds with remaining maturities in the interval of two years to thirty years. At the end of August
2016, the weighted average remaining maturity of PSPP bonds stood at 8.28 years.
 My focus here is on the conjunctural assessment about the role of negative rates in the current euro area
environment;  I  do  not  address  the  longer-term  debate  about  the  implications  of  technological  changes  in
payments systems for the setting of policy rates. Coeure (2016), Constancio (2016a) and Praet (2016) also
provide analyses of the role of negative policy rates in the European context.
  The  interest  earnings  of  households  have  declined  by  a  similar  amount.  However,  the  cash  flow  gain  to
indebted households supports deleveraging and boosts consumption growth.
 Some of the channels by which interest rate policy affects bank profitability are captured in the theoretical model
developed by Brunnermeier and Koby (2016).
 The structural challenges facing European banks are covered in Constancio (2016b) and Draghi (2016b).
 See, amongst many others, Geanakoplos (2010) and Buttiglione et al (2014).
 The national macroprudential authority is also responsible for improving resilience by setting capital buffers for
significant  institutions  and,  where  it  is  permitted  under  national  law,  a  systemic  risk  buffer.  In  addition,
macroprudential  policy  may  also  prompt  increases  in  risk  weights  vis-à-vis  specific  types  of  lending  (for
instance, commercial real estate or mortgage lending).  In some member countries, the central bank is the
designated macroprudential authority; in other countries, the authority is jointly shared by the central bank, the
finance ministry and other public stakeholders.  Since systemic financial risks can also be generated in other
sectors of the financial system, an expanded set of instruments to cover non-bank entities and market activities
would add to the effectiveness of macroprudential regulations.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
