BANK OF UGANDA 
THE WORKSHOP ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF 
ISLAMIC BANKING OPERATIONS 
ORGANIZED BY TROPICAL BANK LIMITED 
Speech 
By 
PROF. EMMANUEL TUMUSIIME-MUTEBILE 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF UGANDA 
NOVEMBER 28, 2016 - HOTEL AFRICANA, KAMPALA 
SPEECH BY THE GOVERNOR AT THE WORKSHOP ON THE 
FUNDAMNETALS OF ISLAMIC BANKING OPERATIONS 
AT HOTEL AFRICANA KAMPALA - NOVEMBER 28, 2016 
The  Chairman  Board  of  Directors,  Tropical  Bank  Limited,  Honourable 
Gerald M.  Ssendaula, 
Senior Management of Tropical Bank Limited, 
Resource Persons from Malaysia, 
Representatives from the Banking Sector and the Business Community, 
Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  and  on  my  own  behalf,  I  wish  to 
welcome you  all  to  this  very  important workshop  on  Islamic  Banking.  I 
further  wish  to  extend  a  very  special  welcome  to  the  delegates  from 
Malaysia.  Please  get  some  time  off  to  enjoy  the  beautiful  sites  and 
sounds of Uganda, the Pearl of Africa and Gifted by nature. 
Let  me  congratulate  Tropical  Bank  Limited  upon  organ1z1ng 
this 
workshop,  which  is  aimed  at  sensitizing  the  public  on  Islamic  Banking. 
The  Bank of Uganda  believes  that  creating  public  awareness  on  Islrunic 
Banking is  one  of the  key  ingredients  for  achieving  a  smooth  rollout  of 
Islamic Banking.  It is for  this reason that the Bank of Uganda continues 
to  participate  in  sensitization  programmes  like  these  whenever  called 
upon.  As you may recall, in  May this year,  Bank of Uganda participated 
in a  similar conference,  organized  by the Islamic University in Uganda at 
this  very  hotel.  I  must  add  that  such  initiatives  augment  Bank  of 
Uganda's  Islamic  Banking  sensitization  programmes  and  are  very 
welcome. 
Mtsston: To foster price stability and a sound financial system  Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability 
Page 2 
Furthermore  as  part of the  Financial Literacy  strategy,  Bank  of Uganda 
has  in  the  past  undertaken  multimedia  sensitization  campaigns  on 
Islamic  Banking  entailing  Radio  Talk  Shows,  Newspaper  Inserts, 
Workshops  and  Journals,  among  others. 
I  wish  to  pledge  Bank  of 
Uganda's  commitment 
to  continuing  with 
the  above-mentioned 
sensitization campaigns. 
The  topic  of  this  workshop  is  "The  Fundamentals  of  Islamic  Banking 
Operations"  and I  note  that the  resource  persons include  delegates  from 
Malaysia,  a  country  that  possesses  enormou s  experience  in  the  Islamic 
Banking field. 
I  therefore  call  upon  the  participants  here  today  to  take 
full  advantage  of the  opportunity  presented  to  you  in  this  workshop. 
I 
urge  you  all  to  seek  as  much  information  as  possible  from  the  Islamic 
Banking  experts  in  order  to  enhance  your  understanding  of  Islamic 
Banking. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  workshop  could  not  have  come  at  a  more 
opportune  time  than  now,  when  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  in  advanced 
stages  of putting  in  place  a  Supervisory  and  Regulatory  Framework  for 
Islamic  Banking.  Since  January  2016  when  H.E  the  President  of  the 
Republic  of Uganda assented  to  Financial Institutions  (Amendment)  Act, 
2016, which embraced Islamic Banking, there has been tremendous work 
going on internally in the Bank of Uganda, which is mainly aimed at fast 
tracking  the  development  of  an  enabling  Supervisory  and  Regulatory 
Framework for  Islamic Banking.  The consultant engaged by the Bank of 
Uganda prepared a  draft  Islamic Banking Legislation,  which  is  currently 
under  review  by  the  various  stakeholders,  whose  feedback,  shall  be 
considered in finalizing the Legislation. 
Mission: To f oster price stability and a sound financial s ystem  Vision:  To  be a centre of  excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability 
Page 3 
Bank of Uganda is aware that the Banking sector and the general public 
are eagerly waiting for the rollout  of Islamic Banking in Uganda.  I wish to 
assure you all that the Bank of Uganda is fast tracking the establishment 
of  a  Supervisory  a nd  Regulatory  framework  for  Islamic  Banking.  All 
stakeholders  shall  be  informed  as  soon  as  the  requisite  processes  have 
been  completed. 
I  wish  to  reiterate  that  an  effective  Supervisory  and 
Regulation framework is key to  ensuring the  success of Islamic  Banking 
and Bank of Uganda  is keen to achieving this objective. 
Islamic  Banking  has  gained  prominence  internationally  due  to  its 
exponential growth and resilience to financial crises as well as the nature 
of  Shari'ah-Compliant  finance  models  that  focus  on  the  principles  of 
In  the  Islamic  Banking 
investment  in  real  assets  and  risk-sharing. 
model,  each  contract  is  backed  by  an  underlying  asset  or  investment 
activity  which  creates  a  direct  link  between  financial  markets  and 
economic activity.  The Islamic finance model has thus contributed to the 
spread of real-asset-based finance  principles in many jurisdictions and is 
regarded  as  an  ideal  option  for  the  financing  of infrastructure  projects. 
This  provides  a  condu cive  environment  for  achieving  a  more  integrated 
approach  to  economic  growth.  The  success  stories  of Islamic  Banking 
experienced  in  other jurisdictions  would,  without  a  doubt,  be  replicated 
in emerging  markets like  Uganda  once  Islamic  Banking is  rolled  out. 
I 
am happy to note that the agenda for this workshop covers the envisaged 
benefits of Islamic Banking, among other topics. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  therefore  to  emphasize  that while  Islamic  Banking 
and Finance  is envisaged  to  significantly contribute  to  Economic Growth 
Mission: To foster pn'ce stability and a sound financial system  Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability 
Page 4 
and  Development,  it  remains  an  emerging  field  in  the  Financial  System 
worldwide. 
I,  therefore,  urge  all  stakeholders  to  clearly  understand 
Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  model;  appreciate  its  unique  tenets  that 
distinguish  it  from  Conventional  Banking  and  at  the  same  time 
acknowledge  the  similarities  between  the  two  (2)  models.  This  will 
significantly  contribute  to  the  effective  rollout  and growth  of the Islamic 
Banking sector in Uganda. 
On  its  part,  Bank  of  Uganda  will  continue  to  collaborate  with  all 
stakeholders  and  ensure  that  the  requisite  Regulatory  and  Supervisory 
Structures for  supporting  the  growth  of Islamic  Banking and Finance in 
this country are robust and conducive for all investors. 
With those remarks, it is now my  honour to declare the workshop on The 
Fundamentals of Islamic Banking Operations officially open. 
I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
I thank you. 
E. Tumusiime-Mutebile 
GOVERNOR 
BANK OF UGANDA 
KAMPALA 
Mission: To f oster price stability and a sound financial s ystem  Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability 
Page 5 
