Rameswurlall Basant Roi: “The Growing Role of Human Resource
Managers in Modern Business Organisations”
Address  by  Mr  Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual
Congress of the Association of Human Resource Professionals of Mauritius, Balaclava, 5 August
2016.
Mr Areff Salauroo, President of the Association of Human Resource Professionals of Mauritius
 Professor Donald Ah Chuen
Professor McKenna
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
 Good evening
I am delighted to be here with you this evening. Thank you, Areff, for having invited me for the
celebration  of  the  40th  Anniversary  of  the  Association  of  Human  Resource  Professionals  of
Mauritius. My warmest congratulations to you all. I understand you are also having your Annual
Congress over two days carrying the theme “The Growing Role of Human Resource Managers
in Modern Business Organisations” which, I believe, fits well in the current social and economic
context.
As you are aware I re-joined the Bank as Governor again after a long break of eight years which I
spent mostly overseas. Having seen the human resource landscape in Mauritius after so many
years and the quality of human capital relative to the exigencies of the day, I should express my
appreciation  to  the Association  for  having  chosen  this  topic.  There  is  an  unprecedented  gap
between the quality of human resources we have at our disposal and the quality of human capital
needed to escape the middle income trap we find ourselves in. Humans are slow learners. It
takes  longer  for  humans  to  reach  maturity  as  a  percentage  of  their  lifetimes  than  any  other
species. Having had the experience as a Director of a Department at the central bank and as a
Governor  for  several  years,  I  am  more  than  convinced  that  getting  human  resources  in  the
country  do  what  needs  to  be  done  for  enterprises  in  the  private  sector  and  institutions  in  the
public sector to survive in an increasingly competitive world must be a daunting challenge for
human resource managers. How do we get people give their best shots when the character of
the modern individuals is threatened by an economic system that has shifted from capitalism to
turbo-capitalism?
How do we get people give their best shots when the feelings of authenticity have become more
and more scarce? How do we get people give their best shots in times of individualization and a
serious lack of true and sincere connection with each other within a team in an organization?
How do we get people give their best shots if they lack insight, quickness and a can-do attitude?
And  how  do  we  get  people  deliver  what  they  are  paid  for  when  corrosion  of  character  is  so
pervasive?
I  come  from  a  profession  that  has  little  to  do  with  the  practical  aspects  of  human  resource
management. I am an economist, not a human resource professional. I have my own style of
resolving human resource problems that is not necessarily the ideal one. It was 1998. I had just
been appointed Governor of the Bank. The Bank’s operations were partially computerized. There
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
were a few senior employees who, despite having had the benefit of many sessions of training,
were still averse to the use of computer. I had seized the opportunity of a meeting with staff to
drive  home  a  key  point.  I  vividly  recall  having  said  that  people  hate  change.  The  world  hates
change. Yet it is the only thing that has brought progress. The sophisticated quality of their cars
they were driving, the electrical appliances that have greatly enhanced the quality of their lives,
the advanced medical facilities that have reduced suffering were some examples of the products
of “change” that successful organisations have adapted to. I had gone on to quote Harold Wilson,
former British Prime Minister of the UK, “He who rejects change is the architect of decay. The
only human institution which rejects progress is the cemetery.” My eyeballs rolled, on and on, on
those who were aversive to the use of computer at the Bank, while I stressed that we had to
reinvent ourselves continually. It is not the strongest or the most intelligent that survives; it is the
one that is most adaptable to change. It was compelling for us to tool and re-tool, equip and re-
equip ourselves and keep on moving ahead if we had to keep earning a salary at the Bank. The
bad news was that re-engineering in any enterprise requires hard decisions. The hard decision
was that those who are against change would have to head towards the exit door. Guess what?
Samuel  Johnson  said  it  beautifully:  “When  a  man  knows  he  is  to  be  hanged  in  a  fortnight,  it
concentrates  his  mind  wonderfully.”  The  same  day  the  senior  guys  unpacked  themselves  to
learn the difference between business ignorance and business tragedy.
Not  long  after,  the  same  guys  became  the  champion  for  change.  They  are  still  employed
somewhere  in  the  private  sector,  even  after  the  age  of  65.  They  turned  out  to  be  winners.
Winners are often losers who have evaluated themselves.
CEOs,  Heads  of  Departments/Divisions  and  Human  Resource  Managers  often  face  the
extremely  difficult  task  of  identifying  what  one  is  best  capable  of  doing.  I  have  seen  how  an
established system have often labelled people possessing enormous talent as “losers”. I find no
better example than the Beatles. No one had ever noticed that Paul McCartney had any musical
talent in his schooldays. In the 1950s, a schoolteacher in Liverpool had half of the Beatles in his
class. The teacher missed it. My point here is that talent is often buried deep; it’s not lying around
on  the  surface.  But  one  thing  the  Beatles  had  that  many  individuals  in  Mauritius  don’t  have  it
today  –  the  sense  of  sacrifice,  the  strong  commitment  to  a  goal,  hunger  for  success  and
recognition through perseverance.
I  regularly  meet  with  CEOs  of  enterprises  in  the  country  and  I  am  given  to  understand  that
complacency is a phenomenon quite pervasive in the private sector and in the public sector as
well. I am often told of people who have been in their position for years. They are good at what
they have been doing. They are respected. They have a likeable boss and a job that brings them
distinction in society. It’s great to be in that position. Problem is that they feel too comfortable in
the job and they get less vigilant. The urge for new learning evaporates and they eventually lose
their edge. Once someone goes to work simply in order to work rather than to improve oneself,
one  becomes  invariably  incompetent. As  CEOs,  we  often  hear  staff  members  saying,  “This
cannot  be  done. And  that  cannot  be  done.  This  is  an  impossible  task.  That  is  an  impossible
task.” Mentally, the guys are pensioned off.
In the world of athletics, the Kenyans’ refusal to discount anything as impossible is well illustrated
in the game of ‘Catch the Impala’. The impala is a supremely fast animal. Run after it. The impala
will stop at some stage to rest. Before you get too close, it starts running again. This stop-chase
race can go on for about 40 kilometres. After that point, the impala is tired and one is able to pat it
on the backside. To the Kenyans, ‘Catch the Impala” is the ultimate test of perseverance. Mike
Boit, a former Olympic 800 meters winner, once said, “When I returned home to Kenya, they
actually  respected  me  more  for  my  ability  to  catch  the  impala  than  for  having  brought  the
Olympic  medal.”  The  idea  of  someone  running  barefoot  to  catch  a  wild  impala  seems
impossible. The Kenyan runners make the impossible possible. The power of positive thinking,
rather than getting sunk into a world of impossibilities, which allows the Kenyans to go beyond
what appears to be an ultimate frontier has lessons for the business world as well.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Right  from  the  day  we  are  born,  we  pick  up  ideas,  attitudes  and  convictions  from  the  world
around us. Friends, parents, teachers and so many other agents sell to us their version of the
truth. The one we accept, consciously or unconsciously, forms our belief as to what is possible
and what is not. The problem is that many people end up accepting a ‘truth’ that limits rather than
open up the frontiers of possibilities for them. What we need to hammer on our people is that,
whether  one  is  a  business  executive,  an  employee  or  someone  running  a  sandwich  shop,  if
anything extraordinary is to come out, then something extraordinary must go in. And if something
extraordinary  has  to  go  in,  then  our  people  need  to  have  extraordinary  qualities.  I  am  here
reminded of the qualities of the Russian woman who can stop a horse in full strides. She can
walk into a house on fire and come out with the beauty of a queen. So much is the hunger for
success  and  a  bold  commitment  to  make  a  difference.  Hunger  to  win,  to  improve  and  a
willingness to do whatever it takes. These are the intrinsic qualities of outstanding performers.
Do not ruin the raw materials in people. It takes a lot for a human resource manager to get that
right. Bear in mind one thing: nothing is more common than unsuccessful people with talent.
May I wish you a Happy 40th Anniversary and plenty of success in your endeavours.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
