William C Dudley: Financial regulation nine years on from the GFC -
where do we stand?
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, on the Panel "Financial Regulation Nine Years on from the GFC - Where Do
We Stand?", at the G30’s 76th Plenary Session, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York
City, 3 December 2016.
 Beverly Hirtle, Antoine Martin, Susan McLaughlin and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these
remarks.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this panel discussion.  As always, what I have to
say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or
the Federal Reserve System.
In  assessing  where  we  are  eight  years  after  the  financial  crisis,  I  would  make  three  broad
observations.    First,  we  have  made  considerable  progress  in  bolstering  the  safety  and
soundness of the global financial system.  In the U.S., which was the epicenter of the crisis, the
risk of a failure of a systemically important financial firm has declined considerably.  Second,
although significant progress has been made toward ending “too big to fail,” there is still much
more to do.  While the risk of failure of a global systemically important financial institution has
diminished,  it  has  not  been  eliminated.    Without  a  well-functioning  resolution  process,  the
consequences of such a failure could still be catastrophic.  Much headway has been made in the
U.S. in developing a Single Point of Entry resolution regime with a layer of total loss-absorbing
capacity (TLAC) that would facilitate recapitalization and enable an orderly resolution.  However,
significant challenges remain, especially on managing resolution on a cross-border basis.  Third,
bank leaders still have much to do to rebuild the trustworthiness of their industry.  Long after the
financial crisis, conduct failures have persisted.  We need financial firms to foster cultures that
are intolerant of bad conduct and that are attentive to incentive structures that may encourage
such behaviors.
So, let me begin with the good news.  The U.S. financial system is much more resilient now than
it  was  a  decade  ago  on  the  eve  of  the  financial  crisis.    This  progress  reflects  a  number  of
initiatives―some  focused  on  the  ability  of  firms  to  absorb  shocks,  and  others  oriented  at
reducing structural vulnerabilities within the financial system that spanned the activities of firms
and their counterparties. 
Changes made to capital and liquidity requirements in the U.S. and globally have made banks
more resilient and robust.  The major U.S. banking organizations today have much more capital,
much  higher-quality  capital,  and  much  larger  liquidity  buffers  than  prior  to  the  crisis.    On  the
capital side, we have taken a belt-and-suspenders approach.  The Basel III risk-weighted capital
standards framework has been significantly strengthened―a stronger belt―and a supplemental
leverage ratio requirement has also been imposed on large banks and bank holding companies
to  restrain  overall  leverage―the  suspenders.    In  addition,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  the
capital requirements have now become much more forward-looking.  Each year a bank’s capital
dividend and share-repurchase plan is assessed against the amount of capital the bank would
potentially  have  under  an  extremely  stressed  economic  and  market  environment  given  its
portfolio of assets.  The annual Comprehensive Capital and Analysis Review (CCAR) process
has  pushed  U.S.  banks  to  improve  their  capital  planning  processes  and  forced  them,  when
needed, to retain more earnings and to build up their capital.  As a result, these banks are much
less risky now than they were prior to the financial crisis, when their vulnerability was masked by
a high, but unsustainable, level of profitability.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the liquidity side, there has also been significant improvement.  The Liquidity Coverage Ratio
and the Net Stable Funding Ratio requirements have forced banks to hold more high-quality liquid
assets and have reduced the scope for maturity transformation.  The ability and willingness of
banks to finance illiquid, hard-to-value assets with short-term funding was an important element
that contributed to the financial crisis.
In  addition,  I  believe  that  supervisory  oversight  has  improved.    There  is  more  attention  on
horizontal evaluations across the systemically important firms and a greater emphasis on bank
governance, risk management, cyber security, and bank data and technology capabilities than in
the past.
But the progress has not just been in terms of enhancing the strength of individual institutions.
The system as a whole is also stronger because of a number of important initiatives. Due to time
constraints, I cannot be exhaustive today.  But, there are four important structural changes to the
financial  system  that  are  worth  highlighting.    First,  the  tri-party  repo  system—which  matches
institutional investors with bank dealers that need to fund their securities portfolios—has been
made much safer.  Before the crisis, each morning the two large clearing banks provided huge
amounts of intraday credit to their tri-party repo borrowers when cash invested overnight was
returned to lenders.  These temporary extensions of credit have been largely eliminated.  This is
an important structural reform because these exposures had proven to be destabilizing during
the financial crisis.  In particular, when a major dealer became stressed, the clearing banks were
motivated to reassess their large overdraft exposures to the dealer, and that turned out to be an
important channel of contagion.
Another important change has been the shift in over-the-counter derivatives activity from bilateral
settlement  to  central  clearing.    Although  this  shift  was  already  underway  at  the  time  of  the
financial crisis, it has now been underpinned by important changes to the capital and collateral
regime, which has accelerated the process by strengthening the incentives to structure and clear
trades centrally. 
When banks settle their trades with central counterparties (CCPs), it reduces risk in the system. 
Exposures can be netted, and the counterparty risk is shifted from many individual firms to the
single CCP that clears the trades.  Although this shift in clearing activity still has some way to go,
the proportion of centrally cleared trades will continue to rise as legacy trades mature.
A  third  important  structural  change  is  the  increased  focus  on  the  strength  and  resiliency  of
CCPs.  Because CCPs are now going to play a more significant role, they must be strong and
resilient.  There have been many important initiatives in this regard.  Foremost, perhaps, is the
promulgation  of  the  international  standards  embodied  in  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market
Infrastructures (PFMI)—which were developed when I chaired the Committee on Payment and
Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)—and 
financial  market
infrastructure resolution.
the  work  currently  underway  on 
A fourth significant structural change has been reform of the U.S. money market mutual fund
industry.    The  October  14th  implementation  of  floating  net  asset  values  (NAVs)  for  prime
institutional money market mutual funds has dramatically reduced their use and has encouraged
banks and other borrowers to find sources of funding that are less prone to runs.
The  financial  crisis  exposed  two  important  flaws  of  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry. 
First, the fixed NAV structure created a first-mover advantage that encouraged runs.  That is, if a
fund came under stress, investors who quickly withdrew their funds received par value.  Second,
although money market mutual fund investments are often collateralized, the funds themselves
have no desire to take possession of the collateral in a crisis.  Instead, they tend to head for the
exits at the first sign of trouble, which makes the financial system less stable.
Much  progress  has  been  made  in  making  the  U.S.  financial  system  safer  and  less  prone  to
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
panics.  Still, there is more to do before we can say that we have ended “too big to fail.”  This is
work  that  we  absolutely  must  complete.    In  particular,  U.S.  bank  holding  companies  must  do
more to make their organizations resolvable under either Title I bankruptcy or Title II resolution. 
This requires having clean parent holding company structures, less corporate complexity, and
essential  service  and  support  operations  that  are  able  to  continue  to  operate  even  when  the
parent company becomes non-viable. 
Also,  while  there  has  been  significant  progress  in  terms  of  developing  a  workable  resolution
regime—the Single Point of Entry regime established under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act—we
still have to ensure that this regime can be safely utilized on a cross-border basis.  This requires
fully  implementing  the  TLAC  framework,  and  defining  more  explicitly  the  expectations  and
responsibilities  of  the  different  supervisory  and  regulatory  oversight  bodies  that  would  have  to
work together internationally.  In particular, this includes how liquidity would be provided to an
insolvent firm during the early stages of resolution, so that the firm’s operations could be wound
down in an orderly way without destabilizing the global financial system.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of bank culture and conduct.  Although there has been
considerable  effort  here,  there  is  still  much  more  to  do.    Banks  must  restore  their
trustworthiness.  Only then can they effectively perform their critical financial intermediation role
in funneling funds from savers to borrowers, and in helping firms and households manage their
finances and risk exposure.
As  I  see  it,  incentives  drive  behavior,  and  behavior  establishes  the  social  norms  that  define
culture.  This means that bank leaders need to take a close look at the incentives they put in
place with respect to compensation and promotion in particular.
In addition, bank leaders must foster an atmosphere that encourages people to speak up when
they witness questionable behavior.  Preet Bharara, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of
New York, highlighted the importance of getting people to speak up when he spoke at the New
York Fed’s conference on bank culture in October.  He argued—and I agree—that big problems
can  be  nipped  in  the  bud  when  people  speak  up  and  senior  management  responds
appropriately.    Therefore,  bank  leaders  ought  to  recognize  and  reward  those  who  speak  up. 
Actions  speak  louder  than  words  in  shaping  culture.    Establishing  appropriate  incentives  and
fostering an environment in which people feel they can speak up would go a long way toward
bolstering bank culture. 
I am gratified that many bank leaders and boards of directors are working hard to improve their
firms’ cultures, and I very much appreciate the G30’s efforts in this area.  I think most leaders
recognize that good culture is fully consistent with strong financial performance, and that it helps
enable  banks  to  attract  the  talent  needed  to  sustain  such  performance.    Yet,  we  could  make
greater progress more quickly if this effort were coordinated across the industry.  I think bank
leaders could benefit from sharing best practices and participating in surveys that would allow
them to benchmark their strengths and weaknesses versus others on an ongoing basis.
Building a financial system that is more resilient and robust, having a bank resolution regime that
credibly ends “too big to fail,” and building strong cultures that restore the trustworthiness of the
financial industry are all goals we must continue to pursue.  Without success on all three fronts, I
don’t think we can say that we have fully addressed the problems made evident by the financial
crisis.
Thank you for your kind attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
