Már Guðmundsson: Capital flows, systemic risk and policy responses 
Opening remarks by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
the conference “Capital Flows, Systemic Risk and Policy Responses”, Reykjavík, 28 April 
2016. 
 Dear colleagues, 
I would like to welcome many of you to Iceland and all of you to this conference that we have 
given the title Capital flows, systemic risk, and policy responses (see programme here). It is 
organised  jointly  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  the  Systemic  Risk  Centre  at  the  London 
School  of  Economics,  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  The  list  of  those  that  have 
helped to make this event possible by making sure that we had the necessary programme, 
speakers, participants and facilities is too long for these opening remarks. But I would like to 
thank them all very much for their efforts. 
However, I cannot escape mentioning five names. Jón Daníelsson, Director of the Systemic 
Risk Centre at the London School of Economics, and Sigríður Benediktsdóttir, Director of the 
Financial Stability Department of the Central Bank of Iceland, came up with the original idea 
for this conference about a year ago. On behalf of the Central Bank of Iceland, Sigríður was 
also the key organiser of the programme, along with Katja Neugebauer and Ann Law from 
the  Systemic  Risk  Centre  at  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Marco  Arena  from  the 
International Monetary Fund. 
The  conference  is  in  two  parts.  Today  and  until  lunch  tomorrow,  we  will  be  here  at  Hotel 
Hilton Reykjavík Nordica. We begin by hearing a keynote address by Stijn Claessens, whom 
I will introduce shortly. We will then discuss twelve submitted papers. We clearly picked a hot 
topic,  as  we  received  150  submissions,  including  at  least  100  that  were  deemed  highly 
relevant to the topic of the conference. I look forward to hearing the selections. Finally, we 
will have a special policy and case study session just before lunch tomorrow, where you will 
also learn about Iceland’s experience with volatile capital flows. 
After lunch tomorrow, we move over to Harpa, the new conference and music centre on the 
Reykjavík seafront and in front of the Central Bank. We move the latter part of conference to 
Harpa not only because many Icelanders nowadays feel that our visitors have a duty to see 
that magnificent place. We will have more space and the audience will be larger. In addition, 
the proceedings from then on will be streamed on the websites of the IMF and the Central 
Bank of Iceland (see webcast here). The location will remind us that there are also positive 
aspects to capital inflow surges! 
After  we  convene  at  Harpa,  we  will  first  hear  a  keynote  address  by  Maurice  Obstfeld, 
Economic Counsellor of the International Monetary Fund. Then we will have a policy panel 
moderated by Jörg Decressin, Deputy Director of the European Department of the IMF, with 
two  Governors,  Karnit  Flug from  Israel  and  myself,  Turalay  Kenc,  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Central Bank of Turkey, Luiz A. Pereira da Silva, Deputy General Manager of the BIS and 
former  Deputy  Governor  in  Brazil,  and  Professor  Carmen  Reinhart  from  the  Harvard 
Kennedy School. Jón Daníelsson will then make the closing remarks. 
In addition, let me recognise one more person on the programme, who is Charles Goodhart. 
He  needs  no  introduction  to  you,  of  course.  Charles  was  initially  scheduled  to  be  on  the 
panel, but because he has now to leave early on Friday, that is no longer possible. Instead, 
he  offered  lead  the  discussion  in  one  of  the  paper  sessions.  Charles  has  been  to  Iceland 
several times. I remember that I met him first in the early 1990s, when he came to Iceland to 
talk  about  central  bank  independence  and  the  new  monetary  framework  in  New  Zealand, 
which we adopted many years later. But I also remember sharing a panel with him here in 
Iceland in 1998, when I was Chief Economist of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a conference 
organised by Jón Daníelsson and others. This was shortly after the Asian crisis had broken 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  out and the international community had come to the conclusion that it was perhaps not such 
a good idea after all to incorporate free capital movements as a requirement into the Articles 
of Agreement of the IMF. I remember that we agreed that we were at a turning point, when 
policy views were shifting. And here we are again, but this time around it is perhaps more 
fundamental! 
You  see  from  this  that  we  have  a  rich  and  varied  two-day  programme  ahead  of  us  –  a 
programme that I, for one, am looking very much forward to. 
Let me now use the rest of my time to reflect briefly on the topic. I will initially approach it 
from the monetary policy perspective, which is very much influenced by my role as a policy-
maker in this country, which used to be very financially integrated with the rest of the world 
but has been behind comprehensive capital controls on outflows since the crisis. But it is also 
informed by my work and that of my colleagues on these issues when I was at the BIS during 
the prelude to the Great Financial Crisis (GFC). 
Among the questions that we are faced with in this connection are the following: 
1. 
How  is  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  affected  in  small,  open 
economies with open capital accounts as global financial integration progresses? 
What is the scope for independent monetary policy in that case? 
What is the interaction with financial stability? 
Does this state of affairs call for changes in policy frameworks and tools? 
2. 
3. 
4. 
You know the theory. If we have a world made up of one very large country and several very 
small countries, have full cross-border financial integration (in the economic sense of these 
terms rather than the legal), and assume that relative risk premia are constant, then long-
term interest rates in the small countries will be pegged to long-term rates in the large one. 
This, of course, is an “unrealistic” theoretical simplification. But it gives us a reference point 
to start to think about these issues, and it indicates the direction we might be heading in as 
global financial integration progresses. 
In this type of world, the small countries could still have  independent monetary policy of a 
sort,  provided  that  they  have  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime.  They  could  pick  their  own 
inflation targets and set their own short-term rates that would affect economic activity in the 
short run and inflation in the long run. In this case, monetary policy works mostly through the 
exchange rate channel. 
So  why  is  this  a  problem?  If  exchange  rates  were  smooth  reflections  of  underlying 
fundamentals, then it would not need to be. The evidence suggests, however, that foreign 
exchange  markets  exhibit  excess  volatility  and 
from 
fundamentals  for  protracted  periods.  In  some  sense,  the  existence  of  carry  trade  can  be 
construed as evidence of this, as it involves betting that interest rate differentials are not fully 
compensated by exchange rate movements; i.e., that uncovered interest rate parity does not 
hold, except at long horizons, and then often through sharp and disorderly corrections. 
This,  in  turn,  gives  rise  to  two  concerns:  first,  regarding  detrimental  effects  on  the  traded 
goods  sector  (for  example,  New  Zealand  and  Iceland  prior  to  the  crisis),  and  second,  on 
financial  stability  where  volatile  capital  flows,  currency  mismatches,  and  rollover  risk  of 
foreign currency debt are among the key players. Adverse effects on financial stability can be 
particularly  severe  when  a  blocked  interest  rate  channel  and  an  erratic  exchange  rate 
channel interact badly with other economic and financial risks that can face small, open, and 
financially  integrated  economies  –  such  as  the  global  credit  cycle,  domestic  financial 
vulnerabilities, policy conflicts, and asymmetric shocks. This was the case in Iceland. 
We saw trends before the GFC that are consistent with this story, although they could also 
be  explained  by  common  shocks  and  monetary  policy  credibility.  The  GFC  reversed  this 
process  somewhat,  as  risk  premia  skyrocketed,  cross-border  banking  retreated  to  home 
that  exchange  rates  diverge 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  base,  and  restrictions  on  capital  movements  were  in  some  cases  reintroduced.  But  it  has 
come back to a significant degree. 
The bottom line is that it is becoming more difficult to conduct independent monetary policy in 
small, open, and financially integrated economies, and although a flexible exchange rate is a 
necessary condition for doing so, it might not be sufficient, especially when we factor in the 
financial  stability  aspects.  This,  I  think,  is  why  we  find  on  occasion  that  we  are  closer  to 
facing a dilemma than a trilemma. 
What can be done about this, apart from giving up on the task of conducting independent 
monetary policy and entering a monetary union (with its own pros and cons, which I will not 
discuss  here)  or  by  making  radical  changes  to  the  international  monetary  and  financial 
systems that are not forthcoming any time soon? 
In  principle,  there  are  three  ways  to  mitigate  the  problem.  The  first  is  to  adjust 
macroeconomic  policy  frameworks.  The  second  is  to  use  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision  aimed  at  reducing  potential  vulnerabilities  and  increasing  resilience  in  face  of 
volatile capital flows. The third is to introduce tools aimed directly at the financial integration 
part in order to regain greater monetary independence and shift the effect of monetary policy 
more to the interest rate channel and towards the non-traded goods sector. These so-called 
capital  flow  management  measures  could,  for  instance,  take  the  form  of  some  type  of 
reserve requirement or a tax that could complement appropriate macroeconomic policies by 
reducing the returns on portfolio investments of foreign residents, thus limiting the increase in 
the effective interest rate differential vis-à-vis abroad when domestic interest rates are raised. 
In  Iceland,  this  issue  is  very  much  on  the  agenda  as  the  country  prepares  to  lift  the 
comprehensive controls on capital outflows that were introduced at the peak of its financial 
crisis. We will work through all of the avenues that I have just mentioned, and many of the 
reforms have already been implemented. What I call inflation targeting-plus will replace IT of 
the  pre-crisis  type.  A  managed float  has  already  taken  the  place  of  the  free float.  Foreign 
exchange intervention without targeting a specific exchange rate level is thus used to reduce 
excess volatility in the FX market and lean against capital flow cycles. The financial stability 
framework has been strengthened, and macroprudential tools are being developed that are 
intended  to  mitigate  adverse  interactions  between  capital  flows,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
domestic  credit  growth  and  asset  prices,  on  the  other.  Foreign  currency  borrowing  by 
unhedged  domestic  agents  will  be  very  much  restricted.  Prudential  limits  on  banks’  FX 
balance  sheets,  in  the  form  of  specific  LCR  and  NSFR  in  FX,  have  been  imposed.  In 
practice, this will greatly limit the size of their FX balance sheets and the associated maturity 
mismatch that was the proximate cause of the demise of the old banks that failed during the 
crisis.  Finally,  a  tool  to  directly  affect  capital  flows  when  the  interest  differential  vis-à-vis 
abroad becomes sizeable is being contemplated. We know, however, that such a tool will be 
no panacea and should normally not be used as a first or even second line of defence. It will 
have side effects and might take us to the limits of international obligations, particularly if the 
tools are designed for maximum efficacy. 
History will tell whether all of this will be sufficient to preserve monetary and financial stability 
in the rougher seas of freer capital movements that we intend to embark upon. In any case, 
although  some  of them were  used  in  the  more distant  past,  we  have  much  to  learn  about 
how the additional tools now being contemplated around the world will work and how they 
should  interact  with  current  tools.  I  see  that  many  of  the  papers  are  indeed  about  various 
aspects of this issue. 
Let me stop here and introduce Stijn Claessens and his keynote address to you, although he 
does not need much of an introduction to this group, having been Assistant Director of the 
Research  Department  of  the  IMF  from  2007–2015  and  currently  a  Senior  Adviser  to  the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The title of his talk fits very well with the 
topic of this conference and some of the issues that I have just raised. It is Macroprudential, 
Monetary and Capital Flow Management Policies and Their Interactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
