7 December 2016 (Correction 12 Dec 2016, Figure 8 has been corrected in this version) 
Deputy Governor Per Jansson 
Swedbank, Stockholm 
  SVERIGES  RIKSBANK 
SE-103  37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergst org  11) 
 
Tel.  +46  8  787 00  00 
Fax  +46  8  21 05 31 
registratorn @ riks ban k .se 
www.riksb ank .s e 
SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
   Time to scrap the inflation target?* 
To avoid  keeping you on tenterhooks, I shall begin by answering the question  in the 
title of my speech. No, it is not time to scrap the inflation  target, in case any of you 
thought I wanted to. The question  is of course  rhetorical. The reason I ask the 
question  is that I think it has been the focal point of the recent debate in Sweden, 
although it is not usually  expressed  so directly. Following  the financial  crisis the 
foundations  of monetary policy  certainly have been discussed  and questioned  around 
the world. But my feeling is that the debate has been driven  further in Sweden than  in 
most other countries. 
Monetary policy  in Sweden has often attracted interest from other countries. One 
reason is that we have often been among the first to implement  changes in the 
monetary policy framework and thus become an interesting object of study.  As is 
well-known,  Sweden was one of the very first countries to introduce  inflation 
targeting in the early 1990s, and we have in many respects remained at the front edge 
since then. For instance, the Riksbank is one of few central banks  to publish  its own 
forecast for the policy  rate and possibly  the only  central bank where the minutes state 
which Board member has said what during the monetary policy  meetings. 1  
Inflation has been low for longer in Sweden than in many other countries 
In recent years, international interest in Sweden as an object of study has been more 
due to economic  developments  here, and to the measures the Riksbank  has taken, 
rather than the changes in the monetary policy  framework. 
Despite the Swedish  economy developing  relatively well since the global financial 
crisis 2008-2009  (see Figure 1), inflation  began to fall earlier in Sweden  than in the 
rest of the world. This has meant that inflation  has undershot  the target and been 
lower than in many other countries for a long time (see Figure 2). This has in turn 
contributed to the Riksbank considering  it necessary  to cut its policy rate below zero, 
                                                                 
* I would like to thank Mikael Apel for his help in writing this text, Elizabeth Nilsson for translating it into English, 
Goran Katinic for help with the slides and Björn Andersson, Gina Bayoumi, Claes Berg, Charlotta Edler, Gabriela 
Guibourg, Marianne Nessén, Marianne Sterner and Anders Vredin for their valuable comments. 
1 Another completely fresh example is the Riksbank’s thoughts on introducing a digital currency (see Skingsley, 
2016). 
  1 [20] 
   which only  a few other central banks  have done so far. 2 The long period of low 
inflation  has also started a debate regarding the grounds  for the Riksbank’s monetary 
policy  and the inflation  target, which as far as I can tell is more intense than in most 
other countries. In this sense, too, one can therefore in some ways say that we are 
pioneers. 
What I intend to do today is first to say a few words about this debate. Most often, 
the criticism merely states that the “monetary policy  of the Riksbank  is wrong”. The 
reasons for this vary: because a negative policy  rate is not healthy, because housing 
prices are rising, because the krona is too weak or because the economy  is already 
developing  well. There is usually  no detailed reasoning  as to what the consequences 
would be if the policy was shifted in another direction. In particular, what is often 
missing, but I argue is crucial, is a discussion  on why the advantages of the inflation 
target should  no longer apply and what the consequences  would  be if the Riksbank 
abandoned  it. 
After discussing  the debate on monetary policy, I intend to conclude  by looking  ahead 
and examining the problems  and possibilities  for monetary policy  in the future. Here, I 
focus  in particular on a scenario where monetary policy  is not made more 
expansionary  despite a delay in reaching the inflation  target. 
In Sweden, the policy  rate has been negative since February 2015. This has not been 
an uncontroversial  policy. The criticism can be divided  into two types. These are often 
expressed  simultaneously  and are difficult  to distinguish  from one another, but I think 
there is a point in trying to keep the arguments separate. One sort of criticism is that a 
negative policy  rate in itself is something  unnatural and unhealthy. The other is that a 
negative policy  rate is the wrong policy  in the current economic situation. Let me 
discuss  these arguments one at a time. 
Negative policy rate unnatural and unhealthy in itself? 
One can dispute  whether a negative policy rate is unnatural and unhealthy, but it is 
certainly very unusual.  This applies not only to policy rates but also to nominal 
interest rates in general. Prior to 2015 we had never had a negative nominal  interest 
rate in Sweden. On the other hand, negative real interest rates, that is, nominal 
interest rates adjusted  for inflation,  have occurred now and then. The short-term real 
interest rate has been more or less  constantly negative since 2009. If we look  further 
back in time, negative real interest rates have not been so unusual  either (see Figure 
3).  
Of course one might think it rather unnatural to need to pay to lend money to 
someone, and to be paid for borrowing. But as it is usually  our purchasing power that 
we are concerned with, it is not really clear, when one thinks  about it, why it should 
be more unnatural to have a negative nominal interest rate than a negative real 
interest rate. If one lends  money, one will in both cases be able to consume  less when 
one regains what one has lent, including interest. In the case of a negative real 
interest rate, this is because inflation  is higher than the interest payment, and one is 
therefore unable to buy as much for the sum  one receives from the borrower. If 
instead the nominal  interest rate is negative, then the negative return is written into 
                                                                 
2 Danmarks Nationalbank, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank also have 
negative policy rates (a list of central banks’ policy rates can be found at centralbanksnews.info). It is worth 
noting that almost a quarter of global GDP is currently produced in countries where the policy rate is n egative. 
  2 [20] 
   the contract from the start, so to say, and perhaps this is what many feel goes against 
normal social and economic conventions.  But regarded solely  in terms of purchasing 
power, a negative nominal  interest rate is not anything  very special, in any case no 
more special than a negative real interest rate. 
General interest rates low but not negative 
Moreover, the fact that the repo rate is negative does  not mean that general interest 
rates in Sweden are negative. The repo rate is a very special short-term rate that only 
the Riksbank's  monetary policy  counterparties encounter, including  the major 
Swedish  banks. When the repo rate is negative, the banks  pay interest to the 
Riksbank, as the banking system as a whole has a liquidity  surplus  that must be 
deposited  in the Riksbank. The short-term interbank rates, that is interest on loans 
between the banks, and some government rates have followed  the repo rate down 
below zero. However, the banks have not introduced  negative deposit  rates for 
households  and most companies. Only  a few economic agents, primarily other 
financial institutions,  large companies  and some municipalities,  have experienced  a 
negative deposit  rate, and these can in some cases also borrow at a negative interest 
rate. Companies  have been forced to expend a certain amount of resources on 
avoiding negative return on their funds, but they appear to have succeeded  relatively 
well in this. Cutting the repo rate below zero has thus in total contributed to pushing 
down interest rates, but has not meant that interest rates have become negative for 
the general public. 
Good profitability among the banks and few signs of a decline in demand 
Another fear has been that negative interest rates reduce the banks’ profitability, 
which could lead to higher lending rates and a lower supply  of credit. The reason for 
this is said to be that the banks’ deposit  margin, that is, the difference between the 
interest on deposits  and lending, would decline because it is difficult  to cut the 
deposit  rate below zero. However, Swedish  banks’ profitability  has been good in 
recent years, especially  in relation to banks  in the euro area (see Figure 4). The 
negative repo rate has contributed to making their extensive  market funding less 
expensive, at the same time as lending volumes  have increased. In low interest rate 
environments  there is also a tendency for income from fees and commission  to rise, 
as the demand for the banks’ asset management increases as more people want to 
invest in for example funds.  Nor does  it appear to have been too difficult  or expensive 
to adapt IT systems  to manage negative interest rates. The Riksbank's  overall 
assessment  is that the negative interest rates have had little or perhaps even a 
positive  effect on the banks’ profitability. 3 
As negative nominal interest rates are a new phenomenon,  it is nevertheless  natural 
that they are met with scepticism  and give rise to various psychological  reactions. One 
fear along these lines has been that the negative policy rate would be perceived as a 
crisis signal that would increase uncertainty among economic agents. I believe that 
reactions of this kind should  be taken seriously.  That there are such reactions is one 
reason why I am taking up this question  here today. However, there are so far few 
signs of declining demand  resulting from concern among households  and companies. 
On the contrary, domestic demand has been the most important driving force behind 
                                                                 
3 For a more detailed review, see the article “How do low and negative interest rates affect banks’ profitability?” 
in the Monetary Policy Report April 2016. The Riksbank's conclusions in this field are shared by Turk (2016).  
  3 [20] 
   the improved  economic  activity in Sweden. In addition, sentiment in the household 
and corporate sectors is good, according to various confidence  indicators  (see Figure 
5). 
It is also worth noting in this context that there is a fairly intensive international 
discussion  on whether negative policy rates should  be included  in the central banks’ 
normal arsenal going forward, as a weapon that could be used if special needs arise. 
One advocate of this is Ben Bernanke, former chairman of the Federal Reserve. 4 He 
argues that negative policy rates have many advantages in relation to raising the 
inflation  target, which is also discussed  as a means of creating greater room for 
manoeuvre in future recessions.  It is worth noting that this international discussion 
exists, as a contrast to the picture often painted in the Swedish  debate – that negative 
policy  rates are an isolated  and strange invention  of the Riksbank  and a few other 
central banks. 
Negative policy rate wrong policy in current economic situation? 
The second  form of criticism, as I mentioned  earlier, is that a negative interest rate is 
the wrong policy in the current economic situation. One reflection one can make here 
is that the criticism really concerns  the repo rate being too low, not specifically  that it 
is negative. 
Low global interest rates are not due to monetary policy 
There are reasons to begin reflecting on why interest rates are so low. One important 
observation  is that there has been a downward trend in real interest rates around the 
world for a couple of decades now (see Figure 6). It is not entirely clear why this has 
happened  and why global real interest rates are currently so low, but in general terms 
it is due to the willingness  to save long being greater than the willingness  to invest. 
Another significant factor is that trend growth has deteriorated in many countries 
following  the financial crisis. It is important to realise that global interest rates today 
are low because of factors that are unrelated to monetary policy.  And global real 
interest rates are an important determinant for long-term real interest rates in 
individual  countries. Monetary policy  has to continuously  relate to this long-term real 
interest rate. To put it simply,  if monetary policy  gives rise to interest rates below the 
long-term real interest rate, then the policy is expansionary.  Correspondingly, 
monetary policy is tight if interest rates exceed the long-term real interest rate. 
However, monetary policy can neither influence  nor deviate in the long run from the 
long-term real interest rate.5  
These aspects are important, for instance with regard to the discussions  about various 
possible  negative side-effects  of the very expansionary  monetary policy. One 
argument is that the low interest rate constitutes  a danger to pensions  as the return 
on pension  savings  becomes so low. But with regard to pensions,  it is the long-term 
return that is important. This means it is the long-term real interest rate that is the 
most relevant variable. The solution  to the problem  is thus not that central banks 
should  raise their policy  rates, much less that the Riksbank  should  do so single-
handedly. To make interest rates persistently  higher, one needs  to implement 
                                                                 
4 Bernanke (2016). Rogoff (2016) reasons similarly. 
5 See, for instance, Rachel and Smith (2015) for a more detailed discussion and quantitative estimates of the 
global real equilibrium rate. 
  4 [20] 
   structural measures  that push  up the long-term real interest rate. This is 
unfortunately  not so easy to do.    
With reasonable estimates of the long-term real interest rate, the Riksbank's 
monetary policy has in recent years been clearly expansionary. The reasons  why the 
Riksbank  has conducted  this policy are that inflation has undershot  the target for a 
long time and that long-term inflation expectations have fallen to worryingly  low 
levels. Around the turn of the year 2014-15 the situation  was particularly serious. 
Expectations of inflation five years ahead had fallen some way below the target and 
there was a tendency towards acceleration in the decline (see Figure 7). The Riksbank 
therefore assessed  it was necessary to conduct a very expansionary  policy  to 
safeguard confidence in the inflation  target. 
Good reasons to preserve confidence in the inflation target  
There are good reasons for safeguarding this confidence. When economic  agents have 
a collective picture of how prices will develop  in the future, it becomes easier to plan 
for the long term. The inflation  target contributes to coordinating  expectations in the 
economy  and thereby lays the foundations  for smoothly-functioning  price-setting and 
wage formation. As I see it, the good wage formation  system that we have today is 
perhaps the greatest achievement of inflation  targeting. During the 1970s and 1980s, 
wage formation  was a constant source of disruption  in the Swedish  economy. It 
caused considerable  uncertainty for many companies. One was forced to manage the 
cost problem and poorer competitiveness  through recurring devaluations  of the 
krona. The situation was generally untenable and eventually led to an extensive 
economic  crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
An important insight here is that a credible inflation  target can give rise to a beneficial 
self-reinforcing  cycle. If expectations are in line with the inflation target, and if price-
setting and wage formation adapt to these expectations, actual price developments 
will then also become consistent  with the inflation target. On the other hand, if 
expectations were to become stuck at a level that is too low, one instead has a 
negative self-reinforcing  effect, which means that the central bank has to struggle 
much harder to attain the inflation  target. This underlines  the significance of taking 
resolute action particularly when more long-term inflation  expectations begin to 
deviate fairly substantially  from the target level. 
There are also good reasons why the target is 2 per cent and not lower. Perhaps the 
most important is that there should  be sufficient  scope to cut the policy rate in the 
future if inflation  becomes low or economic activity wanes. A lower inflation target 
would mean reaching the policy  rate's lower bound  more often and for longer. This is 
why there is currently an international discussion  on whether the central banks’ 
inflation  targets should  be raised. 6 A somewhat paradoxical observation  here is that 
many of those in the Swedish  debate who are critical of negative policy  rates are also 
critical of higher inflation  targets, and often even advocate lower inflation  targets. But 
with an unchanged or lower inflation target, it becomes  even more important that the 
policy  rate can be cut below zero.  
A further reason that I believe should  not be underestimated is that wage formation 
can deteriorate when average inflation  is too low. The reason is that in practice it has 
proved difficult  to lower nominal  wages. If inflation  is low and nominal wages cannot 
                                                                 
6 See, for example, Blanchard et al. (2010), Ball (2014) and Rosengren (2015). 
  5 [20] 
   be lowered, it becomes difficult  to adjust  real wages between individuals  at a 
company and between different sectors. This can ultimately bring about both higher 
unemployment  and poorer productivity  growth in the economy. These problems  can 
be mitigated if there is a certain underlying inflation  rate in the economy. 
Underestimating the significance of monetary policy and exchange rate 
developments 
One problem when criticizing monetary policy with reference to the current economic 
situation is that one does not take into account the fact that the current strong 
Swedish  economy  is of course  to a large degree due to the monetary policy  that has 
been conducted. It is a little like taking medicine  in connection  with an illness  and 
when cured drawing the conclusion  that it was unnecessary  to take the medicine.  
On this point I feel that the events of spring 2015 are a good illustration. The ECB had 
announced  in January that it intended  to buy securities  over slightly  more than a year 
to come for the equivalent of SEK 10,000 billion  (around 2.5 times the size of Swedish 
GDP). This is indeed a very substantial monetary policy intervention. Within  the 
course of just a few weeks the krona exchange rate appreciated significantly  against 
the euro, from almost 9.65 krona per euro to just over  9.10. This was in itself a large 
appreciation of almost 6 per cent, but the real danger lay in the fact that it could  have 
been much worse. During 2014 and up to spring 2015 the US dollar and the British 
pound  sterling had appreciated by between 15 and 25 per cent against the euro. 
There was agreement on the market that differences  in monetary policy  were decisive 
for the different development  paths of these currencies and the Swedish  krona 
against the euro. If the Swedish  krona had in this situation so to speak appreciated 
level with the dollar and sterling, the total appreciation would  have been around 30 
per cent. This would  have meant a very serious  deterioration in the competitiveness 
of the Swedish  export industry and would have entirely changed the playing field  for 
the Swedish  economy  (see Figure 8). Under such circumstances  there would certainly 
not have been any growth in the vicinity of 4 per cent in 2015. 
My own impression  is that the risk the Swedish  economy  was exposed  to at this stage 
is severely underestimated  by many commentators. They appear to assume that the 
strong performance in 2015 would have happened  more or less regardless of 
monetary policy and the krona exchange rate. The fact that the Riksbank  in February 
reacted by introducing a negative repo rate and beginning to buy government bonds 
is not considered  to have played any major role. Although it is possible  that the 
outcome would  not have been quite as bad as I have outlined  above, I think that it is 
extremely misguided  to assume that monetary policy  was more or less  insignificant. 
There is also good reason for a reminder of a circumstance that tends to be forgotten. 
The current debate sometimes  gives the impression  that the Swedish  economy  has 
for some time been in a situation of almost overheating. But the fact is that we fairly 
recently, according to most empirical estimates, once again attained a level of 
resource utilisation  that can be described  as normal. Thus, although such estimates 
are uncertain, the Swedish  economy  appears to have been producing  below, rather 
than above, its long-term capacity for several years following  the financial crisis. 
  6 [20] 
   Confidence in the inflation target unimportant or possible to maintain 
with a different policy?  
One thing that is rarely done, but I think is of utmost importance, is to spell out the 
practical consequences  of this criticism. It is of course easy to agree that if the 
Riksbank  had not needed  to defend confidence  in the inflation  target, then monetary 
policy  would not have needed to be so expansionary  and the repo rate would  perhaps 
not have needed to be negative. One may therefore draw the conclusion  that those 
who say that monetary policy  is wrong are arguing one of the following:  Either that 
confidence  in the inflation target is not so important, or at least less important than 
other things, or that the Riksbank  should  have been able to conduct a less 
expansionary  policy  while still being able to safeguard confidence  in the inflation 
target. 
The criticism is rarely clear with regard to which of the statements it is based on, but 
my interpretation is that most of it is based on the first claim  – that it is not so 
important to maintain confidence in the inflation  target. Unfortunately, this rarely 
develops  into any more detailed reasoning. Typically, the criticism tends to stop at 
monetary policy having been inappropriate, while reflections on the merits of a 
credible inflation  target – and in particular on why the advantages of the current 
target should  no longer apply – are almost always lacking. 
Essentially the criticism concerns whether or not to have an inflation 
target  
When thinking  about it, this criticism is in fact quite remarkable. What it actually says 
is that even if confidence  in the inflation target is beginning to fail quite clearly, the 
Riksbank  should  not do what it can to maintain it. In this sense, one can argue that the 
discussion  is essentially  about whether or not to have an inflation  target, and perhaps 
even about whether or not to pursue  an inflation-targeting policy at all, although it is 
rarely expressed  in this way. 
I can only think of one earlier parallel. It was as long ago as the second  half of 1994, 
after the Riksbank  had decided to introduce an inflation  target, but before it came 
into force in 1995. The reason for the delay between the decision  in January 1993 and 
the target coming into force was to give the inflationary  impulse  that arose when the 
krona was allowed to float in November 1992 time to wane. 
During summer 1994, inflation  and inflation expectations  began to rise.7 Most 
analysts’ forecasts pointed to inflation  overshooting  the target by a broad margin, and 
various  indicators showed  that the long-term expected inflation rate, which had never 
been close to 2 per cent, was now above 4 per cent. The inflation-targeting policy was 
thus faced with its first real challenge and the Riksbank  began to raise the repo rate. 
Despite this being an entirely logical measure in the prevailing situation, it was met 
with strong criticism from some parts of society.  A number of members of the largely 
politically-appointed  General Council  of the Riksbank, which was then the body that 
made the monetary policy  decisions,  entered reservations  against the decision.  Some 
even considered  that this interest-rate and monetary policy was leading Sweden into 
“economic suicide”.8 The most important measure, they said, should  be to achieve a 
                                                                 
7 See Bäckström (2003) for a description of the situation at that time. 
8 See LO (1994). It should be added that LO fairly soon afterwards came out in support of the inflation target and 
has supported it ever since.  
  7 [20] 
   lower real interest rate. The criticism lived on for quite a long time, but it was 
probably  quite essential to demonstrate at that time that the inflation  target was 
taken seriously. 
This was until now the only time I can remember that the Riksbank  was urged not to 
do its best to maintain confidence  in the inflation target. The criticism then was 
largely due to the inflation-targeting policy  being so new – as I said, the inflation 
target had not yet even come into force. It is less easy today, after twenty years of 
positive  economic developments,  in which the inflation  target has been a 
cornerstone, to see why the Riksbank is being urged to lower its ambitions. Perhaps it 
is because developments  have been so positive for so long that one feels the 
existence of a credible nominal anchor is no longer as important. If so, I am convinced 
that this is a mistake. 
Difficult to see reasonable  alternatives to the policy conducted 
But what about developments  in household  debt and housing  prices? Don't they give 
a reason for changing monetary policy?  The Riksbank  has previously  used the repo 
rate to try to subdue  the upturn in debt and housing  prices. But this was on a fairly 
modest scale and – above all – during a period when confidence  in the inflation target 
appeared firmly  rooted.9 In recent years, on the other hand, there have been signs 
that this confidence has begun to be undermined, which has changed conditions 
rather drastically. It has no longer been possible  to do both; the Riksbank  has been 
forced to choose.  
I think it has been an absolute necessity  in this case to prioritise confidence  in the 
inflation  target. It is not just because this is the Riksbank's  main task. In my opinion,  it 
is rather obvious  that the problems  on the housing  market are deeper than the 
currently low interest rate. Housing prices and household  debt have risen in parallel 
and almost constantly  for twenty years, and during this time the interest rate has 
been both relatively high and very low (see Figure 9). Another observation  that 
underlines  the claim that the interest rate does not  play the leading role is that 
developments  in housing  prices in Germany have been quite different  from those  in 
Sweden, despite a rather similar monetary policy  (see Figure 10). 
As I see it, it is not reasonable given this to advocate that the Riksbank  shall sacrifice 
its main task – to maintain confidence  in the inflation  target – to perhaps attain some 
easing with regard to housing  prices and debt, which would  in any case only  be 
temporary unless  other measures were taken. If we are to attain a long-term 
sustainable  development  in the Swedish  economy there is no way around  managing 
the risks  in the housing  and credit markets with targeted measures  in housing  policy, 
taxation policy  and macroprudential  policy. Anything else would be a very strange and 
ultimately untenable allocation of roles in economic policy. 
                                                                 
9 See, for example, Jansson (2014). 
  8 [20] 
   Could confidence in the inflation target have been maintained with a less 
expansionary  policy? 
As I noted, some analysts would  probably argue that it is important to defend the 
inflation  target, but that this could have been done with a less  expansionary  policy, 
where the repo rate would not have needed  to be cut below  zero.  
This is a view that I have greater understanding  for. However, there are many 
arguments against it. The expansionary  policy  conducted by the Riksbank  has indeed 
led to inflation  turning upwards and to long-term inflation  expectations being once 
again at or very close  to 2 per cent (see Figure 11). But the upturn in inflation  has 
been bumpy  and fragile and there are some signs that it has slowed  down in recent 
months. Moreover, the upturn has to a fairly large degree been based on the krona 
being relatively weak and its sustainability  rests on the assumption  that the krona will 
not appreciate too rapidly going forward. It is very probable that developments  would 
have looked quite different with a higher repo rate. And in this context the 
significance of a repo rate that is only half a percentage point  higher should  not be 
underestimated. It is not particularly difficult  to imagine a scenario where the krona in 
such a case would  have strengthened, possibly  quite significantly, economic activity 
would have slowed  down and inflation  and inflation expectations would  have turned 
downwards. 
This relates to a different type of criticism that argues that the negative interest rate 
has not had any effect or even been counter-productive.  The grounds  for this criticism 
appear to be that inflation has not attained the target despite the repo rate being 
negative. This is of course true, but the question  one should  ask is how things would 
have looked if the Riksbank  had not cut the rate as much as it did. Of course we can 
never know for certain, but it is difficult to see any convincing  reasons why inflation 
would have been the same as it is now, or even higher, if the repo rate had stayed at 
zero. And in this context the risks of a very strong krona appreciation  that needed to 
be dealt with during the spring of 2015 should  be recalled. 
Unclear arguments regarding exchange rate and welfare   
Before I continue, I would like to say something about one type of criticism that has 
been common recently. It appears to be based on the idea that the exchange rate can 
be regarded as a measure of welfare and argues that “Swedes have become poorer” 
when the krona is weak, and vice versa. As the Riksbank's  expansionary  monetary 
policy  is assumed  to be an important explanation for the weak krona, the Riksbank is 
thus considered  to contribute to this increased poverty. This is then taken as 
justification  for saying that monetary policy  is wrong. 
I have some difficulty  in understanding  this linking  of the exchange rate to welfare. A 
weak krona does tend to increase the prices of goods we import. But imported goods 
are included  in the representative consumption  basket that inflation  is measured by. 
And the problem  today is not that inflation  is high, rather the reverse. It is thus not 
the case that the weak krona significantly  erodes our daily consumption. 
For the man on the street a weak krona is most noticeable because it becomes  more 
expensive  to travel abroad. This is of course unfortunate, but it nevertheless  seems 
fairly far-fetched to compare this with reduced welfare or increased  poverty. The 
other side  of the coin is of course  that Swedish  companies  find it easier to export and 
  9 [20] 
   are able to increase their employment.  A more established  measure of welfare is GDP 
or GDP per capita, or consumption  or consumption  per capita. 
Negative policy rates no panacea  
Before I go on, let me note in conclusion  that the negative repo rate has on the whole 
had the expected effects. It has most probably contributed  to inflation  being higher 
than it would  have been otherwise and the fears of what might happen when the 
repo rate passed  the zero mark have so far not been realised.  
Having said this, I would  like to point out that I do not see negative policy  rates as  a 
panacea for the problems  monetary policy has faced in recent years, in an 
environment  where the global real interest rate is very low.  There is an international 
discussion,  mostly on an academic level, about monetary policy  becoming more 
effective if the central banks’ policy  rates were to be made very negative – that is, if 
the lower bound  could in principle  be eliminated entirely. 10 But personally  I do not 
regard this as a practically implementable  solution. Negative policy  rates are already 
regarded with scepticism  and it is easy to imagine how opinion  would  be if they were 
cut so far that the general public’s deposit  rates also passed beyond  the zero mark – 
or, even worse, if one with various  electronic money  solutions  were to force people  to 
“pay to save”.11 
I definitely believe  that there is scope to cut the repo rate somewhat further if 
necessary. But one cannot ignore the fact that this scope is limited. It is of course also 
possible  to make further purchases  of securities, but even there it is reasonable to 
assume that the positive  effects will wane sooner or later and the complications  will 
gradually increase.  
I would like to emphasise,  to avoid any misunderstanding,  that I still count on inflation 
developing  in line with the Riksbank's  forecast and attaining 2 per cent safely within 
the current forecast period. But it is nevertheless important and necessary to 
seriously  consider  and evaluate alternative scenarios. 
It may take longer to attain the target... 
The idea behind  the recent policy has been to avoid the exchange rate appreciating 
too rapidly and in this way to hold inflation  up until economic activity takes over as 
the driving force. Thus, the plan has not been to try to permanently battle against 
fundamentals.12 This has so far worked relatively well, but we are now beginning  to 
approach the critical stage where economic activity  is supposed  to take over the 
baton. One cannot escape the fact that inflation outcomes  have been somewhat 
worrying recently. It is now mostly  the CPI that is showing a clear upturn. The more 
underlying  rate of inflation  measured by the CPIF excluding energy prices has over the 
year developed  more or less sideways,  or even shown  a tendency to decline slightly. 
The inflation  outcomes in coming months  will be very important. 
                                                                 
10 See, for example, Goodfriend (2016). 
11 For a more detailed discussion of the problem of very negative policy rates, see Alsterlind et al (2015) and 
Nessén (2016). 
12 However, for my own part I am not convinced that fundamentals currently need to lead to a signifi cant krona 
appreciation in real terms, see the minutes of the Riksbank's monetary policy meetings in September and 
October. 
  10 [20] 
   The conditions  for economic activity to soon take over as the main driving force 
behind  inflation nevertheless  look  good, given the positive  development  we are 
seeing in the real economy. But there are also reasons  to consider  the possibility  that 
the baton changeover might not go as smoothly  as we hope and believe. One reason 
for this could be that economic  activity in Sweden as such  does not continue 
developing  as favourably  as we are presently  assuming it will. Another reason could 
be that the forces currently holding  back inflation  in Sweden and other countries are 
stronger and more persistent than expected  – that the inflation propensity  has fallen, 
at least temporarily.    
The first step will then probably  be to make monetary policy more expansionary. But 
as I noted, the room for manoeuvre  is becoming more limited. It is not possible  to 
quantify exactly when it has been exhausted, but somewhere  there is a limit. We 
cannot rule out the possibility  that we will sooner or later reach a situation  where we 
assess  that it is no longer possible  or desirable to make policy even more 
expansionary.  If we were to find ourselves  in such  a situation  – and I emphasise  if – 
then the consequence  could be that we will have to accept that it will take longer 
than desirable  to attain the inflation target.  
I would like to emphasise  that in such a hypothetical case it would  not be a question 
of “giving up the inflation  target”. The advantages of an inflation  target of 2 per cent 
that I have just described  would of course still apply and we would continue  to do our 
best to attain it. The difference  would be that we open up for the possibility  that it 
could take longer than we previously  assumed, without making monetary policy  more 
expansionary. 
... but the aim of the policy would not change  
If we were to find  ourselves  in such a situation it would  not mean that we were 
suddenly  to start conducting  a completely different policy  and begin raising the repo 
rate, for instance. There would  still be reasons  to conduct a policy  that is as 
expansionary  as possible,  to avoid taking longer than necessary to attain the target. 
However, one consequence  would  be that the Riksbank's  communication  became 
very important. The damage in a situation where monetary policy can no longer be 
made more expansionary, despite  inflation being expected to undershoot  the target 
for quite a long time, will be much less if the general public  can be convinced  that the 
target has not been abandoned, that it is merely a question  of taking longer than 
normal to attain it. Clarifying  this would be a difficult but hopefully  not impossible 
task.  
Here it is important to realise that inflation can be controlled  by the central bank in 
the long run. Inflation is ultimately, as is often put, a monetary phenomenon  and 
determined by how expansionary  monetary policy is on average (see Figure 12). 
Digitalisation, globalisation  and other structural changes can push  down inflation 
during certain periods  of time, and these periods  can very well be quite long. 
However, the effects of structural changes on inflation do not last for ever. In the long 
run, it is monetary policy that determine the rate of inflation  in the economy  and 
“rational” long-term inflation expectations should  therefore still be in line with the 
central bank's target for price stability. If the public  makes this presumption, the 
negative consequences  of taking longer to attain the inflation  target will be much less 
serious.  
  11 [20] 
   Concluding comments 
Let me round  off. My purpose  here has been to do two things. Firstly, I have tried to 
put the recent debate on monetary policy into perspective. I have discussed  the 
criticism raised against our policy  in general and against the negative repo rate in 
particular. As I hope I have made clear, there are some gaps in the criticism.  
I noted earlier that the main argument is often merely that monetary policy for 
various  reasons is wrong. What I feel is often missing  is a discussion  of why the 
advantages of the inflation  target should  no longer apply and what the consequences 
would be if the Riksbank abandoned  it.  
It is no new phenomenon  that the debate fails to answer important questions.  In the 
mid-1990s,  when the inflation-targeting regime was relatively new, Lars E.O. 
Svensson,  who was then scientific  adviser to the Riksbank  and later a member of the 
Executive Board, argued that the debate often lacked structure. At the Swedish 
Economics  Associations’  proceedings  in February 1996 he called for each debater to 
answer the following  questions  explicitly or implicitly: 
(i) Do you apply the same inflation  target as the Riksbank, or another inflation  target, 
or any other target? 
(ii) Do you  make the same forecast as the Riksbank or do you make a different 
assessment? 
(iii) Do you  know of a better way of attaining the target?13 
These questions  appear as relevant today as they were twenty years ago. 
Secondly,  I have discussed  how one should  view a situation  where it takes longer for 
inflation  to attain the target, despite the Riksbank  doing everything it can to avoid this 
happening. This is not a situation  we expect to find  ourselves  in, but there is 
nevertheless  reason to seriously  consider and examine it. If such a situation  were to 
arise, it would very important to clearly communicate  that the inflation  target has not 
been abandoned, to prevent long-term inflation expectations from falling excessively. 
As the central bank determines inflation  in the long run  – inflation  is a monetary 
phenomenon  – there are also good reasons for expectations of long-term inflation  to 
remain in line with the target. This is important to maintain a smoothly-functioning 
price-setting and wage formation, but also for monetary policy to be able to 
counteract future economic downturns.  Communicating  this is a difficult  but 
hopefully  not impossible  task. 
 References 
Alsterlind, Jan, Armelius, Hanna, Forsman, David, Jönsson,  Björn and Wretman, Anna-
Lena (2015), ”How far can the repo rate be cut?”, Economic Commentary, no. 11, 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
Ball, Laurence M. (2014), “The case for a long-run  inflation target of four percent,” 
IMF Working  Paper, WP/14/92,  International Monetary Fund.   
                                                                 
13 Ekonomisk Debatt (1996). 
  12 [20] 
   Bernanke, Ben S. (2016), “Modifying the Fed’s policy framework: Does a higher 
inflation  target beat negative interest rates?”, blog post, Brookings, 13 September. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2010), “Rethinking macro 
policy”, IMF Staff Position  Note SPN/10/03,  International Monetary Fund. 
Bäckström, Urban (2003), ”1990-talets väg till prisstabilitet” (the 1990s route to price 
stability), Chapter 6 in Jonung,  Lars (ed.), På jakt efter ett nytt ankare – från fast 
kronkurs  till inflationsmål  (Looking  for a new anchor. From a fixed exchange rate to an 
inflation  target), SNS Förlag. 
Ekonomisk  Debatt (1996), ”Riksbanken och penningpolitiken”  (the Riksbank and 
monetary policy), Proceedings  at the Swedish  Economics  Association  21 February 
1996, no. 4. 
Jansson,  Per (2014), ”Swedish  monetary policy  after the financial crisis  – myths  and 
facts”, speech at SvD Bank Summit, 3 December, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin (2016), ”The case for unencumbering  interest rate policy  at the 
zero bound”, essay presented  at the conference  “Designing Resilient Monetary Policy 
Frameworks for the Future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,  25-27 August. 
LO (1994), ”Sverige har råd!” (Sweden can afford it), information paper, the Swedish 
Trade Union Confederation. 
Nessén, Marianne (2016), Discussion  of ”The case for unencumbering  interest rate 
policy  at the zero bound”  by Marvin Goodfriend”, Jackson  Hole, Wyoming, 25-27 
August. 
Rachel, Lukasz and Thomas D. Smith (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real interest 
rate”, Staff Working  Paper No. 571, Bank of England. 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2016), “It would  be wrong to abandon the policy  of negative rates”, 
Financial Times, 11 October. 
Rosengren, Eric S. (2015), “Changing economic relationships:  Implications  for 
monetary policy and simple monetary policy  rules”, speech on 16 April, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston. 
Skingsley,  Cecilia (2016), “Should  the Riksbank  issue  e-krona?”, speech at the FinTech 
conference in Stockholm,  16 November, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Turk, Rima A. (2016), “Negative interest rates: How big a challenge for large Danish 
and Swedish  banks?”, IMF Working Paper WP/16/198, International Monetary Fund. 
 
   13 [20] 
  Figure 1. Good GDP development in Sweden after financial crisis  
Index, 2007 Q4=100 
 Sources: Bureau of Economic  Analysis, Eurostat, Office for National Statistics and 
Statistics Sweden 
 Figure 2. Inflation fell early in Sweden 
Annual percentage change 
Note. The CPI for the US and the HICP for others. 
Sources: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat and Statistics Sweden.  
 
    14 [20] 
   Figure 3. Negative real interest rate not unusual 
Per cent 
   
Note. The real interest rate is calculated using series for the nominal  interest rate and 
inflation/inflation  expectations. For the nominal  interest rates, annual data from 
historical monetary statistics is used for the period 1900-1918, while the Riksbank's 
discount  rate is used  for the period  1919-1983 and after that the rate on a three-
month treasury bill is used. For inflation/inflation  expectations, annual data from 
historical monetary statistics is used for the period 1900-1918, the cost-of-living 
index/CPI  from Statistics Sweden  is used for 1919-1979 and after that inflation 
expectations in the household  sector for one year ahead, as calculated by the 
National Institute of Economic  Research.  
Sources: National Institute of Economic Research, Statistics Sweden  and the Riksbank 
 
   15 [20] 
  Figure 4. Good profitability in Swedish banks 
Return on equity, rolling four quarters, per cent
 Note. Unweighted mean value. The red line refers to a selection of major European 
banks. 
Sources: The banks’ interim reports and SNL Financial 
 Figure 5. Positive sentiment in household and corporate sectors 
Index, mean = 100, standard deviation  = 10 
Source: National Institute of Economic  Research 
 
    16 [20] 
   Figure 6. Downward trend in global real interest rates 
Per cent 
  
Note. 10-year yield  on real government bonds  in Sweden, the United Kingdom and 
the United States. Swedish  real interest rates are zero coupon yields  interpolated 
from bond  prices using the Nelson-Siegel  method. 
Sources: The Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Thomson  Reuters and the 
Riksbank 
Figure 7. Problematic inflation conditions, especially 2014-2015 
Annual percentage change 
Inflation 
  Inflation expectations 
   
Note. Inflation expectations refer to mean value for money market participants. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Sifo  Prospera 
 
  17 [20] 
  Figure 8. Serious situation in spring 2015 
Exchange rates 
 Unit labour costs 
  
Note. The ECB communicated  its decision  to purchase securities on 22 January 2015 
and initiated purchases  on 9 March 2015. Exchange rates, index, 1 January 2014 = 
100. Unit labour costs  in manufacturing industry, euro, index, 2011 = 100. The blue 
square indicates the effect of the krona appreciating by 30 per cent against the euro.  
Sources: The ECB, Macrobond  and Conference  Board 
 Figure 9. Rising trend in housing prices and debts for 20 years despite varying repo 
rate  
Index 2000 Q1 = 100 
Note. Housing prices have been converted from nominal  to real terms by using  the 
CPIF. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
    18 [20] 
    Figure 10. Much slower increase in housing prices in Germany despite roughly the 
same development in policy rates  
Index, 2005 Q1 = 100 and per cent respectively 
Housing prices  
 Short-term interest rates 
 
Sources: The BIS and the OECD 
 Figure 11. Long-term inflation expectations close to target once again 
Per cent 
Note. Inflation expectations according to money  market participants. 
Source: TNS Sifo  Prospera 
 
    19 [20] 
    Figure 12. Monetary policy determines long-term inflation – inflation is a “monetary 
phenomenon” 
Annual percentage change 
 
Note. Money supply  refers to M3 and inflation  refers to CPI. The squares show 
averages for different decades. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
   20 [20] 
