Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 28 November 2016.
 I am glad to be back at the European Parliament just a week after the plenary debate on the
ECB’s activities in 2015. This will be my last visit this year, so it is a good opportunity to reflect on
upcoming challenges.
In 2016 the euro area economy proved to be resilient, in spite of uncertainty stemming from the
economic and political environment. Inflation has gradually edged up, and the ECB’s monetary
stimulus has been a key ingredient of the ongoing recovery.
In my remarks today I will first focus on the upcoming challenges at global and euro area levels.
Then, at the request of this committee, I will discuss the still uncertain impact of Brexit and its
implications from a Single Market perspective.
Strengthening the recovery: responding to current challenges at global and euro area
levels
The global economy is expected to continue its recovery, although growth will remain slower than
before  the  crisis.  While  showing  signs  of  resilience,  the  global  economy  is  facing  significant
political and economic uncertainties.
In this context, one of the key takeaways from the 2016 World Bank-IMF Annual Meetings was
that  monetary  policy  cannot  be  the  only  game  in  town.  It  cannot  generate  sustainable  and
balanced  growth  on  its  own.  To  increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  fiscal  and
structural policies are needed that reinforce growth and make it more inclusive.
The euro area economy continues to expand at a moderate but steady pace, despite the adverse
effects  of  global  economic  and  political  uncertainty.  This  gradual  upward  trend  is  expected  to
continue, not least owing to our monetary policy measures.
In particular, our very low policy interest rates, the favourable lending conditions in our targeted
longer-term  refinancing  operations  and  our  ongoing  asset  purchases  have  resulted  in  lower
borrowing costs. Firms are benefiting from improved conditions when seeking loans from banks
and  when  issuing  equity  or  new  bonds.  Smaller  firms  are  also  benefiting,  both  via  lower
borrowing costs from banks and from the increased capacity of banks to grant loans, while larger
firms are increasingly seeking funding from the financial markets.
These conditions support higher consumption and investment. This is reflected by the gradually
improving supply of loans to households and firms.
Still – if supported by decisive action taken by other policymakers – monetary policy measures in
the  euro  area  could  be  even  more  effective.  Low  productivity  growth,  legacy  problems  in  the
banking sector and limited progress with structural reforms are all issues that need to be tackled
swiftly. This would help close the output gap faster and increase growth potential, resulting in
higher employment.
I  am  aware  that  the  attention  of  our  policymakers  has  shifted.  In  the  direct  aftermath  of  the
financial crisis the need to complete Economic and Monetary Union came to the forefront of the
European debate. Since then circumstances have changed. Today Europe’s focus is more on
security. Both projects require Europe to be united – to act together. However, let us not forget
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
that Europe will be better able to protect itself if it has a strong and resilient economy. And for that
purpose, Economic and Monetary Union will have to overcome the vulnerabilities stemming from
its incompleteness. One important lesson from the crisis is that a half-built house is not stable, it
is fragile. Progress is thus needed in all the unions identified in the Five Presidents’ Report.
This  committee  plays  an  important  role  in  ensuring  greater  financial  sector  resilience  in  the
European Union and in completing the banking union. To this end, solid progress is needed on
the  current  legislative  dossiers.  The  European  Parliament  will  also  play  a  leading  role  in  the
context of the proposed revision of the Single Rulebook’s legislative pillars: the Bank Recovery
and Resolution Directive (BRRD), the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and the Capital
Requirements Directive (CRD IV).
The Single Market and Brexit
Let me now turn to the repercussions of Brexit, which you have asked me to address in more
detail.
For both the euro area and the United Kingdom, the Single Market has been a fundamental asset
and  a  positive  sum  game.  Bringing  together  European  economies  has  allowed  the  European
Union to reap efficiency gains and better satisfy demand. For sectors such as financial services,
the ability to serve an EU-wide, interconnected market is a key factor of success. The Single
Market also makes it possible for firms to benefit from the complementarities of various locations
across  the  EU  as  part  of  European  value  chains.  Moreover,  the  free  movement  of  people
ensures  that  anyone  can  seek  work  where  economic  activity  is  concentrated  as  a  result  of
agglomeration effects. Economic clusters in turn benefit from being able to recruit workers from
across the EU.
The United Kingdom has benefited from the strong economic and financial links within the Single
Market. In fact, more than 40% of the foreign value-added contained in UK exports comes from
the rest of the EU. Within the Single Market, the United Kingdom has also been a major hub for
wholesale banking activities. More specifically, the single passport means that UK-based banks
can currently serve the rest of the EU without needing to set up subsidiaries in other Member
States, and vice versa. That implies sizeable savings in terms of capital and liquidity.
If, in the long run, the risk of a less open UK economy in terms of trade, migration and foreign
direct  investment  were  to  materialise,  there  would  be  a  negative  impact  on  innovation  and
competition  and,  thus,  productivity  and  potential  output.  Such  developments  would  first  and
foremost weigh on the UK economy. They would to a likely lesser extent also have some limited
adverse  spillover  effects  on  the  euro  area.  The  overall  impact  would,  however,  vary  across
countries depending on their trade links with the United Kingdom.
So far the euro area has weathered the fallout from the referendum outcome with encouraging
resilience, also thanks to the preparations of central banks and supervisors on both sides of the
Channel. The outcome of the vote led to a pronounced bout of heightened risk aversion, but the
market reaction was short-lived and asset prices largely recovered in the weeks thereafter. Also,
the  euro  area  Economic  Sentiment  Indicator  and  the  Purchasing  Managers’  Index,  which
declined in August, recovered in September and October.
In the United Kingdom, economic activity has also remained fairly resilient on the back of robust
consumption growth. At the same time, uncertainty appears to have weighed on investment and
the pound sterling. Economic activity in the United Kingdom is generally expected to slow down.
It is difficult to predict the precise economic implications of the United Kingdom withdrawing from
the  EU.  They  will  notably  depend  on  the  timing,  progress  and  final  outcome  of  the  upcoming
negotiations. Thus, it is important to have clarity on the negotiation process as soon as possible
in order to reduce uncertainty.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, let me be clear. While the UK referendum did create uncertainty as far as the country’s
participation  in  the  Single  Market  is  concerned,  the  Single  Market  cannot  go  backwards.  It  is
imperative that its integrity and the homogeneity of rules and their enforcement will be preserved.
This  also  means  we  cannot  take  backward  steps  concerning  the  regulatory,  supervisory  and
oversight framework for banks and financial market infrastructures, which has been enhanced
considerably since 2008.
It is, in fact, essential to further strengthen and develop the Single Market. In the area of financial
services  we  have  made  significant  progress.  The  Single  Market  for  financial  services  is  now
supported by the Single Rulebook for banks and by common supervisory institutions. Within the
euro area we went further with the banking union. As I have said, we are not at the end of this
process. For instance, financial integration through a fully fledged Capital Markets Union could
diversify financing sources for European companies. By fostering private risk-sharing, it can also
contribute to a more resilient European economy.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  recent  opinion  surveys  show  support  for  European  integration
increasing since the UK referendum, contrary to the expectations of many. At the same time,
there are lessons to be learnt. The key lesson is that the European Union has to deliver on key
objectives from the citizens’ perspective if it is to rekindle trust in the European project. And to
address  the  widespread  feelings  of  insecurity,  including  economic  insecurity,  the  European
project  needs  strong  economic  foundations.  For  the  euro  area  economy,  this  means
strengthening  the  recovery,  preserving  financial  stability  and  addressing  the  remaining
vulnerabilities of Economic and Monetary Union.
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to our discussion.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
