The	Mexican	economy:	A	call	for	stronger	fundamentals	
	
	
Remarks	by	
	
Manuel	Sánchez	
	
Deputy	Governor	
	
The	Bank	of	Mexico	
	at	the	
	
OMFIF	Meeting	
	
London,	U.K.	
	
October	21,	2016	
	
I	would	like	to	thank	the	Official	Monetary	and	Financial	Forum	for	the	invitation	to	
talk	to	you	today.	I	am	honored	by	the	privilege	of	participating	in	this	excellent	
platform	for	worldwide	public‐private‐sector	interaction	in	finance	and	economics.	
On	this	occasion,	I	will	exchange	my	views	with	you	on	Mexico’s	economy	in	the	face	
of	a	challenging	international	environment.	I	will	first	consider	economic	
developments	and	prospects	in	the	country,	where	external	demand,	and	
particularly	its	effects	on	the	manufacturing	sector,	are	key.	I	will	then	analyze	the	
impact	of	global	risk	factors	on	financial	markets	and	why	it	is	important	to	fortify	
macroeconomic	fundamentals	in	a	context	of	worldwide	uncertainty.	Finally,	I	will	
look	at	monetary	policy	and	inflation.	
As	usual,	my	views	are	entirely	my	own	and	do	not	necessarily	reflect	those	of	the	
Bank	of	Mexico	or	its	Governing	Board.1	
During	the	last	few	years,	the	world	economy	has	decelerated,	with	year‐on‐year	
growth	declining	to	rates	below	long‐term	averages.	Since	last	year,	moderation	has	
Softer	economic	growth	
 1 For	a	graphic	presentation	accompanying	these	remarks,	see	Sánchez,	M.	(2016).	“The	Mexican	
economy:	 A	 call	 for	 stronger	 fundamentals,”	 presentation	 at	 the	 OMFIF	 Meeting,	 October.	
http://www.banxico.org.mx/publicaciones‐y‐discursos/discursos‐y‐presentaciones/presentaciones/%7BA1D7C9D7‐F64D‐
71FB‐AD64‐67CE393BD1EA%7D.pdf 
 1 
come	mainly	from	sluggishness	in	advanced	countries,	while	emerging	economies	
have	improved	somewhat.	
For	Mexico,	conditions	in	the	United	States,	its	main	trading	partner,	are	the	most	
important	external	determinant.	U.S.	GDP	annual	growth	has	been	falling	since	
2015,	reaching	only	1.3	percent	in	the	second	quarter	of	2016.	What	is	worrisome	
for	Mexico	is	that	this	slowdown	has	coincided	with	contracting	trends	in	industrial	
and	manufacturing	production.	
Nowhere	is	Mexico’s	economic	integration	with	the	United	States	more	evident	than	
in	the	high	correlation	between	both	countries’	industrial	and	manufacturing	
outputs.	Furthermore,	causation	runs	from	the	larger	country	to	the	smaller	one.	
Inevitably,	U.S.	manufacturing	fragility	translates	into	a	slower	sector	in	Mexico.	
A	significant	driver	of	weakness	in	U.S.	manufacturing	can	be	found	in	foreign	trade,	
in	the	context	of	a	global	tendency	in	recent	years	of	smaller	international	flows	of	
goods,	extending	to	the	United	States.	In	particular,	both	U.S.	manufacturing	imports	
and	exports	have	been	shrinking,	and	statistical	evidence	suggests	that	reduced	
foreign	trade	is	sapping	vigor	from	the	manufacturing	sector	in	that	nation.2	
A	warning	sign	comes	from	forward‐looking	indicators	for	U.S.	manufacturing,	such	
as	those	estimated	as	diffusion	indexes	based	on	surveys.	The	manufacturing	PMI,	
2 See	Banco	de	México	(2016).	Informe	Trimestral	Abril‐Junio	2016,	August,	Box	2,	pp.	30‐33.	
  2 
calculated	by	the	Institute	of	Supply	Management,	recently	touched	contraction	
territory	and	since	then	has	stayed	close	to	it.	
Against	this	backdrop,	Mexico’s	annual	GDP	growth	has	been	relatively	stable	
during	the	last	three	years	at	around	its	long‐term	average	of	2.3	percent,	with	a	dip	
in	the	second	quarter	of	2016.	This	development	has	resulted	from	two	opposing	
forces:	expansion	in	services	and	a	weaker	industrial	sector.	
Weakness	in	industrial	production	reflects	both	domestic	and	external	restrictions.	
On	the	one	hand,	mining	has	been	dropping	significantly,	mainly	due	to	a	
longstanding	decline	in	oil	extraction.	This,	in	turn,	reflects	near	depletion	of	the	
most	profitable	oil	fields,	as	well	as	insufficient	investment	by	the	state‐run	oil	
company,	Pemex,	and	poor	results	from	exploration	projects.	
On	the	other	hand,	slower	manufacturing	is	linked	to	softening	U.S.	production,	as	
in	 the	 United	 States,	 Mexican	
suggested	 earlier.	 Mirroring	 developments	
manufacturing	exports,	especially	those	directed	to	that	country,	are	subdued	at	
negative	growth	rates,	largely	explaining	trends	in	manufacturing	output.	
This	has	occurred	in	spite	of	substantial	real	peso	depreciation	vis‐à‐vis	the	U.S.	
dollar.	Although	peso	competitiveness	has	allowed	Mexican	exports	to	gain	some	
market	share	in	the	United	States,	this	price	effect	has	been	more	than	offset	by	a	
negative	effect	associated	with	lower	external	demand	for	Mexico’s	goods.	
 3 
In	contrast,	services	are	still	relatively	robust,	constituting	the	most	significant	
engine	of	recent	economic	growth.	However,	expansion	in	the	services	sector	has	
stalled	lately,	partly	reflecting	spillover	from	contracting	foreign	trade.	For	example,	
slower	trends	are	present	in	both	commerce	and	trucking,	which	are	tightly	linked	
to	external	trade.	
On	the	demand	side,	private	consumption	has	continued	to	increase	at	relatively	
high	rates,	while	total	investment	has	been	falling,	particularly	that	related	to	public	
works.	Investment	expenditure	cuts	have	been	the	main	avenue	for	fiscal	
adjustment	in	the	face	of	lower	international	oil	prices.	
Confidence	indicators	imply	that	economic	activity	may	continue	to	wane.	In	
particular,	declining	producer	confidence	may	signal	further	potential	weakening	in	
investment	in	the	short	term.	
Analysts’	consensus	forecasts	are	for	moderate	economic	improvement	in	2017	for	
the	world	and	U.S.	economies,	and	to	a	lesser	extent	for	Mexico,	where	growth	is	
foreseen	rising	from	an	estimated	2.1	percent	this	year	to	2.2	percent	in	the	next.	It	
is	worth	noting	that	the	outlook	for	Mexico’s	growth	next	year	is	for	a	return	of	
growth	to	approximately	the	aforementioned	long‐term	average,	obviously	
 4 
insufficient	to	meet	the	requirement	of	significantly	improving	general	living	
standards.3	
This	necessity	and	the	recognition	that	the	main	long‐term	growth	problem	in	
Mexico	is	stagnant	productivity	led	the	country	to	undertake	an	ample	set	of	
structural	reforms,	now	being	put	into	place.	Their	benefits	depend	crucially	on	the	
quality	of	implementation,	and	will	fully	be	felt	only	in	the	medium	term.	
In	addition,	Mexico’s	growth	scenario	faces	downside	risks.	In	the	short	term,	there	
is	the	potential	for	a	greater	slowdown	in	the	global	and	U.S.	economies,	particularly	
manufacturing,	as	well	as	a	larger‐than‐expected	fall	in	crude	oil	output,	and	further	
deterioration	in	consumer	and	producer	confidence.	
In	the	medium	term,	global‐wide	protectionist	tendencies	are	on	the	rise.	Finally,	
again	on	the	domestic	front,	obstacles	to	adequate	implementation	of	structural	
reforms	could	arise.	
Since	2014,	rising	risk	aversion	has	hit	emerging	markets	especially	hard	in	terms	
of	lower	capital	flows	and	asset	prices.	Sources	of	concern	have	included	economic	
3 Analysts’	estimates	for	global	and	U.S.	GDP	are,	respectively,	2.5	and	1.5	percent	in	2016,	and	2.8	and	
2.2	percent	in	2017.	See	Consensus	Forecasts	and	Latin	American	Consensus	Forecasts,	October	2016.	
Heightened	risk	aversion	
  5 
and	political	issues,	such	as	Chinese	economic	health	and	policy	actions	there,	and	
Brexit.	
However,	a	persistent	factor	during	the	last	few	years	has	been	uncertainty	over	the	
degree	of	monetary	accommodation	in	advanced	countries,	particularly	the	United	
States.	Central	banks	have	become	more	proactive,	and	their	communication	and	
actions	have	sometimes	generated	undue	volatility.	
More	importantly,	increasingly	loose,	sustained,	and	far‐reaching	monetary	stances	
in	developed	countries	confront	at	least	two	challenges.	One	is	maintaining	
credibility	in	light	of	perceived	low	and	decreasing	policy	effectiveness.	Not	only	has	
expansionary	monetary	policy	faced	difficulties	attaining	the	intended	objectives,	
including	support	for	growth,	but	lately,	such	as	in	Japan	and	the	euro	zone,	even	
their	financial	effects,	in	terms	of	exchange	rates	and	other	asset	price	movements,	
seem	to	be	the	opposite	of	those	expected.	
The	other	challenge	is	to	deal	with	the	consequences	of	asset	price	distortions	as	a	
result	of	monetary	accommodation	and	consequent	financial	stability	risks.	For	this	
and	other	reasons,	future	amplification	of	uncertainty	and	volatility	cannot	be	ruled	
out.	
To	date,	heightened	risk	aversion	has	not	greatly	affected	Mexico’s	key	financial	
quantities,	such	as	non‐resident	holdings	of	peso‐denominated	government	
 6 
securities.	These	foreign	portfolio	investments	are	among	the	highest	in	emerging	
markets,	a	fact	which	could	be	interpreted	as	a	sign	both	of	strength	and	possible	
vulnerability,	for	instance,	if	a	sudden	change	occurs	in	market	sentiment	towards	
emerging	markets	or	Mexico.	
These	holdings	have	been	relatively	stable	in	absolute	terms	during	the	last	few	
years,	largely	reflecting	lower	short‐term	asset	positions,	namely	zero	coupon	Cetes,	
while	those	of	long‐term	M	bonds	have	increased	persistently.	This	behavior	may	
suggest	that	investors’	positive	long	view	on	Mexico	remains	firm.	Caution	is	
appropriate,	however,	as	international	conditions	can	always	change.	
The	adverse	international	environment	has	exerted	a	clear	effect	on	Mexico’s	asset	
prices.	In	particular,	market	interest	rates,	especially	those	of	medium	duration,	
have	been	rising,	along	with	risk	perception.	Consistently,	spreads	against	the	
United	States	have	been	widening,	as	interest	rates	in	that	country	have	either	fallen	
or	stayed	flat.	
More	notably,	the	value	of	the	dollar	in	peso	terms	has	been	trending	upward	
sharply,	along	with	its	value	in	terms	of	a	basket	of	emerging‐market	currencies.	
However,	so	far	in	2016,	the	Mexican	peso	has	decoupled	from	other	currencies,	
with	a	further	substantial	weakening,	while	the	others,	on	average,	have	
 7 
appreciated.	The	obvious	question	is	why	the	Mexican	peso	has	been	hurt	more	
severely.4	
Several	factors	could	be	behind	peso	underperformance,	in	particular,	three	
possibly	interrelated	causes.	One	is	rather	mechanical	and	refers	to	the	fact	that	the	
Mexican	peso	is	a	highly	liquid	currency	in	international	markets.	This	characteristic	
leads	investors	to	see	the	peso	as	an	attractive	vehicle	for	hedging	against	an	ample	
set	of	risks.	
A	second,	deeper	reason	may	stem	from	concerns	over	the	results	of	the	imminent	
U.S.	presidential	election	and	its	possible	impact	on	its	southern	neighbor.	A	third	
probable	factor	may	be	perception	of	Mexico’s	fiscal	fragility,	including	weak	
financial	conditions	at	state‐owned	oil	company	Pemex.	
Two	notable	statistics	on	public	finances	put	analysts	and	market	participants	on	
alert.	One	is	the	rising	trend	observed	since	2009	in	the	historic	balance	of	public‐
sector	borrowing	requirements	relative	to	GDP.	Although	this	ratio	continues	to	be	
inferior	to	frequent	values	encountered	in	the	developed	world,	it	does	not	compare	
favorably	with	those	of	many	emerging	economies.	A	second	statistic	has	to	do	with	
4 See	the	JP	Morgan	Index	of	emerging‐market	currencies,	which	includes	Brazil,	Chile,	Mexico,	Hungary,	
South	Africa,	Turkey,	Russia,	China,	India	and	Singapore.	
  8 
in	
inertia	
long‐standing	 growth	
Mexico’s	sovereign	risk	premium,	which	has	risen	above	those	of	other	countries	
with	equivalent	credit	ratings.5	
In	this	scenario,	Mexico	needs	to	buttress	its	fiscal	stance	without	delay.	Deep	
adjustments	to	public	finances	are	necessary	given	at	least	three	significant	
restrictions:	reduced	oil	prices	and	production,	limits	to	ongoing	investment	
in	 current	 public	
expenditure	 cuts,	 and	
expenditures.	
Markets	should	be	convinced	that	authorities	will	do	what	it	takes	to	stabilize	the	
ratio	of	public	debt	to	GDP.	These	actions	cannot	be	postponed	for	public	finances	
to	become	sustainable.	
Since	last	year,	inflation	has	remained	benign,	for	several	months	below	the	3	
percent	target	established	by	the	Bank	of	Mexico	since	2003.	Obtaining	inflation	this	
low	and	close	to	the	target	is	an	unprecedented	achievement	which	took	a	long	time	
and	must	be	preserved.	
Monetary	policy	challenges	
 5 The	debt‐to‐GDP	ratio	rose	from	36.2	percent	in	2009	to	an	estimated	50.5	percent	in	2016.	See	SHCP	
(2016).	Criterios	Generales	de	Política	Económica	2017.	For	sovereign	risk	premium	developments,	see,	
for	instance,	the	5‐year	Credit	Default	Swaps	for	countries	with	a	BBB+	rating	from	Standard	&	Poor’s,	
which	are	Mexico,	Poland,	Spain,	Peru,	and	Thailand. 
 9 
One	important	consideration	is	that	recent	contained	inflation	has	been	supported	
by	unusually	low	noncore	price	increases.	This	phenomenon	may	prove	to	be	
transitory.	
Core	inflation,	on	the	other	hand,	has	been	rising	in	2016,	basically	pulled	by	the	
impact	of	peso	depreciation	on	tradable	goods	prices,	as	illustrated	by	the	behavior	
of	merchandise	inflation,	which	lately	reached	almost	4	percent.	It	is	worth	noting,	
however,	that	this	pass‐through	from	peso	depreciation	has	been	relatively	mild.	
Recently,	break‐even	inflation	breached	the	3	percent	target,	which	may	indicate	
possible	future	price	pressures.	Additionally,	inflation	expectations	based	on	
analysts’	surveys	have	stopped	falling,	thus	possibly	suggesting	that	further	
reductions	of	inflation	are	not	in	sight.6	
Upside	risks	to	inflation	would	appear	to	have	the	upper	hand.	The	main	negative	
possibility	 seems	 to	 come	
from	 widespread	 contagion	 of	 exchange‐rate	
depreciation	to	inflation	and	expectations.	A	second	risk	stems	from	the	reversion	
of	noncore	inflation	to	historical	averages.	Third,	an	upsurge	of	aggregate	demand	
pressures	could	occur,	in	particular	considering	uncertainty	over	the	degree	of	
slackness	in	the	economy.	
6 See	Banco	de	México,	Encuesta	sobre	las	Expectativas	de	los	Especialistas	en	Economía	del	Sector	Privado.	
  10 
These	dangers	could	cause	the	price	formation	process	to	unravel,	with	lasting	
consequences.	Prudence	is	all	the	more	important	given	the	time	and	effort	it	took	
for	inflation	to	reach	the	target.	
Since	December	2015,	the	policy	interest	rate	has	been	raised	four	times	for	a	total	
of	175	basis	points,	to	4.75	percent,	a	level	just	above	that	in	the	second	half	of	2009,	
in	the	wake	of	the	global	financial	crisis.	
These	moves	should	be	interpreted	as	preemptive,	in	full	view	of	the	fact	that	
monetary	policy	exerts	its	full	effects	with	lags.	One	central	objective	has	been	to	
avert	deviation	of	inflation	expectations	from	the	target	due	to	pass‐through.	The	
Bank	of	Mexico	does	not	target	any	exchange‐rate	level.	However,	exchange‐rate	
developments	are	taken	into	account	to	the	extent	that	they	may	influence	inflation	
and	expectations.	
In	a	more	general	sense,	the	hikes	have	sought	to	contribute	to	stronger	
macroeconomic	fundamentals	in	the	face	of	an	adverse	international	environment.	
Other	factors	considered	include	the	relative	monetary	stance	vis‐à‐vis	that	of	the	
United	States,	as	well	as	the	phase	of	the	economic	cycle.	Going	forward,	monetary	
policy	will	remain	vigilant.	
	
 11 
Conclusions	
A	disadvantageous	international	environment	has	hobbled	Mexican	economic	
performance,	and	bouts	of	amplified	risk	aversion	could	easily	recur.	This	makes	the	
urgency	with	which	Mexico	needs	to	buttress	its	macroeconomic	fundamentals,	
including	its	fiscal	stance,	overwhelmingly	clear.	
On	the	monetary	front,	pre‐emptive	policy	action	has	been	required.	Especially	
given	the	time	it	has	taken	to	reach	the	3	percent	permanent	inflation	target,	policy	
will	be	on	the	alert	to	avert	any	problems	that	would	prevent	consolidation	of	
convergence	of	inflation	to	this	target.	
 12 
