Gent  Sejko:  Including  monetary  policy  and  financial  shocks  and
trends in modelling and policy analysis
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  to  the  Tenth  South-Eastern
European Economic Research Workshop “Including monetary policy and financial shocks and
trends in modelling and policy analysis”, Tirana, 1 December 2016.
Dear participants,
 I  am  privileged  to  open  the  10th  South-Eastern  European  Economic  Research  Workshop
organised  by  the  Bank  of Albania,  and  welcome  all  new  and  returning  friends.  I  would  like  to
congratulate  Bank  of  Albania’  experts  that  present  every  year  their  research  works  for
discussion.
This  year’s  workshop  will  focus  on  the  main  topics  that  prevail  in  the  economic,  political  and
academic  debates  in  the  field  of  economy,  finance  and  central  banking.  The  topic  of  this
workshop is: “Including monetary policy and financial shocks and trends in modelling and policy
analysis".
The focus was placed on these topics on the grounds that the central bank and policy decisions
should  take  into  account  an  increasing  number  of  shocks  that  are  arising  not  only  as  a
consequence of economic, but also of political, legal and regulatory phenomena. The challenges
that monetary policy and financial stability are facing reflect the problems of the society in the
economic,  social  and  geo-political  aspects.  These  challenges  are  best  reflected  in  the  non-
effective functioning of the pass-through mechanism that should transmit and amplify the positive
effects  of  central  banks’  decisions.  These  challenges  increase  ambiguity,  uncertainty  and
volatility in goods, services and financial, markets, broaden and intertwine the nature of shocks
and place the authorities vis-à-vis new and unprecedented phenomena.
These  developments  render  the  well  management  of  monetary  policies  and  financial  stability
even more difficult As a result, scientific research needs to: explore and propose new solutions,
more  efficient  empirical  and  theoretical  models  for  policy  implementation  by  central  banks;
assess the effects of the adopted policies; and, carefully observe the side effects in the economy
or the financial system, which may potentially accompany such policies.
Due to unconventional monetary policies, central banking is practically in unexplored territories;
therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  how  the  economy  reacts  to  shocks
under such circumstances. The Bank of Albania is interested in identifying potential shocks and
their  modelling  with  a  view  to  guaranteeing  optimal  solutions  in  terms  of  prices,  economic
activity, employment and financial system soundness. For that reason, we invite you to discuss
openly and thoroughly all the papers that will be presented during these two days. This would
serve to discuss about their findings, improve them and assess their effectiveness for the Bank
of Albania’ decision making.
The Bank of Albania deems that the economy and the financial system are currently sound and
in  line  with  our  expectations  and  forecasts.  The  present  indicators  of  prices  and  economic
growth are not yet at their long-term equilibriums; however, they do not present surprises that
would call for immediate attention of the Bank of Albania and change of monetary and financial
stability policies. They are in line with our expectations and are very well serviced by the actual
decision-making course of action.
In concrete terms, consumer prices, the main objective of the monetary policy, returned to an
upward trajectory and are expected to progressively approach the 3% target. Economic activity
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
remains stable, at positive figures, reflecting a slight upward trend, and is expected to perform
along similar trends in the future.
Nevertheless, the current figures appear still far from the optimal conditions and there is place for
further improvement in both the inflation rate and the economic activity. In addition, there is place
for faster growth of lending and monetary expansion, yet, subject to the situation in the balance
sheets of the private sector and banking system. The fall in interest rates is transmitted to all
segments  of  the  financial  market,  contributing  to  the  decrease  of  existing  credit  costs  and
providing the possibility for investments in new projects. The monetary policy transmission has
helped somewhat to mitigate the negative effects and improve the households and firms’ balance
sheets.  Also,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  during  this  time,  lending  in  the  domestic  currency  has
increased; this is translated into a success for both the transmission of the monetary policy and
the soundness of the financial system and the private sector.
The monetary policy decisions have helped the economy by not causing adverse effects on the
banking system soundness indicators. An accommodative monetary policy, potentially, has side
effects;  but,  they  have  not  materialised  thanks  to  the  duly  and  prudential  management  of  the
monetary policy intervention. In our daily work, we pay special attention to maintaining a sound
system  and  our  decisions  take  into  account  potential  implications  on  the  banking  system  at
home.
In  perspective,  the  short-term  shocks  of  the  past  have  turned  into  stable  equilibriums  in  the
medium term and the non-traditional policies, which are turning into conventional instruments of
policy making in our partners, have encouraged a new behaviour among economic and financial
agents. These changes affect the Bank of Albania’s ability to stimulate the economy and mitigate
the effects from economic shocks during times of difficulties that may arise in the future. The
researches will assess whether we are experiencing a new equilibrium or other problems exist in
the transmission of accommodative policies, and whether the resilience and reactions against
these shocks remain similar to the pre-crisis periods.
In  the  meantime,  regulatory  and  adjustment  processes  that  accompany  monetary  policy
decision-making (especially those that will follow the return of the past to normality) may trigger
temporary shocks with effects on both the European economy and the small economies related
to  it. Again,  it  is  the  duty  of  research  to  investigate  potential  shocks  and  model  them  in  the
framework of models corroborating central banks decision-making. This situation is not unique to
Albania, but is a global-wide problem. Therefore, we are happy to see here participation from all
the regions, whose research will introduce new experiences, of benefit to us not only from their
conclusions but also from the methodologies they have applied.
Fortunately,  the  topics  that  will  be  discussed  address  the  whole  spectrum  of  central  banks’
interest and will enrich our experience with the opinion and focus of your scientific research. I
hope  you  will  find  Bank  of Albania’s  experience  interesting,  informative  and  valuable  for  your
current and future scientific research.
I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  regional  and  European  central  banks  for  their  high
consideration and valuable contribution to the reputation of our research workshop.
Finally,  I  wish  you  a  successful  and  fruitful  Workshop  and  hope  to  meet  you  again  in  future
activities of the Bank of Albania.
Thank You!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
