Benoît  Cœuré:  Addressing  Europe's  economic  and  political
challenges
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  TUM  Speakers  Series/HEC  Débats  organised  by  the  Technical  University  of
Munich, Munich, 21 November 2016.
 Recent  political  developments  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  have  been
interpreted as reflecting widespread concerns about globalisation as well as scepticism about
international  cooperation .  Many  Europeans  also  regard  the  responses  to  cross-border
challenges  such  as  economic  fragilities,  migration  and  terrorism  as  unsatisfactory.  A  broad
debate  is  under  way  about  the  European  Union’s raison  d’être  and  its  future.  This  debate
resonates particularly strongly as we approach the 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome and
the 25th anniversary of the Treaty of Maastricht.
1
For Europe to thrive, Europeans, young and old alike, need to be confident that working together
is still the best way forward.
Participation in the European project has rested on three successive promises. For the post-war
generation, it was a guarantee of lasting peace and democracy. For Europeans who witnessed
in their youth the fall of the Berlin Wall, it held out the promise of freedom of movement and better
life  chances.  For  European  workers  hit  by  technological  change  and  global  competition,  it
promised economic security and protection.
The first two promises have been fulfilled and generated strong support for the European project.
But many now consider that the third promise has not been kept. Europe has suffered from the
worst economic crisis since the 1930s. It partly originated abroad but it was partly also of its own
making.
Next summer it will be ten years since the crisis erupted in Europe. Many people of your age
have  felt  its  effects  to  a  disproportionate  degree.  With  high  levels  of  youth  unemployment  in
several  Member  States ,  large  numbers  of  young  people  feel  economically  and  socially
marginalised.   For  them,  the  national  and  European  responses  have  not  been  sufficient.  The
emergence  of  a  “lost  generation”  is  morally  unacceptable  –  and  it  would  affect  Europe’s
4
prosperity in a persistent way .
2
3
In my remarks tonight, I will tell you why I believe that Europe’s raison d’être remains strong and
could be made stronger. As a European central banker, I will focus on the economic dimension. I
5
will only touch on the political dimension insofar as it influences economic outcomes .
The benefits of European integration
As  President  Obama  said  during  his  recent  visit  to  Europe:  “…at  a  time  when  the  European
project  is  facing  challenges,  it’s  especially  important  to  show  the  benefits  of  economic
integration.”   I  believe  that  the  way  Europe  addresses  its  current  challenges  does  not  only
matters for our own future prosperity. It also holds lessons for the rest of the world.
6
European integration translated European values into tangible benefits: EU citizens today have
the right to live, work, study and do business anywhere in the Union. They enjoy equal judicial
protection, guaranteed by European courts of law.
In  fact,  the  establishment  of  a  single  European  market  was  never  solely  about  economic
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
efficiency. It was also about creating a free and open European society under a common rule of
law.
Today, the European Union is one of the world’s biggest economic blocs, alongside the United
States  and  China.  This  will  not  last  forever.  At  a  time  when  several  regional  powers  are
increasingly  assertive  on  the  global  stage,  the  single  market  and  the  single  currency  are
essential assets. They enhance Europe’s significance and influence worldwide.
Beyond its economic benefits, the euro indeed forges political bonds that have been repeatedly
underestimated – not least by observers outside of Europe. The crisis put those ties to the test
and the commitment to the euro area’s integrity was strongly reaffirmed. One example of this
was euro area leaders’ commitment last year to secure the future of Greece in the euro, provided
that it undertakes the necessary reforms. It is also reflected in public opinion in Europe: popular
7
support for the euro has remained high throughout the crisis .
And indeed, the crisis showed that when Europeans act together, they are stronger. But when
uncertainty has the upper hand, attention turns inwards to national fragilities, fuelling economic
selfishness and accentuating financial fragmentation.
Monetary policy as an example of acting together
Monetary policy is a clear example of where we did act together in a decisive manner.
Monetary policy undeniably played a key role in stabilising the economy in Europe after the crisis.
By  deploying  a  range  of  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  the
European Central Bank (ECB) avoided deflation, reduced financial fragmentation and supported
the economic recovery. We’ve done it within the mandate given to us by the people of Europe,
namely  price  stability.  And  we  are  fully  accountable  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the
European Court of Justice.
But monetary policy alone cannot achieve sustainable growth. It needs to be complemented by
economic, and where available, fiscal policies at national and European level.
Organising our interdependencies
We also need to better organise our interdependencies.
First, we should not ignore our economic and financial connections when considering national
policies. Under EU Treaties, Member States have a duty to regard their economic policies as a
matter of common concern and to coordinate them.
Second, the crisis has shown that common institutions can help respond to crises and also to
prevent them from occurring in the first place by avoiding excessive risk-taking.
Important  measures  to  improve  the  financial  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU)  have  already  been  adopted.  For  instance,  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM) and the launch of banking union were essential steps towards safeguarding
financial stability. As a result, our Monetary Union is considerably more resilient today than it was
at the peak of the crisis in 2012.
Some institutional shortcomings remain, however.
Banking union still has to be completed. What has been called the “doom loop” between banking
and sovereign risk remains to be broken. Agreement on a European deposit insurance scheme
is not within sight and the Single Resolution Fund still lacks a common financial backstop. ECB
8
Banking Supervision is doing impressive work, and euro area banks are now more resilient .
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
But achieving a level playing field in banking supervision, at arm’s length from national and vested
interests, will be a long journey given the place we started from.
Fiscal rules, albeit revised several times, have failed to build confidence in fiscal sustainability at
national  level,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  any  further  move  towards  shared  fiscal  sovereignty.
Likewise, the rules aimed at preventing macroeconomic imbalances remain untested.
The ESM is a strong and efficient institution, but the euro area’s crisis resolution arrangements,
which are still mostly intergovernmental, are unnecessarily slow and costly, as the protracted
discussions on Greece showed last year. Enshrining crisis resolution in Union law and bringing it
under the oversight of the European Parliament should remain a key objective.
Europeans of all ages are demanding that Europe offers more protection.  And indeed, Europe’s
focus today is clearly on defence and security, rather than on completing EMU. This is for very
good reasons, but make no mistake: Europe will not strengthen its capacity in these areas if it
cannot rely on a stronger economy and a more resilient monetary union.
10
9
And let me be clear: we should only embark on new projects if there is a consensus that joint
action is necessary, that it is clearly linked to people’s concerns and that it addresses a matter of
European or global relevance.
When we do take joint action, we need to be consistent in our efforts and complete the initiatives
we have started. Half-built houses are the most dangerous option. We cannot take competences
away  from  the  national  level  without  empowering  the  Union  level  to  provide  at  least  as  much
protection for citizens as they had before.
And where responsibilities are clearly assigned to one level, there needs to be commensurate
democratic accountability at that level.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Policies often create winners and losers. For this to be acceptable at European level, we need to
share  a  feeling  of  belonging  together  as  Europeans.  One  way  to  develop  and  strengthen  that
feeling of belonging is to share tangible common goods that we can all relate to. Democracy
comes to mind first. The euro is another example, and so is the commitment to make our social
model sustainable. They bring us together and shape our identity in the world.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
On the backlash against financial globalisation and how it could be better designed, see also B. Cœuré, “The
Case for Rethinking International Capital Flows”, Paris, 15 September 2016.
In September 2016, youth unemployment stood at 37.1% in Italy and 42.6% in Spain. Youth unemployment
stood at 42.7% in Greece in July 2016. See Eurostat euro indicators, 3 November 2016.
European Youth in 2016, Special Eurobarometer of the European Parliament, May 2016.
See Cœuré, B., “Monetary Policy and the Risk of a Lost Decade”, speech at the Amundi World Investment Forum
2013, Paris, 5 July 2013.
For a discussion on the need for a more political Europe, see Moscovici, P., “Keynote public address at the 2016
Summit on the Future of Europe”, November 2016, Harvard University, Minda de Gunzburg Center for European
Studies.
Remarks at a joint press conference with Chancellor Merkel, Berlin, 17 November 2016.
In spring 2016, support for the single currency stood at 68% in the euro area, with a majority of citizens in favour
of the euro in all euro area Member States.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
See also Draghi, M., “The state and prospects of the euro area recovery”, speech at the European Banking
Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2016.
Eurobarometer April 2016. In particular, younger age groups associate Europe more with social protection, free
movement and a stronger say in the world.
See “The Five Presidents’ Report: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, a report prepared by J.-
C. Juncker, in close cooperation with D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
