  François Villeroy de Galhau: The future of Europe – a central banker’s 
view 
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  before  the 
Hearing of the Committee on Economic and  Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 28 September 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members, 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  welcoming  me  here  today  in  this  institution  which  is  the 
embodiment of European democracy. I particularly wanted to come and exchange views with 
you during the first year of my mandate. Furthermore, I am speaking to you two days after 
Mario Draghi. I would like to start by focusing on an issue that concerns us all: the future of 
Europe. And, as a central banker, I would like to approach this question in economic terms. 
At present Europe is not doing well, at any rate not as well as it could. Eight years after the 
crisis its economic performance is still disappointing. The recovery is underway, but it is too 
slow: even though the promising results in some countries show that there is no inevitability 
about outcomes in Europe, overall growth is levelling off. This is having real consequences: 
the  scourge  of  unemployment  continues  to  afflict  over  21  million  people;  16  million  in  the 
euro area alone. This is compounded by growing Euroscepticism as evidenced by the victory 
of the Brexit camp, even though this also had specifically British causes. All too often, the 
European Union is no longer seen as a solution, but as another problem to add to the many 
difficulties we already have to face. And our differences of opinion tend to overshadow areas 
where we share common ground. 
Yet  I  believe  that  we  need  more  than  ever  to  remain  proud  of  our  European  identity.  Our 
identity  is  more  than  our  great  history  of  reconciliation,  more  than  our  rich  diversity.  Our 
common  identity  is  a  unique  social  model  combining  high  standards  of  public  service  and 
relatively low levels of inequality – much lower than in American society. And this has been 
achieved in a market economy: indeed, the hallmark of Europe is a social market economy. 
At a time when concerns are being raised over the fate of those in many parts of the world 
who have been left behind by globalisation, this is not the moment to abandon our common 
model or to lower our European flag. 
But this ambition must be clear-sighted. To assert our social model inaction is not an option; 
we need newfound confidence and stronger growth. In economic terms, this means building 
on our dual strengths and leveraging their full potential through three projects. 
We have two major strengths in Europe: 
– 
We have built a large single market. It is a tremendous asset which belongs to us 
all. It is no coincidence that access to the single market lies at the heart of the Brexit 
debate. We cannot prejudge the outcome of the future negotiations, but access to 
the single market must continue to go hand-in-hand with strict acceptance of all the 
usual European Union rules: there can be no cherry-picking or free-riding. 
We have also built a solid currency in the euro which is recognised worldwide. The 
great majority of euro area citizens (68%) are attached to their currency. Within the 
ECB  Governing  Council,  we  take  very  seriously  the  task  entrusted  to  us  by  the 
Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  of  maintaining  price  stability.  In 
practical terms, this means that inflation should be neither too high nor too low which 
was  the  greatest  danger  in  recent  years.  In  a  world  of  uncertainty,  European 
monetary  policy  is  today  a  yardstick  of  stability.  And  it  has  produced  tangible 
outcomes: it is boosting demand – by between 0.3% and 0.5% per year – as well as 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inflation.  Inflation  should  exceed  1%  in  early  2017  and  rise  to  1.6%  in  2018.  But 
although  we  have  succeeded  with  monetary  union,  much  remains  to  be  done  for 
economic union. It is precisely for this reason that we have actively used monetary 
policy, but we have failed to follow it up sufficiently with other economic policies. 
Building on these dual strengths, Europe’s quest for growth must, in my view, follow the path 
of three concrete projects, three steps. 
First step: as of today, Europe needs what I prefer to call a real “Financing and Investment 
Union” (FIU), rather than just a “Capital Markets Union”. Why? Because there are still firms 
in  Europe  today  looking  to  invest  and  innovate  but  which  cannot  find  the  appropriate 
financing. And yet resources are not lacking: in the euro area, the current account surplus, 
which is a measure of the gap between savings and investment, stands at more than 3% of 
GDP. This is huge. This trend is often described as a savings glut but I believe it is more 
fitting to talk of an investment dearth, since the solution for closing the gap is not to diminish 
savings;  on  the  contrary,  the  solution  is  to  increase  productive  investment.  Indeed,  the 
investment shortfall highlighted at the time the Juncker Plan was rolled  out is still more or 
less equivalent to around 2% of GDP today. 
In order to create this FIU, we need to build on the initiatives already in place: the Capital 
Markets Union of course, but also the Juncker Plan and the Banking Union. And this does 
not  mean  simply  merging  them  together,  but  rather  magnifying  their  impact  through  the 
creation of synergies. We need to gather together our existing forces – which are currently 
over-compartmentalised and split between the European Commission, the EIB, and even the 
ECB – and rally them behind a single objective: the creation of a vast European savings and 
investment  market. This  new  framework  would  allow  Europe  to  implement  more  ambitious 
initiatives. Let me cite just two examples.  
Firstly, in the business world: we need to make it easier for firms to finance themselves with 
equity  rather  than  debt.  Equity  capital  is  the  best  way  of  financing  innovation,  which  is  by 
nature more risky. Yet Europe is lagging behind in this field: equity capital amounts to 52% of 
GDP in the euro area, compared with 121% in the United States – less than half as much. In 
practice,  this  will  mean  harmonising  business  insolvency  laws,  and  ensuring  standardised 
and  more  detailed  financial  information  on  SMEs.  The  second  example  concerns  the 
financial  sector:  we  need  to  allow  more  cross-border mergers  within  the  euro  area.  Banks 
that are more European will be better able to shift savings across national borders. And to 
loosen  the  excessive  link  between  sovereign  debt  and  the  domestic  banking  sector,  one 
solution  could  be to  create  high quality  euro  area  synthetic  bonds  (European  safe  bonds), 
backed by a diversified pool of sovereign debt securities issued by Member States. In this 
case, each Member State would retain sole responsibility for the issuance and repayment of 
its debt. 
The second step for the euro area is a collective economic strategy. When each state acts 
in isolation, we inevitably end up with a situation that is suboptimal for everyone. We blame 
each other for the deficits of the south and the surpluses of the north… and the end result is 
that  our  economic  policies  get  stuck.  In  some  cases,  they  are  even  held  hostage  to 
oversimplistic political posturing. But the answer does not lie in widespread fiscal stimulus, as 
a recent trend seems to suggest. On the contrary, we know that growth and employment will 
be  stronger  in  Europe  if  we  implement  a  differentiated  economic  strategy,  with  more 
structural  reforms  where  they  are  needed,  such  as  in  France,  and  more  fiscal  support  in 
those  countries  with  room  for  manoeuvre,  such  as  Germany.  In  practice,  for  this  level  of 
coordination to exist, the euro area needs an institution that fosters confidence, one that both 
embodies and nurtures the shared commitment of our Member States. This institution could 
consist of a “Finance Minister” who would be a member of the Commission and Chairman of 
the  Eurogroup,  and  would  be  backed  by  a  European  treasury.  He  or  she  would  be 
responsible for defining a collective strategy – which would then be ratified by the European 
Parliament – and for ensuring it was implemented in each country. The Minister would also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  be tasked with managing a reinforced ESM (European Stability Mechanism). As this step will 
mean  modifying  the  existing  Treaties,  it  can  only  reasonably  come  after  the  elections 
scheduled for next year in various euro area countries. 
Lastly, the third and final step would be to complete the Economic and Monetary Union with 
a European fiscal capacity.  This  would  mean  first  increasing  the  sense  of trust  between 
Member States, to avoid it being seen as a one-way “transfer union”. A genuine euro budget 
would be a stabilisation tool and could include, for example, a European-wide unemployment 
insurance scheme. It could also be used to finance certain “European public goods” such as 
digital technology, the energy transition or the integration of refugees. And in the long term, it 
would be directly able to raise taxes and issue common debt. 
In conclusion, as a central banker and steadfast European, this is what I believe is needed 
for the future of Europe. As a central banker, of course, I know the decision does not fall to 
me. My responsibility as part of the Eurosystem is to assist in delivering a monetary policy 
that  is  in  line  with  the  mandate  entrusted  to  us,  and  to  make  proposals  so  that  other 
economic  policies  are  more  efficient  and  more  complementary.  Because  monetary  policy 
cannot do everything. Indeed the founders of the euro always made it clear that other stages 
would be necessary. I have given you an outline of my views, and I will be happy to answer 
any questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
