  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Consumer protection – a shared responsibility 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  Consumer  Welfare  Month, 
Manila, 30 September 2016. 
 On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I am pleased to welcome all of you to the 
opening  ceremonies  of  the  2016  National  Consumer  Welfare  Month  under  the  theme 
Consumer Protection: A Shared Responsibility. This is the first time the Bangko Sentral ng 
Pilipinas is hosting this event; for this, we thank the NCAC, the agency tasked to lead this 
annual  celebration  every  October.  We  also  extend  our  special  thanks  to  Senator  Poe,  for 
gracing this event as our Keynote Speaker. 
Consumer welfare is important to the BSP. The three pillars of central banking – which are 
price stability, stable banking system, and a safe and reliable payments system – all affect 
consumers, ultimately. 
To those who ask how we are doing, our answer is - so far, so good. The BSP has been able 
to tame inflation through appropriate monetary and banking policies. For instance, inflation 
has dropped to low single-digit levels - 1.8% in August this year, from a double-digit figure of 
10.5% in August 1998. By keeping inflation at low levels, we protect the purchasing power of 
consumers. 
In addition, our banking system is sound, stable, liquid, and able to fund the requirements of 
business and consumers at relatively lower interest rates. In fact, banks compete to provide 
credit to those with good credit history. 
At the same time, a public perception survey conducted by the Philippine Statistics Authority 
indicated that our payments system gets high marks from consumers. Indeed, our payments 
system  is  safe,  efficient  and  reliable,  and  continues  to  inspire  confidence  in  our  financial 
system. 
The  same  survey  revealed  that  the  new  generation  banknotes  issued  by  the  BSP  also 
received  high  marks,  having  more  security  features  to  protect  consumers  against 
counterfeiters. We have also taken the final steps to demonetize our old design banknotes so 
that  only  our  new  generation  banknotes  that  are  difficult  to  counterfeit  will  remain  in 
circulation. 
 
Another study revealed that Filipinos make 2.5 billion payments per month valued at over 3 
trillion  pesos,  99%  of  which  is  in  the  form  of  cash  or  checks,  while  only  1%  represents 
electronic  payments.  On  average,  there  are  704,000  checks  processed  every  day.  In 
addition, banks maintain about 52 million deposit accounts for the public. 
Indeed,  whether  it  is  thru  money,  credit  or  banking,  there  are  many  points  of  interaction 
between banks and consumers. 
Given  all  these,  the  BSP,  in  coordination  with  banks  and  other  stakeholders,  has  been 
working to institutionalize consumer protection standards. 
In  2006,  the  BSP  created  a  unit  dedicated  to  hear  and  address  the  concerns  of  financial 
consumers. Since the creation of that dedicated unit – which is now the Financial Consumer 
Protection  Department–  we  have  created  a  venue  for  redress  that  treats  each  consumer 
equally… and handles each bank objectively. 
We  take  pride  that  in  2014,  the  BSP  formalized  the  first  Financial  Consumer  Protection 
framework  for  regulated  financial  institutions.  Among  others,  it  advocates  the  rights  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial  consumers,  sets  the  standard  for  the  market  conduct  of  BSP  supervised  entities, 
and institutionalizes financial education as a continuing undertaking. 
Along the way, we have conducted financial education expos, mounted exhibits that educate 
on  scams  and  fraudulent  activities,  engaged  constituents  in  poster  and  essay  contests, 
prepared consumer protection videos, and published pamphlets, brochures and a book on 
wealth management. 
These initiatives are intended to serve and protect consumers, assert their rights, raise their 
awareness,  hear  their  complaints…  and  underscore  the  philosophy  that  the  vitality  of  the 
economy rests to a large extent on the welfare of the consumer. 
These  are  the  very  tenets  that  underpin  Presidential  Proclamation  1098,  the  same 
proclamation  for  which  we  gather  every  October  to  celebrate  consumer  welfare.  In  this 
context, the BSP is proud to be an active and  vocal advocate of consumer protection and 
financial education. They go hand in hand - to strengthen consumer protection, consumers 
need financial education to know their rights as financial consumers. 
We are  pleased  to  share  therefore  that  our  network  of  partners  and  stakeholders  in  these 
activities continues to expand. Banks and bank organizations such as BAIPHIL and FINEX, 
as well as the Department of Education come to mind. And we look forward to having more 
partners,  especially  with  the  launch  last  year  by  the  BSP  with  12  other  agencies  of  our 
National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion.  Indeed,  we  need  to  collaborate  because  the 
responsibility is too great and the scope too wide for any single entity to take on consumer 
education and protection. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  consumer  protection  and  financial  education  are  not  mere  buzz 
words to discuss in October. Consumer protection and financial education are international 
best practices that must be part of our continuing agenda. Let us therefore work together to 
push these initiatives forward as part of our shared responsibility. 
Mabuhay ang Filipino consumers! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Mabuhay 
po tayong lahat! 
Maraming salamat sa inyo! 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
