BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks 
 By  
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the High-Level Meeting on Agricultural Financing in 
Uganda 
 Kampala, 30 August 2016 
   1 
The Rt. Hon. Prime-Minister, 
Hon. Ministers (present and past), 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning! 
 In  my  remarks,  I  wish  to  highlight  the  numerous  policy  interventions  and 
schemes  undertaken  by  the  Government  of  Uganda  since  the  1960s 
particularly  those  that  had  the  banking  industry  actively  involved;  identify 
what I think is the most optimal strategy for agricultural modernization, and 
third,  is  to  reiterate  what  I  envisage  as  the  appropriate  role  for  the  state  in 
agricultural financing.  
  Interventions  for  agricultural  development  over  the  past  fifty  years  can  be 
broadly  summarized  into  the  establishment  of  institutions,  the  set-up  of 
lending schemes and the application of tax incentives. Let me start by dealing 
with  the  experience  of  the  public  financial  institutions.  Government  used 
public sector banks, the Uganda Commercial Bank and the Cooperative Bank 
to  provide  loans  to  farmers  at  subsidized  interest  rates  –  which  were  often 
highly negative in real terms. Some of these lending schemes were financed 
from  the  Central  bank.  About  20  percent  of  all  commercial  bank  lending  in 
the  1980s  was  allocated  to  farming  entities  such  as  the  Coffee  Marketing 
Board.  
  2 
These policies did not work.  Farmers  and cooperatives  were not able to use 
cheap credit to modernize their farming and were unable to repay their loans. 
By the early 1990s, both UCB and the Cooperative Bank had been rendered 
bankrupt by non-performing loans.   
 Uganda’s  experience  was  similar  to  that  of  many  other  countries  in  Africa. 
The  continent  is  littered  with  many  agricultural  finance  banks  that  became 
unprofitable  and  required  continuous  budgetary  support,  thus  necessitating 
their restructuring in form of privatization, or complete closure like Lesotho’s 
Agricultural Bank and Building Society.  
 Since the mid-1980s several targeted credit schemes have been implemented. 
The  Government  of  Uganda  through  the  Development  Finance  Department 
(DFD) of the Bank of Uganda managed several credit programs, (see table 1), 
that  supported  various  investment  projects  in  the  different  sectors  of  the 
economy,  including  agriculture,  agro-industry,  manufacturing  and  the 
services sub sectors like education, health, and tourism/hotels.  
 Table 1: Credit Schemes Managed by BOU/DFD between 1986-2006/07 
Credit Program 
Rehabilitation of Productive Enterprises (RPE) 
Development Finance Fund (DFF) 
Source of Funding 
USAID (GOU) 
BOU  &  Commercial 
banks 
EIB (GOU) 
Apex I, II, III & IV 
Investment Term Credit Refinance Fund   (ITCRF)  World Bank (GOU) 
Export Refinance Scheme 
Cotton Sub-Sector Development Project (CSDP) 
Crop Finance Fund (CFF) 
(ERS) 
   
BOU 
World Bank/IFAD 
Libyan Government 
3 
Export Promotion Fund (EPF)                                        GOU 
Export Credit Guarantee Scheme (ECGS)            
Energy  for  Rural  Transformation  Refinance  Fund
 
Distressed Flower Project Fund (DFPF)                            GOU 
Source: Bank of Uganda 
  (ERTRF) 
BOU /USAID (GOU)              
World Bank (GOU) 
 In  the  period  prior  to  2006/07,  when  the  Development  Finance  Department 
and  all  its  activities  were  transferred  to  the  Uganda  Development  Bank 
limited (UDBL), DFD also coordinated a number of credit related programs. 
These  included  the  Linkage  Banking  Program  under  the  Africa  Regional 
Agricultural Credit Association (AFRACA); the Capacity  Building Program 
(CBP)  for  micro  finance 
institutions  under 
the  Cotton  Sub-sector 
Development  Project;  Research  and  advocacy  on  government  programs, 
policies  and  processes  from  a  gender  perceptive  under  the  Gender  and 
Economic  Reform  for  Africa  (GERA)  initiative  of the  North  South Institute 
of  Canada;  Capacity  Building  for  Rural  Women  Financial  Intermediaries 
Program  financed  by  a  grant  sourced  from  IFAD;  and  the DANIDA-funded 
Rural Financial Services Component (RFSC), which was aimed at widening 
financial services outreach to the rural areas.  
 Although  these  schemes  yielded  some  individual  successes,  they  have  not 
transformed agriculture in this country.  Agriculture valued added per worker 
measured  at  constant  2005  US  dollars,  has  remained  very  low,  despite 
Uganda’s  favorable  resource  endowments,  increasing  only  marginally  from 
an average of US$ 212 in the 1990s to an average of US$ 219 in the past five 
years, according to the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.  
 4 
 Public  support  to  the  agriculture  sector  over  the  decade  to  2015  has  also 
included  tax  exemptions  and  subsidies,  including  the  current  Agriculture 
Credit Facility (ACF) that primarily targets value addition in agriculture and 
provides  for  a  maximum  interest  rate  of  12  percent  using  budgetary 
resources.  The  fiscal  incentives  have  included:  i)  tax  exemption  on  income 
earned by financial institutions lending to agriculture that was introduced in 
2006/07; 
ii) 
income 
tax  exemptions  for  new  rural  agro-processing 
investments;  and  iii)      zero  rating  for  VAT  on  most  agricultural  inputs  and 
services.  Various  studies  including  those  published  in  our  very  own 
Agriculture  Finance  Year  Book  have  demonstrated  that  these  tax  incentives 
did not result in any significant gains to farmers in the form of either reduced 
input prices, or  an increase in lending to  the agriculture sector. Instead  they 
benefited  mostly  the  banks  and  importers  while  denying  government 
revenues;  and  as  a  result,  Government  embarked  on  eliminating  many  of 
these tax incentives in the financial year 2014/15. 
 What lessons can we learn from these experiences? Agriculture in Uganda is 
dominated  by  small  holder  farmers,  of  whom  two  thirds  are  engaged  in 
subsistence  agriculture,  according  to  the  2014  Uganda  National  Population 
and  Housing  Census.  Therefore  the  agriculture  development  strategy  must 
focus on the small holder farmer. Any risk-sharing model for financing must 
be based on a clear understanding of the profile and origins of the risk. In this 
case,  we  must  resolve  what  continually  constrains  the  modernization  of 
agriculture and what makes small holder farming very risky for financing. 
  5 
Smallholder  farmers  face  a  raft  of  constraints  to  modernising  their  farming, 
of  which  lack  of  financing  is  not  necessarily  the  most  important.  Most 
smallholders  produce  very  little  surplus,  beyond  their  own  needs  for 
consumption,  which  can  be  marketed.  Furthermore,  the  vulnerability  of 
agriculture  to  the  weather,  pests  and  other  hazards  means  that  surpluses 
cannot  be  produced  with  any  degree  of  reliability.  In  these  circumstances, 
agriculture  assumes  a  very  high  risk  premium,  and  borrowing  money  to 
purchase  agricultural  inputs  is  very  risky  for  farmers,  and  they  will 
unavoidably struggle to repay loans.  
 Modernising  smallholder  agriculture  in  Uganda  requires  a  holistic  set  of 
interventions.  The  first  priority  should  be  to  assist  farmers  to  increase  their 
output  without  exposing  them  to  greater  risks.  There  is  evidence  from 
agricultural  projects  that  if  smallholder  farmers  are  given  advice  on  the 
adoption  of  good  agricultural  practices,  such  as  better  seeds,  optimal  crop 
spacing,  weeding,  post-harvest  handling  etc,  substantial  increases  in  yields 
per  acre  can  be  achieved,  even  without  the  application  of  purchased  inputs 
such  as  fertilisers.  This  would  allow  farmers  to  produce  more  marketable 
surplus  and  thereby  generate  cash  incomes.  The  next  step  would  then  be  to 
start  applying  modest  amounts  of  purchased  inputs  such  as  fertilisers,  to 
increase yields further.  
 Luckily,  we  are  not  short  of  demonstrable  projects  in  the  Uganda  and 
elsewhere  that  have  markedly  improved  yields  per  acre  and  income  of  the 
 6 
farmers  by  providing  this  sort  of  comprehensive  support.  The  2015 
Agriculture  Finance  Year  book  for  Uganda  provided  an  assessment  of  one 
such  pilot  by  the  One  Acre-Fund  in  Kamuli  district.  The  main  challenge 
facing  agricultural  policy  is  how  to  scale  up  the  successes  of  individual 
projects  to  smallholders  throughout  the  country.    The  key  to  delivering  the 
interventions  needed  to  modernize  agriculture  are  effective,  nationwide 
agricultural  extension  services.  We  also  need  to  strengthen  the  rural 
infrastructure,  especially  the  rural  feeder  roads,  and  provide  the  necessary 
support for private sector-led contract farming.  
 Once  the  above  interventions  are  effected  and  farmers  are  able  to  earn  cash 
incomes from selling their produce, the risk profile of agriculture will reduce 
and  it  will  become  possible  to  extend  credit  to  them  on  a  sustainable  basis, 
although it is unlikely that commercial banks, given their cost structures, will 
be  the  most  suitable  financial  institutions  to  do  this.  Instead  financial 
institutions  which  specialize  in  small  savings  and  loan  facilities,  and  which 
have  strong  local  roots,  are  better  suited  to  delivering  rural  finance  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  Mobile  banking  and  leveraging  technology  may  also  be 
able  to  contribute  to  solving  market  information  deficiencies  and  delivering 
financial services in a more cost effective manner. A key question is whether 
rural finance can be provided on a purely commercial basis, or requires some 
degree of subsidy to offset the undoubtedly higher risks involved. We don’t 
yet have a definitive answer to this question. 
  7 
I  am  of  the  view  that,  in  implementing  a  holistic  set  of  interventions 
highlighted  above,  Government  resources  should  prioritize  what  it  can  do 
best and what the market cannot provide:  the provision of public goods that 
benefit the majority of the small holder farmers such as policy, strengthening 
land rights, rural feeder  road infrastructure, research  and extension services, 
and supporting the strengthening of the ware house receipt system.  
Tax incentives and subsidies as we have evidently seen are the least optimal 
way of utilizing public resources.  I am aware that in a bid to lower the risk 
profile  of  agriculture  and  incentivize  agricultural  financing,  government  is 
introducing  an  agriculture  insurance  scheme.  My  advice  is  that  any  such 
publically funded insurance scheme should mainly cover systemic risk faced 
by  the  majority  of  farmers  such  as  a  general  epidemic  or  extreme  weather 
conditions.  
 Finally, 
the  historical  evidence  with  state-run  agriculture  financing 
mechanisms  –  risk  sharing  schemes  or  development  banks  on  the  African 
continent, is instructive that if any such financing institution or scheme is to 
efficiently  support  the  development  process,  it  must  be  managed  on 
commercial principles.  
  I thank you for listening to me. 
 8 
