Jens Weidmann: The future of the European Monetary Union (EMU)
and some comments on the German economy
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Federation  of
Enterprises in Belgium, Brussels, 19 December 2016.
 1. Introduction
Ms Sioen
Mr Timmermans
Mr Smets
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a special pleasure for me to speak on European issues right here at the heart of Europe.
Thank you very much for your kind invitation.
Directly opposite the building we are in today, on the other side of Rue Ravenstein, the “Palais
des Beaux-Arts de Bruxelles” is located, also known as “Bozar". As you all know better than me,
it was designed by Victor Horta, one of the leading Art Nouveau architects, and was built as a
new kind of cultural centre that would embrace all forms of art and be open to the general public.
According to the Bozar website, Horta himself imagined this building as being “immense and yet
almost  invisible,  overlooking  the  city  and  yet  buried  underground,  multiple  and  yet  unified,
prestigious  and  yet  open  to  all".  While  Horta  was  referring  to  the  “Palais  des  Beaux-Arts  de
Bruxelles", the words could equally serve to describe expectations with regard to the European
Union: "Immense and yet almost invisible, multiple and yet unified, prestigious and yet open to
all".
However, over the last few years a growing number of voices have been saying that reality and
ambition have increasingly drifted apart: that the European Union has become too visible, more
multiple  than  unified,  and  too  open  to  all.  Europe,  many  feel,  has  become  more  and  more
associated  with  obligation  instead  of  opportunity,  with  bureaucracy  instead  of  business,  with
heterogeneity instead of homogeneity.
In the following, however, I will argue that now is not the time to throw in the towel, especially
where the euro area is concerned.
 
2. Economic situation and monetary policy
Ladies and gentlemen
As all of you know, this year has been marked by an unusually large number of political events
with  the  potential  to  elevate  uncertainty  about  the  future  outlook  –  notably  the  decision
by UK voters to leave the European Union, the result of the presidential election in the US and,
most recently, the referendum in Italy. These results have also been interpreted as signs of a
growing  scepticism  about  open  markets  and  free  trade.  And  indeed,  calls  for  protectionist
measures have been heard in many countries lately.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a fact that worldwide competition presents challenges for individuals and companies alike.
And so it is quite understandable that some might feel that globalisation and technical progress
are  threatening  their  economic  livelihood.  More  protectionism,  however,  would  be  the  wrong
answer  on  how  to  maintain  our  welfare.  The  WTO  recently  announced  that  it  expects  global
trade to grow by only 1.7% in 2016 – which is about 1 PP lower than in 2015 and the lowest rate
since the crisis year of 2009.  While for a long time, trade grew twice as fast as GDP, it has now
fallen below the GDP growth rate for the first time in 15 years.
1
I’m  convinced  that  the  introduction  of  trade  barriers  or  other  protectionist  measures  would
intensify a situation where growth in global trade already appears to be weak. Such impairments
would therefore have the potential to weaken prosperity and innovation in the countries imposing
these  measures.  If  many  were  to  act  in  this  way,  it  would  also  pose  a  crucial  risk  for  global
growth.
And  all  things  considered,  open  markets  and  free  trade  of  goods  and  services  belong  to  the
foundations of our welfare – not only in Germany but also in Belgium, for instance. And here in
Brussels,  the  importance  of  trade  and  business  for  welfare  and  growth  is  illustrated  by  the
Grand-Place, which UNESCO describes as "a rare example of a square without a church or any
other place of worship, which emphasizes its mercantile and administrative nature". By allowing
specialisation  and,  therefore,  using  economies  of  scale,  free  trade  makes  production  more
efficient. By increasing competition it lowers the prices of goods and facilitates the spread of new
ideas and technologies, which leads to more innovation and growth. In this spirit, Germany as the
new G20 presidency will strive to re-iterate the G20’s commitment to maintain open markets and
refrain from additional protectionist measures.
But to benefit from the advantages of global competition and exchange, countries need to enable
their  citizens  to  manage  the  changes  in  their  economic  and  social  life.  This  would  mean
enhancing education, but also improving the flexibility of goods and labour markets. These are
topics to which I will return later in my speech.
Looking ahead to the next three years, and assuming that far-reaching protectionist measures
are not adopted in important parts of the world, a moderate expansion of global economic activity
can be expected. That also holds for the euro-area economy, which – given the high political
uncertainty and the notable shocks that have hit it this year – appears to be more resilient than in
the past.
The reduction of the monthly purchase volume under the APP from €80 billion to €60 billion can
be  seen  as  an  expression  of  the  Governing  Council’s  increased  confidence  in  the  economic
recovery in the euro area. Additionally, deflation isn’t really an issue any longer. And to be honest,
in my view, the risk of deflation has largely been overestimated in the past.
This conjunctural picture is in line with the latest Eurosystem staff economic projection, which
shows a rather stable growth rate of 1.6% or 1.7% within the projection horizon. These rates are,
in any case, higher than potential output growth and would lead to a gradual closing of the output
gap, further increasing employment and higher wages.
The German economy is expected to grow more or less in line with the euro area as a whole
within  the  projection  horizon. A  further  decline  in  unemployment  and  above-average  capacity
utilisation  means  that  the  robust  growth  in  Germany  will  be  increasingly  driven  by  domestic
demand. This projected economic development shows also that Germany doesn’t need a debt-
financed  fiscal  stimulus  package,  such  as  some  occasionally  call  for.  While  the  German
government has indeed increased spending for public infrastructure, this hasn’t led to a fiscal
deficit.  Given  the  expected  burden  on  the  budget  and  the  social  security  system  due  to  the
looming  demographic  development  in  Germany,  slight  public  surpluses  are  absolutely
appropriate in times when interest rates are low and tax revenues are rising.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last but not least, according to our estimates, spill-over effects from German public spending on
other euro-area economies are rather low. So the benefits to the rest of the euro area of such a
policy would be dubious, while it would be neither useful nor necessary for Germany, against the
background of its benign cyclical position and ageing society.
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  rise  in  line  with  the  robust  economic  growth.  The
Eurosystem staff projections indicate that the inflation rate will pick up gradually until the end of
the projection horizon to a level broadly in line with Governing Council’s definition of price stability.
In  this  context,  four-fifths  of  the  increase  between  2016  and  2017  can  be  attributed  to  the
development of energy prices. The dampening effect of the slump in oil prices about a year ago
is now going to be washed out statistically. In addition to this base effect, OPEC’s decision to
reduce their oil production might mark a fundamental change of the organisation’s strategy. This
could lead to a faster closing of the gap between oil demand and oil supply, stabilising oil prices
at an elevated level. However, much depends on how other oil producers react. Up to now, it’s
not clear if the current level of oil prices will set incentives to resume oil production.  
And there is a further reason why inflation is currently so subdued in the euro area. The domestic
price pressure is weak because of the adjustment processes in some euro-area member states
to overcome the biggest economic shock since World War II.
While it is right that the only gradual increase in inflation justifies an expansionary monetary policy
stance  in  the  euro  area  at  the  current  juncture,  reasonable  people  can  disagree  about  the
appropriate  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  All  the  more  as  monetary  policy  becomes
looser automatically over the coming months, even without central bank action: when inflation
rises as forecasted in our projections, the real interest rate declines. The effects are similar to a
central bank rate cut.
And  it  is  also  no  secret  that  I’m  quite  sceptical  with  regard  to  Eurosystem  government  bond
purchases. Although such purchases aren’t prohibited per se and they can loosen the monetary
policy stance, they are blurring the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. And this is
especially problematic in a currency union with a single monetary policy and largely autonomous
economic and fiscal policies.
Euro-area central banks are now the largest creditors of their member states. All governments
ultimately pay the same interest rate on the debt in central banks’ balance sheets, regardless of
the country’s creditworthiness. Currently, as the Eurosystem’s deposit rate is negative, they all
receive money for that part of their debt.
What’s more: the larger the part of the debt that central banks withdraw from the market, the less
markets will exert their disciplining forces sanctioning unhealthy public finances with higher risk-
premia. This is all the more worrisome as the low-interest-rate environment offers few incentives
for governments to consolidate their budgets. Fiscal policy in the euro area has been loosened
again noticeably over the  past  few  years.  What  governments  are  saving  in  interest  payments
isn’t being put towards the urgent goal of reducing debt, but instead is being spent to a significant
extent. Germany is no exception here, by the way. Of course, this is not only due to diminished
market discipline, but also to a lack of rigour in applying the fiscal rules. I will come back to this
later.
This fiscal environment could lead to a situation where monetary policy comes under political
pressure to make high levels of debt sustainable through low interest rates. This, however, could
put price stability at risk.I fear that the danger of fiscal policy becoming too comfortable with the
current  low-interest-rate  environment  increases  with  the  time  these  favourable  financing
conditions exist.
Besides  these  observations,  I  never  tire  of  emphasising  that  the  current  very  expansionary
monetary policy entails additional costs. It is impairing the profitability of banks and life insurance
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
companies,  for  example. Although  both  are  not  targets  of  a  monetary  policy  geared  solely  to
preserving price stability, central banks cannot afford to ignore this fact if banks’ health problems
endanger the monetary transmission mechanism, for instance.
Additionally, low interest rates and unconventional monetary policies could also drive up financial
risk-taking in some financial market segments or the real estate market. I currently see no sign of
exuberance in the real estate market in the euro area as a whole. Yet there’s no denying that
some national markets are at risk of overheating, and the competent financial stability authorities
of  some  euro-area  countries  like  Ireland,  the  Netherlands  and,  more  recently,  Finland  have
introduced macroprudential measures to limit the risk of house price bubbles.
Again,  even  if  macroprudential  instruments  are  better  targeted  to  address  specific  financial
stability issues, monetary policy cannot turn a blind eye if rising financial stability risks could get
central banks into trouble with regard to safeguarding price stability in the future. In any case, it is
key that concerns over financial market volatility or the sustainability of public finances do not
lead to a postponement of an exit from the ultra-loose monetary policy, if that’s what it takes to
reach  our  price  stability  target.  Otherwise,  monetary  policy  would  be  taken  hostage  by  fiscal
policy or markets.  
Ladies and gentlemen
It is the responsibility of member states to make sure that their public finances are able to cope
with an increase in interest rates when it happens one day. And it is also the responsibility of
member states to ensure sufficient growth and economic convergence. Contrary to what some
believe – or wish – it’s not central banks that can put the economy on a higher growth path.
Or to put it metaphorically: it is not enough for a car to have a tank full of “liquidity” if you want to
speed up. Someone still has to rev up the engine. It’s politicians who hold the key to unlocking
economic growth. That’s why the Governing Council has been tireless in calling for structural
reforms. But while the ambition should be to move into a higher gear with regard to reforms,
there  are  signals  that  we  have  already  shifted  back  to  a  lower  gear  again.  “Going  for  growth
2016", a recent study by the OECD, shows that since 2013 the speed of reforms has slowed
down,  especially  with  regard  to  measures  in  the  fields  of  “innovation  policy,  public  sector
2
efficiency or product and labour market regulation".
It is clear that each country has its own economic situation and preferences – meaning there’s
no such thing as a “one size fits all” approach. But I am convinced that measures which lead to
sound public finances as well as competition-based economic systems with flexible labour and
product markets would foster growth.
Making  it  easier  for  new  firms  to  enter  the  market  is  one  type  of  reform  helping  to  raise
competition  and  innovation.  Measures  easing  the  process  of  setting  up  a  new  business  and,
where necessary, eliminating red tape would boost growth potential, too. As a case in point, let
me mention the creation of a common services market and a single digital market in Europe.
Studies  show  that  this  could  yield  twice  the  growth  effects  unleashed  by  the  creation  of  the
common market for goods.
3, 4
    
Lowering the barriers that prevent enterprises from exiting the market will likewise foster growth.
It  would  facilitate  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  "creative  destruction".  OECD  research
suggests that policy-induced exit barriers matter for productivity growth, because fewer exits lead
to  less  scope  for  productivity  spillovers  and  the  misallocation  of  capital,  labour  and  skills.  It
5
concludes, for instance, that insolvency regimes should be streamlined.
And investing more in skills and education promises to deliver rich rewards, too. This would not
only boost labour productivity, but also reduce the risk of workers losing their jobs. And this, in
turn, would in my view be the most effective antidote to the feeling many have of being threatened
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
by globalisation and technological progress.
But companies not only stand to gain from higher labour market flexibility: they would also benefit
from an increased flexibility in their financing options. This is where the Capital Markets Union
comes in. Because European companies largely rely on bank debt – in relation to GDP, about
four times more than in the United States  - improving and harmonising regulation could help to
make equity markets a better funding source for enterprises. And a deeper and more integrated
European  capital  market  would  also  improve  financial  stability,  because  equity  flows  are  less
prone to sudden stops. Hence, more equity financing makes companies more shock-resistant,
thereby supporting growth and jobs.
6
Research has found that private risk sharing through integrated capital markets is a much more
important  shock  absorber  than  public  risk  sharing.  The  integrated  equity  markets  in
7
the US cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between federal states.
If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyond
that  region.  Creditors,  on  the  other  hand,  are  not  exposed  to  losses  –  except  in  the  event  of
insolvency. In other words: equity is a shock absorber, debt is a shock amplifier. 
 
3. Improving the institutional framework of the EMU
Ladies and gentlemen
Implementing economic reforms at the national or European level as a way of strengthening the
euro area is important to improve the cohesion in the euro area, which has undoubtedly suffered
from  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises.  What’s  also  crucial,  however,  is  to  make  the
institutional setting of EMU more stable and to restore trust, for instance by abiding by the agreed
rules. The financial and sovereign debt crises in the euro area bore one major characteristic in
common:  both  saw  a  core  economic  principle  being  violated:  the  liability  principle.  German
economist  Walter  Eucken,  who  was  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  Germany’s  social  market
economy, once said very aptly: "Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs."
If banks assume they are too big to fail, they will be tempted to make the most of this implicit
insurance and take on excessive risks, at the expense of society at large. This is exactly what
happened before the financial crisis. This kind of implicit insurance is not altogether unfamiliar to
the framework of EMU, where a single monetary policy exists alongside 19 largely autonomous
economic  and  fiscal  policies. As  the  crisis  taught  us,  this  set-up  potentially  exposes  EMU  to
vulnerability. Because at the end of the day, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthy
developments in individual member states if it wishes to prevent the stability of the union as a
whole from coming under threat.
The prospect of being able to spread the consequences of unsustainable policy across the entire
monetary  union  might  weaken  the  incentives  to  run  sound  policies,  in  particular  a  healthy
budgetary  policy.  This  is  why  institutional  safeguards  were  put  in  place  before  the  euro  was
launched:  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the  no  bail-out  clause,  and  the  ban  on  monetary
financing  of  governments.  Unfortunately,  however,  these  safeguards  were  unable  to  prevent
public debt from ballooning in some euro-area countries. The crisis played a role in this, but also
that  the  fiscal  rules  were  repeatedly  violated  and  the  capital  markets  didn’t  sanction  these
breaches because the no bail-out clause lacked credibility.
When doubts about the debt sustainability of some euro-area member states surfaced during the
sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  urgently-taken  rescue  measures  helped  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
escalating. But they did so by mutualising fiscal liability on a substantial scale. Economic and
fiscal policies, on the other hand, essentially remained a national prerogative, though the fiscal
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
rules have admittedly been adapted. As a result, the balance between liability and control has
been thrown out of kilter.
However,  striking  an  even  balance  between  liability  and  control  is  crucial  for  the  functioning
of EMU. Theoretically, there are two possible ways to restore this balance: deeper integration, or
more individual national responsibility on the part of the member states.
The  first  solution  would  be  to  create  a  fiscal  union  with  centralised  decision-making  powers.
While a fiscal union would not guarantee sound fiscal policymaking, it could certainly mitigate the
deficit bias of individual member states. And interestingly, even for Karl Otto Pöhl, the former
Bundesbank  President  who  was  a  member  of  the  Delors  Commission,  the  “fiscal  union
approach” was the intuitive one: “In a monetary union with irreversibly fixed exchange rates, the
weak would become ever weaker and the strong ever stronger. We would thus experience great
tensions  in  the  real  economy  of  Europe.  For  this  reason  alone,  monetary  union  without  the
simultaneous  integration  in  fields  like  fiscal  policy  as  well  as  regional  and  social  policy  is
completely inconceivable."
But let’s be honest here: recent political developments show that a fiscal union approach is not
on the cards: The outcome of the Brexit referendum and maybe at least partly the outcome of the
Italian constitutional referendum have laid bare the scepticism about the European project and a
tendency to reject further integration steps. Furthermore, surveys reveal that many citizens in
the EU doubt whether the existing process of integration is still sustainable. And this is possibly
not unrelated to the fact that the ongoing debate over the right response to the crisis in the euro
area has brought out into the open the persistent differences of opinion in fiscal and economic
policy  matters.  This  is  all  the  more  astonishing  because  the  euro-area  countries  had  actually
already established a consensus on the appropriate role of fiscal policy, which is documented in
the Stability and Growth Pact. So building trust in the rules we already have today is paramount
before we engage in major new integration steps.
To  cut  a  long  story  short:  a  fiscal  union,  which  would  require  member  states  to  surrender
substantial national sovereignty, hardly seems feasible at the moment. And as long as there’s no
willingness  to  transfer  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level,  there  will  be  no  basis  for
mutualising  sovereign  risks  –  and  that’s  why  the  proposal  to  establish  a  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme (EDIS) isn’t the right institutional response to restore the balance between
liability and control in the euro area.
As  long  as  actions  taken  at  the  national  level,  such  as  drafting  insolvency  laws,  or  very  high
stocks  of  government  bonds  on  banks’  balance  sheets  can  have  a  substantial  impact  on  the
health of financial institutions, EDIS would allow risks from national decisions to be shifted to the
European  level.  This  would  send  the  wrong  incentives  to  banks  and  investors  alike.  The
mutualisation of risk would not go hand in hand with the necessary mutualisation of control rights
– irrespective of the Single Supervisory Mechanism that was put in place.
The second way of restoring the balance between liability and control, meanwhile, would be to
strengthen  the  Maastricht  approach  based  on  individual  responsibility.  This  would  leave
economic  and  fiscal  policy,  as  well  as  ultimate  liability  for  public  debt,  in  the  hands  of  the
individual member states. But how could such a decentralised approach work better in future
than it has done in the past?
Only  five  minutes  away  from  here,  you  can  visit  the  Magritte  museum.  René  Magritte  once
said: "I saw the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, it’s not bad but the postcards are better." Whether or
not you would agree with that, it is my impression that the same might be said of the fiscal rules.
It is not enough that the fiscal rules of the euro area exist on paper: their principles also have to
be applied in reality.
Although the rules were changed after the crisis, the European Commission was granted more
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
flexibility in interpreting them. And it has used this flexibility quite a few times so far – and always
to interpret the rules very loosely. In addition, recent statements by the Commission show that
her interest in enforcing the rules is further continuing to decline. As a result, the binding force of
the budgetary rules is weaker than ever before, as we can see, for instance, in the budgetary
developments in France, Spain and Portugal.
One  way  of  ensuring  that  the  rules  are  binding  would  be  to  install  a  new  and  independent
authority, a fiscal council. This institution would not be exposed to the same political conflicts of
interest  as  the  Commission,  which  has  to  assess  whether  national  budgets  comply  with  the
Stability and Growth Pact and hammer out political compromises between the interests of the
different  member  states.  Of  course,  the  European  Council  ultimately  holds  the  key  to  the
success  of  any  budgetary  control.  Its  determination  to  enforce  the  rules  and  support  the
Commission in a strict interpretation is all-important.
"Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But,
when  it  is  used  imprudently  and  in  excess,  the  result  can  be  disaster.”  This  statement  by
former  BIS  chief  economist  Stephen  Cecchetti  and  his  colleagues  Madhusudan  Mohanty  and
Fabrizio  Zampolli  is  directed  not  only  at  private  debt  but  also  at  public  debt.   They  show  that
excessively  high  private  and  public  debt  is  not  only  a  risk  to  financial  stability  but  also  to
economic growth. According to their estimations, in the euro area we are already in the danger
zone – at least with regard to corporate debt, at 105% of GDP, but also in terms of public debt, at
91%. And  so  this  is  one  more  reason  why  effective  limits  for  government  debt  are  urgently
needed.
8
Binding fiscal rules and an institution that observes their adherence are just one component of a
consistent reform agenda. Additionally, it is important for capital markets to resume their role of
disciplining national fiscal policy. As for enterprises, more deeply indebted countries ought to pay
higher interest rates. This will only happen if the no bail-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty really
has teeth. Therefore, it must be possible to restructure public debt without posing major risks to
the financial system.
The July edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly Report describes what needs to be done to make
this possible. There are two reforms I’d like to mention in the following.
First,  we  need  to  sever  the  sovereign-bank  nexus. A  strong  inter-linkage  between  banks  and
sovereigns  increases  the  probability  of  a  bail-out  by  other  member  states  and  weakens
incentives for risk-oriented pricing. And it is precisely this sovereign-bank nexus that contributed
to  a  mutual  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  when  banks  suffered  from  declining
prices for sovereign bonds in their balance sheets and countries from struggling banks in their
territory.
The  European  banking  union  already  marks  a  huge  step  towards  untangling  this  dangerous
embrace. However, to this end, and to complement the banking union, it is also crucial to do
away  with  the  preferential  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  in  banking  regulation.  This  implies  that
similar  to  banks’  lending  to  the  private  sector  sovereign  exposures  will  need  to  be  backed  by
capital and also be part of a large exposures regime.
A second measure concerns the design of the European Stability Mechanism’s (ESM’s) financial
assistance  programmes.  The  ESM  is  there  to  provide  resources  to  countries  that  apply  for
an ESM financial assistance programme. However, these funds are generally not only used to
cover  budget  deficits,  but  also  to  redeem  maturing  sovereign  bonds.  By  implication,  when  a
programme is activated, European taxpayers are, in essence, bailing out the respective country’s
creditors.  If  a  haircut  ends  up  being  the  only  way  to  restore  a  country’s  debt  sustainability,
taxpayers,  rather  than  investors,  would  shoulder  the  bill.  This  does  not  exactly  foster  any
willingness on the part of member states to agree to restructure a programme country’s debt.
Instead  of  a  truly  viable  solution  being  reached,  when  push  comes  to  shove,  a  strategy  of
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
muddling through would win the day.
That’s why the Bundesbank is proposing to add a clause to the government bonds of euro-area
countries which automatically extends the maturity of bonds by three years if the member state
in question applies for ESM assistance. This way, the initial creditors would remain liable, and if
the government debt really does need to be restructured, that could be done in an orderly fashion
without jeopardising financial stability.
Our proposals would help to sever one direction of the sovereign-bank nexus: banks would be
better shielded from a deterioration in public finances. The financial crisis showed, however, that
wobbling banks can lead to stumbling sovereigns. To cut this direction of the nexus, financial
market regulation was already improved substantially. In the euro area, a common restructuring
and resolution regime (the Single Resolution Mechanism) and a bank supervision body under the
aegis of the ECB (the Single Supervisory Mechanism, SSM) were established.
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),
which  assure  the  harmonised  implementation  of  the  rules  throughout  all  member  states,
substantially  strengthen  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  in  the  banking  sector,  thereby
reducing  the  likelihood  of  public  bail-outs.  However,  the  first  line  of  defence  in  making  a  bank
resolution  less  likely  is  the  establishment  of  higher  capital  requirements  for  banks  as  it  was
already decided in principle by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision almost exactly six
years ago.
That’s why the timely implementation of Basel III is important. This would also reduce regulatory
uncertainty for banks which is in my view a grave burden for them. But I want also reiterate that
finalising Basel III - i.e. with regard to the design of banks’ internal risk-based models – shouldn’t
lead to an additional significant increase in banks’ capital requirements, and the outcome should
also  be  regionally  balanced.  The  fact  that  Common  Equity  Tier  1  (CET1)  for  the  directly
supervised SSM banks increased after the financial crisis to 12.8% by mid-2016, and that this
level is well above  the  unchanged  aggregated  capital  demand  of  the  Supervisory  Review  and
Evaluation  Process  (SREP)  for  2017  of  around  10%,  can  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  an  improved
resilience of the European banking sector.
 
4. Conclusion
To  sum  up,  I  am  strongly  convinced  that  taking  responsibility  for  national  circumstances  and
policy decisions away from the member states would help neither the countries nor the people
nor  the  European  project.  Strengthening  individual  responsibility  appears  to  be  the  better
approach.
Ladies and gentlemen
To  borrow  the  words  of  Victor  Horta:  I  hope  that  the  duration  of  my  speech  was  neither  too
immense nor my main points invisible to you. Instead, I would be glad if I have given you some
food for thought on how the economy and the institutions of the euro area might be strengthened.
Thank you very much.
1
2
3
4
www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres16_e/pr779_e.htm
www.oecd.org/eco/growth/going-for-growth-2016-executive-summary.htm
Roland de Bruijn, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour (2008), “Economic benefits of an integrated European market for
services", Journal of Policy Modeling 30, pp 301–19.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The economic impact of a European digital single market, Final Report.
Müge Adalet McGowan and Dan Andrews (2016), “Insolvency regimes and productivity growth: a framework for
analysis", OECD Working Paper (2016)33.
www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper33.pdf, p 6.
P Asdrubali, B Sørensen and O Yosha (1996). Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: US 1963–1990, in Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110.
Stephen G Cecchetti, Madhusudan Mohanty and Fabrizio Zampolli (2011), “The real effects of debt", BIS Working
Papers No. 352.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
