  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Of TRUST, wellbeing of society and the role of 
financial ombudsman 
Remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Launch  of  the  Financial  Ombudsman  Scheme  “Of  TRUST, 
Wellbeing  of  Society  and  the  Role  of  Financial  Ombudsman”,  Kuala  Lumpur,  3  November 
2016. 
 TRUST is the bedrock of a financial system. The numbers and figures we diligently report to 
reflect  financial  positions,  the  close  regulation  and  scrutiny  by  supervisory  authorities  –  all 
these  ultimately  serve  to  uphold  the  TRUST  of  our  people  in  our  financial  system.  But 
TRUST  is  fragile,  and  when  it  is  eroded,  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  system  becomes 
threatened. 
We see this clearly in economies most affected by the Global Financial Crisis. Even today, 
societal and political backlash against financial institutions still continues. It is imperative that 
we rebuild and enhance TRUST. 
This  is  especially  important  in  an  operating  landscape  that  is  undergoing  rapid  changes 
brought  about  by  technological  advancement,  demographic  shifts,  changing  expectations 
and norms of society. Over the years, financial institutions have responded to these changes 
in their offerings of products and services, in marketing strategies, and in the delivery and 
usage of financial services. 
Consumers have also become increasingly discerning, better informed and assertive of their 
rights. With  the  advent  of  information  and  communication  technology,  we  can  only  expect 
these trends to accelerate as information becomes more widely available, more transparent 
and more insightful. 
It is in response to these developments that the consumer protection framework must evolve 
in tandem, to provide the right balance for consumers in terms of fair treatment, access to 
information to make informed choices, and the need for an effective mechanism to resolve 
disputes with financial institutions. 
The Bank has consistently worked to build TRUST in our financial system. Much investment 
in  resources  has  been made  over the  years.  Significant  progress  has  been  achieved. The 
necessary institutional arrangements and a strong regulatory framework for market conduct 
were put in place. These measures were supported by efforts to continuously  improve the 
transparency and comparability of financial products, and suitability assessments of financial 
products offered to consumers. At the same time, efforts to raise the level of professionalism 
of financial service providers and intermediaries have also been intensified. 
Ensuring adequate avenues for consumers to resolve disputes through an equitable process 
has been another long-standing priority of the Bank. We embarked on this journey way back 
in 1991 with the establishment of the Insurance Mediation Bureau followed by the Banking 
Mediation Bureau in 1996. We integrated both these entities in 2004 to form the Financial 
Mediation  Bureau.  The  transformation  of  the  Financial  Mediation  Bureau  into  Financial 
Ombudsman Scheme backed by legislation marks an important milestone in this evolution, 
putting Malaysia on par with international best practices for consumer protection in terms of 
effective redress mechanisms. 
The  establishment  of  the  Financial  Ombudsman  Scheme  will  further  strengthen  consumer 
confidence and market discipline in the financial sector. It will provide consumers with a user-
friendly and efficient redress mechanism to resolve disputes. This mechanism will continue to 
benefit both consumers and financial service providers (FSPs). Our data bear proof to this 
point. Over the past 12 years, the Ombudsman for Financial Services has helped to resolve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  close to 25,000 financial disputes. It saved significant costs and time for both consumers and 
FSPs. Assuming a cost of about RM15,000 to resolve a case through a court proceeding, it 
will translate to a cost savings of RM375 million. 
TRUST  is  the  vital  ingredient  for  the  Ombudsman  for  Financial  Services’  integrity  and 
credibility  in  the  delivery  of  its  services.  For  this  to  happen,  there  are  a  few  fundamental 
principles  that  are  absolutely  critical  for  success;  namely,  independence,  fairness  and 
impartiality,  accessibility,  accountability,  transparency  and  effectiveness.  These  principles 
must  be  embedded  in  perpetuity  into  its  governance  and  operational  arrangements. 
Recognising its importance, these principles have also been enshrined in the legislation. 
In line with the principle of accessibility, the services will continue to be treated as a public 
good and offered free of charge to financial consumers, with minimum formality. 
The  Ombudsman  for  Financial  Services  will  also  have  an  important  role  in  identifying 
systemic  issues  and  serious  misconduct,  and  escalating  these  issues  to  FSPs  and  the 
regulator, where appropriate. 
In  recent  months,  further  episodes  of  large-scale  misconduct  have  again  come  to  light, 
highlighting  the  growing  concerns  at  the  global  level  that  misconduct  increases  systemic 
risks and will further erode confidence in the financial system. Addressing this risk will require 
closer  coordination  and  understanding  between  FSPs,  the  Ombudsman  for  Financial 
Services and the regulator. 
Expectations on Financial Service Providers 
The  fragility  of  TRUST  is  evident  today  in  the  news  headlines.  Time  and  again,  we  had 
witnessed how poor culture and misaligned compensation practices drive behaviours to the 
detriment  of  consumers’  interest.  These  behaviours  cannot  be  allowed  to  proliferate  and 
ought  to  be  unacceptable  under  any  circumstances;  it  is  particularly  intolerable  when  it 
affects the most vulnerable segments of our society, whose wellbeing should be held in high 
priority  by  financial  institutions. In recent  years, financial  institutions  paid  a  heavy  price for 
indiscretions in terms of heavier fines and loss of reputation. Even institutions that have not 
been at the centre of misconduct have had to work substantially harder to maintain TRUST 
with their customers. 
Let  me  focus  on  three  key  areas  that  FSPs  should  strengthen  to  inspire  TRUST,  namely, 
instilling  the  right  corporate  culture,  inspiring  confidence  through  exceptional  customer 
service and assisting efforts to empower consumers. 
On instilling fair dealing into the core corporate culture 
First,  industry  players  must  ensure  that  strategies,  business  models  and  governance 
arrangements  are  aligned  with  their  underlying  culture,  shared  values  and  an  attitude  that 
place customers’ interests at the very core of the business model. Indeed, the true north of 
an organisation’s culture is often tested when there are no written rules to dictate behaviour. 
This can only be cultivated over time through a consistent demonstration and enforcement of 
intended  values  and  behaviours  in  every  aspect  of  its  business  and  operations.  In  this 
respect, it is critical that the Board and senior management ‘set the right tone’ from the top, 
and supplemented by incentive structures that reward appropriate behaviours. 
Strengthening public confidence in FSPs’ customer service 
Second, FSPs should strive and commit to exceptional customer service. This should define 
their value propositions. A few things come to mind; simplify procedures to speed up service 
delivery, ensure complaints are properly handled, and develop a feedback mechanism that 
consumers can use to channel their views and concerns. One key aspect that FSPs should 
consider  is  to  link  organisational  and  staff  performances  to  customers’  satisfaction  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  perceptions. We have learnt over the years that ultimately, a leading indicator of impending 
problems  faced  by  an  institution  often  started  with  abnormal  trends  in  the  number  of 
complaints received. 
As consumers ourselves, we should all agree on the rights of consumers to be treated with 
fairness,  dignity  and  respect.  This  is  the  very  reason  behind  the  Bank’s  efforts  to  invest 
significantly  in  strengthening  consumer  feedback  channels  and  ensuring  that  alternative 
avenues are available for consumers to resolve their disputes with financial institutions. 
In  Malaysia,  the  central  bank  is  pleased  that  all  financial  institutions  have  reciprocated  by 
creating a dedicated complaints units complemented by additional channels at the respective 
industry  associations,  BNM’s  LINK  and  the  Ombudsman  for  Financial  Services.  These 
additional channels also provide an important feedback loop for insights on financial sector 
developments that may be useful in shaping regulatory policies and supervisory priorities. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  handled  6,695  banking  and  insurance  complaints  in  2015,  a 
slight reduction compared to 7,197 in 2014. The Bank expects this number to come down 
further as FSPs enhance and improve their complaints handling practices. Bill Gates once 
said,  “Your  most  unhappy  customers  are  your  greatest  source  of  learning.”  FSPs  should 
mine  customers’  complaints  data  and  use  the  insights  to  explore  new  opportunities  to 
connect, learn and improve services, and build long-term relationships with customers. 
Moving forward, the Bank will consider publishing the outcome of the FSPs customer service 
index to generate long-term benefits for consumers who can make informed decisions and 
exercise their right of choice. 
Over time, the survey findings will drive industry’s performance by facilitating comparison and 
performance measurement. Competition will also drive players to up their game. 
Raising awareness on financial products and services 
Consumer  protection  is  however  not  a  one-sided  pursuit.  To  enjoy  protection,  consumers 
have to exercise some responsibilities too. Which brings me to a third point – it is equally 
important  to  empower  consumers  to  make  financial  decisions  that  are  well-informed, 
effective and responsible. 
Malaysia ranked relatively low among 30 countries that had participated in the OECD/INFE 
International  Survey  of  Adult  Financial  Literacy  Competencies.  The  survey  results 
corroborate the  Bank’s  own  findings  which  were  published  earlier  this  year  that  Malaysian 
consumers generally lack the capability to make good financial decisions. We are determined 
to improve this situation. Greater public and private sector collaboration is required to elevate 
the  financial  knowledge,  skills  and  behaviours  of  our  consumers.  When  consumers 
understand the characteristics of the financial products and transactions, they can make well-
informed decisions and know their rights and responsibilities. 
FSPs  also  stand  to  benefit  from  empowered  and  well-informed  consumers.  Greater 
participation  from  more  informed  consumers  will  increase  demand  for  financial  products, 
build competitiveness and promote alignment with consumer expectations. 
Enhancing  consumer  awareness  is  therefore  a  shared  responsibility,  one  that  the 
Ombudsman for Financial Services and FSPs should embrace as an important part in their 
engagements with the public at large. 
Conclusion 
A sound financial system is a central pillar for a thriving economy and for the betterment of 
society.  It  plays  a  catalytic  role  and  at  its  best, a financial  system  goes  beyond  managing 
risks  and  allocating  resources.  It  uncovers  and  creates  opportunities  and  facilitates 
entrepreneurship that creates value and drive innovation. And the higher the integrity of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  system, the more effective a force it will become to serve the public good. It is a symbiotic 
relationship that has always been built on TRUST. To uphold this TRUST is to preserve the 
functioning and advancement of our nation. 
The financial ombudsman scheme is an essential part of our overall efforts to nurture and 
deepen  this  TRUST.  It  is  this  precious  bond  with  society  that  will  ultimately  secure  the 
objectives of enhancing our societal growth, prosperity and wellbeing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
