Andreas Dombret: Banks navigating uncharted waters
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Instituto de Estudos de Politica Economica, Rio de Janeiro, 2 December 2016.
1. The world in uncharted territory
Ladies and gentlemen
 Do you remember where you were on the evening of November 8, 2016? It was a Tuesday, and
judging by the headlines in literally every major newspaper in the world on the day after, the world
was in a state of shock. The sentiment that dominated the greater part of media coverage of
the  USpresidential  election  was  also  apparent  in  social  media  and  in  personal  conversations
probably everyone in this room had in the days that followed.
The outcome of the US election has caused a great deal of uncertainty. How will the change of
government  affect  the  foreign  and  security  policy  of  the  United  States  of  America?  What
influence  will  it  have  on  trade,  regulatory  and  environmental  issues?  What  will  it  mean
for US relations with other regions, in particular Europe and Latin America?
As you know, the US presidential election was not the first vote that took markets and the public
by  surprise.  In  June  this  year,  UK  voters  left  Europe  astonished  as  they  voted  to  leave  the
European Union. Both decisions were taken in an already agitated situation in which the world is
facing terrorism and tension over security in several parts of the world. On a different front, it is
still  fighting  the  after-effects  of  the  worst  financial  and  economic  crisis  since  the  Great
Depression.
Looking ahead, we see more potential stumbling blocks. The Italian constitutional referendum will
be held next Sunday and the French presidential election in about five months from now, just to
name two of them.
All those past and future events have two things in common.
First, they actually change our world, or they have the potential to do so. Many expect this change
in society, politics and economics to be for the worse. While we can try to predict how exactly
the change will affect us, we have learned that such predictions are doomed to fail. In the end,
we have to cope with a certain degree of uncertainty – and at the moment, there is plenty of it.
Second,  these  various  events  can  tempt  us  to  look  for  easy  answers.  Being  confronted  with
multiple  issues  simultaneously,  each  complex  enough  in  itself,  can  be  overwhelming.  The
prevalence  of  over-simplification,  polarisation  and  populism  in  recent  political  campaigns  is  a
reflection of this desire for a simple solution.
2. Parallels to the financial world
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you are not wondering by now if you accidentally ended up in the
wrong room, listening to a talk about contemporary history, political science or sociology.
Because of what I have just described is also very relevant for my field of expertise – the banking
and financial sector. It is my impression that, like the world as a whole, the financial world is
currently going through its very own period of change and uncertainty, that it is struggling just as
much to cope with it, and that we are just as prone to the lure of easy answers.
  1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  this  context,  you  may  already  have  come  across  the  term  “the  new  normal  of  banking".  It
suggests that the sector has reached some kind of new equilibrium and that we have understood
what it characterises. First of all, I doubt that this is true. And second, to be honest, whenever I
hear this phrase I don’t even know exactly what is meant by it.
Therefore, I want to dedicate the remainder of my remarks to an overview of what I believe to be
the major developments in and challenges for the banking sector. I will also discuss possible
answers to these challenges. Coming from Deutsche Bundesbank, I will of course be doing this
from a European perspective. But in our discussion later on, I am eager to hear your views on,
and to learn from your experiences in the financial sector in Brazil and Latin America.
 3. Challenges for (European) banks
Let  me  start  with  a  challenge  I  have  already  mentioned:  the  pending  divorce  of  the  UK  and
the  EU.  I  have  mentioned  it  because  of  its  political  impact.  But  as  you  know,  it  has  strong
implications  for  the  financial  sector  as  well  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  Many  eyes  are  on  the
question  of  whether,  and  in  what  form,  the  UK  will  retain  access  to  the  single  market.  In  the
financial realm, the related question is whether financial firms in the UK will continue to benefit
from what we call “passporting". Currently, many international banks use London as a hub to
conduct business within the European Economic Area. But depending on the deal that will be
struck between the UK and the EU, passporting in its current form might end – and with it the
possibility to enter the European market through the UK. Another open question is whether the
City  of  London  will  still  be  in  a  position  to  clear  euro-denominated  swaps  and  other  euro-
denominated transactions once the UK has formally exited the EU.
These are just two of the most prominent examples of the regulatory uncertainty that is troubling
the  financial  sector  in  the  wake  of  the  UKreferendum.  Further  questions  such  as  the  free
movement of labour, goods and services affect the UK economy as a whole and with it all the
clients of banks.
Given that formal negotiations have not even started yet between the EUand the UK, there are
still plenty of plausible scenarios for their future relations, and thus for the environment banks will
have to operate in. This uncertainty surrounding Brexit will stay with the financial sector for some
time to come, and there is no easy way around it.
Let’s move on to the second issue, which concerns regulation more generally. Earlier this week, I
was  in  Santiago  de  Chile  to  meet  with  my  colleagues  from  the  Basel  Committee,  where  we
discussed details for completing Basel III. The rules based on this regulatory regime are currently
being  finalised  and  phased  in.  Important  aspects  of  the  current  negotiations  are  the  revisions
made to the level and the calculation of capital requirements.
The need to adapt to, and comply with these new requirements is imposing costs on banks and
causing  headaches  among  bank  managers.  This  holds  for  European  financial  institutions  in
particular. In comparison to Brazil, for example, the use of internal models for calculating risk-
weighted  assets  and  thus  capital  requirements  is  widespread  in  Europe.  Consequently,  any
changes  to  this  approach  –  as  currently  discussed  –  have  much  stronger  implications  for
European banks than for their counterparts elsewhere.
It is therefore crucial that the final result of our current negotiations will be regionally balanced and
does not undermine the risk-oriented approach of the Basel framework. The Committee was not
able to reach such an agreement yet. We will continue our negotiations with the goal of ending
regulatory  uncertainty  as  soon  as  possible. And  we  will  work  towards  finding  a  compromise
before the Committee’s oversight body – the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision – will
meet in January.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In parallel with reforming Basel III, in Europe we have established the banking union with a whole
new supervisory architecture at its core – the Single Supervisory Mechanism. This supervisory
mechanism is still relatively new territory for banks, as it has just recently celebrated its second
anniversary.
As  you  can  see,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  world  is  changing  significantly  and  rapidly  for
banks. Keeping up with these developments is a challenging task.
On top of that, we are currently seeing significant structural changes in the market environment
for banks. Two developments are decisive here.
On the one hand, digitalisation is rapidly transforming the banking business. While technology
has  always  played  a  prominent  role  in  banking,  the  speed  and  force  of  the  current  wave  of
digitalisation is unprecedented for European banks. Small FinTech start-ups as well as major
tech  giants  are  forcing  their  way  into  the  market,  for  example  by  providing  instant  payment
services with a speed and convenience unmatched by the traditional services that banks have on
offer. In parallel, technologies with the potential to disrupt individual business models are being
honed and refined, and made ready for the market.
In  contrast  to  some  banks  in  Europe,  most  Brazilian  banks  are  already  well-advanced  in
digitalising their business. Ironically, this is due to the fact that they mostly set up their IT later
than their European counterparts. This observation is very much at the heart of the challenge
posed by digitalisation: in the field of IT and digital services, it is not sufficient to put up a high
upfront investment in order to ensure quality that will last for years. Instead, you need to do both:
move early on and then continuously keep up with the pace of digital innovation. Only then can
you  ensure  both  –    IT  and  cyber  security  as  well  as  the  quality  necessary  to  satisfy  an
increasingly elusive customer base.
The  impact  of  digitalisation  on  the  financial  world  –  and  the  world  as  a  whole  –  cannot  be
overestimated. But there is a second structural challenge that is even more pressing for many
financial institutions. I am, of course, talking about the prolonged period of very low interest rates.
The low-interest-rate environment is a prime candidate for the lure of the easy answer. And the
seemingly easy answer is that low interest rates are the result of misguided monetary policy. But
this answer reflects a common misperception as to the root causes of the low rates.
The  downward  trend  in  long-term  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  across  the  world  has  been
visible  since  the  1990s.  This  trend  accelerated  after  2007  with  the  financial  crisis.  The
macroeconomic  literature  currently  discusses  a  number  of  structural  causes  as  potential
explanations. Without going into details on the research, there are indications that show that a
slowdown in global growth together with shifts in savings and investment behaviour, partly driven
by demographic change in industrial countries, have led to a fall in the price of capital. With the
financial  crisis  and  the  recession  that  followed,  the  fall  in  the  desired  levels  of  investment
together with expansionary monetary policy have pushed down rates even further.
In summary, not only are the very low interest rates influenced by central banks: they also reflect
an economic malaise in the global and in the euro-area economies.
Irrespective of their origin, the very low interest rates pose a serious challenge for profitability in
the  financial  sector.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  banks  whose  business  model  depends
heavily on net interest income. First of all, the margins derived from maturity transformation are
declining because of the very flat yield curve. And second, deposit-based refinancing which we
have always regarded as highly desirable as a stable source of funding, even in crisis periods,
becomes less attractive. This is because it is difficult to pass on negative rates to small private
depositors  in  a  very  competitive  market  and  when  depositors  always  have  the  alternative  of
hording cash.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite the low rates, net interest income hasn’t been affected much so far. But the pressure on
margins is going to mount over the medium term as outstanding loans are repaid and replaced
by lower-yielding ones.
A major risk associated with a low-interest-rate environment materialises when that spell comes
to  an  end.  In  this  scenario,  pre-tax  net  income  would  probably  suffer  a  short-term  slump,
especially if interest rates were to climb abruptly following a long period of low rates. In the short
term, this would lead to present-value losses. More importantly, as banks are by their very nature
engaged in the business of maturity transformation, a rise in interest rates will force them to roll
over their liabilities at higher interest rates. But the yields on their assets will still reflect the low-
rate environment.
Moreover, the longer banks have to cope with low interest rates, the more they are likely to take
risky assets onto their books. We can observe that banks are extending the average maturity on
the asset side, which is exposing them to more credit default and market risk.
At the same time, European banks are still holding significant amounts of non-performing loans
in their books. For the euro area as a whole, the stock of NPLs amounts to roughly 9% of euro-
area  GDP,  more  than  double  the  level  in  2009,  and  is  only  declining  slowly.  If  we  instead
measure the amount of NPLs relative to total loans, we get the so-called NPL ratio. This ratio
stands  at  5.5%  on  average  for  European  banks.  However,  we  can  see  a  strong  dispersion
of NPL ratios across countries. The highest NPL ratios are present in those member states that
were hit hardest by the economic crisis that followed the financial crisis after 2007.
The high stock of NPLs ties up operational capacity of the affected banks, it involves legal as well
as administrative costs, and it weighs on the capacity of those banks to extend new loans to
realise profits and to support economic recovery.
 4. How to cope
Ladies  and  gentleman,  the  financial  world  is  clearly  confronted  with  significant  change  and
uncertainty. And many in the financial world perceive this to be a change for the worse.
There are no easy solutions. The Brexit negotiations will take time and uncertainty will be with us
just as long. Turning back regulatory achievements to provide relief from a perceived burden is
not an option. As for the challenges posed by digitalisation, sticking to business as usual will not
suffice. The same is true for the low-interest-rate environment: hoping for relief from a change in
monetary policy won’t be enough.
Clearly, banks need to adapt, and indeed they have already begun. Any long-term strategy for
profitable  banking  needs  to  be  built  on  its  value  added  for  customers,  business  partners  and
society.
In times like these, supervisors need to be especially vigilant in monitoring financial institutions
and ensuring that they do not take on excessive risks. What supervisors will not do is attempt to
be management consultants for banks.
Difficult though the times may be, and however numerous and complex the problems may seem,
it’s important to keep a clear mind and a steady hand.
Having a holistic and encompassing understanding of the current challenges does not mean that
there are broad encompassing solutions available. We will succeed only if we refrain from falling
for sweeping answers that promise to solve all the issues at once. That’s why it’s so important to
have  institutes  like  the  IEPE  that  enable  us  to  get  together  and  thoroughly  discuss  both  the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
challenges and the strategies needed to overcome them. And I am looking forward to having this
conversation with you now.
If  we  approach  and  tackle  our  current  problems  one  by  one,  we  will  see  that  any  change  is
manageable – both in the financial and in the real world.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
