  17.11.2016 
 Challenges facing the retail banking sector 
Remarks at the dinner event organised by the European Savings and Retail 
Banking Group (ESBG), Madrid 
Fernando Restoy 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good evening.  
 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  event  and  to  address  this 
eminent group of bankers. I am grateful to Isidro Fainé and José María Méndez for inviting 
me.  I  hope  that  you  have  now  got  your  breath  back  and  recomposed  yourselves  after 
viewing Picasso’s impressive and to some extent disheartening masterpiece, Guernica. You 
certainly need a strong mind to discuss banking issues nowadays. 
 
I  imagine  that  probably  much  of  the  agenda  of  your  regular  meetings  is  devoted  to 
exchanging  experiences  on  how  financial  institutions  such  as  those  participating  in  the 
European Savings and Retail Banking Group (ESBG) are addressing the current challenges 
affecting the entire financial sector in the current post-crisis period. Allow me to attempt to 
make a modest contribution to that discussion.  
 
I would like to say from the outset that I do not believe that the financial crisis, as such, has 
challenged any specific business model. We have seen institutions with quite different sizes, 
governance structures and business orientations failing all around the world. The crisis has 
affected both investment and commercial banks as well as wholesale and retail businesses. 
Indeed, I would subscribe to the idea that, by and large, the crisis does not provide clear 
arguments with which to question a particular business model or line of activities, such as 
retail  intermediation,  wealth  management  or  investment  services.  It  does  however 
encourage us to analyse whether those banking activities are conducted in a  sufficiently 
efficient way by specific institutions so as to make them profitable. 
 
That  said,  pure  European  retail  banks  admittedly  face  specific  challenges  in  the  current 
environment, which need to be effectively addressed in order to preserve the social function 
that those institutions provide. Let me mention three of the most obvious challenges. 
 
First, the low interest rate environment, which is putting heavy pressure on financial margins, 
particularly  for  institutions  –such  as  most  of  those  belonging  to  the  ESBG  -  with  little 
investment in securities that could be revalued as rates go down, and with much funding 
obtained  from  retail  deposits,  which  impedes  a  full  transmission  of  very  low  or  negative 
market rates to funding costs. 
 
Second, the accumulation of non-performing loans in several regions of the euro zone.  
This  is  particularly  a  challenge  for  banks,  again  mostly  retail  banks,  with  a  significant 
concentration of exposures in a single country or even a single region subject to a subdued 
macroeconomic performance in the recent past. 
 
Third,  regulation.  Banks  are  now  facing  new  requests  to  raise  more  and  better-quality 
capital. More importantly, significant institutions will have to hold on their balance sheets 
substantial volumes of liabilities that could be subject to bail-in. Clearly, those retail banks 
with little or no tradition in issuing capital and other securities in capital markets will have 
particular difficulties coping with the enhanced regulatory framework. 
 
Admittedly, though, the corporate structure of many retail banks -particularly those which 
are not yet regular corporations listed in capital markets - may face less immediate pressure 
to restore higher profitability levels. That may allow them to buy some time. 
 3/5 
  
Yet, low sustained profitability is often a symptom of vulnerability and, certainly, of inefficient 
allocation of the resources employed in the banking business. 
 
There is therefore a need to reflect on the best way to strengthen retail banks, to make them 
better  able  to  cope  with  the  new  macroeconomic  and  regulatory  conditions  without 
damaging the social benefits associated with their activity.  
 
It  would  be  unsound  to  try  to  establish  specific  strategies  with  the  pretention  to  be 
unconditionally applied in all circumstances. However, I see some difficulties for numerous 
retail banks in adapting to the low-profitability and tighter regulatory environment if they are 
not  able  to  increase  their  ability  to  compete with  banking  corporations  in  terms  of  cost-
efficiency, business diversification and access to capital markets. Some transformation of 
the retail and, in particular, the saving banking sector therefore seems unavoidable in order 
to meet the target. We, in Spain, have already taken some steps in that direction.  
 
As you well know, in response to the financial crisis, measures were taken along different 
lines, which helped solve the main shortcomings affecting the Spanish banking sector at 
that moment in time and positioned it in a good starting point for the implementation of the 
SSM.  
 
In addition to measures taken to reduce the level of exposure to real estate development 
and  to  drive  greater  consolidation  in  the  sector,  a  major  effort  was  made  in  the  field  of 
recapitalisation, which went beyond the actions taken by public authorities. Since 2008, the 
sector has set aside new provisions for outstanding loans or foreclosures for approximately 
€300  billion.  And,  after  absorbing  this  substantial  balance  sheet  clean-up  into  results  or 
reserves,  banks  have  managed  to  increase  their  own  funds  by  approximately  €70  billion 
over the same period.  
 
However, a key part of the reform was the overhaul of the regulatory framework of the saving 
banks’ sector, which represented almost half of the Spanish banking system.  
 
As you are aware, this reform aimed at separating the ownership of the banking institutions 
from  their  management.  Former  saving  banks  (except  for  two  small  institutions)  have  all 
become banking foundations whose main asset is the participation in credit institutions. The 
latter  are  managed  independently  of  the  foundation  and  take  the  form  of  regular 
corporations which, in most cases, are or will soon be listed in capital markets. Moreover, 
the  Law  incorporates  a  number  of  incentives  for  foundations  to  relinquish  control  of  the 
banks in which they participate, something that will normally happen in most cases in less 
than four years. 
 
We  believe  that  this  approach  will  certainly  promote  better  business  management  and 
facilitate access to capital markets. In doing so it will contribute to a smoother adjustment 
by saving banks to the new and very demanding environment, thereby contributing to the 
strength of the institutions themselves and to financial stability. 
 
But more importantly, the highly relevant social objectives of the cajas are fully preserved 
through  the  operation  of  the  foundations.  These  foundations  continue  to  contribute  very 
4/5 
  significantly  to  social  welfare.  It  is  just  that  the  foundations´  wealth  will  now  be  more 
diversified  and,  therefore,  they  are  likely  to  obtain  a  more  robust  stream  of  income  with 
which to finance their activities.  
 
Of course, I would not dare claim that this formula be pursued everywhere. Other reform 
strategies  may  also  work  in  other  jurisdictions.  Yet,  I  strongly  believe  that  some  form  of 
restructuring is required in the European banking market and that the strategy followed in 
Spain is a reasonable response to the new challenges all credit institutions have to face 
while preserving the essence of the social value that saving banks have historically provided.  
Thank you for your attention.  
  5/5 
