Benoît Cœuré: Strengthening the Greek financial system
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at a public hearing at the European Parliament, Brussels, 12 October 2016.
 Thank you for inviting me to this meeting of the Financial Assistance Working Group.
I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the dialogue between our institutions on the euro
area  macroeconomic  adjustment  programmes.  In  recent  years,  this  topic  has  indeed  been
frequently  discussed  here  by  the  ECB  President  and  other  ECB  Executive  Board  Members,
including myself. We have also responded publicly to the many questions you have sent us in
writing. Maintaining an open discussion with you as the representatives of the people of Europe is
very important, given the advisory role in the field of surveillance and programme assessment
conferred upon the ECB by EU legislators  and by the ESM Treaty.
1
You asked me to discuss in particular the third adjustment programme in Greece from the ECB’s
perspective. Let me therefore base my short introductory remarks on the following three points.
First, I will recall the challenging situation in summer 2015 when the third Greek programme was
negotiated. Against this backdrop, and this will be my second point, I will review the progress
made in the third programme. Finally, I will discuss the challenges ahead and emphasise the
importance of a continued collective commitment for the success of the programme.
In my remarks today, I will mainly focus on financial issues, as I believe this is where the ECB’s
advice is of particular relevance.
The situation at the start of the third Greek programme
Let  me  briefly  recall  the  circumstances  in  which  the  third  ESM  programme  for  Greece  was
negotiated. This indeed remains key to understanding where we are now.
After  the  severe  and  long  recession,  which  started  in  2009,  the  long-awaited  rebound  of  the
Greek economy got under way in the second half of 2014.
However, following the announcement of new parliamentary elections at the end of December
2014,  economic  conditions  started  to  rapidly  deteriorate.  Increased  policy  and  political
uncertainty, partial reversals of previous reforms, the rejection of existing commitments by the
new  government  and  the  lack  of  a  prospect  of  continued  financial  assistance  under  a
programme led to a worsening of the economic environment and of sovereign creditworthiness.
This in turn had a strong impact on an already severely weakened financial sector.
In particular, between December 2014 and June 2015, deposit outflows amounted to more than a
quarter  of  total  deposits.  Lack  of  adherence  to  the  second  programme  no  longer  allowed  the
ECB, under its rules, to waive its minimum credit requirements and accept Greek government-
linked securities as collateral in its monetary policy operations. Nevertheless, the Eurosystem
provided all the liquidity necessary for the Greek economy to function, with adequate safeguards
against monetary financing of the government. As a result, central bank funding rose from €56
billion  to  over  €125  billion,  more  than  two-thirds  of  Greece’s  gross  domestic  product,
demonstrating our commitment to the Greek economy.
By the end of June, uncertainty and concerns about the economic policies of the government
were  mounting,  culminating  in  the  announcement  of  the  referendum  on  5  July  2016.  The
introduction  of  bank  holidays  and  capital  controls  in  late  June  had  eased  immediate  liquidity
pressures, but further impaired economic activity.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In such an environment, once the third programme had been agreed by the Greek authorities and
their  euro  area  partners,  one  of  the  immediate  priorities  was  to  regain  depositor  and  market
confidence in the Greek banking system.
To this end, a comprehensive assessment was conducted of the four significant Greek banks
between August  and  October  2015  by  the  supervisory  arm  of  the  ECB.  It  was  followed  by  a
successful recapitalisation exercise. The identified capital shortfall was largely covered by private
funds, while the reliance on public funds was limited to €4.5 billion.
Measuring progress so far
The conclusion of the programme negotiations and the successful recapitalisation of the banking
system led to a stabilisation of economic conditions.
Real GDP in 2015 turned out to be only slightly negative, but more than one percentage point
better  than  expected  after  the  imposition  of  capital  controls.  The  stabilisation  of  output  was
supported by the resilience of private consumption, positive net exports and an acceleration of
public investment at the end of the year.
The achievement of the primary budget balance target for end-2015 was supported by a series of
important policy actions, especially on the revenue side.
Supporting and at the same time benefiting from the macroeconomic stabilisation, the situation in
the Greek banking sector has also gradually improved during the first year of the programme,
although it has not yet regained the ground lost in the first half of 2015.
Following the recapitalisation in October 2015, the aggregated CET1 ratio for the four significant
Greek institutions increased from 11.2% in September 2015 to 17.9% in June 2016. While the
ratios may appear high compared with the European banking sector average, they provide the
necessary capital buffers to properly address the elevated risk profile of Greek banks.
Nevertheless, restoring the capital position of Greek banks represented only the first step of a
more comprehensive reform plan to restore confidence in Greek banks. Over the past months
the  focus  has  been  on  the  resolution  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  and  on  improving  bank
governance. The non-performing exposure (NPE) ratio of Greek banks is very high (49% in June
2016), the second highest in the euro area, after Cyprus. Its reduction is a key precondition for
gradually  restoring  an  adequate  and  efficient  supply  of  credit  to  the  Greek  economy,  and  for
achieving sustained growth.
Some important legislative reforms in this direction have already been passed. For instance, the
household  insolvency  law  was  amended  to  ensure  that  banks  can  take  legal  steps  against
strategic defaulters and that debtors make payments in line with their ability to pay. And the Code
of  Conduct  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  provides  guidelines  on  the  interaction  between  banks  and
debtors in arrears. The authorities have also adopted legislation that liberalises NPL servicing for
all loan categories, and provided a framework for the sales of loans. In addition, banks have set
up  comprehensive  strategies,  including  detailed  operational  measures  and  actions,  prioritised
and scheduled, as well as numerical targets to significantly reduce their NPE stocks over the
coming years.
Banks are also reshaping their governance structures in compliance with new Greek regulations
and  international  regulations  and  guidelines.  While  the  process  is  still  ongoing,  considerable
progress has already been made in the review of boards of directors. Strict application of the
criteria  set  under  Greek  law  will  be  key  to  increase  the  knowledge,  relevant  experience  and
independence of bank directors.
The policy actions I have outlined have already started to show effects. Since the imposition of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the capital controls in Greece in June 2015, the liquidity position of Greek banks has improved,
albeit  at  a  slow  pace.  Deposits  have  increased  slightly  and  banks  have  regained  access  to
market funding based on high-quality collateral. Dependence on central bank funding has been
reduced to about €78 billion.
Working together towards the same goal
While the conclusion of the first review constitutes a first major step in safeguarding financial
stability,  preparing  the  ground  for  a  sustainable  economic  recovery  and  regaining  access  to
international capital markets, let me be very clear: more is yet to be done. The mere fact that
bank deposits linger at about three-quarters of their level of late 2014 shows that the return of
confidence is still gradual.
The important challenges Greece still faces can only be addressed by a steady implementation
of the agreed policies and strong political support from all stakeholders.
From a financial point of view, let me emphasise two key deliverables of the forthcoming second
review which aim to further reduce structural impediments to the swift and effective resolution of
the large amount of NPLs I already mentioned.
The  first  is  the  overhaul  of  the  out-of-court  workout  framework,  whose  main  objective  is  to
provide sufficient incentives for creditors and debtors to participate in a mutually advantageous
scheme.
The  second  deliverable  is  the  development  of  the  corporate  insolvency  code  to  support  the
restructuring  of  the  Greek  non-financial  sector  and  overcome  possible  obstructions  by
uncooperative shareholders.
In addition to these legislative changes, the Greek authorities need to fully implement the agreed
measures  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  judicial  system  to  substantially  shorten  legal
proceedings and enhance the competence of the courts.
These requirements are not specific to Greece and experience has shown that throughout the
euro area, NPL resolution requires strong legal frameworks. While these reforms are essential to
support  the  financial  sector,  action  is  also  required  on  the  other  three  pillars  which  form  the
foundations  of  the  third  programme:  first,  improving  the  fiscal  position,  second,  restoring
sustained and sustainable growth via a number of reforms, and third, introducing a modern state
and public administration and a well-targeted social security system.
All  stakeholders  in  the  Greek  adjustment  programme  realise  that  there  are  serious  concerns
about the sustainability of Greek public debt. As you are all well aware, a discussion is currently
ongoing in the Eurogroup on the short-term, medium-term and long-term measures needed to
secure the sustainability of Greek debt. We are looking forward to a solution that can reassure
markets, restore confidence in the dynamics of public debt, allow the full involvement of the IMF
in  the  programme  –  which  would  enhance  the  programme’s  credibility  –  and  restore  market
access for Greece ahead of the end of the programme in July 2018, while not undermining the
reform effort.
To bring the programme to a successful conclusion and to restore market access on a lasting
basis, it is above all essential that the Greek authorities continue to show a serious commitment
to the goals and measures taken in the context of the programme. Only if this happens can all
stakeholders be confident that reforms will not be reversed and, instead, will be strengthened in
the aftermath of the programme, therefore further supporting the potential for growth of the Greek
economy.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
I have traced the progress achieved so far and mapped the challenges ahead for the third Greek
adjustment programme. A year ago, European leaders agreed on a set of measures that will
secure Greece’s future in the euro. If everyone plays their part, I am firmly convinced that at the
end of the programme, Greece will be better able to reap the benefits of Economic and Monetary
Union  –  a  Union  of  340  million  people  sharing  the  same  currency  –  and  its  economy  will  be
stronger and more resilient.
We should not forget, nevertheless, what else we can do to make Greece stronger in a stronger
Europe. Let me be clear: Europe will not address matters of pressing concern such as security
or migration without a strong and sustainable economy. A lot still needs to be done to make our
Economic and Monetary Union stronger.
The  ECB  is  committed  to  playing  its  role  as  the  central  bank  for  the  euro  area,  and  thus  for
Greece.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your questions.
1
The ECB’s role in surveillance is enshrined in EU secondary legislation (‘two-pack’ Regulation (Regulation (EU)
472/2013).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
