   Reflections on monetary policy in the euro area 
at the current juncture 
  Address by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Luigi Federico Signorini 
        Bank of Italy workshop on 
“Unconventional monetary policy: effectiveness and risks”  
 Rome, 21 October 2016  
  It is a pleasure to welcome you to the Banca d’Italia for this one-day workshop on 
‘Unconventional monetary policy: effectiveness and risks’. I understand that you have a 
full agenda, with  nine  dense and thought-provoking  papers packed into a single day.  I 
will keep my remarks very brief. 
Your discussions today are sure to be policy-relevant and timely. The Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  asserted,  most  recently  yesterday,  that  the  asset 
purchase programme (APP) will continue at the current pace of purchases until at least 
March  2017,  or  possibly  beyond  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing 
Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  target. 
Properly  measuring  the  effects  of  the  APP  is  therefore  a  priority  for  the  euro  area 
monetary policymakers. 
 The Eurosystem’s expanded APP has been in place for almost two years, exerting 
clear  and  sizeable  downward  pressure  on  government  bond  and  other  financial  asset 
yields; these, in turn, have had favourable effects on private sector financing conditions.  
Monetary  policy  on  its  own  cannot  produce  growth.  It  can,  however,    create 
favourable  conditions  for  a  cyclical  upturn;  it  may  facilitate  the  adoption  of  other 
measures,  such  as  structural  reforms,  by  limiting  the  negative  short-run  impact  that  is 
sometime associated with them.  
As  a  joint  outcome  of  the  APP  and  the  other  extraordinarily  expansionary 
measures recently adopted by the Eurosystem, the cost of bank loans is now historically 
low and, even more importantly, the dispersion of lending rates across countries is once 
again  close  to  the  levels  prevailing  in  the  pre-crisis  period.  This  helps  to  preserve  the 
integrity  of  the  monetary  union.  Still,  almost  ten  years  after  the  onset  of  the  financial 
crisis and five years after the start of the sovereign debt crisis, the slack in the euro-area 
economy persists.  
A  number  of  questions  are  being  raised  on  the  functioning  of  the  expansionary 
measures  recently  adopted  by  the  Eurosystem.  How  does  the  transmission  mechanism 
work when the economy is at the lower bound of the interest rates? Might the working 
of  those  measures  be  impaired  after  some  time?  What  are  the  interactions  with  other 
developments, such as commodity prices, financial regulation, legacy assets in banking, 
and  conditions  in  the  world  economy?  Could  specific  monetary  policy  measures 
adopted by the ECB weaken the transmission mechanism by negatively affecting banks’ 
 2 
profits and capital accumulation and hence lower the incentives for banks to engage in 
lending activities?  
Many  factors  are  at work, and disentangling the  impact  of the APP  from that of 
other  measures  is  of  capital  importance  in  informing  the  monetary  policymakers’ 
decisions.  Yet,  it  is  no  easy  task;  and  that  is  why  solid,  in-depth  analysis,  looking  at 
these  issues  from  different  angles  and  with  different  tools,  is  surely  needed.  The  first 
part of today’s workshop will provide several interesting papers which attempt at doing 
that.  
 The  second  half  will  deal  with  another  question  that  is  being  asked  in  the 
monetary  policy  debate,    namely  whether  the  current,  extraordinarily  expansionary 
monetary policy stance  is  inducing excessive  risk-taking and thereby  possibly igniting 
tomorrow’s financial crises.  
Low  interest  rates  and  yields  make  investors  inclined  to  search-for-yield  and 
embark  on  riskier  investment  strategies.  Up  to  a  point,  this  is  not  an  unintended 
consequence of the current monetary policy measures, but actually part of the hoped-for 
transmission  mechanism.  Portfolio  rebalancing  is  a  key  component  of  the  mechanism 
that is expected to transmit the APP to the real economy.  
It is conceivable, however, that this may eventually go too far  and the amount of 
risk-taking induced by the Eurosystem’s monetary policy exceeds what  is  optimal and 
results  in  more  costs  than  benefits.  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  evidence  that  this  is 
happening so far at the aggregate level. There are localized tensions, particularly in the 
property  market  in  certain  member  states;  these  need  to  be  tackled,  and  are  being 
tackled, by macroprudential measures.  
Opinions  on  the  respective  roles  of  monetary  policy  and  macro  prudential  tools 
differ,  as  is  perhaps  natural  given  that  macro-prudential  policy  is  still  in  its  infancy; 
more research on these topics is therefore welcome.  
 Looking  at  today’s  impressive  collection  of  papers,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
workshop  will  go  a  long  way  towards  providing  us  with  answers  to  many  of  the 
questions  I  listed.  I  very  much  look  forward  to  hearing  about  your  findings  and  the 
outcome of your discussions. 
 Before the presentations begin, I would like to thank all those that contributed to 
this  workshop,  both  from  the  Banca  d’Italia  and  from  other  national  central  banks  of 
 3 
ESCB or academia.  I  wish  you all a most successful workshop, and a pleasant  stay in 
Rome and at the Banca d’Italia. 
  4 
