Ravi Menon: Singapore's FinTech journey - where we are, what is
next
Speech  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the
Singapore FinTech Festival - FinTech Conference, Singapore, 16 November 2016.
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning and welcome to the inaugural Singapore FinTech Festival.
We have more than 11,000 participants from more than 50 countries, attending one or more
of the many events lined up over these five days.
Technologies Transforming Finance
Financial technology or FinTech is transforming financial services, in a way not seen before.
We  have  unprecedented mobility.  The  smartphone  is  becoming  our  bank.    People  can
consume financial services on the go.
We  have  unprecedented connectivity.  The  Internet  has  compressed  time  and  space. 
Interaction is real-time and unconstrained by physical boundaries.
We have unprecedented computing power. The devices in our hands or on our wrists are
literally pokemons  –  pocket-sized  monsters  that  pack  more  data  and  more  processing
power than super computers just a couple of decades ago.
Digital  payments  are  becoming  more  widespread,  propelled  by  advances  in  near-field
communications, identity authentication, digital IDs, and biometrics.
Blockchains or distributed ledgers are being tested for a wide variety of financial operations, to
make them faster, more robust, more efficient:
to settle interbank payments;
to verify and reconcile trade finance invoices;
to execute, enforce, and verify the performance of contracts;
to keep an audit trail and deter money laundering.
Perhaps the biggest potential is in what is called Big Data.  We are beginning to aggregate and
analyse large data sets to:
gain richer insights into customer behaviour and needs;
detect fraud or anomalies in financial transactions;
sharpen surveillance of market trends and emerging risks.
Big data is in turn being driven by advances in:
sensor  networks  and  natural  language  processing  to  gather  information  from  a  wide
universe of sources;
cloud technologies to store and retrieve large volumes of information at low cost and on-
demand;
learning machines and smart algorithms that can continuously adapt and improve on their
decision making with every iteration.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Smart Financial Centre Vision
Be it countries, businesses, or people – those who are alert to technology trends, understand
their implications, and harness their potential will gain a competitive edge. 
To be sure, many of these technologies are disruptive to existing jobs and existing business
models.
But if we do not disrupt ourselves – in a manner we choose – somebody else will – in a
manner we will not like.
Last year, MAS laid out a vision for a Smart Financial Centre, where innovation is pervasive and
technology is used widely.
Since  then,  MAS  has  been  working  closely  with  the  financial  industry,  FinTech  start-ups,  the
institutes  of  higher  learning  and  other  stakeholders  towards  this  shared  vision.    MAS’  role  in
supporting this FinTech journey is two-fold: 
provide regulation conducive to innovation while fostering safety and security; and
facilitate infrastructure for an innovation ecosystem and adoption of new technologies.
REGULATION Conducive to Innovation
Let me start with a couple of general principles underlying our approach to FinTech regulation.
First, we believe regulation must not front-run innovation.
Introducing regulation prematurely may stifle innovation and potentially derail the adoption of
useful technology.
But the regulator must run alongside innovation. 
It  is  important  to  keep  pace  with  what  is  going  on,  assess  what  the  risks  might  be,  and
continually evaluate whether it is necessary to regulate or leave things to evolve further. 
Second, we apply a materiality and proportionality test.
This means regulation comes in only when the risk posed by the new technology becomes
material or crosses a threshold.
And the weight of regulation must be proportionate to the risk posed.
Third, we focus on the balance of risks posed by new technologies or solutions.
Many technologies mitigate existing risks but may create new ones.
The  regulatory  approach  must  seek  to  incentivise  the  risk  mitigation  aspects  while
restraining the new risks.
Let me illustrate our approach to the regulation of FinTech with a few concrete initiatives:
Activity-based regulation to keep pace with payments innovations.
Specific guidelines to promote secure cloud computing.
Enabling digital financial advice and insurance.
A regulatory sandbox to test innovative ideas.
Strengthening cyber security.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Activity-Based Regulation for Payments
Some of the most visible FinTech innovations are taking place in the payments space. 
They are making payments cheaper, faster, better – delighting consumers and giving the
banks a run for their money. 
But  many  of  these  e-wallet  solutions  are  currently  caught  under  two  separate  pieces  of
regulation in Singapore.
MAS will streamline the licensing of payments services under a single, activity-based modular
framework.  This means:
holding just one licence to conduct different kinds of payment activities;
meeting only those regulations pertinent to the specific payments activities they undertake,
rather than the full gamut of payments regulations;
adhering to common standards for consumer protection and cyber security.
Guidelines to Promote Secure Cloud Computing
There used to be a view within some quarters that “MAS does not like the cloud”.  Lest there be
any lingering doubt, let me reiterate: MAS has no objections to FIs using the cloud.
Cloud  computing  provides  economies  of  scale,  enhances  operational  efficiencies,  and
delivers potential cost savings.
In  fact,  a  secure  cloud  infrastructure  is  an  enabler  for  a  variety  of  FinTech  innovations,
including banking-as-a-service (BaaS) platforms.
To put its money where its mouth is, MAS set out earlier this year specific guidelines on the use
of cloud services by FIs. 
FIs are free to adopt private clouds, public clouds, or a combination of these to create hybrid
clouds.
But  some  of  the  distinguishing  features  of  clouds  –  such  as  multi-tenancy,  data
commingling,  and  processing  in  multiple  locations  –  can  potentially  pose  issues  for  data
confidentiality and recoverability.
And so we expect FIs to conduct the necessary due diligence and apply sound governance
and risk management practices to address potential vulnerabilities.
Enabling Digital Financial Advice and Insurance
The digital offering of financial advice and insurance is becoming more popular, catering to the
needs of a growing segment of technology-savvy, self-directed consumers.
MAS’ regulatory framework for financial advice is technology-agnostic.
But we need to update it to make it easier for consumers to benefit from the lower cost and
greater choice that digital advice and insurance can potentially provide.
While at the same time ensuring adequate safeguards for these consumers.
Automated, algorithm-based digital advice on financial or investment services by robo-advisers
has taken off in the United States and will soon reach our shores.
MAS  will  soon  set  out  proposals  on  the  governance,  supervision,  and  management  of
algorithms for robo-advisers to ensure integrity and robustness in the delivery of financial
advice.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
We will consult the industry before finalising the guidance.
In  insurance,  MAS  already  allows  insurers  to  offer  online  without  advice  simple  term  life  and
direct purchase policies with broadly standardised features.
MAS will now allow insurers to offer the full suite of life insurance products online without
advice.
MAS will be issuing guidance on the safeguards to be put in place for online distribution of life
insurance products.
Regulatory Sandbox to Test Innovative Ideas
In June this year, MAS launched a regulatory sandbox for financial institutions as well as new
FinTech players to test their innovations. The sandbox serves two purposes:
First,  it  allows  experiments  to  take  place,  even  where  it  is  not  possible  at  the  outset  to
anticipate every risk or meet every regulatory requirement. 
Second, it provides an environment where if an experiment fails, it fails safely and cheaply
within controlled boundaries, without widespread adverse consequences.
How will the sandbox work?
MAS and the applicant will jointly define the boundaries within which the experiment will take
place.
MAS will then determine the specific legal and regulatory requirements which it is prepared
to relax for the duration of the experiment within these boundaries.
We have received several sandbox applications since June, from FIs and FinTech players.
The  proposals  leverage  a  range  of  technologies  including  distributed  ledgers,  machine
learning, and big data analytics. 
MAS  is  reviewing  the  applications  and  looks  forward  to  having  some  of  these  proposals
launched in the sandbox soon.
Meanwhile,  we  will  be  issuing  today  our  finalised  regulatory  sandbox  guidelines,  incorporating
feedback  from  the  industry  and  road-tested  against  the  actual  sandbox  applications  we  have
received.
Strengthening Cyber Security
A smart financial centre must be a safe financial centre.
As more financial services are delivered over the Internet, there will be growing security and
privacy concerns from cyber threats.
Users will have confidence in new technologies and innovative services only to the extent
they have confidence in cyber security.
Strengthening cyber security is therefore an important part of Singapore’s FinTech agenda. MAS
works closely with other government agencies and the industry to help ensure cyber-defences
are robust.
Given the interconnectedness of financial activities and systems, an effective cyber defence
strategy requires close co-operation and sharing of cyber intelligence.
A  good  model  for  such  co-operation  among  banks  in  the  US  is  the  Financial  Services  –
Information Sharing and Analysis Centre, or FS-ISAC.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is the global financial industry’s go-to resource for cyber threat intelligence analysis and
sharing.
I am pleased to announce that FS-ISAC will set up in Singapore the industry body’s only cyber
intelligence centre in the Asia-Pacific region. 
This centre will help  our  financial  industry  better  monitor  cyber  threats  and  provide  better
intelligence support.
It will also help deepen the capabilities of the cyber security community here.
INFRASTRUCTURE for an Innovation Ecosystem
The second key thrust of Singapore’s FinTech agenda is to facilitate the infrastructure necessary
for an innovation ecosystem and the adoption of new technologies. 
We need an ecosystem where people can connect and collaborate, and ideas can flow and
multiply.
We need common standards and inter-operable systems so that innovations can be scaled
up quickly and their potential benefits fully realised.
W  want  a  hundred  flowers  of  innovation  to  bloom  but  also  want  to  ensure  they  make  a
garden.
To facilitate such an ecosystem, MAS started with itself:
Last year, we formed within MAS a new FinTech & Innovation Group under a Chief FinTech
Officer – probably the first regulator in the world to do so.  The Group’s task is to work with
the  financial  industry  and  FinTech  players  and  help  foster  a  conducive  ecosystem  for
innovation.
MAS  has  committed  S$225  million  (or  US$160  million)  over  five  years  to  support  the
development of a vibrant FinTech ecosystem.
Earlier this year, MAS and the National Research Foundation (NRF) set up a FinTech Office
to provide a one-stop point-of-contact for all FinTech matters. 
– If you are a FinTech company interested in finding out what are the grants and assistance
schemes  available  in  Singapore  or  connecting  with  relevant  government  agencies  to
expedite approvals – this is the Office to go to.
Creating the infrastructure for an innovation ecosystem is a shared responsibility and joint effort. 
MAS plays the role of a facilitator, the real work is done by the financial industry and the FinTech
community coming together to collaborate and create.
Let me highlight the exciting infrastructure initiatives underway:
Physical spaces for collaboration and experimentation.
Infrastructure for electronic payments.
A national “know-your-customer” utility.
A blockchain infrastructure for cross-border inter-bank payments.
An open API architecture.
Physical Spaces for Collaboration and Experimentation
A  basic  element  of  the  FinTech  infrastructure  is  having  physical  spaces  that  facilitate
collaboration and partnerships among different players.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Just last week, we saw the launch of LATTICE80, Singapore’s first FinTech innovation village.
LATTICE80 offers dedicated physical space in the heart of Singapore financial district for
FinTech  start-ups  to  work,  connect,  and  co-create  with  the  financial  industry  and  VC
investors.
More than 20 global FIs have set up innovation centres here.  You would have seen during the
Innovation Lab Crawl earlier this week some of the exciting things they are experimenting with:
digital health solutions tapping on wearable devices;
telematics for motor insurance;
blockchains to streamline payments;
big data to produce customised service offerings.
MAS itself has set up an innovation lab – called Looking Glass. It aims to:
spur collaboration among MAS, FIs, start-ups, and technologists; and
facilitate consultations for start-ups by industry experts on legal, regulatory, and business-
related matters.
Infrastructure for Electronic Payments: UPOS, CAS
We have a world-class infrastructure for electronic payments.
It is a 24/7, real-time inter-bank fund transfer system.
We call it FAST; short for Fast and Secure Transfers.
But  FAST  is  grossly  under-utilised  and  Singapore  is  still  heavily  dependent  on  cash  and
cheques as means of payments. 
The  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  is  working  on  two  key  initiatives  to  make  electronic
payments seamless and convenient for everyone.
First,  a Central Addressing  Scheme  (CAS)  that  will  allow  you  to  pay  anyone  using  that
person’s  mobile  number,  national  ID  number,  email  address,  or  any  other  social  media
address, without the need to know the recipient’s bank or bank account number.
Second,  a Unified Point-of-Sale  (UPOS)  terminal  that  will  allow  a  merchant  to  accept  all
major card brands, including those that are contactless or embedded in smartphones.
A National KYC Utility
Knowing the identity of a customer – or KYC – is one of the biggest pain points in the financial
industry. 
The process is costly and laborious, and hugely duplicative. 
The  pain  is  pervasive  because  KYC  and  identity  authentication  are  involved  in  so  many
financial  services,  from  opening  a  bank  account  to  making  a  payment  to  making  an
insurance claim.
We need an infrastructure solution to this problem.
Singapore is in the process of creating a national KYC utility. 
Now, obviously this involves several layers of identity verification depending on the purpose
of the transaction, the extent of information involved, and the degree of rigour required.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The basic building block is the MyInfo service, jointly developed by the Ministry of Finance and
GovTech, the lead agency for digital and data strategy in Singapore.
MyInfo is a personal data platform, containing government-verified personal details, e.g. the
national ID number, residential address, and so on.
MyInfo  enables  residents  to  provide  their  personal  data  just  once  to  the  government,  and
retrieve their personal details for all subsequent online transactions with the government.
MAS is partnering MOF and GovTech to embark on a pilot that will expand the MyInfo service to
the financial industry for more efficient KYC using trusted government collected personal data.
No more tedious form-filling and providing hardcopy documents for manual verification by
the FI.
No  more  data  entry  errors.    Higher  productivity  for  the  FI  and  greater  convenience  for
customers.
The government will run a MyInfo pilot with two banks in Q1 2017, before scaling it up to
other FIs progressively.
•  And  beyond  MyInfo,  we  have  to  think  of  more  advanced  forms  of  KYC  for  more
sophisticated use cases.
A Blockchain Infrastructure for Cross-Border Interbank Payments
Another big pain point is cross-border interbank payments. 
Today, banks have to go through correspondent banks to intermediate these payments.  It
takes time and adds to cost.
MAS, the Singapore Exchange, and eight banks have embarked on a proof-of-concept project to
use  blockchain  technology  for  inter-bank  payments,  including  cross-border  transactions  in
foreign currency.
This effort is supported by the R3 blockchain research lab and BCS Information Systems
Under the pilot system, banks will deposit cash as collateral with the MAS in exchange for MAS-
issued digital currency. The banks can later redeem the digital currency for cash.
Participating  banks  can  pay  each  other  directly  with  this  digital  currency  instead  of  first
sending payment instructions through MAS.
This  is  an  improvement  over  current  large-value  payment  systems  that  are  centrally
operated. It strengthens resilience and lowers cost.
The banks also have the option of using the existing common payments gateway provided by
BCS Information Systems to transact on the blockchain.
The banks need not rewrite their back-end systems.
This  practical  capability  rides  on  the  advances  made  by  OCBC  Bank  in  its  recently
announced inter-bank payments pilot.
This project marks the first step in MAS’ exploration of ways to harness the potential of central
bank issued digital currency.
The next phase of the project will involve transactions in foreign currency, possibly with the
support of another central bank.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
An Open API Architecture
And saving the best for the end: creating an API economy. 
APIs,  or Application  Programming  Interfaces,  are  likely  to  be  one  of  the  most  important
building blocks for innovation in the future economy.
APIs are basically a set of protocols that define how one system or application interacts with
another, usually from the perspective of information exchange.
They allow systems to interact with one another without the need for human intervention.
Publishing these APIs allows FIs to collaborate with external users to:
– seamlessly merge multiple data sets from different sources into an integrated rich data
set; and
– deliver more functional and customised solutions faster and cheaper.
MAS aims to establish Singapore as a centre of excellence for APIs on financial services.
We are actively pushing FIs to develop and adopt APIs, and to offer as many of them as
possible to the broader community.
APIs  are  the  essential  ‘plumbing’  –  the  pipes  –  that  enable  the  connections  and
collaborations that foster innovation.
The financial industry has come together, in partnership with MAS and the Association of Banks
in Singapore, to develop guidance on APIs.
I am pleased to announce that we will publish today what we call the “Finance-as-a-Service
API Playbook”.
The API Playbook provides guidance on common and useful APIs that FIs could make available.
For instance:
Many of us struggle today to track and use our rewards points on our credit cards issued by
various banks before they expire.
Imagine  if  the  banks  publish  their  ‘rewards  points’  suite  of APIs,  a  single  aggregator  app
could be developed that allows us to enquire and redeem points directly with merchants and
service providers.
The Playbook also provides guidance for the standardisation of APIs.
The  industry  has  come  up  with  standards  for  information  security,  data  exchange,  and
governance mechanisms.
Having common standards will help promote greater data sharing and interoperability.
The API Playbook is an important milestone in our FinTech journey. 
Some of our FIs are announcing their API initiatives over the course of this week. So watch
this space.
Not to be outdone, MAS published last week 12 APIs for its most heavily used data sets.  We
will progressively expand the list.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by saying a few words about the larger picture behind what we are trying to do
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
in FinTech.
We talk a lot about technology but it is really about fostering a culture of innovation. 
In  an  industry  facing  the  headwinds  of  lower  economic  growth  and  heavier  regulatory
burdens, innovation must be the way to refresh and re-energise the business model. 
And innovation is not always about high-tech. It is about seeking newer and better ways to do
things, about a spirit of enterprise.  It is about hope in the future. The financial industry needs
that.
And let us not forget the purpose of innovation. We want to create a Smart Financial Centre:
because we want to increase efficiency – to do things cheaper, better, faster;
because we want to manage our risks better – to keep our system safe and sound;
because we want to create new opportunities – to generate growth and good jobs;
and  most  of  all,  because  we  want  to improve  people’s  lives  –  to  provide  them  better
services, to help them realise their goals.
Innovative finance must be purposeful finance.
Thank you and I wish you all the best.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
