  Keynote address by  
Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Conference on Financial Intermediation in Emerging Markets 
hosted by the University of Cape Town / Imperial Business School / Economic 
Research Southern Africa / Review of Finance 
 Cape Town 
7-10 December 2016 
  
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  
 Let me begin by thanking the organisers for inviting me to address you today.  
 Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  evolving  banking  landscape,  specifically  the 
regulatory and governance challenges that face banks in emerging markets. I  would 
also like to discuss the challenges relating to correspondent banking as well  as the 
opportunities and risks that come with fintech and digitisation developments. Last but 
not least, I will touch on the concept of ‘financial inclusion’ and the framework for the 
resolution of troubled financial institutions.  
 The increased volume, complexity and impact of regulatory reforms  on the financial 
sector in recent years are a challenge for both supervisors and banks. The concern 
for supervisors is that the volume and complexity of new international standards are 
placing  increased  demands  on  limited  supervisory  resources  (particularly 
in 
emerging markets). This may affect supervisory effectiveness. 
 Supervisors  and  the  supervised  institutions  alike  demonstrate  a  high  demand  for 
staff most suitable for ensuring regulatory compliance. It remains a challenge for the 
 1 
regulator, similarly to the rest of the financial sector, to attract and retain adequately 
skilled  human  resources  in  the  current  environment  of  increased  regulatory  and 
compliance scrutiny, as the South African Reserve Bank – or SARB – competes with 
commercial banks for the same set of skills and experience to address the regulatory 
requirements imposed on banks. 
 The combination of the new credit, market and interest rate risk in the banking book 
and  liquidity  standards,  the  changes  to  provisioning,  capital  buffers  as  well  as  the 
implementation  of  the  total  loss-absorbing  capital  (or  TLAC)  and  resolution 
frameworks  are  specific  challenges.  Banks  are  also  facing  growing  compliance 
challenges  from  the  increase  in  new  requirements,  which  further  affect  their 
resources in order to keep up with regulatory developments.  
 A  concern  we  hear  frequently  relates  to  the  potential  risks  and  impact  on  banks  of 
the  interaction  of  the  various  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards.  The 
understanding  of  these  risks  and  their  likely  impact  is  necessary  to  avoid  the 
unintended consequences of the cumulative modification of regulatory standards.  
 As  a  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision,  South  Africa 
continuously  strives  to  strengthen  its  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  as  well 
as to promote and enhance the stability of its financial system.  
 
The  G-201,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  have  made  significant  strides  in  future-proofing  the  resilience  of  the 
global  financial  system  and  finalising  the  core  elements  of  the  regulatory  reforms. 
The first phase of this new global regulatory initiative focused on ending the ‘too big 
to fail’ problem in order to reduce the risk to the fiscus and taxpayers. In particular, 
this has meant increasing the resilience of individual institutions.  
 The G-20 has tasked the Financial Stability Board with developing a framework and 
ensuring  that  the  relevant  international  standard-setting  bodies  prepare  new 
standards  for  large  and  important  financial  institutions,  particularly  the  systemically 
                                                           
1 Founded in 1999, the Group of Twenty (G-20) is an international forum for the governments and 
central bank governors from 20 major economies.  
 2 
important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  Regulatory  bodies  have  since  developed 
common  standards,  monitored  by  mutual  peer  reviews,  to  ensure  that  economies 
can  still  enjoy  the  benefits  of  global  trade  while  reducing  the  risks  caused  by  a 
financial crisis.  
 South  Africa  is  also  imposing  new  regulatory  requirements,  especially  on  banking 
groups, which are material subsidiaries of global systemically important banks (or G-
SIBs).  The  requirements  being  imposed  on  these  G-SIBs  and  their  material 
subsidiaries in the emerging markets have the potential to create an uneven playing 
field  with  other  locally  incorporated  banking  groups  and  carry  the  consequence  of 
bringing unwanted risk into the South African financial system. 
 The second phase of the global reforms involves authorities reducing the costs from 
the  failure  of  a  financial  institution.  In  a  document  titled  Key  attributes  of  effective 
resolution regimes for financial institutions, the Financial Stability Board  has set out 
key  principles  to  ensure  that  the  consequences  of  the  failure  of  individual  financial 
firms are minimised. 
 South Africa has implemented Basel III through the 2013 Bank Regulations and the 
Banks Amendment Act  22 of 2013. A new  prudential framework for insurers will be 
introduced  through  the  Insurance  Bill  now  being  considered  by  Parliament.  This 
prudential framework may be  expanded to other financial sectors in the near future 
to  ensure  a  consistent  regulatory  approach.  These  reforms  will  support  the  shift 
towards the coming Twin Peaks approach to regulating the financial sector in South 
Africa.  Making  financial  institutions  safer  is  important,  but  the  possibility  of  failure 
remains. 
 Considering the fact that South Africa is an emerging market and that South African 
banking  groups  operate  mainly  in  other  emerging  markets,  some  of  the  regulatory 
requirements  developed  or  being  developed  could  have  a  negative  impact  on  the 
South  African  banking  system  and/or  financial  market,  such  as  the  Net  Stable 
Funding  Ratio  or  the  proposals  being  developed  around  TLAC.  Some  of  these 
requirements  may  in  fact  be  more  suitable  for,  or  may  have  been  calibrated  to  be 
 3 
more  applicable  in,  developed  markets;  they  may  not  always  be  fit-for-purpose  in 
emerging markets such as South Africa. 
 The  large  banking  groups  regulated  by  the  SARB  mainly  have  operations  on  the 
African  continent  and/or  in  other  emerging  markets.  Some  supervisors  on  the 
continent and in other emerging markets where South African banks have operations 
have  yet  to  implement  the  regulatory  reforms.  This  imposes  an  obligation  on  the 
SARB,  which  is  the  only  African  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,  to  effectively  supervise  the  subsidiaries  of  South  African  banks  in  the 
rest of the African continent and other emerging markets.  
 Failure  to  do  this  creates  inconsistencies  in  how  regulatory  capital  and  other  risks 
are measured, and in how supervisory standards are applied. Another example of an 
inconsistent  application  of 
international  standards 
is  different  supervisory 
expectations in Africa of the same international standards relating to the use of risk 
models under the advanced measurement approaches. 
 Although there is a need for more standardisation and comparability of risk-weighted 
assets across banks and jurisdictions, the SARB believes that there remains a need 
for  banks  to  be  able  to  apply  quantitative  risk  models  to  adequately  measure  risk 
across  portfolios  and/or  risk  types.  If  the  expectation  is  to  reduce  the  use  of  risk 
models  in  measuring  regulatory  capital,  then  banks  will  become  less  inclined  to 
invest in the use of test requirements imposed under Basel II.  
 The SARB believes that the use of test requirements has made a significant positive 
contribution to the way in which banks measure and manage risk, and that this has 
led  to  improved  risk  management  and  pricing  of  risk  across  the  regulated  entities. 
The SARB supports the risk models under the advanced measurement approaches 
to be used. 
 The  regulatory  framework  is  beginning  to  succeed  in  meeting  its  objective  of 
addressing  the  ‘too  big  to  fail’  problem  as  G-SIBs  are  in  general  adjusting  their 
balance sheets and evaluating their complex business models to meet strengthened 
 4 
regulatory  demands  in  many  areas,  especially  in  respect  of  higher-quality  capital 
ratios and the difficult economic environment we are currently facing.  
 As you know, these developments have spilled over into South Africa when a G-SIB 
headquartered  in  the  UK2  announced  its  partial  withdrawal  from  a  domestic 
systemically important bank, or D-SIB, mainly due to global regulatory pressures. As 
a  result,  we  might  face  various  policy  considerations  going  forward  as  we  need  to 
carefully assess the effect and potential impact of home regulatory requirements on 
local  markets and  if  we  are  not perhaps  importing  structural  instability  (uncertainty) 
into our markets.  
 An unintended consequence of the reforms to end  ‘too big to fail’ is deglobalisation, 
resulting  in  G-SIBs  reducing  their  activity  in  some  emerging  market  economies, 
which  in  turn  has  a  potential  impact  on  the  stability  of  those  financial  systems  and 
policy implications.  
 Another consequence of the regulatory reforms is that the regulated banking system 
is  being  scrutinised  and  regulated  more  strictly  but  no  similar  requirements  or 
oversight  are  currently  imposed  on  the  shadow-banking  environment.  This  is  being 
discussed in the international meetings we attend. 
 Let  me  turn  to  digital  innovations.  Innovative  technologies  are  emerging  as  a 
potentially transformative force in financial markets. ‘Fintech’ is used as a broad term 
for  technically  enabled  financial  innovation  that  results  in  new  business  models, 
applications and/or products with an associated material effect on financial markets, 
institutions and the provision of financial services. 
 Coping with opportunities and threats from innovation and technology remains a key 
area for banks and continues to pose challenges for supervisors.  New technologies 
may  be  outpacing  the  ability  of  banks  to  put  in  place  adequate  controls  and 
information  technology  (IT)  systems.  Furthermore,  supervisors  do  not  necessarily 
have sufficient expertise to assess a bank’s capability in this area. Building capacity 
                                                           
2 United Kingdom 
 5 
to  address  IT  needs  and  cyber-risks  is  therefore  becoming  more  urgent  in  the 
context of the growth of fintech. 
 With greater reliance on technology comes a greater risk of cyberattacks. The risk of 
cyberattacks on the financial sector has dramatically increased in recent years. The 
financial  sector  stands  out  as  a  particularly  attractive  target  for  cyberattackers. 
Cyberattackers’  ambition  and  capacity  to  manipulate  and  gain  direct  access  to 
financial data and services may lead not only to severe losses of trust in the global 
financial sector but also to high costs for market participants and customers. 
 With  today’s  financial  systems  being  globally  interconnected  and  dependent  on 
technical  core  infrastructures  and  services,  cybersecurity  incidents  compromising 
such  a  core  function  could,  by  contagion  across  sectors  and  jurisdictions,  even 
develop a capacity to undermine global financial stability. 
 The  SARB 
joined 
the  Alliance 
for  Financial 
Inclusion  (AFI)  during  2016. 
Representatives from the SARB have attended AFI Global Policy Forums in the past 
two years. We are also a member of the AFI African Mobile Phone Initiative (AMPI). 
By  participating  in  international  forums,  it  is  clear  that  the  solutions  are  probably  in 
fintech, specifically mobile phones and regulatory sandboxes. 
 Financial  inclusion  covers  aspects  of  affordability  and  the  ability  to  use  financial 
services, which involves a certain level of financial literacy. The SARB has not been 
actively  driving  financial  inclusion,  but  it  has  done  some  work  on  financial  literacy. 
Going  forward,  financial  inclusion  will  be  an  ancillary  objective  for  the  Prudential 
Authority in terms of the Financial Sector Regulation Bill. 
 Derisking and deglobalisation contribute to global financial market fragmentation and 
could  end  the  open  and  integrated  structure  we  are  all  striving  for.  Derisking  can 
create financial exclusion. 
   6 
Digital  innovation  can  also  be  used  to  enhance  global  financial  inclusion.  A  peer 
exchange between countries and regions on emerging policy practices for achieving 
digital  financial  inclusion  could  help  those  who  lack  access  to  financial  services  to 
better steer their implementation efforts. 
 We  believe  that  the  global  phenomenon  of  derisking  through  a  decline  in 
correspondent  banking  services  requires  priority  and  expedited  action.  This  is  one 
area  where  proportionality  in  the  implementation  of  regulatory  reforms  is  very 
appropriate. Evidence reveals that the picture is especially bleak in the sub-Sahara 
Africa region where some countries are constrained since they are potentially unable 
to process payments across international borders.  
 To date, a limited number of correspondent banking relationships with South African 
banks have been terminated but derisking has not had a significant impact on cross-
border flows from a South African point of view. However, South African banks are 
being  subjected  to  heightened  scrutiny  by  foreign  counterparts.  Markets  in  all 
jurisdictions must have access to a well-functioning global financial system in order 
to develop and prosper. This development goes straight against our goal of financial 
inclusion, which is a critical element for long-term global economic growth and for the 
elimination of poverty. 
 In conclusion, the fact that the  South African  banking sector remains profitable and 
adequately  capitalised  is  not  a  cause  for  complacency.  The  future  performance  of 
the  domestic  banking  sector  could  be  adversely  affected  by  a  number  of  factors, 
including constrained household-sector balance sheets,  a weak domestic economic 
growth  outlook,  the  subdued  global  growth  outlook,  the  effects  of  the  threat  of  a 
sovereign  downgrade,  and  increasing  regulatory  compliance  pressures.  As  a 
regulator,  the  SARB  will  remain  vigilant  in  monitoring  and,  where  possible  and 
appropriate, mitigating the impact of the challenging environment in which domestic 
banks are operating. 
 Thank you.  
 7 
