Peter Praet: Interview in Expansión
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Expansión,  conducted  by Andres  Stumpf  Guirao  on  27  March  2017  and  published  on  3 April
2017.
 Growth in Europe is higher and inflation is rising. Is the situation better?
Yes, about a year ago we had the emerging markets shock. Then a high downside risk to the
world economy emerged and the G20 member countries signalled in a statement that they would
use  all  the  tools  at  their  disposal  to  support  the  economy.  In  the  United  States,  the  Federal
Reserve  halted  its  rate  rises,  and  in  the  euro  area,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European
Central Bank decided to add further monetary accommodation. This coordinated reaction was
very  effective  globally.  In  the  euro  area  the  economy  is  now  gaining  momentum.  This
improvement is very visible in confidence indicators but still needs to be confirmed in hard data.
Has the ECB finally won the battle against deflation?
Yes, it has. Since the crisis we have had serious concerns about deflationary risks on several
occasions in the euro area, but now we can say that they have disappeared.
Have they given way to concerns about inflation?
No, I don’t think so. It’s headline inflation that has picked up, and this is significantly affected by
volatile elements such as oil and food prices. Underlying inflation, which is an indicator of price
stability over the medium term, remains subdued.
In Spain the CPI was at 3% for three months, before falling to 2.1% in March. How do you
assess these developments?
We  always  look  through  transitory  changes  in  euro  area  HICP  inflation. As  in  the  euro  area,
underlying price pressures in Spain remain subdued.
So isn’t it time to withdraw the stimulus measures?
We  anticipate  that  the  recovery  will  be  reflected  in  hard  data  and  not  only  in  confidence
indicators.  We  have  more  confidence  in  the  economic  outlook.  Incoming  data  are  making  us
more confident that the economic expansion will continue to firm and broaden. But the important
question is whether the adjustment of the path of inflation towards below, but close to, 2% would
continue without our expansionary monetary policy. At the present time, I would have to say no,
but it’s clear that the tone of our communication has changed – we are now more optimistic on
the economic outlook. Our monetary policy stance thus remains appropriate. Of course, it is our
job to continuously assess the appropriateness of our stance.
But from April the ECB will reduce its asset purchases by €20 billion. Is this the first step
towards the end of these purchases?
In December 2016 we decided to move from a monthly volume of €80 billion to a monthly volume
of €60 billion, and to extend the programme for a further nine months until December 2017. The
ECB Governing Council considered two options and concluded that both options – continuing for
six months with a volume of €80 billion, or for nine months with a volume of €60 billion – would
have a broadly equivalent impact on the economy. Overall, we considered that our presence in
the market would ensure a more lasting transmission of our stimulus measures. This adjustment
does not signal the start of a gradual reduction of purchases (tapering).
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  programme  is  experiencing  some  distortions  regarding  the  capital  key.  Is  that
sustainable?
The purchase volume depends on each country’s percentage contribution to the ECB’s capital.
Temporary  deviations  can  occur,  but  the  capital  key  remains  the  criterion  for  allocating  our
purchases, and we will comply with it. We have always shown that, whenever it is necessary to
act, we do so. In this context, in December we changed the maturity restriction regarding the
securities that we could purchase. The aim is to continue the purchases until the end of the year,
and we have no doubt that we will be able to achieve this.
Does this mean that other conditions will be changed?
That’s not our intention, but the Governing Council could do so at any time.
Have we seen the upper limit of expansionary monetary policy?
The Governing Council reiterated at its last meeting that “we continue to expect rates to remain
at present or lower levels for an extended period of time and well past the horizon of our net
asset  purchases”  and  that,  if  necessary,  “we  stand  ready  to  increase  our  asset  purchase
programme  in  terms  of  size  and/or  duration”.  So  we  still  have  the  option  to  be  more
the  probability  of  us  having 
expansionary,  but  currently 
to  provide  more  monetary
accommodation to meet our objective has reduced considerably.
What stage has Europe reached in the process of banking union?
We are just over half-way along the path to banking union. There is a need to distinguish between
the  area  of  regulation  and  supervision,  where  we  have  made  great  progress,  and  the  field  of
crisis resolution, i.e. what to do when a bank fails, where much remains to be done.
What do you mean by that?
If, for financial stability reasons, a bank is not able to rescue itself by calling on its investors (bail-
in), it currently still falls to the national authority to respond (bail-out). This system is asymmetric,
because  banking  supervision  now  takes  place  at  the  European  level,  but  when  a  bank  fails,
footing the bill is still largely a national responsibility. Completing banking union would help the
banks to develop their cross-border strategy.
Would relying on such institutions be beneficial, or would it add more systemic risk?
Let’s look at an example. If Spain had not had two large international banks and the whole sector
had been exposed solely to the Spanish market, the crisis would have been much worse. We
need cross-border banks at the European level. In a monetary union, private sector risk-sharing
through  cross-border  banking  and  capital  markets  is  essential  to  cushion  asymmetric
macroeconomic shocks. Systemic risk would not increase because the public backstop in case
of bank failure would be European rather than national.
There is an ongoing debate on this issue...
This is indeed subject to debate, but the doubts raised are not about whether or not it should be
done,  but  rather  about  how  and  when  to  achieve  it.  Some  countries  believe  that  it  is  first
necessary  to  reduce  the  risks  in  banks  before  sharing  them,  but  we  are  in  favour  of  making
progress  on  both  risk  reduction  and  risk-sharing  in  parallel.  What  is  missing  today  is  a  clear
timetable, a political commitment to achieve banking union in, say, four or five years. We need to
finish what we have started, and a clear timeframe would help the banks to develop cross-border
strategies.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
After what happened in Italy in November last year, is the concept of the “bail-in” still
alive and well?
The European rules allow flexibility for financial stability reasons under well-defined conditions.
Without any specific reference to the case of Italy, it has to be clear that when the authorities are
forced  to  intervene  in  this  way,  they  must  ensure  that  the  bank  undergoes  a  decisive
restructuring process to ensure its viability on a lasting basis. This is crucial for generating the
necessary confidence so that we can together move forward with the process of banking union.
What is the situation of the Spanish banks?
I think they have made a tremendous effort and improved their situation significantly. The level of
non-performing loans to the private sector has fallen below 7%, which, while still high, is certainly
manageable. Nevertheless, there is still room for greater consolidation because their cost ratios,
while not the highest in the euro area, are still too high. Profitability remains weak, although there
are  substantial  differences  between  banks.  While  there  is  a  need  for  more  consolidation,
preserving a diverse banking system, with both large and local banks, remains important.
The banks are blaming low rates for their reduced profitability.
Yes, they are, but at the same time they are also recognising the favourable effects of low rates
on improved economic conditions and the need to change business models and reduce costs.
Over time, the economic recovery will increasingly support bank profitability.
The deposit rate will remain low, but the last series of targeted longer-term refinancing
operations (TLTROs) that helped banks have already come to an end.
The  banks  benefitted  greatly  from  these  operations,  which  were  heavily  subscribed.  The
transmission of the ECB’s stimulus measures through the banks is working well at the moment.
Credit conditions have improved sufficiently, so there is currently no need to renew the TLTROs.
And what about the sequencing of monetary policy normalisation?
The  current  sequencing  of  monetary  policy  normalisation  makes  a  lot  of  sense.  There  is  no
number, period of time in months or anything like that which will determine when interest rates go
up  after  the  debt  purchases  end.  This  will  happen  based  on  the  ECB’s  assessment.  It  will
depend on the kind of situation we find ourselves in.
And the deposit rate?
The  deposit  rate  is  the  key  monetary  policy  rate.  It  is  the  deposit  rate  that  is  currently  driving
monetary conditions and will in the end shape the risk-free asset curve. If the markets were to
pick  up  any  change  in  communication  about  the  deposit  rate,  it  would  have  the  potential  to
change the policy stance, and we do not want that to happen right now.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
