 News conference 
   Berne, 15 June 2017 
Andréa M. Maechler 
Introductory remarks by Andréa M. Maechler 
 
I will begin by reviewing the situation on the international financial markets. I will then 
address some developments on the Swiss money and foreign exchange markets – specifically 
the establishment of SARON as the leading reference rate for interest rate derivatives and the 
adoption of a global code of conduct for foreign exchange market transactions.  
Situation on the financial markets 
Let me start with developments on the international financial markets.  
Overall, positive sentiment has continued to prevail since the beginning of the year. Economic 
conditions have provided favourable momentum, with data pointing to ongoing recovery in 
both Europe and the US. Furthermore, companies on both sides of the Atlantic reported solid 
profits in the first quarter. The principal beneficiaries of these developments have been the 
equity markets, both in the advanced and the emerging economies (cf. chart 1). Various major 
equity indices have repeatedly recorded historical highs in the year-to-date period. While the 
SMI has not yet hit its historical high, it too made substantial gains and recently closed up 8% 
on the beginning of the year. Heightened political uncertainty has had no lasting effects on the 
equity markets.  
This assertion is borne out in risk perception metrics. Volatility derived from option prices 
(implied volatility) once again fell substantially. On the US equity market, volatility 
approached historical lows at times in May and June (cf. chart 2). 
Heightened political uncertainty has, however, occasionally left its mark on the bond and 
foreign exchange markets. For instance, demand for highly rated government bonds has 
remained strong since the start of the year. In addition, despite largely positive economic data, 
the inflation outlook for the major advanced economies is still muted. As a result, yields on 
highly rated government bonds have changed only marginally since the beginning of 2017 
  Page 1/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Andréa M. Maechler 
and have remained low (cf. chart 3). In Switzerland, too, the yield on ten-year Confederation 
bonds has remained essentially unchanged.  
On the foreign exchange market, the Swiss franc experienced repeated episodes of upward 
pressure as a result of heightened political uncertainty in Europe. The elections in the 
Netherlands and France, as well as the UK’s upcoming Brexit negotiations with the EU, 
generated increased demand for currencies considered particularly safe by investors. After the 
presidential election in France, the euro strengthened and pressure on the Swiss franc 
subsided. Since the beginning of the year, the euro has gained around 3%. The Swiss franc is 
now trading close to where it was at the start of the year, and thus remains significantly 
overvalued. Despite ongoing normalisation of monetary policy in the US, the dollar has 
depreciated roughly 5%. 
Establishment of SARON as reference rate for interest rate derivatives 
Let me now turn to innovations on the Swiss money market. 
For some time, efforts have been under way worldwide to reform major reference interest 
rates such as Libor. These reforms aim to put existing benchmarks on a more solid footing 
and, where necessary, to develop alternatives. In the case of Libor, these reforms are still 
ongoing.  
In the context of these reforms, a decision has already been made to discontinue the TOIS 
fixing on the Swiss money market and replace it with SARON at the end of 2017. This is due 
to the fact that, despite various reform attempts, the volume of transactions underlying the 
TOIS reference rate has remained too low for efficient price formation. Transaction volume is 
not expected to be an issue with SARON. Unlike the TOIS fixing, which is calculated using 
data contributed by a panel of banks, SARON is based on actual market transactions and 
binding quotes. This fact reinforces trust in SARON and makes it more attractive as a 
reference rate for all money market transactions. 
Progress has already been made in establishing SARON on the Swiss money market. For 
some weeks now, it has been used as the reference rate for interest rate derivatives; hence, 
quotes for SARON interest rate swaps (SARON swaps) are already being offered. We can 
observe this in chart 4, which plots the curves for TOIS and SARON swaps. We see that the 
yield curve for SARON swaps already covers all maturities. Moreover, the SARON yield 
curve is below the TOIS curve. This is because, unlike the unsecured TOIS fixing, SARON, 
as the secured overnight reference rate, is risk-free.  
Although the volume of SARON swaps is still small, many players are in the final stages of 
preparing to enter this market. Both the transaction volumes and acceptance of this market 
among market participants are expected to increase in the coming weeks and months. The 
Swiss National Bank is supporting and assisting in continued efforts to establish SARON on 
the Swiss money market. 
  Page 2/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Andréa M. Maechler 
New code of conduct for global foreign exchange market transactions  
That brings me to the new global code of conduct for foreign exchange market transactions 
known as the FX Global Code. Published at the end of May, this new code aims to define 
clear rules of conduct for all those transacting business on the foreign exchange markets, with 
a view to enhancing efficiency. A well-functioning foreign exchange market is in the interests 
of all market players, not least the central banks. Various central banks, including the SNB, 
have therefore been working alongside private sector partners to draft the FX Global Code.  
The code of conduct affects all foreign exchange market activities – from communications 
with market participants to risk management and the execution of transactions. As a global set 
of rules, the new code replaces all existing codes of conduct for foreign exchange markets 
and, as such, establishes clear and uniform guidelines. It should be noted that the FX Global 
Code applies not just to market participants, but to market infrastructure providers as well; it 
thus encompasses all relevant foreign exchange market actors.  
While the FX Global Code is classified as self-regulation, the SNB expects its regular 
counterparties to implement the new code and to abide by the agreed rules. 
 
   Page 3/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Andréa M. Maechler 
      Page 4/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Andréa M. Maechler 
      Page 5/5 
 