Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Regulation,  supervision  and  market
discipline - striking a balance
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a
conference hosted by the Financial Stability Institute, Basel, 18 September 2017.
 Almost nine years ago to the day, the investment bank Lehman Brothers failed.
What followed was a financial crisis that wreaked havoc on economies around the globe. But it
did more than that.
The crisis also shattered many beliefs about how the banking system works and how it should
be regulated and supervised.
There was a time when many people believed that the market could bring about a stable and
efficient banking sector on its own. They thought that market forces would ensure banks had
sustainable business models that were resilient to the ups and downs of the economy. We now
know that this did not turn out so well.
In fact, there are three pillars that support a stable banking sector: regulation, supervision and
market discipline. The crisis made clear that all of these pillars were in need of some repairs.
The good news is that we have come a long way – today, the banking sector rests on more solid
foundations than before. But some issues still need to be resolved. Let us briefly look over them,
beginning with regulation.
Once the crisis had started, everyone agreed that the rulebook needed to be rewritten. And back
then, everyone agreed that the revised rulebook needed to be a global one. The crisis clearly
demonstrated that banking is a global business, so the rules that govern it should also be global.
Today, however, it is much less clear whether everyone still subscribes to the idea of a global
rulebook.
And this worries me.
It worries me because it shows that people are starting to forget the lessons we learned from the
crisis.
That’s why we need to finalise the global rulebook, Basel III, as quickly as possible.
But that is just the first step.
The second step is to implement and apply the rules in a broadly consistent manner at regional
and national level. And this is a challenge – sometimes we see quite a different interpretation of
the standards when it comes to implementing and applying them at national level.
You won’t be surprised that I will focus on the euro area. The euro area countries have become
closely intertwined. For many years now they have shared a single market and a single currency.
Since  the  crisis,  they  have  even  begun  to  build  a  banking  union,  which  includes  a  single
supervisor.
But when it comes to regulation, we still see differences between countries.
It is true, of course, that we have a single rulebook in Europe. As one might expect for a union,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
we had to come further than other countries.
However, parts of that rulebook come in the form of EU directives. And these still need to be
transposed into national law, which explains some of the differences we see.
So regulation in the euro area remains fragmented. But this runs counter to the idea of “same
business, same risk, same rules”; and it runs counter to the idea of the European banking union.
So there is a clear case to be made for further harmonising the rules. We need a well-written
rulebook to keep risks in the banking sector in check.
But rules are just one of the pillars that support a stable banking sector. The second pillar is
supervision. And here we need to strike a delicate balance because these two pillars interact in a
subtle way.
The general idea is that rules create the foundations for supervisors to do their job. There is a
danger, though. If the rulebook becomes too detailed, it might wall supervisors in and limit their
options too much, rather than provide them with solid foundations.
And this can happen fairly quickly. By way of example, just think of speed limits. Let’s say you
want to set a speed limit for motorways. Does 120 kilometres per hour sound about right? At first
sight, this is a very simple and straightforward rule.
But then you start to think – what if there’s a sharp and dangerous bend in the road? Wouldn’t
that call for a lower speed limit? And what if the road becomes slippery when it rains? Perhaps
the  speed  limit  should  depend  on  the  weather? And  shouldn’t  it  also  depend  on  the  kind  of
vehicle? One could easily think of many more questions like these.
So even a seemingly simple rule can quickly start to become more and more complicated.
The  world  is  complex  and  uncertain,  particularly  when  it  comes  to  finance  and  banking.  That
leaves us with two options.
Either we come up with more rules to try to cover every potential situation.
Or  we  allow  supervisors  some  discretion  within  a  set  framework  and  let  them  judge  specific
situations on their merits.
In the end, these two options need to be in balance, and we must be careful not to disturb this
balance. And here is where I see some cause for concern.
Regulators might be tempted to lay down rules to cover every eventuality – think of the example I
just  gave  you.  And  their  motivation  would  certainly  be  laudable.  But  their  goal  would  be
unattainable.
It is just not possible to cater for every potential situation. There are too many possibilities, most
of which we cannot anticipate. No one knows what financial innovations might emerge; no one
knows where technological change will lead us; and no one knows how the economy will evolve
over the coming decades.
If we try to cover everything, the rulebook will, at some point, become too detailed, too big and too
complex.  From  that  point  onwards  it  will  stop  making  the  banking  sector  a  safer  place  and
instead create new problems.
First, overly complex rules facilitate regulatory arbitrage. Yes, we could add page after page to
the rulebook, setting out detailed rules, definitions and thresholds governing how banks should
deal  with  risks  and  specifying,  for  instance,  which  tools  supervisors  should  use  in  certain
situations, and when. But with each new page, more loopholes open up. It becomes easier for
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks to game the system. This defeats the purpose of a rulebook and poses a threat to stability.
Second, there is the problem of interaction. The more rules there are, the more they can interact
and  interfere  with  each  other.  If  there  are  two  rules,  there  is  just  one  way  in  which  they  can
interact. If there are 1,000 rules, they can, in theory, interact in at least 500,000 ways. It becomes
ever more difficult to foresee the overall effect of the rules, and the danger of unintended side-
effects increases.
And third, there is the issue of costs. The thicker the rulebook, the more expensive it becomes
for banks to comply with it and for supervisors to do their jobs. These costs are justifiable if each
additional rule reduces the risk of another crisis. However, at a certain point the costs of the rules
begin to outweigh the benefits.
So, instead of having overly detailed rules, we should have a strong basic set of rules that allows
supervisors some discretion. .Supervisors have the relevant skills and experience, and in-depth
knowledge of the banks they supervise. We should ensure that supervisors can continue to apply
their  judgement.  They  should  be  empowered  to  assess  the  risks  that  a  bank  poses  to  its
stakeholders and the financial system. This will enable them to deal with risks at an early stage.
But if the rulebook becomes too extensive and too detailed, supervision turns into a simple box-
ticking exercise.
A large, detailed and seemingly comprehensive set of rules would make supervisors less flexible
and effective; it would leave no room for discretion. Supervisors would no longer be able to react
quickly to newly emerging risks in an ever-changing banking sector. They would be walled in by
rules that were devised to cover every possible situation but, in reality, were outdated right from
the start.
So, looking ahead, we must fight the urge to make the rulebook ever more detailed.
But don’t get me wrong – we shouldn’t unwind any of the reforms. What has been done was
necessary. But we should be cautious about going too far. A few clear principles can be more
effective  than  1,000  complex  rules.  The  two  pillars  of  regulation  and  supervision  are  equally
important and we should not favour one at the other’s expense.
And this brings us to the third pillar of a stable banking sector: market discipline. With all this talk
about rules and supervision, we must not forget that banks operate in a market economy. So
why not use market forces to keep risks in check?
There is nothing like the prospect of failure and financial loss to keep a lid on risk-taking. And this,
as  a  general  rule,  is  the  essence  of  market  discipline.  Investors  who  stand  to  lose  their  own
money will be more cautious than investors who can offload losses onto someone else.
But, as I said earlier, markets have not always exerted discipline. During the crisis, bank failures
were rare. But why?
Well, first, there was a lack of tools to resolve failing banks – particularly across borders. And
second, there were fears of contagion and a meltdown of the entire financial system.
So, in the end, governments often stepped in and propped up failing banks with public funds.
There was no chance for the market to impose discipline.
This  has  changed.  In  Europe,  we  now  have  a  single  resolution  mechanism  for  banks.  It  was
designed  to  ensure  that  banks  can  fail  in  an  orderly  manner  without  damaging  the  financial
system. This new mechanism has recently passed its first series of tests. Generally speaking, it
was successful, although some adjustments are still needed.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In any case, we have taken a big step towards more market discipline in the European banking
sector.
To  sum  up,  a  stable  banking  sector  is  supported  by  three  pillars:  regulation,  supervision  and
market discipline. Since the crisis, we have made these three pillars stronger. Now we have to
make sure that they remain in good shape and share the load in a balanced way. Otherwise, we
will not reap all the benefits of the transformation that has taken place in banking supervision.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
