R Gandhi: FinTechs and virtual currency
Inaugural speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “FinTech
Conference 2017”, organized by FICCI, IBA and NASSCOM, Mumbai, 1 March 2017.
 I am very glad that IBA, FICCI and NASSCOM are organizing this Conference as a Platform for
Innovation and Collaboration with Upcoming and Promising (PICUP) Fintech.
institutions  and 
Technology and banking have a long close association. Both have been benefitted immensely by
this  association.  Technological  developments  have  been  changing  the  way  the  banks  and
financial 
interact.  These  developments  have  created
opportunities  for  new  entrants,  not  necessarily  new  bankers,  to  disrupt  traditional  business
models and penetrate new markets. The plethora of technological products and services have
helped emergence of FinTech companies who offer different ways of doing traditional services,
that too in more efficient ways.
their  customers 
From the time the concept of money was understood, the concepts of lending and borrowing
came into existence. However, the organised way of lending and borrowing happened when the
prototypes of modern banks were established some 700 years ago. Banks undertook another
service  i.e.,  the  remittance  service.  The  mega  trends  in  the  fields  of  Information  and
Communication Technology have redefined banking and banks. Actually it is not redefinition, but
de-definition. Banking is no longer what a bank does; it is also what a non-bank does. Banks are
no longer those entities who do banking exclusively; now others, the non-banks also do banking.
Chunking  of  banking  is  the  norm;  and  for  undertaking  each  of  these  chunks,  there  are  some
specialist  entities  who  perform  only  those  chunks.  Payment  service  providers,  P2P  services,
P2B services, SME financing, consumer retail financing, disintermediation, crowd funding, open
ended mutual funds, money market mutual funds, deposit alternatives, trade financing, invoice
financing,  bill  discounters,  bill  collectors,  credit  referrals,  account  aggregators,  interest  free
products, syndicators, investment bankers, MFIs, co-ops, HFCs and credit rating agencies are
some  of  the  entities  who  chipped  away  chunk  after  chunk  of  banking.  Is  there  an  element  of
banking that remains the exclusive privilege of banks?
The  chunking  away  of  banking  from  the  banks  has  given  enormous  business  and  growth  for
these non-banks. With their specialisation and focussed service rendering, they are able to offer
that chosen service at greatest efficiency, speed and at very affordable cost to the consumers.
When these specialised entities make innovative use of ICT as their business model, they tend
to  be  called  the  FinTech  companies.  There  is  another  type  of  FinTech  companies.  They  are
those who develop innovative systems, products and solutions for use by those in the financial
sector; they will not be in the business of rendering the financial services. These are primarily the
R & D structure of FinTechs. I would think these are the real FinTech entities.
As a definition, Fintech is usually applied to the segment of the technology startup scene that is
disrupting sectors such as mobile payments, money transfers, loans, fundraising and even asset
management.
The  term  has  become  a  buzz  word  in  the  last  three  years.  It  is  changing  the  way  funds  are
raised, used, lent and borrowed, remitted. It is impacting not just entrepreneurs and businesses,
but also ordinary bank and financial customers. Not just that, the regulators across the world are
sitting up and closely monitoring the developments with great interest. Standard setting bodies
like the Financial Stability Board, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and others have
formed special teams, working groups to examine the developments.
Why this enhanced interest in FinTechs? In my opinion it is because of two of the key FinTech
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
innovations viz., the Market Place Financing and the Blockchain.
Market Place Financing is also known as ‘Crowd Funding’ and generally refers to a method of
funding  a  project  or  venture  through  small  amounts  of  money  raised  from  a  large  number  of
people, typically through a portal acting as an intermediary. There are numerous forms of crowd
funding: some are charitable donations that provide no financial returns; others, such as equity
crowd funding would fall within the domain of financial markets. Person to Person (P2P) lending
is a form of crowd-funding used to raise loans which are paid back with interest.
Lot of people around the world is seeing the end of banking and financial intermediation because
of this innovative Market Place Financing. Some advocate an early end to the traditional banks
and  financial  institutions.  This  disruptive  innovation  has  indeed  caught  the  attention  of  many
analysts, opinion makers and influential thinkers. They talk of bank-less economy or banks-free
economy; as a consequent version thereof they dream of the death of regulators as well.
Likewise, the Blockchain Technology is also another disruptive innovation. The blockchain is an
incorruptible digital ledger of economic transactions that can be programmed to record not just
financial transactions but virtually everything of value. Blockchains are an open, distributed ledger
that can record transactions between two parties efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent
way.
Using this technology, certain innovative products which have come on the scene have excited a
large section of people around the world. I am referring to the BitCoins phenomenon. The way
the BitCoins have caught the imagination, generated interest, and gained value has led to some
quarters predicting end of the currency system.
I  suppose  these  predictions  about  of  death  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  and  also  the
currency have naturally aroused the curiosity at minimum and concerns among the regulators
and central bankers around the world.
in  positive  changes 
Innovations,  admittedly,  bring 
in  efficiency,  productivity,  quality,
competitiveness, and market share, among other factors. However, as innovations usually result
in paradigm shifts, they are typically disruptive. It takes effort and time to understand them. The
associated dangers include untested effects, lack of clarity on long term effects, and can lead to
misunderstanding  and  misusing  the  innovation.  Innovations  can  sometimes  be  bad  per  se;
sometimes even good innovations can be misused.
Innovations, which are by definition leveraging technology in unusual way, have the great potential
to  be  disturbing  the  standard  ways  in  which  systems  are  operated.  However,  in  that  process
while  we  do  gain,  it  is  not  uncommon  that  these  innovations  do  inflict  pain  on  the  society.
Therefore, a careful analysis of the pros and cons, a thoughtful ring-fencing of risks, closer study
on pilot basis before scaling up, fine-tuning based on feedback, etc are required before we adopt
such innovations.
What are the downside risks of Market Place Financing and Blockchain technologies? Market
Place Financing links the fund raiser/s and fund provider/s. Fine. That eliminates the need for a
financial intermediary and therefore all the costs associated with that. However, who guarantees
the good performance of the fund raiser/s and fund provider/s? Who will enforce the contractual
obligations?  When  each  of  them  is  faceless  to  one  another,  and  is  at  great  distance,  even
beyond  borders,  the  issue  gets  complicated.  Therefore,  Market  Place  Financing  may  not  be
suitable  for  large  amounts.  It  is  a  received  wisdom  in  finance  that  after  the  initial  rounds  of
acceptances and successes, the moment the rounds increase and more number of people get
attracted in geometrical progression the chain breaks and fails. You need an organised and a
regulated entity to ensure that the innocent and weak parties are protected. Any democratic set
up cannot dismiss it quoting ‘Consenting Adult’ argument. ‘Consenting adult’ argument cannot be
presented when mass scale failure takes place.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I want to discuss a little more about the Blockchain or the distributed ledger technology and its
professed capabilities to usher in virtual currency.
As  regards  death  of  currency,  it  is  not  a  new  subject.  It  has  been  predicted  right  from  early
1950s. As  you  will  recall,  Isaac Asimov’s  Robot  Series  (1950s-80s)  imagined  a  future  where
cash didn’t exist; instead people earned “credits” that were traded electronically. In June 1991,
the writers for Omni Magazine claimed “…cash and credit will soon be obsolete.” In 1994, Joel
Kurtzman  in  his  book  titled  ‘The  death  of  Money’  said  “Few  people  realize  that  money,  in  the
traditional sense, has met its demise. Fewer still have paused to reflect on the implications of
that fact.”
It was fashionable then to talk about the death of currency. People said “By 2020 most people will
have  embraced  and  fully  adopted  the  use  of  smart-device  swiping  for  purchases  they  make,
nearly eliminating the need for cash or credit cards.”
Has currency died? Is it dying? Or at least will it die? In all these years, you will find that currency
has actually increased in absolute terms, not just in developing and emerging economies where
penetration  of  banking  and  finance  is  not  yet  complete,  but  also  in  the  developed  economies
where the penetration of banking and finance has been far larger. Countries are printing more
and more of currency. Perhaps the Nordic countries are the exceptions.
Now cometh the Crypto Currency. People say, this time around currency will die. Some others
say, it will be a close call; at least currency will be replaced by Virtual Currency.
The  quest  for  anonymous  and  independent  Digital  Currency  has  been  in  the  minds  of
researchers for quite some time. The Cypherpunks, as they were called, led by Timothy May of
Intel and Eric Hughes in 1992 tried to develop privacy thru crypto logic. They endorsed a mistrust
on  the  prevalent  system  of  currency  and  boasted  of  an  anarchist  philosophy  to  find  the
anonymous  and  independent  digital  currency.  Wei  Dai  in  1998  attempted  to  create  what  was
called the B-Money, a money that could not be taxed or tracked. Nick Szabo attempted to create
Bit-Gold which will be difficult to solve (mine) and so will have value; he tried to create a puzzle of
solving cryptographic equation which was further refined by the hands of Satoshi Nakamoto in
Bitcoins.
Voila! You now have a digital currency; not created by authorities; more and more people have
accepted it. Bitcoins have acquired value; they are being used for settling varieties of economic
transactions; people are using them as investments and store of value. So ‘currency’ is being
eliminated.
Blockchain, the foundation for Bitcoins like innovations, is touted to be the death knell of currency.
I believe its potential is being overstated. We can see that in these types of solutions for Virtual
Currency,  there  is  no  central  bank  or  monetary  authority.  They  pose  potential  financial,
operational, legal, customer protection and security related risks. VCs being in digital form are
stored in digital / electronic media; are prone to losses arising out of hacking, loss of password,
compromise of access credentials, malware attack, etc. Payments by VCs are on a peer-to-peer
basis. No established framework for recourse to customer problems / disputes / charge backs,
etc. is feasible. There is underlying or backing of any asset for VCs. Value seems to be a matter
of speculation. Legal status is definitely not there. While this is a purported objective of a VC, it
puts a natural limit for its progression as I will explain in a moment. And finally, the usage of VCs
for illicit and illegal activities has been reported as uncomfortably large.
My arguments against these VCs stem from two key elements viz., Confidence and Anonymity.
A ‘currency’ should be able to sustain these two elements for ever; it will impair its exalted status
once, either of these elements gets affected. The ‘confidence’ in BitCoins or for that matter any
virtual currency based on blockchain or any other technology is also limited to its initial rounds
and  circles  only;  the  initial  rounds  are  always  filled  with  adventurists  and  risk  seekers;  the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
moment  masses  get  in,  the  risk-avoiders  get  in,  they  will  need  greater  ‘confidence’  for
acceptance  and  that  can  come  only  if  an  ‘authority’  issues  it.  As  regards  ‘anonymity’,  the
blockchain technology apologists say it can be made very difficult to track; they say ‘difficult to
track’,  and  that  is  not  ‘anonymity’.  Therefore,  it  may  remain  a  pipedream  that  blockchain  will
eliminate ‘currency’, by ushering in ‘virtual currency’.
There is some realisation among the proponents of these FinTech innovations. They do see that
exaggeration of capabilities of FinTech innovations can be bad for further developments in the
area. In parallel thinking, the banks and financial institutions have also realised that there will be
value in adopting or adapting the FinTech innovations for mutual and customer benefits. There is
a  movement  to  make  use  of  Blockchain  technology  for  Virtual  Currency  by  the  central  banks
themselves. Of course, this calls for lot of research. I am glad that IDRBT brought out a white
paper on applications of Blockchain Technology for the banking and financial sectors in India.
There are several such endeavours in the world. Hopefully, these will lead to usable solutions.
To conclude, FinTech companies are accelerating the pace of change and are reshaping the
financial  services  industry  radically.  Financial  service  providers  like  banks  are  recognizing  the
potentials of the FinTech. It is clear that the disruptive innovations of the FinTech cannot wholly
eliminate or completely decimate the traditional banking or finance. However, I can see that there
are immense ways in which the FinTechs and the banks and financial entities can collaborate to
usher in the best value for the financial service customers.
I  am  sure  this  conference  will  provide  the  unique  platform  to  all  the  stakeholders  for  creating
potential opportunities for meeting grounds and build mutually benefiting partnerships.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
