Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 9 March 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for
an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that we will continue to make
purchases  under  the  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  at  the  current  monthly  pace  of  €80
billion until the end of this month and that, from April 2017, our net asset purchases are intended
to  continue  at  a  monthly  pace  of  €60  billion  until  the  end  of  December  2017,  or  beyond,  if
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  The  net  purchases  will  be  made  alongside
reinvestments of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  continued  to  preserve  the  very  favourable  financing
conditions that are necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation rates towards levels
below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Their  ongoing  pass-through  to  the  borrowing
conditions  for  firms  and  households  benefits  credit  creation  and  supports  the  steadily  firming
recovery of the euro area economy. Sentiment indicators suggest that the cyclical recovery may
be gaining momentum. Headline inflation has again increased, largely on account of rising energy
and food price inflation. However, underlying inflation pressures continue to remain subdued. The
Governing Council will continue to look through changes in HICP inflation if judged to be transient
and to have no implication for the medium-term outlook for price stability.
A  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for  underlying  inflation
pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term. If the outlook becomes
less favourable, or if financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a
sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  we  stand  ready  to  increase  our  asset  purchase
programme in terms of size and/or duration.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2016, following a
similar pace of growth in the third quarter. Incoming data, notably survey results, increase our
confidence that the ongoing economic expansion will continue to firm and broaden. The pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  is  supporting  domestic  demand  and  facilitates  the
ongoing  deleveraging  process.  The  recovery  in  investment  continues  to  be  promoted  by  very
favourable  financing  conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability.  Moreover,  rising
employment, which is also benefiting from past structural reforms, is having a positive impact on
households’  real  disposable  income,  thereby  providing  support  for  private  consumption. Also,
there are signs of a somewhat stronger global recovery and increasing global trade. However,
economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  be  dampened  by  a  sluggish  pace  of
implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  remaining  balance  sheet  adjustment  needs  in  a
number of sectors.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the March 2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections
for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.8% in 2017, by 1.7% in 2018
and  by  1.6%  in  2019.  Compared  with  the  December  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised upwards slightly in 2017 and 2018.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook have become less pronounced, but remain
tilted to the downside and relate predominantly to global factors.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation increased further to 2.0%
in February, up from 1.8% in January 2017 and 1.1% in December 2016. This reflected mainly a
strong increase in annual energy and unprocessed food price inflation, with no signs yet of a
convincing upward trend in underlying inflation. Headline inflation is likely to remain at levels close
to 2% in the coming months, largely reflecting movements in the annual rate of change of energy
prices. Measures of underlying inflation, however, have remained low and are expected to rise
only gradually over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the expected
continuing economic recovery and the corresponding gradual absorption of slack.
This pattern is also reflected in the March 2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the
euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.7% in 2017, 1.6% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019.
By  comparison  with  the  December  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the
outlook for headline HICP inflation has been revised upwards significantly for 2017 and slightly for
2018,  while  remaining  unchanged  for  2019.  The  staff  projections  are  conditional  on  the  full
implementation of all our monetary policy measures.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an annual rate of growth of 4.9% in January 2017, after 5.0% in December 2016. As in previous
months,  annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the
narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 8.4% in January 2017, after 8.8%
in December 2016.
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. The
annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations was 2.3% in January 2017, as in the
previous month. The annual growth rate of loans to households was 2.2% in January 2017, after
2.0%  in  December  2016. Although  developments  in  bank  credit  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged
relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-
financial sector balance sheets, the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 are
significantly supporting borrowing conditions for firms and households and thereby credit flows
across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  much  more  decisively  to  strengthening  economic  growth.  The  implementation
o f structural  reforms  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce
structural  unemployment  and  boost  potential  output  growth. Against  the  background  of  overall
limited  implementation  of  country-specific  recommendations  in  2016,  greater  reform  effort  is
necessary  in  all  euro  area  countries  in  2017.  Regarding fiscal  policies,  all  countries  should
intensify efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances. A full
and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the  macroeconomic
imbalances procedure over time and across countries remains crucial to ensure confidence in
the EU’s governance framework.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
