Dimitar Bogov: Payment systems and market infrastructures
Speech by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at the
10th jubilee edition of the NBRM's Conference on Payments and Market Infrastructures: Drivers
of European Payment Integration - Innovations and Cooperation, Ohrid, 5-7 July 2017.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  address  you  on  the  10th  jubilee  edition  of  the  Conference  on
Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures.  Organizing  this  Conference  has  become  a  valuable
tradition of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. We take great pride for being able to
host it all these years. This notable anniversary is an opportunity to look back and reflect on the
beginnings, to honor the achievements we have made so far and set the road for future growth
and development.
The history of the Conference dates back to 2008 set as a joint project with De Nederlandsche
Bank who is our partner in this journey from its very beginning. I feel the need to credit for it the
enthusiasm  of  Toni  Mircheski,  Deputy  Head  of  the  Payment  Systems  Department  within  the
NBRM, Mr Michiel van Doeveren and Mr Paul Osse from De Nederlandsche Bank for initiating
and organizing the very first conference. Three years later, Banco de Portugal came on board
thanks to Mr Rui Pimentel, to jointly create a conference that certainly grows into a recognizable
brand  name,  set  with  the  aim  to  inform  of  all  relevant  payment-related  matters,  to  share
knowledge and to educate, to influence and last but not least to network and socialize.
Payment systems and market infrastructures – why this topic in the first place?
There is no doubt that payment systems comprise vital part of countries’ economic and financial
infrastructures.  However,  it  was  only  the  last  two  decades  or  so  when  this  issue  gained  in
topicality,  concerning  both,  service  providers  and  policymakers  and  central  banks.  This  is
because  of  the  new  global  landscape,  which  shaped  by  the  streams  of  globalization,  the
dramatically  rising  volumes  of  payments  and  the  advancing  fintech  innovation  has  returned
payment systems to the focus once again. With their safety, resilience and efficiency becoming
critical to the financial stability and the well-functioning of the economy as a whole.
We started this Conference as domestically oriented, having the domestic financial sector as
target audience, to later on move to expand internationally from Southeastern and Central and
Eastern  Europe  to  the  Black  Sea  Region  and  the  Middle  East  with  Northern Africa  countries
joining  us  lately.  Allow  me  to  extend  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the  Vice  Governor  Maja
Kadievska Vojnovic and to Igor Velichkovski, Head of the Payment Systems Department within
the NBRM for successfully turning this conference into a truly international one.  Over the years,
delegates  from  central  banks  of  30  different  countries  have  attended  the  Conference.  This
growing  international  attendance  makes  particular  strength  of  the  Conference  showcasing
diverse  experiences  from  very  different  areas  of  the  world  driven  by  the  common  interest  in
payments  and  market  infrastructures.  Equally  appreciated  is  our  domestic  audience  that
continues to valuably contribute to the Conference each year.
Focusing  on  current  issues  in  the  payment  systems,  the  Conference  agenda  is  each  year
carefully designed to cover the latest trends and feature the main challenges in the area. Variety
of interesting topics has been on the menu so far including the European payment landscape
and legislation with a special focus on PSD and PSD2; topics related to payment systems and
payments oversight; the EU payment integration initiative known as Single European Payment
Area (SEPA); then, innovations; security and efficiency of retail payments. We have elaborated
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
on  instant  payments,  financial  inclusion  and  accessibility  of  payment  services,  financial
structures  resilience  and  many  more.  This  year’s  agenda  covers  themes  related  to  digital
banking,  cryptocurrencies  and  their  regulation,  the  new  technologies  such  as  DLT  and
blockchain  –  all  of  them  being  topics  of  considerable  relevance  at  the  moment,  and  will  only
become more important over time. Bracketing this jubilee edition we had the pleasure of hosting
many  distinguished  speakers  from  various  affiliations  starting  from  central  banks,  through
relevant  international  institutions,  commercial  banks,  clearing  houses  and  custodians  etc.  We
express our deepest gratitude and appreciation to all speakers and Conference delegates for the
great impact you make, keeping the Conference alive and growing.
The engaging social events are another important hallmark of the Conference as they make an
excellent  opportunity  to  network  and  reconnect  and  finally  to  amuse  and  entertain.  Moreover,
Ohrid, the home of the Conference, a charming city surrounded by water and mountains, known
as a Jerusalem of the Balkans and protected by UNESCO for its natural and cultural heritage, is
a unique experience by itself.
As  we  celebrate  our  10th  jubilee  we  are  proud  to  be  able  to  host  a  conference  that  certainly
evolves  into  important  meeting  place  for  the  payment  system  community  in  the  region  and
beyond. This success would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  wholehearted  support  of  our
colleagues and dear friends from De Nederlandsche Bank and Banco de Portugal. Support by
someone  reliable  and  eloquent  truly  matters  and  often  makes  the  difference  when  striving  to
excel. We could not have done it without you and we are deeply grateful to you for that!
It is why it is my particular pleasure that we have Governor Knot and board member Mr Rosalino
here with us today. Your presence do us great honor and I am confident that our cooperation will
be even stronger and deeper than before.
Allow me also to express my sincere gratitude to Mr Yves Mersch, Executive Board member of
the ECB, for honoring us with his presence at this highly important event.
EU integration is the future we want and we as a National Bank continuously invest in improving
our capacities to comply with EU central banking standards. Focusing on payment systems only,
major  steps  were  taken  toward  harmonization  of  the  Macedonian  legislation  with  the  EU
regulation. The new Law on Payment Services and Systems and related bylaws which are under
procedure  will  implement  PSD  and  part  of  the  provisions  from  PSD2,  Settlement  Finality
Directive and E-money II Directive. The NBRM took an important step toward harmonization with
the EU regulation in the oversight area by adopting new oversight regulation which is in line with
the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures,  as  well  as  the  ECB’s  revised  oversight
framework. Further on, domestic payment statistics was adjusted in accordance with the ECB
Regulation providing methodological and operational compliance with the payment statistics of
the European System of Central Banks. Another major project was completed recently linking the
domestic  payment  system  with  TARGET  2  via  Banca  d’Italia.  This  project  is  expected  to
contribute  to  reducing  the  gap  between  fees  for  cross-border  payment  transactions  and
domestic  payments,  which  is  in  line  with  the  EU  Progress  Report  recommendations  and  the
ECB’s Needs Analysis Report for the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia from 2013. In
the  period  ahead,  we  will  continue  to  further  strengthen  capacities  enabling  the  NBRM  to
successfully  join  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  and  later  the  Eurosystem  once  the
Republic of Macedonia achieves its strategic commitment for EU membership.
I would also like to express my appreciation to our distinguished panelists for today – Governors
and  other  honorable  guests  and  to  thank  all  esteemed  guests,  delegates  and  speakers  for
contributing to another successful event.
Finally, jubilees like this don’t come together over night. Allow me to express my recognition and
appreciation  to  the  whole  team  that  each  year  coordinates  the  Conference.  It  is  your  strong
commitment and dedication that we owe our achievements to. I wish you many more years of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
continued success!
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
