Sharon Donnery: Some perspectives on Brexit
Remarks by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Irish
Centre for European Law, Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, 22 February 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Sean  O’Sullivan,  James  O’Sullivan,  and  Mícheál  O’Keeffe  for  their
contributions to my remarks.
Good morning, it is a pleasure to be invited to share some perspectives on the impact of Brexit.
Disentangling  the  potential  macroeconomic,  financial  stability,  regulatory,  and  legal  effects  of
Brexit is no easy task. However, this is of particular importance for all of us here today, given the
significant level of exposure Ireland has to the UK.
There  is  no  road  map  as  to  how  a  country  goes  about  exiting  the  Union.  The  unprecedented
nature of the event makes assessing the effects difficult and navigating a clear path challenging.
Due to the restriction on any negotiations taking place before Article 50 is invoked, we know little
for  sure  and  even  less  in  detail.  Therefore,  to  guide  us  in  our  risk  assessment,  policy
development and strategy, we must look at all possible options that are left open to the many,
and varying stakeholders.
The precise impact on Ireland’s economy will be determined by a wide range of factors. These
include:
The  conditions  of  the  UK’s  exit  and  type  of  trade  deal  which  will  emerge  from  the
negotiations
The resulting impact on the UK, and the extent to which this is transmitted to Ireland and
Irish firms including financial institutions
The many possible regulatory outcomes.
However, given Ireland’s high level of exposure to the UK economy, we expect the overall effect
to be negative and material.
For  the  financial  services  sector,  Brexit  will  also  likely  have  implications  for  issues  such  as
passporting, equivalence and hence implications for firms’ future plans for location or expansion.
I  am  sure  you  will  appreciate  that  these  are  both  market-sensitive  and  politically-sensitive
matters, and will go right to the heart of the forthcoming negotiations.
In my remarks today, I will first frame the discussion in its macroeconomic context. I will then
touch on possible financial stability considerations from potential changes to the Irish financial
services sector. Finally, I will briefly discuss some of the challenges for cross-border regulation
going forward.
Economic and financial market developments
Despite the volatility in global financial markets in 2016, the most reliable measures of domestic
spending and economic activity suggest that the Irish economy continues to grow at a relatively
healthy pace.
Uncertainty in the period following the referendum vote was reflected in a marked weakening of
business  sentiment  indicators.  These  subsequently  rebounded  strongly  though,  suggesting  a
muted effect over the second-half of 2016.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Underpinning the recovery of the Irish economy in recent years has been the growth of underlying
domestic demand. This measure of activity excludes the volatile components of investment in
intangibles and aircraft.
The stronger performance of activity on the domestic side of the economy, has been supported
by a combination of relatively strong and broad-based growth in employment; modest increases
in incomes; and more favourable financial conditions.
Underlying domestic demand was estimated to have increased by 3.9 per cent in 2016. Looking
ahead, the main impetus for growth is projected to come from the continued strengthening of
demand  from  domestic  sources,  in  the  form  of  solid  growth  in  consumer  spending  and
underlying  investment.  Our  forecasts  for  2017  show  that  underlying  domestic  demand  is
projected to grow by over 3 per cent and by just under 3 per cent next year.
To  date,  in  the  absence  of  any  weakening  in  the  UK  economy,  the  impact  of  the  Brexit
referendum  outcome  on  Ireland  has  mainly  been  felt  through  the  volatility  in  the  euro/sterling
exchange rate.
Irish economic performance is quite sensitive to sterling exchange rate volatility given our close
ties to the UK. Sterling now appears to have fallen into a holding pattern on a trade weighted
basis and versus the euro, since it posted new lows in October. The trend against the dollar
however remains skewed to the downside.  Although the decline in sterling may appear dramatic,
it also reflects an unwinding of sterling’s continued appreciation since 2013.
The main channels through which the effects of Brexit will be felt include trade via weaker foreign
demand, the labour market and foreign direct investment.
The  UK  is  clearly  an  important  trading  partner,  and  some  indicators  suggest  that  Brexit  may
already be having an impact on trade including in food and live animals.
Other key channels through which the effects of Brexit will be felt include labour market flows
between Ireland and the UK and via the significant cross-border investment linkages. These will
be important areas of interest for Ireland in the upcoming negotiations.
The  performance  of  the  Irish  labour  market  was  exceptionally  strong  in  2016  with  estimated
employment  growth  of  about  3  per  cent  –  the  strongest  rate  of  increase  since  2007.  This
translates into an average of 56,000 additional persons at work in 2016. However, labour market
integration between the UK and Ireland has always been close, and was particularly important in
1
the context of the recent downturn.  
There  is  the  potential  for  a  positive  impact  on  growth  from  cross-border  investment  linkages
arising from net international investment inflows. This extends beyond the financial sector, and
might include new investment in technology and fin-tech sectors.
In  the  context  of  these  key  channels,  our  forecasts  incorporate  a  negative  adjustment  to
projected GDP growth because of Brexit related factors amounting to about 0.6 per cent in 2017
and 0.2 per cent in 2018.
The Central Bank is also closely monitoring the exposures of domestic Irish banks to the UK,
given their prominence in some cases, and potential channel for contagion.
In the transition period to establishing new arrangements between the UK and the EU, there is
the  potential  for  further  bouts  of  heightened  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion.  Macroeconomic,
financial and currency market effects will be heavily influenced by the related terms, timing and
impact  of  the  new  relationship.  Therefore,  there  is  the  possibility  for  more  acute  confidence
effects on investment and consumption decisions.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial stability considerations
Given the macroeconomic environment I will now turn to some financial stability considerations.
The mission of the Central Bank is to ‘safeguard stability, protect consumers’.
A hard exit could result in the considerable migration of financial services firms. Since June there
has  been  much  talk  of  a  new  financial  hub  in  Europe  with  many  cities  including  Dublin  put
forward as possible candidates.
I do not believe that a ‘new London’ will necessarily emerge in Europe but rather there may be a
fragmentation of financial services across several European cities.
Authorisation-related  activity  has  continued  to  increase  including  queries  from  banks,  markets
firms,  queries  regarding  payments  and  electronic  money,  and  insurance  authorisations.
However,  to  date,  these  have  largely  been  exploratory.  Many  firms  will  wait  until Article  50  is
triggered before taking concrete decisions on activity and location.
Our authorisation process has been clearly outlined on many occasions.  Firms will be engaged
in an efficient, open and rigorous process. We expect there to be a substantive presence here in
Ireland.
2
The establishment of new firms does indeed bring the prospect of potential upside in the form of
new employment in the financial services sector. However, it is too early to say how material this
will be.
Nonetheless, for financial services, we operate under a common framework for regulation and
supervision. This should ensure other broader considerations – beyond supervision or regulation-
drive location policy.
The potential establishment of new business lines in Ireland also presents a broad range of risks.
For the Central Bank from a financial stability perspective, a key consideration is understanding
the capacity of any potential firm to cause harm to the financial system, the economy and to
citizens through its course of business – particularly were it to fail.
Higher degrees of complexity and interconnectedness of new firms underline the importance of
taking an international perspective in our assessments of potential systemic risks. For new firms,
it  is  particularly  important  we  fully  understand  their  interaction  with  broader  firm  structures,
should a firm intend to establish a subsidiary here.
In a functioning market firms must be allowed to fail, subject to the deployment of recovery and
resolution tools. And there is a resolution dimension to authorisation. In this context we assess
issues  such  as  retail  deposit  base,  intra-financial  system  assets,  type  and  concentration  of
lending, and assets under management.
More broadly, legislation such as the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) provides
a  harmonised  framework  for  recovery  and  resolution  across  the  European  Union.  The
responsibility for resolution planning sits with the Central Bank in our role as National Resolution
Authority.
Under the BRRD banks are, amongst other things, required to prepare recovery and resolution
plans to mitigate the impact of their potential failure on the economy.
Smaller banks and in-scope investment firms are also required to prepare for their failure but
these firms would normally be liquidated under insolvency procedures. In the Banking Union, the
Single Resolution Mechanism has responsibility for the resolution of Significant Institutions.
The  resolution  planning  process  begins  with  a  strategic  business  analysis.  Through  this  we
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
analyse  banks  or  investment  firms  structure,  financial  position,  business  model,  critical
functions, core business lines, internal and external interdependencies and critical systems and
infrastructures.
This  is  followed  by  the  identification  of  a  preferred  resolution  strategy  which  includes:  (i)  an
assessment of both the credibility and feasibility of resolving large institutions; (ii) an assessment
of  the  individual  institution’s  loss  absorption  capacity;  or  (iii)  whether  smaller  firms  should  be
liquidated under normal insolvency proceedings.
Through this process we establish whether a firm’s failure would have a material adverse impact
on:
The functioning of the financial market and market confidence
Financial market infrastructures
Other financial institutions
The real economy.
The broader non-bank sector is also not immune to externalities and systemic risks which must
be closely monitored. Consideration of the risks of these firms in times of stress must also be
assessed.
Challenges for cross-border regulation
Given the macroeconomic and financial stability considerations outlined above, I will now turn to
some of the challenges for cross-border regulation going forward.
In  recent  weeks  the  UK  released  the  white  paper  on  Brexit.  The  central  message  was  clear,
namely  that  the  priority  for  the  UK  is  to  regain  sovereignty  over  immigration  policy  and  have
control over its own laws.   However, many issues have yet to be addressed. 
When the UK leaves the EU, they leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice which
presents many potential challenges. These challenges are complicated by the fact that issues
differ from sector-to-sector and with regard to the specific legislative or regulatory requirements
concerned. The relevant legislation will vary depending on firm type and activities involved.  
What is important is that regulatory authorities ensure that any migration of firms does not lead to
a more fragmented or disjointed supervisory system.  Regardless of where an entity seeks to
relocate, firms should expect a rigorous assessment of the applicable regulatory standards and
intrusive ongoing supervision of their activities.  
Regulatory authorities operate as part of the European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS)
and,  as  such,  should  apply  European  legislative  requirements  in  a  uniform  manner.  This  is  a
decentralised,  multi-layered  system  of  micro-  and  macro-prudential  authorities,  separated
according to the respective sectoral area – banking, insurance and securities markets.
The objective of the ESFS is to ensure consistent and coherent financial supervision and the
effective implementation of the rules in the financial sector. It also aims at preserving financial
stability,  promoting  confidence  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  and  providing  sufficient
protection for consumers.
This commonality of approach is critical to ensure that there will be no ‘race to the bottom’ for
firm’s  location  decisions;  that  the  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage  is  mitigated;  and  that  any  of  the
financial  stability  risks  I  mentioned  earlier  which  could  arise  as  a  result  of  a  diminution  of
regulatory standards are avoided.
In some cases, new firms will be similar to those already operating in the relevant jurisdictions.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
  In  others,  these  will  be  new  firm  types,  new  business  models  or  new  pieces  of  market
infrastructure.  Therefore, Brexit has the potential to significantly change the financial services
landscape  in  some  jurisdictions  as  certain  activities,  which  have  historically  taken  place  in
London, relocate to ensure access to the Single Market.   
For banks, the European Banking Authority acts as the setter of regulatory standards. The Single
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  complements  the  EBA  and  provides  the  framework  for
authorisation  and  supervision  across  the  Banking  Union.  In  this  context,  ECB  Banking
Supervision  will  take  the  final  decision  on  the  authorisation  or  licensing  of  any  Significant
Institution in any Member State in the euro area.    At the heart of SSM is close co-operation
between  the  ECB  and  the  national  competent  authorities  and  staff  in  the  Bank  work  closely
with  our  colleagues  in  Frankfurt.      This  ensures  that  there  will  be  a  level  playing  field  for  the
supervision of banks across the Banking Union regardless of country of authorisation.   
For insurance, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) aims to
strengthen  oversight  of  cross-border  groups  and  promote  coordination  in  the  European  Union
supervisory response. It also ensures greater harmonisation and coherent application of rules,
and better protection of consumers.
For  securities  markets,  the  European  Securities  and  Markets Authority  (ESMA)  mission  is  to
enhance investor protection and promote stable and orderly markets. 
The modalities of Brexit make the architecture of the ESFS ever more important today.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  Brexit  will  have  considerable  implications  for  Europe,  for  Ireland  and  the  Irish
economy, for the Central Bank, and for many of you here today.
In  my  remarks  I  have  explored  some  of  the  macroeconomic,  financial  stability  and  regulatory
considerations currently at play. 
A common theme across each factor is uncertainty. 
From a macroeconomic perspective, the conditions of the UK’s exit and the terms, timing and
impact of the trade deal will be a key determinant for assessing the macroeconomic, financial
and  currency  market  effects.  However,  at  present,  considerable  uncertainty  remains  as  to
the potential modalities of the deal, and hence to our macroeconomic assessment.
Turning to financial stability, new business lines and new firms brings new opportunities, new
challenges and new risks for the economy. These factors need to be considered in the context of
European or global financial markets. As with everything surrounding Brexit, we must be flexible
and prepare for all eventualities.
Yes,  there  may  be  some  employment  benefits  here  in  Ireland  from  firms  that  may  choose  to
establish  here.  However,  given  the  domestic  economy’s  exposure  to  the  UK,  we  expect  the
overall effect to be negative and material. 
The regulatory future is equally complex and uncertain. In the meantime, the Central Bank will
continue  to  fulfil  its  responsibilities  to  deliver  assertive  risk-based  supervision  which  is
undertaken in the context of the wider European System of Financial Supervision. This is critical
to ensure no race to the bottom, no regulatory arbitrage, and no unwarranted financial stability
risks emerge.
For all aspects, it will take some time before we be able to navigate a route to clarity.
1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
 See Honohan, P. and Fitzgerald, J., (2016), ‘Ireland and Brexit’, available here.
See for example Speech by Ed Sibley, Director of Credit Institutions Supervision, at the Banking and Payments
Federation of Ireland, 7 October 2016, available here, ‘Responding to the post-Brexit environment’, article by
Director of Policy & Risk Gerry Cross , 23 December 2016, available here, or Address by Governor Philip R.
Lane at the Institute for International and European Affairs, Dublin, 2 August 2016, available here. 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
