Yves Mersch: Digital transformation - Europe's integrated market of
tomorrow
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Joint ECB and European Commission Conference "Into the future: Europe's digital integrated
market", Frankfurt am Main, 31 January 2017.
Introduction
 For  over  a  decade  the  European  Commission,  the  Eurosystem  and  the  market  have  been
working  towards  transforming  what  has  up  to  now  been  a  very  fragmented  financial  market
infrastructure in Europe into a more integrated one. This work is still ongoing and requires more
effort. However, we are at a point now when progress has become tangible. In the first part of my
speech, I will briefly take stock of where we stand, particularly with regard to the post-trade area. I
will then address two areas where I still see gaps that are in the way of our achieving a truly
integrated European financial market. The first area is securities issuance, the second instant
payment settlement. In both these areas, digitalisation is opening up new opportunities, which
requires action. We at the ECB stand ready to take action accordingly.
Integration in the post-trade area
Following  the  launch  of  T2S  in  summer  2015  and  two  further  migration  waves  in  2016,  the
German market is due to migrate to T2S in less than a week’s time. This latest development is
expected to bring a big increase in the volume of securities transactions being settled on the
platform. More particularly, we anticipate an increase of up to 90% of the total volume expected
by the time all participating central securities depositories (CSDs) connect to the platform. The
next migration wave will also lead to an increase in the use of links between T2S markets that
facilitate cross-border transactions.
T2S  has  significantly  contributed  to  the  integration  of  post-trade  processes  across  all
participating  markets.  This  has  been  achieved  by  the  gradual  implementation  of  the  single
rulebook,  i.e.  standards,  rules  and  procedures,  in  the  T2S  market.  Harmonisation  measures
necessary  for  ensuring  efficient  and  safe  cross-CSD  settlement  in  T2S  are  fairly  advanced.
Monitoring has shown that, by the time they migrate to T2S, market communities are close to
achieving full compliance with the T2S standards.
Nevertheless, some gaps in compliance remain, for example in the area of corporate actions.
These are complex business processes for asset servicing, which involve rules and procedures
developed  by  a  range  of  different  actors.  The  newly  established  Advisory  Group  on  Market
Infrastructure for Securities and Collateral (AMI SeCo) will address these gaps in compliance,
among others. This advisory group will also look at ways in which the existing methodology could
1
be used as a blueprint for building a methodology to harmonise collateral management.
In  addition,  the  T2S  harmonisation  agenda  has  identified  a  number  of  regulatory  and  legal
barriers to post-trade harmonisation that fall under the regulatory agenda. These relate, among
others, to issues such as conflict of law and withholding tax procedures, which are expected to
be tackled this year. While the regulatory and legal barriers have proved to be thorny issues, I
expect that the Commission, as part of its capital markets union (CMU) action plan, will not be
2
dissuaded from its efforts.
Integration of securities issuance
With  T2S,  the  Eurosystem  has  created  the  basis  for  an  efficient  and  effective  settlement
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
mechanism for securities in Europe. At the same time, by adopting the CSD Regulation (CSDR),
the  Commission  has  contributed  to  further  harmonisation  of  the  CSDs’  regulatory  framework.
However,  to  be  able  to  reap  the  benefits  of  these  efforts,  market  participants  and  corporates
need to have full and direct access to the entire EU securities market at a low and harmonised
cost.
A  European  securities  market  should  offer  the  possibility  of  issuing,  settling  and  holding
securities  in  the  same  way,  regardless  of  where  issuers  and  investors  are  located.  A  fully
harmonised  system  of  securities  issuance  could  reduce  the  transaction  costs  for  capital
financing, make the European securities market more attractive in the global economy, and allow
an  effective  redistribution  of  private  risk  across  the  EU  markets.  A  sound  and  uniform  pan-
European securities issuance mechanism would also be conducive to the creation of the CMU.
Despite  efforts  to  overcome  the  fragmentation  of  the  securities  market  by  providing  a  level
playing field, there is still too little evidence of competition. The effects of competition have not
been felt in terms of an actual geographical widening of services provided by the vast majority of
issuers. The goal of having euro area markets where access is as easy and efficient as it is to
the respective national market has – with few exceptions – not been met yet.
The remaining fragmentation is often the result of legacy and national rules. This fragmentation is
an  area  that  calls  for  action.  It  may  be  worth  exploring  the  establishment  of  a  truly  European
issuance service – at least for some supranational debt instruments. We could even think about
the ECB/Eurosystem playing an active role in setting up such an issuance service. And we could
consider whether and to what extent new technologies, like distributed ledger technology (DLT),
can be used in that process.
TARGET instant payment settlement (TIPS)
Turning to the retail payments market, I have to say that, despite the introduction of standardised
retail  payment  instruments  and  harmonised  processing  rules,  the  retail  payments  market
infrastructure  in  Europe  is  still  fragmented. Apart  from  a  few  exceptions,  automated  clearing
houses (ACHs) still primarily focus on their respective national markets.
The availability of a safe and efficient market infrastructure that can guarantee the processing of
instant  payments  across  Europe  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  launch  of  pan-European  instant
payment solutions. Payment service providers should have the choice to either clear their instant
payments through ACHs or use a settlement service for instant payments.
Earlier this month, the Eurosystem launched a market consultation on user requirements and the
expected  volumes  for  a  settlement  service  for  instant  payments  in  central  bank  money.  The
proposed TARGET instant payment settlement (TIPS) service would offer a series of benefits to
the  payment  service  providers.  First,  it  would  guarantee  pan-European  reachability  for  instant
payments. Second, it would give payment service providers the possibility to use their credit lines
stemming  from  their  collateralised  positions  in  TARGET2.  Third,  it  would  eliminate  credit  risk,
thus leading the way to faster and efficient settlement. Last but not least, it would give payment
service  providers  more  choice:  they  could  either  connect  directly  to  TIPS  or  channel  their
payment instructions for instant payments through their respective ACH.
The Eurosystem will take a decision by June 2017 on whether to develop the service, based on
the results of the public consultation. TIPS could commence operations as soon as 2018.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
With the migration of the German market to T2S next week, the time has come to reap the actual
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
benefits  of  harmonisation  in  the  post-trade  area  in  Europe.  But  this  does  not  mean  we  can
slacken in our efforts. There is still a need for further and coordinated action in the harmonisation
of  post-trade  processes.  There  are  also  gaps  that  remain  in  the  financial  market  integration
process when it comes to securities issuance. And there is a need for action in instant payment
settlement across Europe. The ECB, together with market stakeholders, has to explore how to
best take action in these areas. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
This work covers issues such as collateral mobility and cross-border interoperability (i.e. collateral messages,
workflows, cut-off times, settlement cycles, etc.).
With regard to the conflict of law issue, the ECB welcomes the Commission’s “legislative initiative” to determine
with  legal  certainty  which  national  law  should  apply  to  security  ownership.  The  ECB  will  contribute  to  the
forthcoming public consultation with a view to strengthening the legal environment for cross-border settlement
services.  With  regard  to  the  withholding  tax  procedures,  the  Eurosystem  welcomes  the  Commission’s
announcement that a Code of Conduct on withholding tax procedures will be published in 2017. The AMI SeCo
predecessor – T2S Advisory Group – has contributed substantially to the work of the Commission in analysing
the possible harmonisation on withholding tax procedures and stands ready to further contribute to this work, if
required.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
