Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the
Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 25 September 2017.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased to be back speaking to your committee for the third hearing of this year.
A year ago, we were discussing together the moderate pace of the recovery in the euro area. We
were witnessing a slight loss of momentum and assessing the impact of the UK referendum.
Over the past 12 months, however, the recovery has accelerated and broadened, supported by
the pass-through of our monetary policy.
In my remarks today I will discuss the current economic outlook and the impact of our monetary
policy measures. At the request of the committee, I will focus in particular on two topics related to
the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  namely  the  corporate  sector  purchase  programme  (CSPP)  and
monetary policy implementation across the euro area.
The economic and inflation outlook
The economic expansion is now firm and broad-based across euro area countries and sectors.
Real GDP growth was better than expected in the first half of 2017, coming in at 2.3%, year on
year,  in  the  second  quarter.  The  euro  area  economy  has  enjoyed  17  consecutive  quarters  of
growth, and the latest information indicates continued momentum in the period ahead.
The ongoing recovery is, crucially, driven by domestic forces, and the labour market has notably
improved. The unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level in eight years. The number of
people  employed  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  by  almost  7  million  since  mid-2013.  These
employment  gains,  together  with  increasing  household  wealth,  are  supporting  the  private
consumption  outlook.  Moreover,  investment  is  improving,  buoyed  by  very  favourable  financing
conditions.
The  domestic  drivers  are  making  the  recovery  more  robust  and  resilient  to  adverse  external
influences. According  to  the  September  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  economic
expansion will continue at growth rates above potential over the projection horizon. Annual real
GDP  is  projected  to  increase  by  2.2%  in  2017,  by  1.8%  in  2018  and  by  1.7%  in  2019.  Risks
surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  are  broadly  balanced. At  the  same  time,  downside
risks continue to exist, mainly related to global factors and developments in foreign exchange
markets.
The  firm  economic  recovery  still  needs  to  translate  more  convincingly  into  stronger  inflation
dynamics.  As  I  reported  already  in  the  past,  deflation  risks  have  essentially  disappeared.
Nevertheless,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  have  picked  up  only  moderately  over  recent
months. Headline inflation, which was 1.5% in August, is expected to temporarily decline towards
the  turn  of  the  year,  driven  mainly  by  base  effects  in  the  energy  component. Afterwards,  it  is
expected to pick up gradually, reaching 1.5% in 2019, according to the ECB staff projections.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall, we are becoming more confident that inflation will eventually head to levels in line with
our inflation aim, but we also know that a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation is
still needed for the upward inflation path to materialise. Moreover, we still see some uncertainties
with  respect  to  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook.  Most  notably,  the  recent  volatility  in  the
exchange rate represents a source of uncertainty which requires monitoring with regard to its
possible implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability.
We therefore need to be patient and persistent. An upward adjustment of headline inflation that is
durable  and  self-sustained  requires  a  further  absorption  of  economic  slack.  This,  in  turn,  still
requires a very ample degree of monetary policy accommodation.
With  this  in  mind,  we  will  decide  later  this  year  on  a  re-calibration  of  our  instruments  that
maintains the degree of monetary support that the euro area economy still needs to complete its
transition  to  a  new  balanced  growth  trajectory  characterised  by  sustained  conditions  of  price
stability.
The corporate sector purchase programme
The package of monetary policy measures that we have phased in sequentially since June 2014
has  led  to  a  significant  easing  in  financing  conditions.  What  is  very  apparent  today,  and  very
difficult  to  dispute,  is  that  this  monetary  policy  impetus  is  increasingly  leading  to  stronger
economic activity, higher incomes and better employment prospects for people in the euro area.
One  key  factor  has  been  our  ability  to  activate  non-standard  instruments  that  can  transmit
additional stimulus to the productive sector. In fact, transmission through the banking system has
become increasingly effective since we began adopting credit-easing measures. I am referring
here specifically to the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), but a similar case can be
made for our targeted longer-term refinancing operations.
At the request of the committee, let me focus on one component of the APP, namely the CSPP.
Together  with  the  purchase  of  asset-backed  securities  and  covered  bonds,  the  CSPP
represents an important credit-easing component of the APP. By directly lowering the market-
based financing costs of non-financial corporations, it boosts the pass-through of our monetary
policy.
Under  the  CSPP,  the  Eurosystem  has  since  June  2016  purchased  bonds  issued  by  a  wide
range  of  non-bank  corporations  established  in  the  euro  area,  which  include  large,  as  well  as
some  smaller,  companies.  So  far,  close  to  €110  billion  of  corporate  bonds  from  around  200
issuers, in 20 countries, across all sectors, have been purchased. This information is available
on  our  website  and  in  our  publications,  and  is  updated  regularly.  We  continue  to  analyse
possibilities for sharing more information, to the extent that it can enhance transparency without
undermining the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Thanks  to  our  corporate  bond  purchases,  firms  in  the  euro  area  have  witnessed  significant
improvements in their financing conditions when issuing bonds.
But these improvements in financing conditions stemming from the CSPP are not confined to the
companies  whose  bonds  are  purchased  or  to  the  corporate  bond  market:  they  are  evident
across firms and other market segments.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For example, the yield spreads of high-rated corporate bonds that are not eligible for purchase –
namely  those  issued  by  financial  corporations  –  have  fallen  by  as  much  as  those  of  eligible
bonds issued by non-financial corporations (almost 70 basis points, from 1.25% in March 2016 to
0.57%)  since  the  CSPP  announcement.  Spreads  of  non-investment  grade  corporate  bonds,
which are not eligible for the CSPP, have also declined by 262 basis points, from 5.59% in March
1
2016 to 2.97%.
For  asset  purchases  to  boost  activity  and  inflation,  however,  these  improvements  in  financial
markets need to be passed through into credit conditions for the real economy.
In  this  regard,  we  have  seen  very  favourable  spillovers  into  credit  conditions  for  small  and
medium-sized  enterprises.  As  more  corporations  seek  market-based  financing,  given  the
attractive funding conditions prevailing in the capital markets, banks are left with greater capacity
to  provide  loans  to  smaller  companies,  which  are  more  constrained  in  terms  of  access  to
funding  sources.  Hence,  bank  lending  rates  on  very  small  loans  to  non-financial  corporations
have declined by around 50 basis points since the CSPP announcement. Looking at our latest
Survey  on  the  Access  to  Finance  of  Enterprises,  smaller  companies  are  indeed  reporting
improved financing conditions and better access to finance.
The  CSPP,  therefore,  has  strengthened  the  pass-through  of  our  asset  purchases  to  the
financing conditions of the real economy and has contributed to the overall monetary stimulus
needed to bring inflation rates back in line with our inflation aim.
Conducting monetary policy in the euro area
The supportive impact of our policy measures – including all elements of our asset purchase
programme – on financing conditions is therefore evident across firms regardless of their size. It
is also evident across sectors and across euro area countries. In other words, we are seeing a
smooth transmission of our single monetary policy.
A single currency entails a single monetary policy. Hence, the Governing Council takes decisions
to achieve the primary objective of maintaining price stability for the euro area as a whole. It also
establishes the necessary guidelines for their implementation.
At the same time, and in accordance with its Statute,   the  ECB  has  recourse  to  the  national
central  banks  (NCBs)  to  the  extent  deemed  possible  and  appropriate  for  carrying  out  the
operations which form part of the tasks of the Eurosystem. NCBs in turn have a duty to act in
3
accordance with the guidelines and instructions of the ECB.
2
This decentralised approach takes into consideration the financial structure of the euro area, i.e.
a monetary union made up of segmented national financial markets. In such an environment, the
close  interaction  of  NCBs  with  the  banks  operating  in  their  jurisdiction  brings  benefits  for  the
implementation of monetary policy. For example, we are able to collect precise information from
a  wide  range  of  local  counterparties,  which  can  be  integrated  into  the  harmonised  and  rich
information set that the Governing Council needs to design policy. Moreover, NCBs, knowing well
the specificities of their jurisdictions, are well placed to manage assets to be used as collateral in
our operations.
This  makes  our  decentralised  system  more  efficient  than  a  centralised  approach  under  the
current circumstances. In the absence of a truly single market for capital, securities markets still
depend very much on national specificities and preferences. A successful capital markets union
would abolish dividing lines between jurisdictions, with positive effects on the way we implement
our monetary policy. In the end, we should not forget that a fundamental reason for monetary
union was precisely to foster more integrated capital markets and reap the benefits in the form of
improved financing conditions across the euro area.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Since you asked me to elaborate on the issue of decentralisation, let me conclude with a final
thought in this respect and in particular on the implications for the functioning of Economic and
Monetary Union.
The fact that the ECB’s non-standard policy measures have been very effective in supporting the
financing conditions of companies and households throughout the euro area should not make us
forget the situation we witnessed at the peak of the crisis. For example, institutional weaknesses,
structural fragilities and excessive risk-taking contributed to a negative feedback loop between
sovereigns  and  banks  in  some  countries,  which  significantly  impaired  monetary  policy
transmission. The resultant contraction in the euro area economy threatened price stability, our
primary objective. Overcoming this vicious circle required considerable effort.
The pattern is now running in reverse, with positive spillovers from all countries. They all have
benefited from our measures supporting growth across all of the euro area and thus laying the
ground for a sustained return of inflation to levels in line with our aim.
But  while  a  cyclical  adjustment  has  been  taking  place,  there  are  still  structural  issues  which
impede sustainable economic convergence.
In the years to come, a higher degree of sustained convergence and strengthened resilience will
be necessary in order to achieve a better-functioning Economic and Monetary Union.
This requires, on the one hand, policy actions by national governments aimed at unlocking the
productive potential of our economies. On the other hand, further decisive steps are needed to
make Economic and Monetary Union’s economic governance truly fit for purpose.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
3
Spreads over the corresponding AAA-rated euro area average yield curve.
Article 12.1 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.
Article 14.3 of the Statute.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
