 Remarks by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the annual dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners  
to the Republic of South Africa 
 South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
7 June 2017 
  Introduction 
 Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Counsellors and 
Diplomats – a very good evening to you all. Thank you for accepting our invitation to 
this event, which has become a permanent feature on our calendar.  
 South Africa has its fair share of challenges. Our country finds itself at an intensely 
contested but creative moment in its history. South Africans are energetically debating 
the problems we face today and the policies we should be implementing to fix these 
problems.  
 Notwithstanding these challenges, South Africa has a number of positive things going 
for it, not least of which are its institutions, which remain resilient.  
 However,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  bore  you  with  the  developments  in  South  Africa 
tonight. I would prefer to use the limited time I have on this podium to touch on global 
economic developments and say a bit more about some of the initiatives that the South 
African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  has  been  involved  in  on  the  continent  and  in  other 
global forums. I will be brief, so that we can enjoy the excellent food and wine on offer 
tonight.  
 A global economy experiencing a cyclical recovery  
  Page 1 of 7 
Over the past few years, the world has had to become accustomed to disappointing 
global  growth  outcomes.  Therefore,  when  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF) 
identified 2016 as the turning point in the global growth cycle and upgraded the outlook 
for the global economy for 2017, it came as a welcome surprise. Broad-based gains 
were pencilled in across both the developed world and emerging markets. It seemed 
that the many years of accommodative and often unorthodox monetary policy, coupled 
with the more recent easier fiscal policy in the advanced economies, had helped to 
propel the global economy into a cyclical upswing.  
 But despite the promising short-term outlook, a number of challenges and risks persist, 
and  I  would  like  to  highlight  a  few  of  these.  The  shift  towards  more  inward-looking 
policies threatens to derail global trade, with negative consequences for growth. And 
the lack of progress in the implementation of some of the financial regulatory reforms 
agreed on since the most recent global financial crisis, such as finalising the capital 
framework under  Basel III, is also  something  we need to  address  as it  threatens to 
create  an  uneven  global  playing  field,  putting  some  countries  at  a disadvantage  by 
creating space for regulatory arbitrage.  
 Policy uncertainty in many countries, specifically the uncertainty arising from the tax 
proposals  in  the  United  States,  also  warrants  careful  attention.  Furthermore,  more 
aggressive  monetary  policy  actions  than  currently  anticipated  could  tighten  global 
financial  conditions,  causing  disruptions  to  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  and 
developing economies (EMDEs) like South Africa.  
 So while the short-term outlook is an optimistic one, there is general recognition that 
we cannot afford to be complacent. Securing a sustained recovery over the medium 
term  requires  stronger  international  cooperation.  Allow  me  to  highlight  some  of  the 
initiatives in this regard. 
 International cooperation 
  Page 2 of 7 
International  forums  such  as  the  G201  and  BRICS2  continue  to  give  attention  to 
initiatives  aimed  at  supporting  stronger,  more  sustainable,  balanced,  and  inclusive 
growth. As part of that, the G20 and BRICS also give much attention to improving the 
resilience of the global financial system.   
 Structural reforms have been a key objective of the G20 and have consequently been 
receiving greater emphasis since the Australian Presidency of the G20 in 2014. These 
reforms are aimed at raising the collective G20 GDP3 by an additional 2% by 2018. 
Each  G20  country  has  devised  a  growth  strategy,  highlighting  the  key  structural 
reforms  to  be  undertaken  to  raise  potential  output.  Every  year,  member  countries 
update  their  growth  strategies  (which  are  peer-reviewed),  new  measures  are 
committed  to  (where  possible),  and  progress  towards  the  stated  objectives  is 
assessed.  
 Under  China’s  G20  Presidency  in  2016,  the  structural  reform  agenda  was  further 
enhanced  by  the  development  of  a  set  of  priorities  and  guiding  principles  as  a 
reference for G20 reform efforts. An indicator system was devised to assist with the 
monitoring  and  assessment  of  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  their 
adequacy  to  address  the  structural  challenges.  This  year,  under  Germany’s 
Presidency, the G20 has devised a set of principles as a means of enhancing member 
countries’ resilience to shocks.   
 There  is  little  doubt  that  progress  is  being  made  in  building  a  more  resilient  global 
financial architecture. The IMF is currently reviewing its lending toolkit to make it more 
relevant and more balanced, and to also work towards closing the existing gaps within 
the  global  financial  safety  net.  Numerous  discussions  are  also  continuing  on 
developing  macroprudential  policies  and  devising  ways  of  improving  the  availability 
and  quality  of  relevant  data 
to  enhance  economic  policy 
formulation  and 
implementation.    
                                                            
1 Group of Twenty 
2 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 
3 gross domestic product 
 Page 3 of 7 
South Africa continues to reaffirm its support for the agreed reforms to strengthen the 
global  financial  system.  It  is  our  hope  that  various  jurisdictions  will  expedite  their 
respective  processes  to  find  a  compromise  on  the  remaining  Basel  III  elements  to 
ensure level playing fields. We support the efforts of the German G20 Presidency to 
try and establish a more holistic monitoring framework of the effects of the reforms, 
especially  for  EMDEs.  This  is  essential  to  determine  the  adjustments  and/or 
refinements to the reforms that may be needed to reduce their unintended effects.   
 Digital innovations in the financial sphere are another key topic in international forums. 
South Africa is fully supportive of the ongoing work on the regulatory approaches to 
financial digital innovations as well as of the stocktake of cybercrime regulations in the 
financial sector. The reduction of correspondent banking services in some EMDEs has 
presented some challenges for countries on the African continent. Reasons for  this 
reduction in correspondent banking services relate mainly to more stringent regulatory 
requirements  which  have  brought  about  reviews  of  business  models.  The  resultant 
impact  of  these  developments,  inter  alia  on  financial  inclusion,  warrants  closer 
attention.   
 Beyond  the  G20,  the  BRICS  grouping  has  achieved  much  since  its  first  political 
dialogue in September 2006. The New Development Bank (NDB) was established to 
mobilise  resources  for  infrastructure  development,  particularly  within  the  BRICS 
countries but also in other EMDEs. The NDB is doing well in mobilising resources for 
infrastructure  development projects and,  in 2016  alone,  approved  seven  projects  in 
the BRICS countries with a total value of over US$1.5 billion. These projects are all in 
the areas of renewable and green energy and transportation. The first  ‘green bond’ 
was  issued  in  2016  and  the  NDB  has  signed  memorandums  of understanding  with 
other development banks such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. 
I should also mention that the African Regional Centre of the NDB will likely be opened 
in South Africa later this year. 
 Another initiative which the BRICS grouping has undertaken in its quest to strengthen 
the  global  financial  safety  net  is  the  Contingent  Reserve  Arrangement  (CRA).  The 
CRA Treaty was signed in July 2014 and came into effect a year later; it is now fully 
operational.  
 Page 4 of 7 
 The CRA is a self-managed contingent reserves arrangement to forestall short-term 
balance-of-payments  pressures,  provide  mutual  support,  and  further  strengthen 
financial  stability.  The arrangement,  which  is  a  pool of  US$100  billion,  provides  the 
BRICS countries with access to additional liquidity in the event of a crisis. Fortunately, 
none of the BRICS countries have had a need to call upon the CRA to date. 
 A number of new initiatives are being discussed under the BRICS agenda, with a view 
to furthering the work already undertaken and cementing the progress that has been 
made to date. More details will emerge at the BRICS summit later this year. Next year, 
South Africa will take over the Presidency of the BRICS grouping. We will continue the 
work  aimed  at  further  strengthening  the  cooperation  and  collaboration  among  the 
BRICS members. 
 Regional economic integration  
 The SARB is an active participant in various forums on the continent, which include 
the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC),  the  Association  of  African 
Central Banks (AACB), and the Common Monetary Area (CMA).  
 The main aim of SADC is to promote economic and financial integration in the interest 
of sustainable economic development in the region. In this regard, the SADC Heads 
of State adopted the revised Regional Integrated Strategic Development Plan in 2016. 
The  SARB’s  regional  initiatives  are  mainly  conducted  through  the  Committee  of 
Central Bank Governors (CCBG), which is chaired by the SARB. The main objective 
of the CCBG is to undertake initiatives in support of the SADC Finance and Investment 
Protocol. 
 A notable achievement of the CCBG in recent years relates to the implementation of 
the  SADC  Integrated  Regional  Electronic  Settlement  System,  known  as  SIRESS. 
Through  SIRESS,  14  regional  central  banks  and  76  commercial  banks  are 
electronically  linked  to  effect  cross-border  payments  and  settlements  in  real  time. 
Since its inception in 2015, more than 700 000 transactions to the value of almost R3.1 
trillion have been cleared on the SIRESS platform. 
 Page 5 of 7 
 The SARB is also a member of the AACB. The main objectives of the AACB include 
the  promotion  of  cooperation  in  the monetary,  banking  and financial  spheres  in  the 
interest of maintaining price and financial stability. The work of the AACB is in line with 
the broad framework of Agenda 2063 adopted by the African Union in 2013.  
 The SARB is currently the Vice Chair of the AACB and will host the Ordinary Annual 
Meeting as well as the Governors Symposium on 12-16 August 2017 here in Pretoria. 
At this annual meeting, the SARB will assume the chairmanship of the AACB. During 
our tenure as chair, we will continue to enhance cooperation among African central 
banks on cross-border banking supervision and payment systems, continental training 
on  issues  relating  to  banking  supervision  and  regulation,  and  the  collection  of  data 
needed to support bank supervisory activities.  
 Closer to home, the SARB also engages with the central banks of Lesotho, Namibia 
and Swaziland, who together with South Africa are members of the CMA. The central 
bank  governors  of  the  CMA  meet  three  times  a  year  to  discuss  economic 
developments  in  their respective  countries  as  well  as  other  issues  related  to  cross-
border spillover effects among CMA members. The exchange of information as well 
as  the  collaboration  on  research  and  other  matters  of  mutual  interest  have  proven 
extremely  useful  in  assisting  the  CMA  countries  to  fulfil  their  respective  obligations 
stipulated 
in 
the  Multilateral  Monetary  Agreement  which  governs 
the  CMA 
arrangement. 
 Conclusion 
 The SARB remains committed to playing its role in the development of the region, the 
continent, and the global economy. In many instances, we do this in collaboration with 
our counterparts in your respective countries. Tonight, we celebrate this cooperation, 
and we trust that our partnerships will only strengthen in the times ahead. In the spirit 
of  this  cooperation,  I  would  like  to  invite  you  to  approach  the  SARB  through  our 
International Economic Relations and Policy Department should you need an update 
on economic and/or monetary policy developments. 
  Page 6 of 7 
Thank you for honouring our invitation. Please enjoy the rest of the evening.  
 Page 7 of 7 
