SAARCFINANCE Seminar on  
"Macro-prudential Policies in SAARC Countries" 
8-9 June 2017, Kathmandu, Nepal 
 Inaugural Address by 
Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor of  
Nepal Rastra Bank 
to  address 
this  august  gathering  at 
 
Deputy Governor of Nepal Rastra Bank Mr. Chinta Mani Siwakoti, 
Board Members of Nepal Rastra Bank Dr. Sri Ram Poudyal and Mr. Ramjee 
Regmi 
Special Guest and Economic Adviser at Bangladesh Bank Dr.Mohammad 
Akhtaruzzaman,  
Eminent Resource Person and Principal Economist at the BIS Dr. Ilhyock Shim,  
Executive Directors of Nepal Rastra Bank 
Seminar Participants, 
Media Friends, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure 
this 
SAARCFINANCE Seminar on "Macro-Prudential Policies in SAARC Countries.” 
This  theme  seems  to  be  very  appropriate  as  significant  macro-prudential  policy 
reforms  worldwide  are  being  designed 
increasingly 
the 
interconnected nature of financial institutions, markets and systems.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Macro-prudential  policy  has  become  an 
in 
safeguarding  financial  stability  across  the  world.  This  new  perspective  has 
spawned  profound  changes  and  impacts  on  our  understanding  of  how  the  whole 
economy  operates  when  the  impacts  of  financial  policies  and  actions  are 
considered.  
 
Macro-prudential  policies  have  become  part  of  the  policy  paradigm  in  emerging 
and advanced economies alike, but less so in most countries of the SAARC region. 
These    policies  primarily  use  prudential  tools  to  limit  systemic  risk  and  thus 
minimize  disruptions  in  the  provision  of  key  financial  services  that  can  have 
serious repercussions on the economy. 
 
indispensable  public  policy 
to  respond 
to 
Ideally, a sound macro-prudential policy needs to be based on the determination of 
the economic cycles, assessment and measurement of the build-up of systemic risk 
and also the impact of the stance of other public policies like monetary and fiscal 
policy on the risk taking behavior of the financial sector. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
In this digital era that seeks to encourage electronic transaction settlement system 
with  the  aim  of  minimizing  the  use  of  cash,  the  adoption  of  macro-prudential 
supervision  would  persuade  banks  to  adequately  manage  their  investment 
portfolios  and  foster  risk  management.  Macro-prudential  approach  also  elicits 
broad  implementation  of  contingency  plans  by  banks  to  bolster  internal  controls 
and provide early warning signals for the speedy resolution of problem areas. 
 
However,  unlike  the  case  of  monetary  policy  where  there  has  been  a  clear 
consensus  about  the  crucial  role  of  the  policy  rate  and  supported  by  clear  and 
coordinated communication, a comparable consensus is still absent in the literature 
on macro-prudential policy.  
 
Likewise,  there  are  some  complex  issues  with  regard  to  the  implementation  of 
macro-prudential policies in countries in this region. These include a) constructing 
an appropriate tool kit to tackle with systemic risk; b) evolving an optimal mix of 
rules  and  discretion  while  using  macro-prudential  policies;  and  c)  extending  the 
perimeter  for  macro-prudential  instruments  to  encompass  the  shadow  banking 
system. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007-09,  Nepal  Rastra    Bank  had  accorded 
more focus on micro-prudential policies.  As the financial crisis exposed the gaps 
in  existing  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework,  regulators  worldwide  hastened 
to  embrace  macro-prudential  policies  due  to  their  significance  in  overcoming  the 
inherent  flaws  associated  with  the  traditional  micro-prudential  approach.    NRB 
also  followed  suit  and  issued  a  host  of  macro  prudential  measures  to  make  BFIs 
more resilient.   
 
The  principal  macro-prudential  policies  implemented  by  NRB  are  related  to 
strengthening  the  capital  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  implementing  risk 
based supervision, making necessary arrangement for system audit, and enhancing 
corporate  governance  in  BFIs.  Likewise,  some  of  the  core  elements  of  macro-
 2 
prudential  regulation  include  risk  management  guidelines  to  banks,  stress  testing 
guidelines,  liquidity  monitoring,  fixation  of  credit  to  core  capital  and  deposit 
(CCD) ratio, loan to value ratio, and single borrower limit, among others. I will not 
go  into  the  details  of  these  as  they  will  be  examined  in  the  country  presentation 
session. What I want to stress here, however, is that  NRB has been implementing 
macro-prudential  measures  together  with  the  monetary  policy  for  facilitating  in 
maintaining financial stability as well as in attaining higher economic growth. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Let me conclude.  
 
The  significance  of  the  macro-prudential  approach  has  been  acknowledged  for 
quite some time and rightly so. Developing, enhancing and implementing effective 
macro-prudential  policy  measures  are  the  core  for  promoting  and  maintaining 
ongoing financial system stability. 
 
Systemic  risks  and  the  associated  policies  warrant  close  and  active  attention  of 
supervisors  and  regulators.  Prudential  policies  need  to  go  beyond  traditional 
supervision. What is important is not the validity of the approach, but rather how to 
apply it in practice.  
 
This  Seminar  presents  a  unique  opportunity  for  us  to  understand  the  macro-
prudential  approach  for  maintaining  financial  stability.  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that 
all  the  participants  would  maximize  the  opportunity  offered  by  this  Seminar  to 
enhance  their  capacities  in  this  area  through  active  participation  and  sharing  of 
experiences.  
 
In  closing, I  wish  you  an  insightful  and  productive  deliberation  and  trust  that  the 
Seminar  will  leave  you  with  additional  insights  to  tackle  the  challenges  that  lie 
ahead in this field.  
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 3 
