 Opening Ceremony of Asian Financial Cooperation Association (AFCA)  
 Keynote Speech by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Beijing, July 24, 2017 
 Vice President Mr. Ma Kai, Vice Premier of China 
Mr. Guo Shuqing, Chairman of the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) 
Mr. Chen Yuan, Vice Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference  
Mr. Jin Liqun, President of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank  (AIIB) 
Mr. Norman Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) 
Mr. Tian Guoli, Chairman of AFCA 
Excellencies, 
Executives of financial institutions, 
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
A very good afternoon to you all, 
 
 
Today’s opening ceremony of  the  Asian Financial  Cooperation Association  (AFCA) 
is a very auspicious occasion, and I am honoured to be a part of this historical event. I would 
like  to  congratulate  the  Chinese  government  for  successfully  establishing  AFCA  –  a  new 
forum, which I am certain, will play a significant role in enhancing financial connectivity and 
cooperation within Asia. I would therefore like to take this opportunity to share with you my 
thoughts  on  how  we  can  further  enhance  financial  connectivity  to  ensure  sustained  shared 
benefits – as stated in AFCA’s mission1.  
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
People  have  long  been  connected  by  trade  along  the  ancient  Silk  Road  dating  back 
more than 2,000  years ago. Today in  modern times,  many trade and investment  agreements 
between  China  and  other  Asian  countries  have  promoted  close  economic  ties  in  the  region. 
Thanks  to  the  Chinese  leadership,  the  spirit  of  connectivity  and  cooperation  is  further 
enhanced  through  the  One  Belt  One  Road  initiative.  The  Asian  Infrastructure  Investment 
Bank (AIIB) is an added funding impetus to ensure that there will be physical infrastructure 
connectivity, laying the strong foundation for shared economic prosperity.  
China’s growing  economic ties with  Thailand and  ASEAN have become stronger in 
many aspects. China has been the largest trading partner of Thailand since 2013. Thanks to 
the China-ASEAN FTA, China has been ASEAN’s largest trading partner since 20092, while 
ASEAN has been the third-largest trading partner of China since 20113. China has been one 
of Thailand’s top foreign investors for the past nine years4. And in terms of tourism, almost 
                                                           
1 AFCA follows the philosophy of openness and inclusiveness as well as the mission of “connectivity, 
cooperation, joint governance, and shared benefits” 
2 ASEAN Secretariat: ASEAN Trade Balance (in US$ Million) by Country.  
3 World Bank: China Trade at a glance. http://wits.worldbank.org/CountrySnapshot/en/CHN 
4 Foreign Direct Investment Position Classified by Country (US$), Combining Hong Kong and China FDI 
values. BOT.  
 1 
 nine million Chinese tourists visited Thailand last year, the highest number from any country 
in  the  world.  It  is  clear  that  trade  and  investment  connectivity  between  China  and  ASEAN 
have been well established and have great potential to expand much further.  
However, financial connectivity in our region has yet to catch up with trade and 
investment connectivity.  Costs of cross-border financial transactions remain high, and there 
is  limited  usage  of  regional  currencies  for  cross  border  transactions.    There  is  also  limited 
presence  and  penetration  of  regional  banks  in  each  country.  In  this  regard,  I  see  many 
opportunities  for  Asian  banks  to  play  increasing  roles  in  connecting  businesses  within  our 
region.  
Enhanced  regional  financial  connectivity  will  not  only  support  trade  and 
investment  activities,  but  can  also  promote  productivity,  immunity,  and  financial 
inclusivity in Asia. I therefore welcome and fully support AFCA in its endeavor to promote 
greater  financial  cooperation.  This  forum  will  help  ensure  that  our  region  can  reap  the  full 
benefits  of  increased  financial  connectivity.  Greater  regional  economic  integration  can  then 
reach its full potential and harness the dynamism of this region for sustained shared benefits.    
Currently, the Bank of Thailand has placed much emphasis on strengthening financial 
connectivity within the region, particularly with ASEAN-5 and our neighbouring CLMV.     
  
Let  me  highlight  our  two  projects  that  have  strong  potential  to  connect  people  and 
businesses in the region more efficiently by providing better access, wider choices, and lower 
costs of financial services.  
  First,  ASEAN  central  banks  are  working  towards  achieving  the  goals  of  the 
ASEAN Banking  Integration  Framework. For example,  the opening of Qualified 
ASEAN  Banks  or  QABs  would  establish  important  cross-border  banking 
networks,  which  will  help  increase  efficiency  of  financial  services  across  the 
region.  At  present,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  in  the  process  of  negotiating  QAB 
agreements  with  the  authorities  of  Malaysia,  Myanmar,  Indonesia,  and  the 
Philippines. 
  The  second  initiative  is  the  promotion  of  regional  currency  usage  for  trade 
settlement  and  direct  investment  in  our  region.  As  we  all  know,  regional 
currencies tend to move together and volatility of advanced countries’ currencies 
will  continue  to  be  high.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  and  the  PBOC  have  been 
promoting  the  use  of  Thai  Baht  and  Renminbi  for  bilateral  trade  settlement 
between Thailand and China. We have  a THB/CNY bilateral  swap agreement in 
place since 2011 with a Chinese bank serving as the Clearing Bank for Renminbi 
in  Thailand  since  2015.  Additionally,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  worked  with 
several central banks in the region to relax relevant foreign exchange regulations 
with  a  view  to  promoting  the  use  of  regional  currency.  Our  local  currency 
framework  with  Malaysia  became  operational  in  2016.  Discussions  with 
Cambodia, Laos, and Indonesia are underway.  
Thus  far,  ASEAN  countries  have  undertaken  a  number  of  initiatives  to  upgrade  our 
financial  infrastructure,  but  most  of  these  initiatives  are  aimed  for  domestic  usage.  Much 
work remains to enhance closer financial connectivity at the regional level.   
 
Allow  me  to  propose  three  key  areas  to  strengthen  our  regional  financial 
connectivity.  The intended outcomes of these initiatives are to raise productivity, build 
immunity, and increase financial inclusivity for sustained benefits.   
 2 
 First,  we need to  embrace  innovative  financial  technology  to raise productivity. 
 
The  rapid  pace  of  technological  innovations  has  changed  how  we  trade  and  how  financial 
transactions are conducted.  
Alipay  and  WeChat  Pay  have  demonstrated  the  power  of  modern  payment 
services in China. In Vietnam, consumers use OnePay to make financial transactions. Wing 
in  Cambodia,  BCEL  in  Laos  and  Wave  Money  in  Myanmar  provide  instant  payments  and 
money  transfers  through  mobile  phones  to  those  without  bank  accounts.  Last  but  not  least, 
Thailand’s  PromptPay  provides  consumers  with  one  of  the  most  efficient  fund  transfer 
services in the region, using mobile phone or citizen ID numbers as a proxy for bank account 
numbers.  
The Bank of Thailand also set up a “regulatory sandbox” framework to support 
development  of  financial  innovations.  This  framework  allows  innovators  to  test  their 
products,  and  regulators  to  develop  necessary  regulatory  requirements  before  innovative 
products are launched to the public.  
 
Nevertheless, embracing financial technology at the domestic level is not enough.  
We need to create linkages among domestic payment platforms and innovative financial 
products  to  facilitate  cross-border  financial  activities.  Thailand  has  been  active  in 
enhancing  inter-platform  linkages.  On  a  bilateral  level,  Thai  banks  and  FinTech  firms  are 
developing  cross-currency  remittance  services  based  on  blockchain  technology.  At  the 
regional level, Thailand’s national interbank payment system has recently been selected to be 
the hub of the Asian Payment Network (APN).  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As we all know, FinTech comes with new risks. Cyber threats, in recent years, have 
increased  dramatically  in  frequency,  sophistication  and  impacts.  This  leads  to  my  second 
area of cooperation. AFCA members may wish to cooperate to build immunity to lessen 
the impact of unwarranted  risks. Among others, AFCA  could  serve as  a forum to  ensure 
that cooperation on cyber security is  brought  to  fruition.  Regulators  also  need to  strengthen 
their cooperation to minimize possible cross-border spillover risks. On this note, I am glad to 
report  that  tomorrow  CBRC  and  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  enter  into  a  MoU  on  Banking 
Supervision. 
 
The  third  area  of  cooperation  is  to  enhance  financial  inclusivity  in  our  region. 
The  financial  sector  must  be  aware  of  its  social  responsibility  and  take  active  roles  in 
promoting financial access and inclusive growth. People at large need to have access to basic 
financial  products  at  minimal  prices,  together  with  adequate  financial  literacy  and  financial 
planning skills.  
 
In  summary,  financial  connectivity  can  be  and  needs  to  be  enhanced  in  Asia. 
AFCA, with its diverse membership, is in a unique position to deepen financial cooperation 
and promote connectivity among its members. AFCA can play significant roles to strengthen 
the Asian financial sector and Asian economies by improving productivity, building stronger 
immunity, and promoting more financial inclusivity. 
In closing, I would like to congratulate once again the Chinese leadership, CBRC, and 
AFCA. I wish AFCA very fruitful years ahead.  
Thank you. 
  3 
