Rasheed  Al  Maraj:  Financial  technology  and  its  impact  on  the
banking and financial sector
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank
of Bahrain, at the 1st Middle East and Africa FinTech Forum, Manama, 29 March 2017.
 Your  Excellencies,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen, Assalam  u Alaikum  and  good
morning. I welcome you all to the AFS Fintech conference. This conference will discuss a very
important and topical subject – financial technology and its impact on the banking and financial
sector. AFS deserves our appreciation for arranging this conference.  
We  are  living  in  an  era  of  unprecedented  changes  mainly  brought  about  by  technological
advancement.  Technology  was  once  the  backoffice  function  of  a  bank.  Then  came  the  time
when technology took the front seat and started driving the industry. Now we are witnessing the
next  phase  when  technology  is defining financial  services.  Technology  influences  heavily  the
banks’ strategy. If a bank is unable to satisfy its tech-savvy customers in an era of super mobility,
hyper connectivity and immense computing power, it risks losing them to competition. This is the
new normal.   
At  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  we  understand  the  disruptive  nature  of  Fintech  to  business
models and jobs but we have made a conscious decision to adopt it. The pace of innovation is
not reversible, so the only choice we have is how well we prepare ourselves for the disruption.
The CBB issued yesterday a white paper for consultation on a Regulatory Sandbox for Fintech in
which  new  companies  can  test  their  Fintech  solutions.  We  will  also  issue  by  the  end  of  next
month  draft  rules  for  consultation  on  crowdfunding  platforms  for  both  conventional  and  sharia
compliant services.  We will also release soon our new directives on cloud computing.  
These  new  initiatives  are  continuation  of  our  efforts  to  provide  the  right  mix  of  policies  and
products  to  develop  and  enhance  the  quality  and  competitiveness  of  services  in  the  financial
sector. 
Bahrain has had a long history of proactive adoption of new technology. In the past few years the
CBB has taken a number of important steps in this regard, which include:
Introduction of a new license of Payment Service Provision and allowing Payment Service
Providers  to  issue  prepaid  cards  to  allow  the  unbankable  segment  access  to  affordable
payment services including remittances.
Introduction  of  EFTS  commercially  known  as  fawri  and  fawrit  as  mandatory  for  all  retail
banks.
The  CBB  is  all  for  embracing  innovation  and  new  technology,  but  we  cannot  afford  to  be
complacent  in  assessing  the  risks  posed  by  these  technologies  and  taking  action  to  mitigate
them. We have to ask the common sense questions:
-        What is fundamentally new in this offering?
-        What is the cost, benefit equation for the customer?
-        What new risks it poses to the financial system?
-        How can we mitigate these risks? and
-        On balance, is it beneficial to allow this offering?
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
We believe that a nuanced and sensible approach rather than blind following of every trending
technology  is  the  ideal  way  to  regulating  in  these  uncertain  times.  We  have  always  been
accessible  to  the  industry  and  given  the  nature  of  Fintech  it  becomes  even  more  critical  to
consult the market participants before introducing new rules. I encourage market players to take
the initiative and enlighten us if they have strong views on any Fintech related area.   
Ladies and gentlemen, I once again would like to thank AFS for arranging the conference and
wish you all a productive conference today and tomorrow. Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
