Yves Mersch: Advancing financial market integration
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Government Borrowers Forum, organised by the World Bank, Luxembourg, 18 May 2017.
 To foster European financial integration, the ECB has set sail under the European flag. And we
will continue our journey towards European financial integration. Today, in this respect, I’d like to
make three key points.
1.  We need to better explore the potential of our integrated financial market infrastructure for
securities. T2S has integrated the securities settlement business, bringing the economies of
scale  it  needs.  Therefore  we  welcome  the announcement of the international central
securities  depositories  (ICSDs)  to  bring  Eurobonds  (not  to  be  confused  with  EU
sovereign debt bonds) to T2S for settlement.
2.  In the EU, issuance has remained a largely domestic business, often as a result of legacy
structures  and  national  rules.  In  a  true  single  market,  one  could  expect a  Europe-wide
primary market for securities to develop in order to ensure equal and unrestricted
access for economic actors. We stand ready to examine the need for and potential of
such a European issuance service together with potential users.
3.  On  central  counterparty  (CCP)  clearing,  we  must  consider  whether  recent  geopolitical
events require the Eurosystem to take action to ensure that we continue to adequately
control  the  impact  of  offshore  clearing  activities  on  the  stability  of  our  common
currency.
Single market for capital
To foster the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy, an efficient and integrated
financial  system  is  key.  Financial  integration  is  essential  for  an  effective  monetary  union  and
relevant to financial stability, to which we contribute. The Eurosystem’s task of promoting well-
functioning  payment  systems,  as  part  of  its  monetary  policy  mandate,  is  also  supported  by
financial  integration.  And  it  is  not  something  we  can  take  for  granted:  incomplete  financial
integration creates vulnerabilities. This is why, in the past few years, fundamental steps towards
an  integrated  and  developed  capital  market  have  been  taken  at  European  level.  The  banking
union and the capital markets union are important initiatives which have the potential to change
the structure of the euro area’s financial architecture.
A single market for capital is needed primarily because it can improve the efficiency of credit
allocation, it can enhance risk-sharing and it can foster diverse sources of financing. Indeed, it
would  strengthen  the  economic  resilience  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  as  a  whole  by
providing  the  ECB  with  alternative  channels  for  transmitting  monetary  policy  and  by  enabling
capital markets to play a role in cushioning asymmetric shocks.
However, to facilitate the mobility and free flow of capital and financial assets across Europe, it is
essential that an efficient underlying infrastructure is in place. A lot has been achieved already,
but still we need to ensure that we use the market infrastructure as effectively as possible.
TARGET2-Securities
Nine  years  ago  this  month  (on  23  May  2008),  the  Governing  Council  issued  a  proposal  to  all
European  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs)  to  join  T2S.  The  project  was  backed  by  the
European  Parliament,  but  the  ECOFIN  Council  specified  three  requirements:  (i)  the  platform
should be multicurrency; (ii) participation in T2S should not be compulsory; and (iii) access to
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
central bank money should not be restricted for non-participating CSDs.
Nine  years  on  and  the  first  roll-out  phase  of  T2S  is  almost  complete.  The  system  is
multicurrency  and  the  Danish  krone  is  set  to  join  in  October  2018.  The  majority  of  European
markets will be connected, although participation remains voluntary. And some CSDs outside the
European Union have even expressed an interest in joining T2S.
This  February,  the  successful  migration  of  six  CSDs  from  Austria,  Germany,  Hungary,
Luxembourg,  Slovakia  and  Slovenia  doubled  the  settlement  volume  in  T2S.  Today,  a  daily
average of around 500,000 transactions is settled on the platform. This represents 90% of the
transaction volume that is expected to be settled on the platform after the end of the full migration
in September 2017. The volume is in line with the expected yearly forecast done by the Advisory
Group  on  Market  Infrastructures  for  Securities  and  Collateral.  The  most  recent  survey  from
March 2017 shows that the overall volume growth for the next two years is anticipated to be 5.3%
on  average.  Additionally,  when  the  Danish  krone  joins  next  year  we  expect  the  volume  to
increase by 5.5 million transactions per year.
With the introduction of T2S, the average cost at market infrastructure level per transaction has
decreased significantly – in particular for cross-CSD transactions. Our initial cost estimations
showed that the average fee per domestic CSD settlement in the euro area was 73 euro cent
while cross-border transactions were up to ten times more expensive. The launch of T2S has
brought the transaction fee per instruction down to 15 euro cent. However, T2S is built on a full-
cost recovery principle and we continue to monitor the cost recovery prospects. Consequently, in
the  first  half  of  2016  a  review  of  the  T2S  operating  costs  was  launched.  Despite  the  positive
market trend, we cannot rule out that the price list will need to be adjusted after 2019 and/or the
cost recovery period extended.
T2S  also  created  the  momentum  for  an  extraordinary  harmonisation  agenda  which,  for  many
markets,  has  been  the  key  benefit.  T2S,  together  with  the  adoption  of  the  Central  Securities
Depositories Regulation (CSDR), provided the push needed to drive the harmonisation process
forwards. The market used the project to create a single rulebook and harmonise the post-trade
rules and practices. The adoption of the ISO 20022 messaging standard, the single schedule for
the settlement day, a harmonised settlement cycle of T+2 and a single intraday delivery-versus-
payment  settlement  model  in  central  bank  money  are  but  a  few  examples  of  the  achieved
harmonisation. But T2S has also contributed to issues that go beyond the core T2S settlement
functionalities,  such  as  the  harmonisation  of  the  processing  of  corporate  actions  and  the
harmonisation of the different settlement finality rules in T2S CSDs.
The large market players which have migrated to T2S have given us very positive feedback. T2S
has not only harmonised the settlement of securities across Europe and brought forward post-
trade harmonisation in at least nine out of the 15 Giovannini barriers, it has also optimised their
liquidity and collateral management, which many regard as being the greatest benefit. We can
conclude that the benefits brought by T2S are widely recognised.
Eurobonds
The  single  securities  settlement  platform  has  also  led  to  greater  freedom  in  the  mobility  of
securities, in particular for the purpose of collateralisation: this is true for all securities used in
Europe. An example of that is “Eurobonds” (i.e. issues made mostly through the ICSDs). Since
the T2S launch, both Clearstream Group and Euroclear Group have publicly announced that their
group (offering both CSD and ICSD services) will give their customers the possibility to settle all
securities  on  the  T2S  platform.  For  market  participants  such  as  central  banks,  this  is  a  key
benefit, providing greater collateral mobility and greater liquidity efficiency (in particular in central
bank money). In Europe the ICSDs are the main issuers of so-called Eurobonds or international
securities. Today, over 250,000 outstanding ISINs (20% of these ISINs are euro-denominated)
are issued through the two ICSDs, with a value of roughly €9.2 trillion. From a European capital
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
market perspective, these assets are important. They account for about 25% of all outstanding
marketable assets eligible as collateral with the Eurosystem. I would like to see the announced
strategy of the two groups to bring Eurobonds to be settled in T2S starting to take effect by 2018.
Issuance
As  we  see  T2S  roll  out,  it  has  become  apparent  that  despite  the  progress  towards  a  more
integrated market, issuance has remained a largely national business across the EU, often as a
result of legacy structures and national rules. Indeed, the issue was first identified in the T2S
harmonisation agenda in 2011 and remains relevant today.
Recently adopted legislation, namely the CSDR level II, addresses certain aspects of the location
of issuance. In particular, it covers the rights of issuers, allowing them to have their securities
recorded in the CSD of their choice. However, despite both T2S and the CSDR, fragmentation
endures and a domestic issuance process at European level does not exist at the moment.
There are several possible reasons why the market has failed to generate a more integrated and
efficient  securities  issuance  industry.  These  include  legal  constraints  and,  specifically,
uncertainties  arising  from  issuing  in  foreign  jurisdictions,  where  some  or  all  aspects  of  the
issuer’s  domestic  law  no  longer  apply.  In  addition,  regulatory  restrictions  or  domestic  market
practices  may  prevent  issuers  from  reaching  out  to  the  whole  EU  investor  base.  Take,  for
example, restrictions on the location of primary dealers in sovereign debt or national registration
procedures.
The result is that – regardless of the launch of a single securities settlement engine (T2S) and
the single legal framework (CSDR) – the market has remained national, from the perspective of
securities  issuance.  Debt  instruments,  even  supranational  ones,  are  issued  nationally  and
issuers  and  investors  often  fail  to  reach  each  other  across  Europe.  Although  ICSDs  issue
Eurobonds in a global environment, they remain in the context of specific market infrastructures
(under the rules of the market where the ICSD is located). This status quo restricts the investor
base, in particular the pan-European one, lowers the level of credit allocation and risk-sharing,
and hampers cross-border investment.
In a true single market, a Europe-wide market for securities should exist to ensure equal and
unrestricted  access  for  economic  actors.  In  this  context,  the  establishment  of  a  European
issuance service, which would allow the emergence of a Europe-wide market, would be the next
logical step to consider.
Central clearing
Central clearing is another area in which we should continue our efforts to promote European
integration. Awareness has grown within the European Union of the critical importance of “where”
and “how” these clearing houses operate and, as a result, these infrastructures have been under
intense scrutiny recently.
Central clearing is a global financial activity, and major currencies such as the euro, US dollar
and  Japanese  yen  are  traded  and  cleared  worldwide.  It  is  undoubtedly  an  important  function
within the global financial system, and ensures that investors can hedge their risks by accessing
liquidity in multiple currencies across a variety of markets.
The  euro  is  unique  among  major  currencies,  however,  in  that  a  significant  number  of
systemically important classes of derivatives and securities are cleared to a large extent outside
its currency area.
Looking at the centrally cleared euro-denominated derivatives market, the picture that emerges
from the data reported by euro area banks under EMIR is that CCPs established in the UK clear
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
approximately:
95% of their interest rate derivatives transactions;
60% of their credit derivatives transactions;
30% of their commodity derivatives transactions;
25% of their equity derivatives transactions.
Overall,  in  terms  of  notional  amounts,  more  than  90%  of  the  euro-denominated  derivatives
business of euro area banks is cleared via UK CCPs.
The importance of UK CCPs is not limited to derivatives, as they are involved in approximately
50% of the cleared euro-denominated repo business of euro area banks.
As  I  have  said  in  the  past,  the  risks  stemming  from  this  situation  are  currently  adequately
covered: the European Market Infrastructure Regulation allows the Eurosystem to assess and
monitor risks through active participation in cross-border supervisory colleges, whose role and
prerogatives are guaranteed by the authority of the European Court of Justice. This framework is
complemented by the dedicated Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Bank of England
and the European Central Bank.
The UK’s recent decision to leave the EU has called into question the ability of authorities such
as  the  Eurosystem  to  ensure  they  can  continue  to  adequately  control  the  impact  of  offshore
clearing activities while maintaining the stability of their currency.
The challenges arising from Brexit are still ahead of us, and authorities need to think carefully
about  how  they  can  guarantee  the  stability  of  their  respective  currencies  in  the  future.  For
example, in the coming years, a better balance may have to be found between the global nature
of central clearing and the need for certain systemically important clearing activities to be under
the oversight of the domestic currency areas. Naturally, the transition towards a new European
and global clearing landscape could raise certain operational challenges. If poorly managed, it
could  increase  the  cost  of  central  clearing.  A  clear  timetable,  good  cooperation  between
regulators  and  careful  preparation  by  market  participants  would  be  necessary  to  ensure  a
smooth transition. I believe that it is feasible.
The European Commission will shortly be making legislative proposals to address systemic risk
related to CCPs. Naturally, we are willing to cooperate with the Commission within our areas of
expertise.
Conclusion
In  concluding,  I  want  to  reiterate  the  need  to  reflect  on  whether  recent  geopolitical  events
require the Eurosystem to take action to ensure that we continue to adequately control
the impact of offshore clearing activities on the stability of our currency.
To deepen integration and complete the Single Market, ambitious goals need to be supported by
specific  proposals.  We  stand  ready  to  facilitate  a  dialogue  and  take  action  on  these  specific
proposals.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
