9th Global Alliance for Banking on Values (GABV) Conference 
Kathmandu           /         7-9 March 2017 
Address by Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor, Nepal Rastra Bank 
   
Rt. Honorable Prime Minister Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal, 
Chairman of Global Alliance for Banking on Values and CEO of Triodos Bank Mr. Peter Blom, 
Executive Director of GABV Dr. Marcos Eguiguren, 
Chairman of NMB Bank Mr. Pawan Kumar Golyan, 
CEO of NMB Bank Mr. Upendra Poudyal, 
My friends from the financial community in Nepal 
Media friends, 
Distinguished Guests from Nepal and Abroad 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
It gives me immense pleasure to address this 9th Global Alliance for Banking on Values (GABV) Conference, being held 
here in Kathmandu. I would like to thank NMB Bank and other members of the GABV for providing me this privilege. 
 
I  believe  the  theme  of  this  Conference  entitled  "Shifting  the  Financial  Paradigm  -  Courage  to  Act  Together" 
encompasses the work of the Global Alliance targeted at changing the world of finances to put people before profit. In 
this  respect,  I  appreciate  this  laudable  effort  of  the  members  of  GABV  who  are  focusing  on  strengthening  local 
communities and entrepreneurs to become self-reliant. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
The challenge of building a sustainable financial system is to develop one which is a servant of the real economy, not 
its  master,  and  which  enables  the  sustainable  intergenerational  increase  of  common  welfare  and  environmental 
resilience. The ultimate aim of the financial system should be to cater to people’s needs. There may be differences in 
values with respect to geography and time, but human welfare will always remain the principal value across different 
cultures. 
 
It was in the aftermath of the global financial crisis that a number of sustainability-focused or values-based banks had 
exhibited the ability to provide steady risk-adjusted financial returns by focusing on the real economy, and acting as 
financial intermediaries dedicated to supporting economic, social and environmental impact. These banks that put 
people before profit have gained credibility and recognition and are growing in strength and number. These banking 
institutions  are  united  by  the  Principles  of  Sustainable  Banking  that  are  based  on  certain  values  including 
sustainability, transparency, diversity, fairness and inclusion. In this banking model, profit is a result of sustaining and 
growing value in the real economy and healthy communities, not an end goal. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Allow me now to share with you a few words on financial sector development of Nepal which would be of interest 
especially to our foreign delegates.  
 
Nepal’s  modern  financial  system  has  evolved  through  80  years.  Up  until  1983,  the  financial  sector  was  highly 
controlled.  In the  mid-1980s,  the country embarked  on a  financial  liberalization  drive  with  a  view  to  developing a 
diversified  and  competitive  financial  sector.  A  major  structural  change  in  financial  sector  policies,  regulations  and 
institutional  developments  was  witnessed.  The  Government  emphasized  the  role  of  the  private  sector  for  the 
investment in the financial sector. Subsequently, the door was opened for foreign banks to open Joint Venture Banks 
in Nepal.  
 
Due  to  the  adoption  of  financial  liberalization  policy,   a  proliferation  in  number  of banks  and  financial  institutions 
(BFIs) was observed in Nepal in the earlier decades. However, the growth has moderated as NRB imposed moratorium 
on licensing of BFIs. For the last two years, banking system of Nepal is experiencing an encouraging restructuring and 
consolidation, particularly through the merger and acquisition. NRB has taken consolidation in the financial sector as 
an important reform measure for building strong and competitive financial environment.   
 
As  of  mid-January  2017,  the  number  of  commercial  banks  stood  at  28  while  the  number  of  development  banks 
aggregated 57. Similarly, there were 36 finance companies and  48 microfinance institutions. Moreover, there were 15 
cooperatives permitted by NRB to conduct limited banking activities as well as 25 financial NGOs also licensed by NRB 
to undertake micro finance activities in Nepal. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Nepal  Rastra  Bank  and  the  Government  of  Nepal  have  been  according  due  priority  to  values-based  banking  as 
demonstrated by their focus on microfinance which gained momentum in the 1990s as an instrumental tool for social 
mobilization and poverty reduction. Consequently, some policy models were introduced including the Grameen Bank 
Model, the Wholesale Micro Finance Model, the Directed Lending Model, Project-Based Micro Credit Model, and the 
FINGOs and the SACCOs Model.  
 
I would now like to take your few minutes to highlight a couple of recent policy provisions which show that both the 
Government and NRB have given a clear message to banks and financial institutions of the country to focus more on 
the well-being of the people, especially those residing in the rural areas, and not just on profit.  
 
First of all, acknowledging the significance of financial inclusion for Nepal, the Government through the budget for 
2016/17  provided  some  policy  directions.  These  included  expansion  of  banking  and  financial  services  in  the  rural 
areas, promotion of mobile banking and branchless banking, continuation of government led programs such as Rural 
Self Reliance Fund (RSRF), Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF), Youth and Small Entrepreneur Self-employment Fund, and 
the implementation of subsidized agricultural lending program. 
 
Secondly, a policy to extend concessional housing loan to earthquake victims was introduced immediately after the 
earthquake on 25 April 2015. Regulatory relief measures were also introduced to boost the credit disbursement from 
the BFIs and bring dynamism in economic activity in the aftermath of the disastrous earthquake. 
 
Thirdly, the NRB provides direct financial support to the banks and financial institutions where the number of banking 
units is low.  
 
Fourthly,  in its Monetary Policy of 2015/16, the NRB made a provision of special refinance facility at 1 percent interest 
with the aim of encouraging BFIs (A, B, and C class) to extend loans to agriculture and small business-based income 
generating activities in poverty stricken areas of the country.  
 
Fifthly,  under  the  Deprived  Sector  Credit  Program,  presently  commercial  banks,  development  banks  and  finance 
companies  are  required  to  lend  at  least  5.0  percent,  4.5  percent  and  4.0  percent  of  their  outstanding  loans 
respectively to deprived sector. 
 
Another provision exists where commercial banks are required to allocate 20 percent of total credit to the specified 
productive sector such as agriculture, energy, tourism, and small and cottage industries. Likewise, development banks 
and finance companies need to lend 15 percent and 10 percent respectively to the specified productive sector. 
 
Likewise,  BFIs  are  required  to  allocate  at  least  1  percent  of  their  profit  to  activities  relating  to  corporate  social 
responsibility.  In  a  similar  way,  NRB  has  instructed  the  MFIs  to  develop  a  separate  Client  Protection  Fund  for  the 
institutional development and welfare of the borrowers in which they are required to allocate at least 1 percent of 
their net profits. 
 
Similarly,  the  Nepal  Financial  Inclusion  Roadmap  (2017–2022),  released  on  July  2016,  is  expected  to  guide  future 
initiatives around the immediate priorities for financial inclusion.  
 
Last,  but  not  the  least,  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  (FSDS),  covering  the  period  from  2016/17  to 
2020/21, has been recently approved by the Government. The main objective of the strategy is to have a competitive, 
efficient, stable and inclusive financial sector that contributes to broad based economic growth. 
 
The foregoing measures illustrate that NRB has been giving a clear message to the financial institutions of this country 
to focus on values-based banking; however, this requires a collaborative approach as their successful implementation 
is governed by the cooperation provided by the relevant stakeholders. 
 
 
  2 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Let me conclude.  
 
Banks need to move forward on a new, actionable, shared value approach. They have to revamp their role within 
society  by  devising  financial  products  and  services  to  address  social  and  environmental  needs,  extending  existing 
business and capturing new lines of business in areas that are currently considered “unbankable.” I urge the financial 
institutions to support local communities by investing in projects so that they could become self-reliant. For this, they 
can  team  up  with  a  network  of  trusted  partners  to  foster  knowledge,  stimulate  activity,  and  catalyze  financial 
innovation. 
 
The NRB’s challenge is to build up a financial system that is supportive of growth, and dynamic enough to fulfill the 
evolving demands of a real economy. In this respect, I believe this Conference would be very fruitful for all of us as we 
will  be  able  to  draw  concrete  lessons  from  experiences  of  values-based  banks  who  are  working  for  the  local 
communities, who are not guided by profit and who are "Banking on Values." 
 
With this note, I would like to express my best wishes for the successful conclusion of this Conference! 
 
Thank you for your kind attention! 
 
 3 
