Vítor  Constâncio:  Synergies  between  banking  union  and  capital
markets union
Keynote speech by Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
joint  conference  of  the  European  Commission  and  European  Central  Bank  on  European
Financial Integration, Brussels, 19 May 2017.
 1
Banking  union  and  capital  markets  union  are  undoubtedly  the  two  central  policy  initiatives  to
catalyse financial integration in the EU. Consequently, they received a great deal of attention in
the ECB’s report on Financial Integration in Europe over the last years and stand at the centre of
today’s conference.  The benefits of the two initiatives are known. Banking union increases the
resilience of the banking sector, facilitates sector consolidation and enhances the cross border
credit  market,  expanding  its  financing  capabilities  and  reducing  intermediation  costs.  Capital
markets union contributes to diversify sources of finance for our economies and creates a risk-
sharing channel that helps smooth out incomes and consumption via cross-border holdings of
financial assets. In this perspective, I welcome the initiatives by the Commission in the context of
the  review  of  the  CRD  IV/CRR  and  of  the  second  communication  regarding  the  progress  of
capital markets union.
In the past, it was sometimes argued that banks and capital markets were competing with each
other  for  a  limited  amount  of  viable  investment  opportunities.   Some  have  even  seen  capital
markets  as  threatening  traditional  banking  models.  However,  banks  and  capital  markets  are
rather  closely  interconnected  as  parts  of  the  wider  financial  system:  banks  and  markets
complement each other in financing the real economy. Therefore, we should not treat banking
union  and  capital  markets  union  as  two  mutually  exclusive  projects  but  rather  see  them  as
mutually reinforcing initiatives that can bring the Single Market for financial services to the next
level. In my speech today, I will argue that there are very good reasons to think about banking
union and capital markets union together, to capture the synergies between them and to work on
overcoming the impediments that constrain both of them.
2
The need to reap these synergies is particularly compelling at this crucial moment in time, in
which the U.K. has announced its departure from the EU. The prospect that the largest financial
centre  in  Europe  will  drift  away  from  the  EU27  Single  Market  brings  a  number  of  specific
challenges  and  opportunities  for  the  further  development  of  the  banking  union  and  capital
markets union.
On  the  one  hand,  London  is  an  important  provider  of  financial  services  to  firms  in  the  EU,  in
particular as regards capital market services. In the future, firms may have less access to these
financial services and to U.K. capital markets and these services may need to be relocated to or
developed  in  the  EU27.   This  process  of  business  relocation  and  development  needs  to  be
managed, notably from a regulatory and supervisory perspective.
3
On the other hand, the departure of the largest non-banking union Member State is an opportunity
to explore the interlinkages between capital markets union and banking union. All remaining 27
Member  States  have  a  vital  interest  in  the  success  of  both  policy  initiatives  thus  furthering
financial integration.
Let me therefore now go into more detail on how banking union supports capital markets union
and vice-versa.
Banking union supports capital markets union
Banks are important players in capital markets. They are active as service-providers, investors
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  issuers.  Recent  studies  propose  that  banks  and  capital  markets  not  only  compete  for
servicing a limited pool of investment projects but also co-operate. Complementarities between
banks  and  capital  markets  are  becoming  more  and  more  apparent,  broadening  the  set  of
financing  sources  the  ultimate  borrower  can  choose  from.   There  are  many  areas  where
markets  and  banks  offer  complementary  information  and  funding  services,  among  them:  (i)
issuance of bonds, where banks provide a number of advisory and administrative services for
the  issuer;  (ii)  securitisation,  where  banks  focus  on  credit  analysis  and  markets  focus  on
financing; and (iii) bank capital, where capital markets reduce the financing friction by lowering
banks’ cost of equity, and enable banks to raise additional equity to expand their lending scope.
4
Given  these  synergies,  I  see  at  least  two  channels  through  which  the  banking  system  can
contribute  to  the  development  of  capital  markets  in  the  EU.  Firstly,  a  more resilient  banking
system  supports  the  smooth  functioning  of  capital  markets.  For  example,  resilient  banks  are
more likely to act as market makers for certain capital market instruments and may ideally buffer
extreme price movements in times of crisis. Furthermore, well-capitalised banks are less likely to
be forced to fire sale certain asset classes. This leads to less market disruptions in times of
crisis. In addition, prospering banks will be able to invest more resources into the development of
new capital market products and services. And this is the first important reason why banking
union matters for capital markets union: the banking union has been designed to increase the
resilience  of  banks  and  a  more  resilient  banking  system  supports  the  development  of  capital
markets, which is one of the objectives of capital markets union.
Secondly,  an  increasingly integrated  banking  system  should  also  support  the  integration  of
capital markets in the EU. Further regulatory and supervisory convergence should make cross-
border operations and cross-border mergers of banks easier. For example, a bank that was so
far  predominantly  active  in  the  market  of  country  A  could  be  encouraged  by  regulatory
convergence to also offer its capital market services to clients in country B. In this way the bank
would expand and diversify its customer base and possibly even the exposures on its balance
sheet.  Capital  markets  in  country  B  would  thus  benefit  from  a  larger  number  of  available
providers and products. The cross-border holdings of capital market instruments would increase.
The integration of capital markets could also be accelerated by cross-border mergers of banks.
Cross-border  banks  have  an  inherent  interest  in  driving  forward  the  permeability  of  national
capital  markets  as  they  could  benefit  from  scale-effects  by  reaping  cross  border  efficiency
potential.
For the banking system to become more resilient  and  more integrated and hence support the
resilience  and  integration  of  capital  markets,  we  need  to  complete  banking  union.  So  let  me
highlight what, in my view, are the most important missing elements in the banking union.
In  the  area  of  resolution,  we  need  to  continue  to  push  forward  on  establishing  a  permanent
backstop to the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) that would increase the credibility of the system in
systemic  crises.  In  the  area  of  deposit  insurance,  we  should  recognise  the  fundamental
importance of a European Deposit Insurance Scheme when it comes to underpinning the trust in
our currency and to achieve a uniform system whereby the same confidence in bank deposits as
money applies throughout the whole banking union. Last but not least, banking union can only be
completed via a strong Single Rulebook which reduces national discretions and allows liquidity to
flow freely in the banking union to seek its most productive use. The ECB will make proposals on
the  issue  in  the  context  of  its  contribution  to  the  review  of  the  CRD  IV/CRR  proposed  by  the
European  Commission  that  we  find  insufficient  in  the  domain  of  national  discretions.  Further
progress on the banking union could also provide a rationale for recognising that cross-border
lending activities within the banking union would benefit from a unified cross-country supervisory
setup and could therefore be treated like within-country lending under the framework for Global
Systemically  Important  Banks.  There  is  obviously  a  need  to  better  understand  the  potential
impact of such a change on financial integration and capital markets and I am looking forward to
see more analysis on this issue.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Additionally,  we  need  to  make  the  banking  union  unassailable  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the
departure of the U.K. from the European Union, both in terms of resilience and level playing field.
Opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and possible concentration of systemic risk at a national
level  would  lead  to  market  fragmentation  and  thus  threaten  financial  stability.  While  prudential
supervision in the euro area is now entrusted to the ECB which minimizes these risks, market
activity  is  subject  to  national  supervision  and  oversight.  The  risks  are  likely  to  increase  with
Brexit,  when  activities  of  financial  institutions  could  be  reallocated  across  the  EU.   The  ECB
stands  ready  to  technically  support  a  smooth  transition  for  banks  choosing  to  move  to  or
reorganise their activities within the euro area in the context of Brexit. The ECB will ensure that all
banks  operating  in  the  euro  area  meet  equally  high  supervisory  standards,  thus  ensuring  the
safety and soundness of the European banking system. In this context, the borderline between
the  banking  system  and  capital  markets  may  become  important,  in  particular  when  capital
market participants or non-bank intermediaries fulfil typical bank functions. Appropriate regulation
and supervision would have to ensure that similar risks are treated similarly and that regulatory
arbitrage is avoided.
Capital markets union supports banking union
5
I will now turn to the synergies running in the opposite direction and elaborate on how capital
markets union supports banking union. The very essence of the argument is that more integrated
and jointly regulated capital markets would also support cross-border activities and resilience of
banks. But let me be more specific.
Firstly, in a significantly more integrated capital market, banks would no longer need to develop
local expertise for each national capital market. They could exploit cross-border economies of
scale more easily by offering similar or even the same products and services in another Member
State. By operating in a larger, integrated market, banks would likely increase the cross-border
holdings of assets and be able to build larger and more diversified collateral pools for securitised
products and covered bonds. The former effect could also contribute to a significant reduction of
the sovereign bank nexus. Secondly, banks could also benefit from larger investor bases for their
capital-market related funding instruments.
Another possible side effect for banking union could be that deeper, more integrated and efficient
markets  for  certain  assets,  such  as  non-performing  exposures,  could  lead  to  higher  market
values of these assets. This would support the clean-up of bank balance sheets.
Alongside  these  opportunities  of  capital  markets  union,  we  need  to  recognise  that  such
fundamental changes in the structure of the financial system would require revisiting regulatory
approaches.  In this regard, I want to highlight three aspects:
6
First, a Single Rulebook and an integrated supervisor for capital markets are key ingredients to
support the integration of capital markets and would ultimately also allow banks to thrive from
more  stable  capital  markets.  The  establishment  of  ESMA  has  been  a  major  step  towards
fostering  convergence  of  national  supervisory  practices.  But  the  supervision  of  securities
markets remains at the national level, which fragments the application of EU legislation. ESMA
could play a much larger role in ensuring consistent transposition and effective enforcement of
rules agreed at EU level. In the longer term, capital markets union warrants a single European
capital  markets  supervisor.  In  this  context,  the  move  towards  direct  European  supervisory
powers for certain segments of capital markets seems justified, particularly when major financial
market  infrastructures  have  systemic  implications  on  the  entire  EU  market.  A  medium-term
centralisation of supervision for central counterparties (CCPs) would enhance the supervisory
framework for these highly systemic infrastructures, as well as ensure consistent cross-border
supervision.
Second,  an  increased  non-bank  sector  should  go  hand  in  hand  with  an  expansion  of  the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
microprudential  framework  for  non-banks.  What  we  need  is  a  coherent  and  well-supervised
regulatory  perimeter  for  non-banks  that  are  engaged  in  bank-like  activities  to  avoid  regulatory
arbitrage.  At  times  when  risks  legitimately  shift  towards  the  non-bank  sector,  heightened
vigilance is required to avoid that such risks spill back and compromise the soundness of credit
institutions  and  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  For  example,  large  investment  firms  with
substantial cross-border links can pose risks that need to be addressed at the European level.
Third,  an  adequate  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  non-bank  financial  system  from  a
macroprudential  perspective  will  contribute  to  the  resilience  of  banking  union.  It  is  crucial  that
macroprudential tools become available and operational in the EU for non-banks.  In this context,
the Commission seems to have no intention of proposing changes in the macroprudential policy
instruments, which is not helpful.
7
All in all, a more unified set up of regulation and supervision of capital markets and its market
participants  would  increase  the  resilience  of  capital  markets  and  thereby  also  of  the  banking
system.
The underlying rulebook
To  reap  the  synergies  between  banking  and  capital  markets  union,  progress  in  supporting
legislative domains is necessary. For instance, European regulators and supervisors of banks
and capital markets are confronted today with many different rules concerning insolvency law,
company law and tax legislation.
Various changes in insolvency law have recently been undertaken at the national level with the
aim  to  facilitate  court-led  proceedings.  Yet,  they  often  remain  highly  complex  and  costly  and
thereby  reduce  recovery  values.  In  particular  in  the  case  of  non-performing  loans  on  banks’
balance sheets, any delays in the judicial proceedings significantly affect recovery values and
reduce offer prices. This leads to situations of high transaction costs and general impediments to
sales of non-performing exposures. Costly judicial proceedings may not be feasible for smaller
SMEs, with low levels of capital. A recent Commission proposal aims to tackle this impasse by
offering  an  alternative  to  normal  insolvency  proceedings  but  still  relies  on  court  systems.  A
complementary course of action is to encourage out-of-court settlements. A number of European
countries have introduced versions of such regimes since the crisis.
8
Regarding tax law, the Commission has already sponsored various initiatives, concluding that
non-harmonised  and  burdensome  withholding  tax  procedures  constitute  a  barrier  for  the
securities’ industry and for investors.  They penalise cross-border investment, disrupt financial
processes such as clearing and settlement, increase the cost of cross-border trading and are
ultimately incompatible with a single European securities market.
9
Finally,  the  use  of  International  Security  Identification  Number  (ISIN)  and  Legal  Entity  Identifier
(LEI)  will  increase  transparency  in  capital  and  banking  markets,  foster  their  integration  and
enhance  efficiency  and  consumer  protection.  Financial  markets’  stakeholders  need  easy  and
reliable  tools  to  uniquely  identify  financial  assets,  transactions,  issuers,  guarantors  and
counterparties as well as their key features. This is particularly important for data management
which serves as a backbone for operational purposes for market participants and supervisors or
for  provision  of  (statistical)  information  to  the  public.  The  current  situation  is  very  costly  for
market  participants.  The  many  different  proprietary  identifiers  and  local  identifiers  cause
difficulties as they are incomplete, overlapping, and insufficiently accurate and do not guarantee a
level  playing  field.  While  the  drawbacks  of  the  current  situation  are  known  and  undisputed,
resistance to change by the markets is due to the fact that unique identifiers are a public good.
They need to be introduced and maintained by legislation. The mandatory requirement to use the
LEI should be extended to all financial instruments and not only to specific market segments. In
addition to securities, the LEI and ISIN could be used for investment funds, financial derivatives
10
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
and loans.
Conclusions
There are very good reasons to think about banking union and capital markets union together and
to  capture  the  synergies  between  them.  We  are  talking  about  two  inseparable  parts  of  the
financial system.
From  a  policy  perspective,  banking  union  and  capital  markets  union  are  undoubtedly  the  two
central catalysers of EU financial integration for the years to come. All 27 Member States have a
vital  interest  in  keeping  these  two  engines  running  smoothly,  especially  in  view  of  the  U.K.’s
departure from the EU.
Thank you for your attention.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
For example, this year’s report, presented here and released this morning, provides further reasons for the
importance of BU and CMU and updates readers on the ECB’s views on some of their most important items.
See Allen, F. and D. Gale (1997), “Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal Smoothing”, Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 3, pp. 523–46; Boot, A. and A. V. Thakor (1997), “Can Relationship Banking
Survive Competition?”, CEPR Discussion Paper 1592.
See  Sapir, A.,  D.  Schoenmaker,  and  N.  Véron  (2017),  “Making  the  best  of  Brexit  for  the  EU  27  financial
system”, Bruegel Policy Brief, Issue 1.
See Song, F. and A. V. Thakor (2010), “Financial System Architecture and the Co-evolution of Banks and Capital
Markets”, Economic Journal, 120, 547, pp. 1021–1055.
See Veron, N. and D. Schoenmaker (2017), “To Make the Best of Brexit, the European Union Needs to Beef Up
ESMA”,
See Claessens, S. (2016), “Regulation and structural change in financial systems”, in ECB, The Future of the
International Monetary and Financial Architecture, Proceedings of the ECB Monetary Forum on Central Banking,
pp. 188–221.
See “ECB contribution on the Commission’s consultation on the future of the EU macroprudential framework”
See Directive on preventive restructuring frameworks, second chance and measures to increase the efficiency
of restructuring, insolvency and discharge procedures and amending Directive 2012/30/EU.
See the Giovannini Report, the Clearing and Settlement Fiscal Compliance expert group FISCO, the Tax Barrier
Advisory Group (T-BAG) as well as the ECB’s T2S Advisory Group.
The importance of financial market data standards and global identifiers has also been discussed in Box 2 of
last year’s ECB report on Financial Integration in Europe.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
