   NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA 
   Speech at the presentation of the  
Annual Financial Stability Report for 2016  
  
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
  Belgrade, 27 July 2017 
Ladies and gentlemen, members of the press, dear colleagues,  
Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  Annual  Financial  Stability  Report  for  2016.  Consistent  with  best 
international practice, for the third year in a row, we have been presenting to you our analyses aimed at 
assessing the resilience of the financial system to shocks, and the measures that we adopt in order to make 
the system even more resilient.  
Serbia  is  a  small  and  open  economy,  which  is  why  the  developments  in  the  international  environment, 
notably in the euro area, may impact the domestic financial system. Last year saw a slowdown in global 
economic  growth,  the  UK’s  decision  to  withdraw  from  the  EU,  and  soaring  oil  prices  following  the 
decision of the major producers to cap oil production for the first time since 2008. Coupled with this, the 
divergence of monetary policies of the leading central banks still remains the key factor of uncertainty in 
the  international  financial  market  given  that  the  ECB  decided  to  extend  the  quantitative  easing 
programme at least until late 2017, while the Fed continued with monetary policy normalisation. These 
decisions of the leading central banks may affect capital flows to emerging economies, including Serbia.  
Carefully following the developments in the domestic and international markets, we responded in a timely 
fashion,  which,  along  with  full  coordination  with  fiscal  policy,  helped  further  narrow  the  internal  and 
external  imbalances  in  2016.  This  buttressed  the  resilience  of  our  economy  to  influences  from  the 
international environment.   
At  the  same  time,  we  achieved  economic  growth,  low  inflation,  a  relatively  stable  exchange  rate,  and 
earned the trust of foreign investors in the domestic economy. The cycle of key policy rate cuts, launched 
in May 2013, continued into 2016. Still, we exercised due caution over uncertainties in the international 
commodity  and  financial  markets.  The  key  policy  rate  was  cut to  4%  –  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation 
targeting regime. As a result, and given the falling risk premium of the country, interest rates on corporate 
and household loans declined, whilst government borrowing costs fell to their lowest.  
A  reduction  in  average  dinar  and  foreign  currency  borrowing  costs  was  certainly  one  of  the  factors 
leading to a better financial result of the corporate sector. In 2016, economic agents achieved three and a 
half  times  higher  positive  net  financial  result  compared  to  2015.  I  presented  concrete  data  at  the 
presentation  of  the  May  Inflation  Report.  The  share  of  corporate  NPLs  in  total  NPLs  declined 
significantly, as well as the number of economic agents with blocked accounts in enforced collection. 
Inflation running low for three years, strengthening of macroeconomic fundamentals and better prospects 
going forward opened room to make the decision, in November last year, to lower the inflation target to 
3%±1.5 pp starting from 2017. That this decision was justified is indicated by inflation moving within the 
new, lower target band as of early this year, as well as by anchored inflation expectations of the financial 
and  corporate  sectors.  This  serves  as  the  best  confirmation  of  credibility  of  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s 
monetary policy.  
Significant progress in the fiscal policy field continued in 2016. The general government deficit equalled 
1.3% of GDP, this being the most favourable fiscal result in the past ten years. The public debt share in 
GDP headed down, for the first time since 2008.    
When  it  comes  to  Serbia’s  financial  sector,  all  facts  testify  to  its  stability,  as  my  colleagues  will  also 
corroborate. Given that the financial sector is bank-centric, the financial health of banks and their capacity 
to perform their core function of financial intermediation is key for maintaining financial stability. In this 
context, it is important that banks operating in Serbia largely rely on domestic, stable sources of funding. 
This  reduces  banks’  exposure  to  risks  stemming  from  the  international  environment,  and  mitigates  the 
risk of sudden withdrawal of funds by parent banks, which was one of the challenges facing the countries 
in the region in the crisis period. In 2016, Serbia’s banking sector  remained well-capitalised and highly 
liquid, with higher profitability compared to the same period last year. Quarterly  macroprudential  stress 
tests  confirm  high  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  to  different  macroeconomic  shocks  –  namely,  the 
banking  sector  would  remain  adequately  capitalised  and  liquid  even  if  the  worst-case  macroeconomic 
scenario materialised.  
The  extension  of  household  loans  stepped  up  further  in  2016.  Acceleration  of  economic  activity, 
favourable trends in the labour market and a further decline in interest rates on loans impacted the growth 
in  loan  demand.  As  a  consequence  of  higher  demand  and  the  supply  of  loans,  the  volume  of  new 
household  loans  was  by  33%  higher  in  2016  compared  to  2015,  with  close  to  75%  pertaining  to  dinar 
loans.  
The achieved results of overall economic policy have been confirmed by the IMF, credit rating agencies, 
foreign  investors  and  the  EBRD,  which  was  the  first  international  financial  institution  to  issue  dinar 
securities  in  the  Serbian  market.  The  issue  of  these  securities  gave  a  contribution  to  the  process  of 
dinarisation, which is one of our priorities. The results have also been confirmed by Serbia’s progress on 
the  Doing  Business  list,  with  the  country  ranking  among  ten  countries  that  achieved  the  strongest 
progress.  
We  are  satisfied  with  the  fact  that  by  achieving  the  main  objectives  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  – 
preservation  of  price  and  financial  stability,  we  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  the  position  of  our 
country in the international context.  
The National Bank of Serbia’s efforts in the past period focused also on resolving the NPL issue. I can 
say  with  great  pleasure  that  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  Action  Plan  for  implementation  of  the  NPL 
Resolution Strategy has been fully implemented, within the envisaged deadlines. Banks’ capacities have 
been  strengthened,  with  improvements  made  in  the  field  of  application  of  accounting  standards, 
transparency  of  bank  operation,  practice  of  forbearance  and  the  development  of  the  NPL  market.  The 
results of these activities are more than obvious. In May 2017, the share of NPLs in total banking sector 
loans  equalled  16.1%,  this  being  its  lowest  level  since  2010.  Let  me  remind  you  that  in  August  2015, 
when  the  Strategy  was  adopted,  this  share  stood  at  22.2%.  This  implies  a  drop  of  over  6  percentage 
points, which confirms that the systemic, interinstitutional and coordinated approach of the National Bank 
of Serbia, the Government and market participants is yielding the desired results.  
By analysing the risks that may jeopardise financial stability, we always aim to act pre-emptively, among 
other things by enhancing the regulatory framework in accordance with the EU  acquis and the Strategy 
for  Introduction  of  Basel  III  Standards  in  Serbia.  The  regulations  transposing  these  standards  in  the 
domestic legislation were adopted in December 2016, with the start of application on 30 June 2017. We 
may freely say that as of that date, the operation of Serbian banks is regulated in the same way as in EU 
countries. The introduction of Basel III standards will further increase the already high resilience of the 
banking sector, by enhancing the quality of capital, better monitoring and control of risks, strengthening 
market discipline and transparency of bank operations. An important novelty are the capital buffers which 
increase  the  quality  of  bank  capital  and  further  limit  systemic  risks,  thereby  contributing  to  the 
preservation and strengthening of the stability of Serbia’s financial system.  
Ladies and gentlemen, members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Behind us is the year in which, owing to efficient coordination of monetary, fiscal, microprudential and 
macroprudential policy, macroeconomic stability of the country has been preserved and the resilience of 
the domestic financial system strengthened. The National Bank of Serbia will remain committed to long-
term stability of our financial system, in the general interest of all participants, this being a precondition 
for long-term sustainability of economic growth.  
Thank you for your attention. I now give the floor to Vice Governor Diana Dragutinović. 
