Natasha  Ahmetaj:  Interesting  facts  from  the  Treasury  -  art  in
Albanian banknotes
Welcome address by Ms Natasha Ahmetaj, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at
the launch of “Interesting facts from the Treasury: Art in Albanian Banknotes", Tirana, 19 May
2017.
Dear friends, dear guests,
 Today, we are together at the premises of the Bank of Albania, not only in the attribute of this
place as the house of money, figuratively, but also in the physical sense of the word, as this
room is next to the old treasury room.
We  have  invited  you  today  to  enjoy  another  dimension  of  the  currency,  that  of  an  authentic
artwork. A work of art always speaks more broadly and deeper than its mere physical dimension.
Today, we are in a Museum of works of art. Museums are more than just expositions. While you
move  from  one  display  to  the  other,  you  are  not  simply  walking  some  centimetres  along  the
street, but you travel through centuries of history. Those few centimetres take you through eras
of social civilisation. This is a unique feeling you can only experience in a museum. A zoo or a
botanical  garden  depicts  the  real  world  in  miniature.  But  it  shows  the  actual  living  world.  By
contrast, a museum brings together different eras, the past and the present. This is especially
true in a museum of banknotes and coins. Modestly, our Museum does that as well. It was only
founded a year ago and we believe it will continue to develop and be fully fledged as a legacy of
our national memory.
In  mid  1800s,  announcing  the  competition  on  American  banknote,  the  US  Secretary  of  the
Treasury, specified two obligatory requirements to participants about the design:
it had to be original, and unpublished previously, and
have a national character.
Since at the beginning, the banknote is thought as not only a means of exchange, but also as an
education  tool  for  the  public. As  such,  it  should  bear  important  moments  of  the  history.  The
banknote performs this function through complicated techniques of subtly fine lines, to prevent
reproduction, attributable also to robust security features.
Although we frequently have these valuable papers on our hands, seldom do we concentrate for
a few minutes and enjoy the art embedded in them. We very rarely focus on examining how the
work of a talented painter is intertwined in a sort of a miniature canvas with that of a talented
engraver,  turning  that  piece  of  paper  into  an  elegant  expression  of  creative  art.  The  image  is
familiar,  but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  14%  of  interviewers  in  advanced  countries  are  able  to
remember recognise the picture designed on each banknote. Even less people may recognise
the portrait depicted on 1000 Leke or 2000 Leke Albanian banknotes.
Museums and various activities organised in light of promoting national values and raising the
public awareness help to better transmit the message embedded in banknotes, and educate the
public through the art in banknotes, featuring elements of our national identity.
For this particular reason, numismatists take delight in the subtleties of colours and images of
the banknotes. In the apparently just pieces of paper, they are able to distinguish and recognise
different ages, and the degree of social freedom.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, banknotes may also depict concerns of a society, of course, when the artist was able
to properly read this concern. Hence, the green of US dollar was chosen as a symbol to express
the need of the stability in the period of civil war. The 2017 series of Norwegian currency reflects
the concern on the return to the human basic needs, which are taken away by digitalisation. In
reflection to this concern, the portraits of distinguished people of art and science are replaced
with the symbols of natural resources, strongly related with the identity of the Norwegian people,
such as the Viking ship, fish or the lighthouse.
All  these  facts  show  that  nothing  has  threatened  the  educational  and  national  mission  of  the
banknote. Owing to this reason also, it continues to carry it out by resisting even the virtual forms
of the currency. In addition, as a Harvard researcher states, the paper may disappear earlier than
the banknote.
Dear guests,
The  International  Council  of  Museums  was  established  in  1946.  Every  year,  since  1977,  the
ICOM organises the International Museum Day, a worldwide event held on and around 18 May. In
1992, ICOM decided to  choose  a  socially  relevant  theme  for  International  Museum  Day,  each
year.
The theme chosen for 2017 is “Museums and contested histories: Saying the unspeakable in
museums".
Joining  this  worldwide  celebrating  day,  in  our  museum,  we  have  formulated  it  as  “Interesting
facts from the treasury: Art in Albanian Banknotes".
And to say the unspeakable, we have invited today Mr Mark Bundy, a master of designing working
for  over  40  years  at  De  La  Rue,  pioneers  of  banknote  printing  in  the  world.  De  La  Rue  is
frequently heard by everyone visiting our museum, as it relates to the first company printing the
Albanian banknote.
Mr  Bundy  will  show  the  unspeakable  on  the  designing,  techniques  and  art  of  conceiving  the
Albanian banknote, illustrated by photos and sketches.
In  the  end,  we  invite  you  to  explore  our  temporary  exhibition  on  this  topic  and  see  the
unspeakable through your own lens.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
