Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian:  Harnessing 
sustainability of the MSB industry
Speech by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Money  Services  Business  Asia  Pacific  Conference  2017
"Harnessing Innovation for the Sustainability of the MSB Industry", Kuala Lumpur, 5 September
2017.
innovation 
for 
the
 It is my great pleasure to be here with you today at the Money Services Business Asia Pacific
Conference  2017.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Malaysian  Association  of  Money  Services
Business  for  organizing  this  event.  Thank  you  for  allowing  me  an  opportunity  to  offer  some
remarks on this occasion.
Over the last decade, the global MSB industry has made significant strides. Worker remittances
have  more  than  doubled  to  USD420  billion  between  2007  to  June  2017,  providing  critical
resources that have helped lift families and communities in developing countries out of poverty,
and facilitating greater talent mobility. Meanwhile, the currency exchange business has followed
the fortunes of global business travel expenditures that have surpassed USD1 trillion annually, as
well as over a billion international tourists arrivals recorded annually for the last 7 years.
At the same time, the cost of money remittances has also fallen. The global average remittance
cost  has  come  down  from  above  10%  a  decade  ago  to  7%  in  2016.  Several  countries  have
already  met  or  surpassed  the  World  Bank’s  target  of  reducing  costs  to  5%.  In  Malaysia,  the
average remittance cost has been brought below 3% in 2016, while MSB companies offer some
of the most competitive rates for the exchange of currencies in this part of the world.
This  has  been  achieved  over  a  period  that  also  saw  significant  reforms  undertaken  in  the
Malaysian MSB industry. A period in which regulatory, compliance and professional standards
were substantially strengthened across the industry. And a period of structural change that also
introduced greater competition in the industry. MSB companies have risen to these challenges
with strategies that have embraced an increased use of technology, a focus on productivity, and
in some cases, strategic changes in business models to deliver greater value for investment.
Going forward, the MSB industry will continue to be shaped by two important influences. The first
is a strong political and economic focus on the role of the industry in advancing financial inclusion
and  development.  The  second  is  certainly  going  to  be  the  changing  nature  of  competition,
powered by technology. 
Achieving the goal of affordable and inclusive remittance services
Making  remittance  services  more  affordable  and  inclusive  remains  an  unfinished  agenda.  In
many countries, both developing and developed, informal remittances systems remain prevalent.
There are legitimate reasons why such systems exist in some countries, for example countries
that do not have fully developed formal financial systems.
At the same time, legitimate concerns exist over risks associated with such systems, especially
in  an  environment  where  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  concerns  have  heightened.
Opportunities to increase the development impact of remittances have also focused attention on
remittances that are now flowing through informal channels. In balancing these considerations,
efforts  are  being  made  to  bring  these  informal  systems  closer  to  formal  financial  systems  –
especially by increasing transparency – but without altering their inherent advantages. 
We don’t always get the balance right. De-risking by banks has been a clear case of market
failure in which left to their own devices, different parties acted in their own legitimate interests –
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
but with adverse social and economic consequences, including for communities and countries
that depend on remittance to raise resources for development.
We are seeing positive moves to redress this. In particular, it is critical that continued priority be
given  to  providing  clear  guidance  on  risk-based  approaches  for  implementing  AML/CFT
measures,  improving  the  quality  of  supervision  of  remittance  providers,  and  achieving  more
consistency in supervision across borders.
Confronting the changing nature of competition
The  nature  of  competition  has  also  changed  profoundly.  Competition  used  to  be  more
predictable. You knew who your closest competitors were. And you probably also understood
enough about their comparative advantages and constraints to be able to compete effectively.
This is no longer the case. Competition has become much more unpredictable, and can come
from unlikely sources with the advent of peer-to-peer currency exchange platforms, e-commerce
and  blockchain  solutions  created  by  fintech  companies.  It  is  also  not  just  about who  your
competitors  are,  or  even what  they  offer. Whyconsumers  prefer  your  competitors  has  also
become an important factor. 
It matters to more consumers today whether companies are conducting business with integrity
and ethically. Ultimately, consumers will almost always prefer to deal with companies that they
trust.  However,  what  customers  look  for  to  identify  with  companies  that  they  can  trust  is
changing. Advertising campaigns of some of the largest companies that are households names
today, centre on universal values of charity towards our fellow mankind, honesty, and respect for
one another. These are some of the clearest signs of businesses that understand the shifting
preference of a fast growing, new generation of consumers, and are seeking to connect with
customers on a deeper level. 
Innovation and its many faces
As we contemplate these developments, the power and potential of innovation quickly shifts into
sharp focus. Nowadays, we often hear innovation and disruption mentioned in the same breath.
The  flipside  to  that  is  really  innovation and  sustainability  which  are  the  themes  of  this
conference. 
It  used  to  be  that  if  a  business  offered  a  decent  product  or  service,  and  managed  its  costs
reasonably well, prospects of survival were generally good. Today, survival – whether you are in
the business of driving taxis, running a hotel, or offering a financial product or service – depends
on the ability of companies to continuouslyharness and convert innovative ideas, however big or
small, to serve customers better and multiply productivity gains. 
This is the challenge before the MSB industry. 
When we think of “innovation and disruption”, it usually brings up images of companies acting to
ward off imminent threats from challengers to their business. “Innovation and sustainability” on
the  other  hand,  focuses  on  opportunities  to  do  things  better,  increase  long  term  value  and
strengthen a company’s agility to adapt and respond to changing conditions. Put another way,
“disruption” often keeps an eye on your competitor, while “sustainability” focuses attention on the
customer and understanding one’s own inherent strengths and weaknesses to build stronger,
more responsive and more resilient companies.
It would be a mistake to associate innovation solely with technology, or assume that it can only
be achieved with huge investments in research and development. When Apple came up with the
Mac, IBM was spending at least 100 times more on R&D. Steve Jobs underlined the point that
innovation  is  not  about  the  money,  but  the  people  you  have,  how  you’re  led  and  how  much
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
you get it.
Einstein famously said that “we cannot solve problems with the same thinking we used when we
created them”. He reminds us that innovation is fundamentally concerned with solving problems,
having  an  open  mind  to  ideas  and  the  ability  to  convert  those  ideas  into  an  organized  and
disciplined process to create a positive and lasting impact. 
Viewed in this perspective, the frontiers of innovation are almost boundless; limited only by our
ability to define problems and our imagination. 
Innovation  is  as  much  about  creating  new  institutions  and  smart  collaborations  to  advance
common goals, as it is about inventing a new product. We see this in the notion of “co-opetition”,
where competing firms have found benefits in coming together to build shared infrastructure, or
to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  criminal  activity  and
guarding  against  cyber  threats,  all  the  while  remaining  fierce  competitors  in  their  product  and
service offerings. 
Innovation is also about constantly finding better ways to do things within an organisation in order
to deliver a better customer experience and to keep organisations interesting and fresh.
It  is  about  changing  mindsets  and  culture  to  ensure  that  institutions  never  become  tired  or
irrelevant. It is about re-thinking our approach to developing the workforce so that we are at our
most agile to deal with new challenges and risks.
These are all important aspects of innovation and I am reminded that in Malaysia’s own journey
to transform the MSB industry, we benefitted from charting new and sometimes, untested paths
to solve the problems that we faced. 
For  example,  we  learnt  from  and  then  re-defined  the  principal-agent  model  to  meet  the  dual
objectives  of  maintaining  broad  access  to  money  services  while  raising  compliance  and
operational standards.
We departed from conventional regulatory and supervisory approaches, on the conviction that
we  could  not  achieve  our  objectives  through  enforcement  alone.  We  therefore  designed  and
implemented a regulatory programme that combined rule-making and enforcement with active
education and advisory support to help firms understand our expectations and meet them.
We also worked to build stronger cooperation arrangements with authorities in other countries
with remittance links to MSBs in Malaysia. As a direct result of this programme, the share of MSB
companies presenting higher risks continues to reduce dramatically.
Earlier this year, we completed a year-long project within Bank Negara to further strengthen the
Bank’s surveillance of ML/TF risks in the MSB industry and improve our ability to identify illegal or
unreported MSB activities, through the use of data analytics.
The  industry  itself,  through  the  Malaysian Association  of  Money  Services  Business,  has  been
instrumental  in  leading  innovative  approaches  to  public  outreach  and  engagement  aimed  at
capturing a larger share of informal remittances. In the coming quarter, the industry will introduce
its own MSB App, providing consumers with convenient access to price comparisons, locations
of service providers, customer reviews and the ability to lodge complaints and report illegal MSB
activities. 
Regulatory changes to facilitate innovation
It  remains  extremely  important  to  the  Bank  that  we  continue  to  provide  an  environment  that
encourages  innovation  in  the  financial  industry,  including  in  the  MSB  sector.  The  Regulatory
Sandbox which we introduced last year – itself an innovation in regulatory approaches – helps us
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  achieve  this  in  a  way  that  contains  the  external  risks  that  can  come  with  innovation,  while
allowing the opportunity for great new ideas to unfold and take root. As regulators, we are also
continuously learning ourselves about the best way to deal sensibly and proportionately with risks
associated with innovation. 
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the Bank will shortly be issuing proposed regulatory
parameters  for  the  conduct  of  electronic  Know-Your-Customer  or  e-KYC  processes  for
remittance  transactions.  We  expect  to  finalise  the  standards  for  e-KYC  by  October  after
receiving  industry  comments.  Following  this,  the  existing  requirement  for  face-to-face
verifications for onboarding new customers will be removed for companies that have received
approval to conduct e-KYC.
It goes without saying that the Bank fully expects MSB companies licensed in Malaysia to ensure
that innovation is not pursued at the expense of obligations to comply with applicable laws and
regulations,  and  to  safeguard  legitimate  interests  of  customers.  Having  worked  hard  to  build
confidence and trust in the industry and to avert the damaging effects of de-risking that continues
to a key challenge in more than a few jurisdictions, actions by any firm to undermine the integrity
of the financial system will be met with a strong regulatory response from the Bank. 
That  said,  the  Bank  has  been  greatly  encouraged  by  the  progress  of  on-going  efforts  in  the
industry to ensure that all companies are fully competent through mandatory AML/CFT training
programmes conducted by the Association. Steps being taken to require all compliance officers
in  the  industry  to  be  accredited  or  certified  by  recognised  professional  accreditation  and
certification bodies will mark another important milestone for the industry.
Conclusion
Innovation  is  ultimately  a  collaborative  process  whether  it  is  between  individuals  within  an
organization coming together to develop new ideas to give the firm a competitive advantage; or
between companies to share common utilities between policymakers to create conditions that
encourage innovation or between industry, governments and multilateral institutions to deepen
knowledge  and  advance  policies  that  increase  the  impact  of  innovation  on  growth  and
development. 
The best ideas, and more importantly the ability to put them into practice, will come from our
ability  to  overcome  natural  instincts  to  erect  protective  barriers,  and  to  open  up  individual
companies, institutions and economies to new possibilities that can make us more successful,
more  competitive  and  more  inclusive  over  the  longer  term.  This  conference  is  a  valuable
opportunity  for  the  industry  to  exchange  ideas  and  reflect  on  how  innovation  –  not  just
technological but all facets of innovation – can create a game-changing impact in the industry. 
On that note, I wish you highly productive and fruitful discussions over the next two days.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
