Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Walled  off?  Banking  regulation  after  the
crisis
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  at  the
Institute of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 13 March 2017.
 Walls have their place in human history. Just think of the Great Wall of China or Hadrian’s Wall or
the  Berlin  Wall. And  then  there  are  the  more  abstract  walls:  paywalls  or  Chinese  walls,  for
instance.
In my speech today, I would like to discuss banking regulation – which some see as a massive
wall of rules. If you asked bankers, some would certainly claim that they have been imprisoned
by that wall and would even like to tear it down – some politicians might feel the same way.
However, to paraphrase the American poet Robert Frost: “Don’t ever take a wall down until you
know  why  it  was  put  up”.  You  will  understand  that  I,  as  a  German,  cannot  fully  support  this
statement but with regard to regulation this advice is appropriate. Following that advice, let us
have a look at why the regulatory wall was put up.
Why banks need rules
Why do we need rules at all? Rules confine us; they limit our freedom. Take the rules of the road
as an example. You can’t drive as fast as you want; you have to wear a seat belt and you have to
stop at red lights. These rules exist to make our lives safer. They help to prevent accidents; they
protect drivers, passengers and pedestrians.
And that also applies to banking rules. Banks take on risks – that is part of their job. These risks,
however, can lead to huge losses – not only for the banks and their investors, but for the entire
economy and all of us.
In the euro area, it is mostly banks that finance the economy. They also take in deposits and
provide other essential services, in payments, for instance. It is therefore crucial that banks work
well – not only in the short run but in the long run. So it makes sense not to give them absolute
freedom, but to wall them off from the biggest risks.
After all, bankers are people. Like the rest of us, they sometimes tend to overestimate potential
profits  and  underestimate  risks.  Markets  can  get  carried  away,  as  Alan  Greenspan  said,  by
irrational  exuberance.  Expecting  eternal  growth,  banks  might  make  huge  investments.  But  at
some point reality hits, and it might hit hard. If it does, those who took on too much risk might fail.
And the crisis taught us that the failure of a single bank can damage the entire financial system
and the economy.
In a nutshell, that’s why banks need rules. That’s why the regulatory wall was put up in the first
place. And following the financial crisis, we have repaired and modified it.
Not all banks, of course, are happy with the new wall. While they seem to agree with regulation in
principle, they usually think it is too strict. They say that the sheer number and complexity of the
new  rules  increase  the  costs  of  doing  business.  They  also  say  that  this  limits  their  ability  to
finance  the  economy.  In  short,  the  banks  claim  that  regulation  hurts  them,  the  economy  and,
thus, all of us.
Unsurprisingly, I disagree. It is true, of course, that there are many rules; and it is true that the
rulebook  is  very  complex.  But  then  again,  banking  has  become  very  complex.  Over  the  past
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
decades,  banks  have  come  up  with  ever  more  sophisticated  innovations  –  all  of  them  have
added  to  the  complexity  of  banking  but  not  always  to  its  value.  The  rules  just  mirror  this
complexity.
Let  me  give  you  an  example.  Banks  favour  what  is  known  as  “internal  models”.  Using  these
models, they calculate how risky their assets are. The risk-weighted assets then form the basis
for  calculating  capital  requirements.  So  banks  are  clearly  in  favour  of  risk  sensitivity  when  it
comes to determining the adequate level of capital. And I too see merits in that approach.
But internal models are complex, and to keep them in check, we need complex rules. These
rules, for instance, require banks to comply with certain conditions before they are allowed to use
their models. Without these rules we would quickly experience a race to the bottom in capital and
an uneven playing field.
It is true that rules impose a burden on those who have to comply. And the pressure on banks
has increased quite a lot since the crisis; I won’t deny that. Still, there are two points I would like
to make.
First,  we  seek  to  ensure  that  the  burden  is  reasonable.  Take  reporting,  which  banks  often
describe as a major burden. However, to do our job, we need data from banks  –  not  just  on
internal models but on all sorts of things. And this data needs to be comparable across the euro
area;  we  must  be  able  to  compare  banks  with  their  peers,  be  they  Irish,  French,  German,
whatever. We therefore need a European approach to reporting. In this regard, it would lighten
the  load  on  banks  if  national  regulators  and  supervisors  were  to  adjust  their  own  reporting
requirements and processes to the new European reality.
My second point is that rules may not only put a burden on banks but also offer them benefits.
Strong rules foster trust. Would you get into a taxi if you knew the driver was not bound by traffic
rules? Would you do business with a bank that was not regulated?
Banks  with  a  low  level  of  capital  and  inadequate  internal  controls  are  viewed  with  suspicion:
investors ask for higher risk premia and the banks thus face higher funding costs. Banks need
people’s trust to do business, but as a result of the crisis they have lost a lot of trust. They should
bear this in mind when complaining about regulation.
Now, do bank rules harm the economy? This question mainly, but not only, focuses on capital
requirements.  Usually,  the  argument  goes  like  this:  capital  is  expensive  for  banks  and  might
prompt  them  to  increase  lending  rates. And  even  worse,  it  might  cause  them  to  stop  lending
altogether  for  fear  of  not  meeting  their  capital  requirements.  That  in  turn  would  choke  credit
growth and damage the economy.
But  consider  the  benefits.  Banks  which  are  well  capitalised  are  well  prepared  to  withstand
shocks.  It  is  these  banks  that  keep  credit  flowing  to  the  economy  even  when  the  going  gets
tough. These banks can finance the economy throughout the entire business cycle.
Banks with low levels of capital, on the other hand, are more likely to face a crisis, and banking
crises are costly. They inflict damage on the economy by hurting growth, destroying jobs and
putting a burden on taxpayers. As a matter of fact, recessions that accompany a banking crisis
1
are much more severe than “normal” recessions.
So, strong rules put a burden on banks. But at the same time, they do help the economy. Only
well-capitalised,  well-managed  banks  do  a  good  job  of  lending  to  the  real  economy  over  the
short, medium and long term. The net benefit should be positive. Empirical studies indicate that
the benefits of higher capital are indeed greater than the costs.  To me, higher capital and strong
rules in general seem to be a small price to pay for a more stable and prosperous economy. And
the banks themselves also benefit from more stability, of course.
2
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Against that backdrop, I favour a strong regulatory wall. But, work on that wall seems to follow a
pattern. After a crisis, the wall is usually reinforced. Then, after some time, as the crisis fades
into the background and tends to be forgotten, someone starts chipping away at it. The risks start
penetrating the cracks in the wall, eventually leading to a crisis, and the cycle begins again.
I’m afraid that a change of direction lies just ahead. There are more and more voices calling for
an easing of the rules – not just banks, of course, but also some politicians. My advice to them is:
don’t weaken regulation just for a short-lived increase in growth prospects.
Instead,  we  should  finalise  the  reforms  as  quickly  as  possible.  We  have  been  repairing  and
modifying the regulatory wall for eight years now. It’s been a long time, and I understand that the
reforms have created uncertainty for the banks. It’s time to finish the job. It’s time to finish the job
and to focus on implementing the rules.
Writing the rules
However, the job can only be finished at the global level. We must not build walls that separate
nations; we must build a global regulatory wall. The financial system knows no national borders,
and regulation must be equally global.
It is the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision that is in charge here. Founded more than 40
years ago, it has become the main forum for discussing and drafting global rules for banks.
The Basel Committee comprises central bankers and supervisors from 28 countries. Since the
crisis, it has devised an improved set of global rules, known as Basel III. While much of Basel III
has already been agreed upon, some final issues remain open. These are still being debated by
the Basel Committee. In my view, it is time to conclude that debate and bring the reforms to an
end.
With regard to the reforms, I sometimes hear people complain that the Basel Committee lacks
democratic legitimacy. They say it’s an opaque body that imposes its rules on banks all over the
world. The answer, of course, is that the Basel Committee does not impose anything on anyone;
it does not set binding laws. It defines global standards. These standards are mere proposals
submitted to lawmakers. It is they who decide whether the proposals are to be transposed into
actual laws.
In the EU, it is the European Commission that proposes such laws. The European Parliament
and the Council of the EU then decide on whether to pass the laws. The key decisions are thus
taken by elected national and EU representatives. It is they who decide on European banking law.
European law comes in two forms. First, there are regulations. These are directly applicable in all
EU countries and provide a truly level playing field for banks. Second, there are directives. These
still need to be transposed into national law. And this often leads to differences – the outcome in
Ireland might be different from the outcome in Germany or Spain.
This is not a problem in itself as long as the differences are rooted in country-specific risks. But
there are still some unjustified differences; there are some uneven patches on the playing field.
Such patches run counter to the idea of a European banking union. They prevent the European
banking  sector  from  growing  together,  and  they  make  European  banking  supervision  less
efficient. They require us to apply 19 different national rules instead of a single European one.
That is bureaucratic, and it is expensive, first and foremost for banks. If policymakers are serious
about European financial integration, they must further harmonise the relevant rules.
And there is another source of fragmentation. EU banking law contains some provisions that are
known as options and discretions. Some of them give supervisors leeway in applying the rules. It
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
was  therefore  one  of  our  first  major  projects  to  tackle  the  issue  of  options  and  discretions.
Together  with  the  national  supervisors,  we  have  agreed  to  exercise  them  in  a  uniform  way
across the euro area. We have made the playing field a bit more even. But there are also options
and discretion which fall within the competence of the Member States. And here harmonisation
based on the “same business, same risks, same rules” principle is paramount, too.
Rules carved in stone?
To sum up: I am very much in favour of a strong regulatory wall, and I am convinced that it has to
be global. I am also in favour of harmonised rules in Europe.
Still,  rules  must  not  be  carved  in  stone,  of  course.  Driven  by  innovation,  the  banking  sector
constantly  evolves  –  new  instruments  are  devised,  new  risks  emerge.  The  rules  must  reflect
such change. After all, the financial crisis was partly caused by financial innovations that took
place outside the regulatory wall.
To  be  sure:  eight  years  of  regulatory  reform  have  led  to  a  comprehensive  renovation  of  the
regulatory wall. Now it may be time to check whether all the pieces, all the bricks, fit together.
And it may be time to make sure the new rules have no unintended consequences. But I don’t
expect any major revisions, just some minor adjustments.
In any case, I welcome the fact that the European rules are now being reviewed. In November,
the European Commission made proposals on how to adapt and amend the relevant laws.
And there are a lot of good things in these proposals.
First, they support the idea of the global regulatory wall. They seek to transpose a series of
global standards into European law – the leverage ratio is one example.
Second, they support the goal of creating a truly European banking sector. They allow for
capital and liquidity waivers to be granted for intragroup exposures – not just within a single
country as before, but on an EU cross-border basis. This would make life easier for banking
groups that span the entire EU.
And  third,  they  support  the  principle  of  proportionality.  They  seek  to  ease  the  regulatory
burden on smaller banks. And that’s good: smaller banks generally represent a smaller risk
and therefore do not need to be as strongly regulated as large banks.
But there are also items in the proposals that should be further discussed.
First, supervisors need to be able to act quickly and flexibly, based on their judgement and
expertise. A few proposals, however, seek to put a tighter frame around supervisory actions.
That would limit our ability to adapt our actions to the ever-changing financial industry – an
industry  that  is  always  looking  for  the  best  deal,  that  is  always  testing  the  boundaries  of
regulation and that seizes any opportunity to arbitrage the rules.
Second, in some cases, the proposals deviate from global standards – for instance, with
regard to liquidity rules. Sometimes, these deviations just reflect EU specificities and do not
run  counter  to  the  goals  of  regulation.  In  other  cases,  we  would  need  to  ensure  that  the
deviations do not increase risks.
And third, I still hope for more harmonised rules – I have already touched upon that issue.
There  are,  for  instance,  still  some  unwarranted  options  and  discretions  that  lie  within  the
competence  of  Member  States.  These  uneven  patches  in  the  playing  field  should  be
repaired.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Conclusion
I  have  argued  that  banks  need  rules,  and  that  these  rules  need  to  be  global.  I  have  therefore
warned against leaving the global regulatory wall unfinished or even tearing it down. It protects us
all: taxpayers who had to bail out failing banks during the crisis; savers and investors who lost
money;  business  owners  who  could  not  get  loans;  and,  yes,  it  also  protects  the  banks
themselves.
Still, the history of finance seems to follow an eternal cycle. A crisis happens and the rules are
tightened. After a while, people forget the crisis, and the rules are loosened. This leads to the
next crisis, which takes everyone by surprise. The rules are tightened.
Listening to some politicians, I am worried that we are about to enter the next stage of the cycle:
a  new  wave  of  deregulation. As  George  Bernard  Shaw  said:  “If  history  repeats  itself,  and  the
unexpected always happens, how incapable must man be of learning from experience!”. Isn’t it
time to prove that we are capable of learning from experience?
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. (2009), “This Time is Different”, Princeton, NJ. Jorda, O., Shularick, M., Taylor, A.M.
(2011), “When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crisis”, NBER Working Paper No. 17621.
Fender, I. and Lewrick, U. (2016), “Adding it all up: the macroeconomic impact of Basel III and outstanding
reform issues”, BIS Working Paper, No 591; De-Ramon, S., Iscenko, Z., Osborne, M., Straughan, M., Andrews,
P. (2012), “Measuring the impact of prudential policy on the macroeconomy: a practical application to Basel III
and  other  responses  to  the  financial  crisis”, FSA Occasional Paper, No 42. Yan, M., Hall, M.J.B., Turner, P.
(2012), “A cost-benefit analysis of Basel III: Some evidence from the UK”, International Review of Financial
Analysis, Vol 25, pp 73-82.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
