Karnit Flug: Forecasting
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Calcalist  Forecasting
Conference, Tel Aviv, 28 December 2016.
 This conference is entitled “Forecasting”.  Naturally, each forecast carries with it the likelihood,
sometimes high, that it will not come to pass.  In economics, some of the uncertainty regarding
the future comes from the fact that when preparing the forecast, we don’t always exactly know
the current state of the economy or, as I will soon show, even the state of the economy in the
past.  I  will  describe  how  we,  like  other  central  banks,  manage  monetary  policy  given  the
uncertainty in terms of the environment it is supposed to influence, particularly in view of the fact
that monetary policy affects the economy with some lag.
Before I illustrate the limitations each forecaster in the economic environment faces, allow me to
quote prof. Philip Tetlock, who has for years been researching the ability to forecast political and
economic  events.   A  book  he  wrote  in  2006,  which  is  based  on  statistics  from  20  years  of
forecasting,  became  famous  for  its  conclusion  that  “the  average  expert  is  about  as  good  at
predicting what the future holds as a dart-throwing chimp is at hitting the bullseye.”  His new book
was published in 2015, and is also based on tracking the forecasting abilities of a great number
of people.  In that book, he comes to a more optimistic conclusion: There are people who are
better  than  others  at  forecasting,  and  the  work  of  forecasting  can  be  improved  based  on
experience and learning.
Managing economic policy is based on the ability to forecast the economic environment of the
future.  What can we say about forecasting ability in this area?
In  Israel,  given  that  we  are  a  small  and  open  economy,  the  main  input  in  forecasting  the
performance of the Israeli economy is the forecast of the global environment, particularly world
trade.  At the Bank of Israel, we do not pretend to forecast the main developments for the global
economy on our own.  Rather, we rely on forecasts from the main international organizations. 
For  instance,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  the  most  professional  body  in  preparing
forecasts  of  the  global  economy,  and  even  the  forecasts  it  publishes  are  subject  to  frequent
revisions of significant scope.  At the beginning of 2016, the IMF forecast that world growth would
increase by 4 percent.  In October, the revised forecast estimated trade at just 2.3 percent.  It is
important to emphasize that world trade is the most important global economic variable from the
standpoint of the Israeli economy.
The economy is characterized by what economists call a serial correlation.  For instance, the
determination of annual GDP is not disconnected from that of the previous year.  Inflation in the
coming quarter is influenced by inflation in the current quarter, and so forth.  Therefore, when
preparing a forecast, it is necessary to assess the current activity environment (or that of the
recent  past).    But  when  dealing  with  macroeconomic  figures,  it  turns  out  that  the  past  is  still
before us.  Revisions are made every month in Israel’s quarterly GDP growth figures.
One example of a particularly sharp revision was in the figures for the first quarter of 2016.  In the
first publication of those figures, GDP growth was estimated at 0.8 percent—a very low figure
that  was  interpreted  as  a  marked  slowdown  in  economic  activity.    However,  the  figure  was
revised upward each month, and in November, the estimate for first quarter GDP growth was
already 3.2 percent—meaning strong growth, and in line with the rapid growth that we saw in the
labor market, which was a kind of mystery to us given the low growth figures.  Essentially, the
labor market figures, including figures from the Labor Force Survey, are more stable indicators
than National Accounts figures, and provided an earlier indication (as it later turned out) of the
positive state of the economy. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The source for the exceptional upward revision in the first half of 2016 was mainly revisions in
export and investment figures (especially investment in construction).  It turns out that revisions
in the National Accounts figures are common and substantial, but that there is no systematic
deviation in either positive or negative direction (which obviously does not enable an informed
assessment of the direction of the revision in advance). Parenthetically, the revisions in the GDP
components, particularly the change in exports, are much higher.
Are  the  revisions  in  the  National Accounts  data  excessively  large?    It  turns  out  they  are  not. 
There are significant revisions in other OECD countries as well, some of which are even larger,
and the scope of our revisions is above the median in OECD countries, but below the average,
which is affected by a number of countries with particularly large revisions.  While we are in good
company, the troubles of many in this case are not a source of even partial comfort, and do not
make it easier for policy makers to manage policy in such an uncertain environment.
This  is  perhaps  the  place  to  mention  the  famous  statement  by  my  colleague  Janet  Yelin,
Chairman of the Federal Reserve, who tried to convince the markets that the policy adopted by
the  Fed  is  data  dependent,  meaning  that  it  is  not  set  in  advance,  but  is  based  on  currently
published data.  I hope that I have succeeded in illustrating how challenging it is to determine
policy based on data in view of the fact that the data are subject to significant revisions.
If even the past is still before us, is there a reason to try forecasting the future?
Forecasting is a necessary tool for policy makers in any field, and policy makers need to
examine the scenario in accordance with an assessment of the cost or damage involved in
adopting a given policy path.  We must assess the likelihood of the realization of various
scenarios,  what  the  result  of  adopting  a  given  policy  will  be  along  various  paths,  and
particularly, the risks against which the policy must protect.
For instance:
Planners in the education system need to assess how many children will live in a given
locality,  the  margin  of  error  of  the  forecast,  and  the  damage  that  would  occur  if  not
enough classrooms are built against the cost of building too many classrooms.
The defense establishment must assess the reference scenario for the threats we face,
the damage resulting from an under-assessment, and the cost of an over-assessment.
The financial supervisory authorities must assess the extent of damage from a
financial crisis compared to the economic cost of security buffers that are too
deep.
Monetary policy makers must use the best tools available to them to assess the forces
acting on the economy and what direction their effect is expected to take, and formulate
a picture of the  future  situation  based  on  data,  models,  experience  and  know-how  in
order to set the policy path.
Policy management must take  into  account  the  margin  of  uncertainty,  and  decide  the  correct
weight to attribute to various possible scenarios.
In order to make monetary policy effective, a balance is required between the need to be ahead
of  the  curve  in  view  of  the  lags  in  the  effect  of  monetary  policy,  and  the  need  to  respond
immediately to real developments rather than the “noise” in the data.
So after all the warnings about forecasting, the time has come to present the forecast.  The Bank
of  Israel  Research  Department  formulates  a  forecast  of  the  economic  environment  every
quarter, based on models, information, and forecasts of the global economy, and the data (the
best that can be obtained) describing the recent developments in the domestic economy.  After
all  of  these  are  put  together  into  the  “oven”,  the  raw  forecast  emerges.    But  this  is  not  the
forecast that is presented to policy makers or the public.  The economists examine the result,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and exercise judgement regarding the likelihood of various variables, factors that the models do
not cover, and more.  The final result is the forecast that was published two days ago and is
presented before you.  This forecast serves as an ingredient—important though not exclusive—
in  the  formulation  of  the  situational  assessment  that  forms  the  basis  for  the  Monetary
Committee’s decisions.
The  forecast  indicates  expected  growth  of  3.5  percent  this  year  (as  we  said,  the  past  is  still
before  us),  3.2  percent  in  2017  and  3.1  percent  in  2018.    It  indicates  a  gradual  slowdown  in
private  consumption  after  an  exceptional  increase  this  year,  growth  in  public  consumption  of
more than 4 percent this year and 1.5 percent in the next two years, in line with the two-year
budget,  and  a  gradual  acceleration  of  exports  supported  by  a  gradual  recovery  that  the
international organizations project in world trade. 
Together with the central scenario in the forecast, the Research Department also presents the
uncertainty that exists in the forecast.  This is illustrated by a fan chart, which shows 66 percent
of  the  distribution  of  possible  outcomes.    The  uncertainty  in  the  forecast  is  derived  from
uncertainty in the exogenous variables inserted into the model, chiefly in relation to the global
environment.  By the end of 2017, the breadth of outcomes ranges from growth of slightly more
than 2 percent to about 4.5 percent. 
Another important component in assessing the picture based on which policy is formulated is the
development of the relevant exchange rate (the effective exchange rate), which has been in a
trend  of  appreciation  for  the  past  two  years.    This  was  affected  not  only  by  basic  economic
forces,  but  also  by  the  very  accommodative  policies  of  our  main  trading  partners  (which,
according  to  the  updated  assessment  of  the  federal  funds  rate,  is  expected  to  become  less
accommodative in the coming year).
According to the forecast, inflation is expected to return to within the target range in 2017, but the
range of uncertainty surrounding the timing of that return to the range is broad. 
In addition to the forecast regarding the macroeconomic picture, the forecast presented by the
Research  Department  to  the  Committee  also  includes  the  path  of  the  interest  rate  that  is
consistent  with  the  macroeconomic  picture  emerging  from  the  forecast  and  that  supports  its
realization.  Herein lies the importance of using an economic model that ensures the consistency
of each component of the picture and of policy.
Looking  forward,  based  on  the  updated  situational  assessment,  the  Research  Department’s
assessment is that the interest rate is expected to begin increasing in the last quarter of 2017. 
Here too, the range of possible interest rate paths is very broad, and relates to a broad range of
forecasts of economic activity.  It is important to emphasize that this is the interest rate path
assessed by the Research Department as consistent with the other components of the
macroeconomic  forecast,  and  that  also  serves  as  input  for  the  Monetary  Committee’s
discussions.  It is not necessarily the path that the Monetary Committee members view as the
future interest rate path, and it certainly is not binding on the Monetary Committee.
As part of the forecast, we also indicate the main risks to the forecast that has been formulated,
and discussion of these risks serves as input in the formulation of policy.
The Research Department’s assessment is that the risks to the current forecast are:
Uncertainty  surrounding  the  markets’  response,  including  that  of  the  foreign  exchange
market,  to  the  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate  and  extension  of  quantitative  easing  in
Europe—the creation of a split in the direction of change in monetary policy between the two
blocs.
Uncertainty regarding the trend of world trade and of global growth against the background of
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
increasing calls to raise international trade barriers.
Based  on  the  macroeconomic  picture  sketched  out  through  the  forecast,  the  additional
information I mentioned, and the assessment of the various risks to its realization, as formulated
during the year, the accommodative policy outlined by the Bank of Israel’s Monetary Committee
has been reflected in maintaining the interest rate at the low level of 0.1 percent, and for the first
time, in October 2015, the Committee published an assessment that this policy would remain in
place for a considerable time.  Such an announcement is referred to in central bank parlance as
“forward  guidance”,  and  has  the  power  to  affect  long-term  interest  rates  as  well,  beyond  the
effect on the short-term interest rate set by the central bank.  This is in addition to intervention in
the  foreign  exchange  market,  which  included  a  component  offsetting  the  negative  effects  of
pressure on the exchange rate derived from natural gas production, and intervention in order to
prevent too sharp a deviation from the exchange rate derived from the basic economic forces.
The  Monetary  Committee’s  policy  also  took  into  account  the  main  risks  to  the  economy  as
presented in the situational picture that was formulated, including in view of the continued decline
in  exports,  the  continued  deviation  of  inflation  from  the  target  range,  and  the  financial  risks
derived from the mortgage market.  This policy has served, and continues to serve, in achieving
policy targets, chiefly the return of inflation to within the target range, and support of economic
activity and of employment.
The macroeconomic picture that arises from the updated forecast, as well as the state of the
labor market as shown by employment and wage figures, are positive, certainly when taking into
account that the state of the global economy is far from one of high growth.  The relatively good
macroeconomic situation provides a fitting time to focus on solving fundamental problems in the
Israeli  economy  that  may  have  an  effect  on  its  ability  to  achieve  inclusive  and  sustainable
growth.    Chief  among  those  are  increasing  productivity,  improving  human  capital,  reducing
bureaucracy,  and  dealing  with 
implications  of  expected  demographic
developments.
long-term 
the 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
