S S Mundra: Customer service in banks - time to raise the bar!
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual
Conference  of  Principal  Code  Compliance  Officers,  organized  by  the  Banking  Codes  and
Standards Board of India, Mumbai, 30 May 2017.
 Shri  A.  C.  Mahajan,  Chairman,  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI);  Shri
Anand  Aras,  CEO,  BCSBI;  colleagues  from  the  banking  industry;  representatives  from  the
media; ladies and gentlemen! At the outset, I would like to thank BCSBI for inviting me for this
annual conference of the Principal Code Compliance Officers (PCCOs) in the banks.
2.  During  the  past  12  years  of  its  existence,  BCSBI  has  played  a  pivotal  role  in  enhancing
awareness about customer service in banks. The Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers
and the Code of Bank’s Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises developed by BCSBI set
out common minimum standards for customer service in banks.
3. Monitoring of compliance to the Codes by member banks is one of the mandates of BCSBI
which  is  fulfilled  through  visits  to  a  representative  sample  of  branches  by  authorized
representatives of BCSBI. BCSBI, thus, helps the banks by providing an independent review and
feedback on their adherence in practice, to the self-prescribed standards. From 2013, BCSBI
has  been  rating  banks  on  Code  Compliance  based  on  the  inputs  from  branch  visits  and
customers  feedback.  This  rating  indicates  level  of  implementation  of  important  provisions  of
these  Codes  at  the  first  customer  touch  point  in  the  bank. A  release  now  of  these  ratings  in
public domain is intended to increase transparency, generate public awareness and also instill a
sense of competition among the member banks for achieving a higher level of customer service.
A  perusal  of  the  ratings,  however,  does  not  exhibit  any  significant  improvement  in  consumer
service rating of banks. Only 12 of the 46 banks rated by BCSBI received ‘high’ rating in terms of
performance while 24 were above average and 10 remained as ‘average’ performers. In fact, the
position has marginally worsened since 2015 survey.
4. Despite outlining of minimum standards for customer service through codification of banks’
commitments to customers, we observe that the number of complaints received by the offices of
Banking Ombudsmen continues to rise. For the first time since its inception in 1995, the number
of complaints to BOs exceeded one lakh last year. The one lakh mark has already been crossed
in  the  current  year  (July  2016  to  May  2017).  Our  analysis  has  shown  that  percentage  of
complaints on non-Adherence of BCSBI Code – Clause 8(1)(s) and 8(2)(d) of BOS over a six
year period from 2010–11 to 2015–16 has increased from 24 % to 34%. A survey conducted by
BCSBI  suggests  that  the  increase  could  be  on  account  of  disconnect  in  application  and
understanding of Codes among frontline staff of the member banks. Perhaps, engagement of the
Top  Management  with  implementation  of  codes  in  their  respective  banks  has  also  declined.  I
urge PCCOs to take effective steps for creating greater awareness and understanding amongst
the frontline bank staff by ensuring buy-in from the Top Management.
5. In my address today, I intend to focus on few important measures which BCSBI, the PCCOs
and the banks can initiate to further the cause of customer service in the sector.
a. Updation of codes:  I  am  aware  that  BCSBI  has  been  periodically  updating  the  Codes  of
Banks’  Commitments  by  factoring  in  the  relevant  regulatory  guidelines,  developments  in  the
banking sector and evolving customer expectations. I am glad to learn that the Code of Banks’
Commitment  to  Customers  is  currently  under  review. As  you  are  all  aware,  in  2014  RBI  had
released  the  “Charter  of  Customer  Rights”  declaring  five  basic  rights  of  bank  customers  as
broad, overarching principles for protection of bank customers. All banks have since reportedly
adopted/incorporated the Model “Customer Rights Policy” based on the Charter formulated jointly
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
by IBA and BCSBI. I am sure that the committee reviewing the Code of Banks’ Commitments to
their  Customers  would  be  guided  by  the  spirit  of  the  principles  listed  out  in  the  “Charter  of
Customer Rights”. On its part, Reserve Bank will be monitoring aberrations/ non-adherence to
the  Charter  during  supervisory  process.  Specifically,  I  would  urge  the  committee  to  factor  in
following recent developments in the sector and weave them into the Codes appropriately while
reviewing the same:
(i) New branch authorization policy: use of banking correspondents
Business Correspondent (BC) Model has been a major facilitator for financial inclusion especially
in unbanked/under-banked areas. Recent RBI circular on ‘Rationalization of Branch Authorization
Policy’ recognizes BCs as an important pillar for delivery of banking services in under-banked
areas of the country. Some of the BCs in the past have abused the trust placed in them by the
banking  system  and  defrauded  their  customers.  As  BCs  generally  serve  a  less  ‘financially
literate’  population,  it  is  important  that  their  activities  are  brought  under  closer  scrutiny  by  the
banks.  The  banks  have  to  take  ownership  of  BCs  that  they  employ  and  also  put  in  place
appropriate grievance redressal mechanism for cases involving them.
(ii) MSMEs: RBI has recently set out guidelines on ‘Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises’ for early resolution of stress in the accounts of MSMEs,
following  an  ordinance  by  Government  of  India.  Under  this  framework,  the  revival  and
rehabilitation of MSME units having loan limits up to Rs.25 crore is envisaged. Further, with a
view  to  provide  timely  financial  support  to  MSMEs  facing  financial  difficulties  during  their  Life
Cycle,  RBI  had  advised  the  banks  to  review  their  existing  lending  policies  and  incorporating
therein, among others, provisions for sanctioning of Standby Credit Facility in case of term loans,
Additional  Working  Capital  Limits,  Mid  Term  Review  of  Regular  Working  Capital  Limits,  and
Timelines for Credit Decisions.
b.  Synergizing  the  roles  of  PCCOs  and  Internal  Banking  Ombudsmen  (IBOs)  in  the
banks: As  I  understand  the  customer  grievance  redressal  architecture  in  the  banking  sector
suffers from certain structural inconsistencies. I am compelled to make this statement as I see
scope for greater role clarity and synergy in how the PCCOs & the IBOs in the banks operate. I
believe the PCCOs which act as BCSBI’s nodal Point of contact with the member banks and
serve as extended arms of BCSBI for monitoring implementation of Codes in the banks at all
levels must play a more preventive role. For that to happen, the PCCO needs to be suitably
senior in hierarchy with reporting lines to the CEO/ Customer Service Committee of the
Board. I understand, however, that currently this is not uniformly so.
Similarly, the office of the Internal Banking Ombudsman which has been in place in the banks for
almost  last  two  years  does  not  seem  to  have  become  an  effective  forum.  Our  objective  in
institutionalizing the office of IBO was to ensure resolution of a majority of the complaints at the
level  of  bank  itself.  Office  of  IBO  was  envisaged  as  the  ultimate  authority  to  which  all
unresolved/partially resolved complaints were to be escalated before giving final verdict to the
complainant. Only in cases where the customer remained unsatisfied with the resolution should
she  need  to  approach  the  BO. A  continuous  rise  in  the  number  of  complaints  to  the  BO  is
perhaps a pointer to the fact that the institution of IBO has not been very effective or has
not been empowered enough by the Management.
It would be appropriate for the banks to invest in an efficient technology platform which doesn’t
merely  aggregates  and  tracks  the  complaints  but  also  undertakes  a  root  cause  analysis  of
various complaints received, thereby enabling proactive preventive action.Tthe PCCOs and IBO
could  collaborate  in  identifying  areas  where  the  frontline  staff  needed  clearer  operational
instructions  and  provide  them  training/handholding.  This  is  extremely  important  in  a  scenario
where  pace  of  staff  attrition/staff  rotation  have  risen  significantly.  The  banks  could  also
contemplate investing in a technology-aided FAQ platform which the frontline staff could consult
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for addressing customers’ queries rather than misinforming them.
I wonder whether time has come to prescribe some mandatory qualifications for the PCCOs
also in line with that for the CFOs/CTOs. That said, RBI would be conducting an assessment of
the efficacy of the IBOs during the supervisory visits and would expect the bank management to
bring  more  synergy  into  the  working  of  the  PCCOs  and  the  IBOs  for  a  speedier  and  efficient
grievance redressal.
c. Electronic banking – security issues
Technology is being increasingly used in delivery of banking services in recent years. However, it
has also brought in associated risks of security as is evident in few high profile cyber-incidents in
the recent past. There have been several incidents of theft of personal information, fraudulent
use of ATMs, net banking frauds, ATM/ Debit card incidents or cases of unauthorized access to
bank servers. Hence, there is an immediate need for plugging all the gaps and vulnerabilities in
tech-enabled service delivery.
With greater thrust on digital banking especially in the wake of withdrawal of legal tender status of
specified bank notes and consequent increase in complaints relating to unauthorised/fraudulent
transactions, a need for having a comprehensive policy to limit the liability of customers cannot
be over-emphasized. RBI had come out with a draft circular on “Customer Protection – Limiting
Liability  of  Customers  in  Unauthorised  Electronic  Banking  Transactions”  earlier  and  based  on
feedback received from the concerned stakeholders, final guidelines are expected to be issued
shortly. In view of the impending guidelines it would be prudent on part of the banks to internally
tighten their IT security systems and operating procedures so that grievances are minimized.
d. Customer service in the emerging regulatory/supervisory environment
i) As you are aware, several new small finance banks and payment Banks have started their
operations in the recent past. A significant chunk of the customer base of these banks would
comprise  of  first-  time  bank  customers  belonging  to  rural  and  semi-urban  population.  It  is
imperative  that  these  people  are  made  adequately  aware  about  the  need  for  exercising  due
prudence while transacting else they can fall easy prey to fraudsters.
RBI has already advised the Small Finance Banks and Payment Banks to put in place a high
powered  Customer  Grievances  Cell  to  handle  customer  complaints  as  part  of  their  licensing
conditions. These banks are also to be covered under RBI’s Banking Ombudsman Scheme as
per  the  licensing  conditions.  On  their  part,  BCSBI  would  need  to  enroll  these  new  entities  as
member banks so as to ensure compliance to its codes and standards.
ii) The banks also need to be prepared for following impending regulatory changes as well as
enhance their focus on some of the supervisory concerns relating to customer complaints that
have  been  observed  by  RBI.  On  the  face  of  it,  these  might  look  quite  obvious  but  these  are
extremely important from the view point of customers.
The narration in the passbooks/ bank statements at present is quite cryptic and generally
inscrutable.  This  is  despite  extant  RBI  guidelines  that  mandate  recoding  of  intelligible
particulars in the statements. Of late, we have received numerous complaints not only from
customers  but  also  from  the  investigative  agencies  who  find  it  extremely  difficult  to
understand the transactions during the course of their investigations. RBI is in the process of
reiterating its guidelines to banks to provide essential minimum relevant details in respect of
various transactions in the passbook/statement.
The safety of cheques put in the cheque drop boxes as also the quality of cheque leaves
enabling printing of fake cheque leaves is a matter of concern for RBI.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Customer  service  to  senior  citizens  is  an  area  of  major  concern  for  the  RBI.  Difficulties
faced by pensioners in receiving updated pension, issuance of life certificates, verification of
signature,  need  for  periodic  KYC  etc.  Several  grievances  have  also  been  received  from
nominees of deceased customers while seeking settlement of death claims.
Documents to serve as an address proof for KYC compliance continues to remain a major
irritant  even  while  the  customers  are  permitted  to  submit  a  simple  declaration  about  the
current  address  which  may  be  different  from  the  address  proof  which  was  originally
submitted to banks. Similarly, the customers are also allowed to open a small account in the
banks even without “proof of identity and address” by submitting a recent photograph and
signature.
While  banks  have  been granted autonomy in fixing minimum average balance  or  for
charging for premium services, it should not be used as an excuse to deny service or
to drive away common man.
6. Some of these and many similar issues facing customers would have emerged from the root
cause analysis which I alluded to a little earlier paving the way for banks to take corrective action.
I would like to use this forum to inform that RBI would be extensively focused on mis-selling of
third  party  products,  instances  of  violation  of  KYC  guidelines,  imposition  of  usurious  service
charges  during  the  current  year’s  supervisory  cycle.  Further  as  you  are  aware,  RBI  has
specifically established a department for examining the instances of regulatory violations with a
view to taking enforcement actions on the errant banks.
Way forward
7. In view of new developments in the area of banking, BCSBI would have to proactively identify
the  areas  in  which  the  Codes  need  to  be  revised  and  made  contemporaneous.  Before
concluding  my  talk,  by  way  of  setting  out  customer  service  agenda  for  the  banks  and  a  few
specifically for the PCCOs for the ensuing year, I would like to reiterate following points:
Work  towards  operationalizing  a  query  portal  which  will  be  useful  for  the  inexperienced
frontline staff especially in view of higher attrition/rotation. This would enable them to impart
correct information rather than avoiding or giving wrong information.
Updation  of  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  should  include
commitment on revival and rehabilitation framework and lifecycle financing of MSMEs.
Though  the  BOs  don’t  intervene  in  credit  decisions,  several  complaints  about  delayed
decision-making in granting of loans to MSMEs, education and housing loans are received.
There is a need to include a suitable clause in the code for setting deadline for decision-
making on such loans.
The payment system area has become quite integrated with customers of non-bank players
utilizing the banking channels to fund their e- wallets etc. In situations where conflict arises, it
would be expected of banks, being the senior and long –established players to take initiative
for quick resolution so that the customer is not put to harassment
Lessen the frustration faced by the customers while dealing with call centers or automated
response systems. In this context, while the efforts by some of the banks to use artificial
intelligence-driven  chatbot  for  enhancing  customer  service  are  welcome,  it  needs  to  be
ensured that the customers do not end up receiving robotic responses!
8.  I  would  like  to  end  this  section  by  once  again  reiterating  the  idea  of  ‘account  number
portability’  which  I  first  advocated  a  couple  of  years  ago.  Back  then  the  concept  might  have
appeared  somewhat  abstract  but  with  technological  advancements  in  the  field  of  payment
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
system such as UPI etc. coupled with massive enrolments under Aadhaar and their linkage to
individual bank accounts, it has come within the realms of possibility. As such, the prospect of an
aggrieved customer silently moving her account to another bank in the near future has become
very real.
Conclusion
9. I would like to conclude by acknowledging BCSBI’s role in the area of customer protection and
in formulation of policies for elimination of customer grievance. I have briefly spoken on the role of
the Codes of BCSBI and the need to keep them dynamic. In the current scenario, the Codes
have  to  respond  to  three  significant  developments  in  the  banking  sector  –  (a)  the  growing
challenges and realities of industry mainly arising from adoption of technology; (b) addition of new
customers  in  the  formal  banking  structure  arising  from  the  financial  inclusion  efforts  and  (c)
emergence  of  new  entities  like  payment  banks  and  small  finance  banks.  Under  the
circumstances, it is imperative to design an architecture where BCSBI, BOs, IBOs and PCCOs
complement  the  efforts  of  each  other  without  any  friction/overlap.  I  am  sure  the  forum  will
deliberate upon some of these issues in greater detail in course of the Conference.
I once again thank BCSBI for inviting me and wish the Conference all success!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
