Elisa Ferreira: Lessons from the crisis for central banks - a policy
view
Remarks  by  Ms  Elisa  Ferreira,  Vice-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  Joint  Bank  of
Portugal  and  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  "Risk  Management  for  Central  Banks",
Panel 2 "Lessons from the crisis for central banks - a policy view", Lisbon, 25 September 2017.
Introduction
 understanding  macroeconomic 
Economists  and  policymakers  are  still  struggling  to  build  a  consensus  on  the  long-run
economic  impact  and  on  the  policy  implications  of  the  financial  crisis,  10  years  past  its
beginning.
In my view, there are two major lessons from the crisis:
(i.) 
equilibria 
the
interaction/transmission mechanisms of balance sheet positions of all agents in the
economy, the behaviour of financial intermediaries and the interlinkages between
the  financial  and  non-financial  sectors  of  the  economy;  this  has  implications  on  the
design of economic policy, notably monetary and macroprudential policies, and on the need
for interaction between monetary, macroprudential and microprudential policies; 
(ii.)  the  European  architecture  was  unprepared  to  face  the  financial  crisis  and,
despite several major steps observed in recent years, we are still living within an
incomplete setup; a holistic approach – combining (i) steps in micro and macroprudential
policies, (ii) policy action to implement the three interlinked pillars of the banking union; and
(iii) further coherent steps in economic integration are warranted.
requires 
knowing 
In these remarks I would like to briefly touch upon each one of these lessons, having in mind
the policy implications that may arise for the euro area.
(i) The return of financial issues to centre stage in economic thinking and the challenges
still faced at the current juncture
is 
in 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy?  What 
One of the insights from the crisis is that real and financial interactions can only be ignored
at our peril. This has implications for economic modelling and for the design of monetary and
macroprudential  policy  strategies.  In  particular,  should  financial  stability  considerations  be
incorporated 
the  effectiveness  of
macroprudential  policy  when  some  of  the  risks  for  financial  stability  have  already
materialized  and  the  macroprudential  “buffers”  were  not  build  up  beforehand?  How  do
monetary policy and macroprudential policy interact in practical terms? 
Issues such as how to optimally coordinate policies and how to avoid time-inconsistency
problems in this coordination are still outstanding. This is even more evident in a currency
union where monetary policy affects the entire region, but financial imbalances may be local
in nature. 
The  current  consensus  is  that  price  stability  should  continue  to  be  the  primary  goal  of
monetary  policy  and  that  financial  stability  concerns  should  be  mainly  addressed  by
macroprudential policy. This is consistent with Tinbergen’s assignment principle. There is
also  a  clear  alignment  between  the  goals  of  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  as  the
objective of monetary policy is more easily achieved under financial stability and the latter
benefits from price stability. 
Nevertheless,  existing  instruments  are  unable  to  fully  address  persisting  significant
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
macroeconomic imbalances, and they still persist.
Monetary  policy  is  not  the  right  instrument  as  it  may  lead  to  substantial  deviations  of
aggregate output and inflation from their desirable levels.
Macroprudential policy is the most promising tool to tackle financial stability risks. However, it
is still quite recent – the underlying “buffers” were not built up before, they were built during
the  crisis.  Additional  tools  still  need  to  be  developed,  and  more  work  is  still  needed  to
establish a comprehensive macroprudential toolkit beyond banking, which to date is lacking.
Last  week’s  announcement  by  the  European  Commission  calling  for  a  review  of  the
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is a good step in this direction.
Legacy  issues  thus  need  to  be  tackled  also  at  the  micro  level,  underscoring  the  need  to
address the interaction between macro and microprudential policies and guarantee that they
are consistent. 
The design of the institutional roles of central banks should hence guarantee the consistency
between  these  different  policies,  taking  into  account  the  existing  complementary  between
them, as well as these policies’ interaction with fiscal policy.
(ii) The need to complete the European architecture 
The crisis revealed several gaps in the European architecture which have been addressed
to a certain extent during the past decade but still require further decisive work. 
The setting up of the ESM, the Single Rule Book and the two pillars – the supervision and the
resolution – of the Banking Union were major achievements. But one should not think that
without what is missing still, they can work. They cannot.
As we stand, the third pillar of the Banking Union, a common deposit insurance scheme, has
not yet been implemented, thus leading to severe inconsistencies, as the recent resolution
of Banco Popular Español strongly put into evidence.
One should not underestimate how much was achieved in a short time-span. However, in
the rush to solve overarching problems there is always the risk of creating new problems. 
The accountability of recently created European institutions is a good example in this regard
where  we  must  ask  ourselves  if  the  intrinsic  goal  of  preserving  financial  stability  is  being
superseded  by  a  strict  auto-protective  instinct  that  triggers  another  interpretation  of  their
mandate.
The  harsh  conditions  for  any  State  intervention,  under  precautionary  recapitalization,
imposed  by  the  BRRD  and  by  state  aid  rules,  accompanied  by  the  supervisory  and
regulatory  requirements  for  capital  and  other  loss  absorption  instruments,  amidst  low
profitability, in a context of low interest rates, are conducive to significant transfers of wealth
and the destruction of economic value that may seriously jeopardize financial stability.
Moreover,  the  ESM’s  recapitalization  instruments  are  currently  limited  by  the  wider  EU
framework.  Direct  recapitalization  is  extremely  difficult  to  be  activated  and  cannot  in  any
case be used on a precautionary basis.
This is all happening at a time when financial stability is still mostly a national responsibility,
despite  the  much  more  limited  ability  for  the  usage  of  national  tools  to  safeguard  it,  in  a
context where there is a clear misalignment between liability and risk control.
It is thus essential to guarantee a proper alignment of interests between who is entitled with
decisions  powers,  who  bears  the  liabilities  and  who  is  accountable  to  ensure  fair  and
balanced decisions. 
Final remarks and way forward
Uncertainty  calls  for  a  cautious  approach  but  should  not  be  a  reason  for  inaction:  the
foundations  of  the  European  architecture  are  still  not  sufficiently  robust  to  withstand  the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
impact of a future crisis and this should be the focus of policy makers. Otherwise, we risk
fragmenting the single market and not having a genuine Banking Union.
Against the background of (i) a significant amount of banks in the euro area with sizable NPL
stocks, (ii) MREL shortages in banks with a traditional funding model reliant on depositors
and/or elevated stocks of NPLs, (iii) the perceived ‘return’ of the bank-sovereign nexus, and
(iv)  low  levels  of  banks'  profitability,  amid  fintech  challenges,  European  authorities  must
seize the opportunity to review the existing regulatory and crisis management framework in
a coordinated fashion with a full-information approach instead of each devising their own set
of rules.
A comprehensive re-thinking is required recognizing that the current framework was not set
up to address banks with legacy issues and to assess if the existing framework is adequate
when legacy issues have been tackled.
In  addition  to  the  necessary  holistic  approach,  encompassing  monetary,  macro  and
microprudential policies, we need to move forward with concrete measures to improve the
current legal framework, including (i) the setting up of a backstop for the Single Resolution
Fund  and  establishment  of  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS);  (ii)  the
reinterpretation  of  the  ESM  treaty  to  allow  the  ESM  to  become  a  euro  area  backstop  for
financial stability purposes, and (iii) the change of the conditions under which the ESM and
other stabilization tools can be used.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
