Peter  Praet:  Europe's  economic  recovery  -  challenges  and
opportunities for the banking sector
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Association of Banks in Bulgaria, Sofia, 24 May 2017.
Accompanying slides
Europe’s economic recovery
 Since June 2014, the ECB has introduced a range of unconventional measures, alongside our
conventional  ones,  in  pursuit  of  its  price  stability  objective.  Together,  these  measures  have
proved to be extremely effective in preventing a period of disinflation from spiralling into one of
deflation. Nearly three years on, the risks of deflation have vanished and the transmission of our
policy measures to the real economy is clearly evidenced by the strengthening cyclical recovery
– a recovery that has shown a remarkable resilience to external shocks.
Before turning to price developments and monetary policy, let me say a bit more about the latest
economic developments in the euro area.
The  upswing  is  becoming  increasingly  solid,  and  continues  to  broaden  across  sectors  and
countries.  Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  has  expanded  for  16  consecutive  quarters,  growing  by
1.7% year-on-year during the first quarter of 2017, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. This
compares with the latest potential growth estimates for the euro area of around 1%.  Moreover,
recent  survey  data  point  to  a  strong  start  to  the  second  quarter.  For  example,  the  composite
output Purchasing Managers’ Index – which is strongly correlated with growth in the euro area –
hit a six-year high in April and the forward-looking components of the survey point to growth in the
quarters ahead. Moreover, economic sentiment is now at its highest level in nearly a decade and
unemployment is at its lowest level in eight years.
1
The breadth of the economic recovery is also notable. The dispersion of growth rates across
both  countries  and  sectors  is  at  its  lowest  level  in  two  decades,  reflecting  a  convergence  of
growth rates around higher levels. This is reassuring for the growth outlook because recoveries
tend  to  be  firmer  and  more  robust  when  they  are  broad-based.  It’s  a  similar  picture  for
employment,  with  dispersion  of  employment  growth  rates  across  euro  area  countries  at  its
lowest level on record.
The increasingly solid cyclical recovery reflects the success of our monetary policy measures,
which  have  worked  their  way  through  the  financial  system  and  led  to  a  significant  easing  of
financing conditions for consumers and firms. Together with improving financial and non-financial
sector balance sheets, this has strengthened credit dynamics and supported domestic demand.
Since  June  2014,  bank  lending  rates  for  both  euro  area  households  and  non-financial
corporations have fallen by around 110 basis points. Lending rates for very small loans, which
can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), have declined
by  over  180  basis  points.  The  significant  improvement  in  funding  conditions  for  SMEs  is
especially encouraging as they provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro
area. Heterogeneity of lending rates across countries has also fallen sharply, indicating that our
non-standard  measures  have  been  particularly  effective  in  counteracting  bank  funding  and
financial fragmentation in some jurisdictions. For example, the difference between the median
lending rate for firms in countries that were severely affected by the crisis versus other countries
has narrowed by about 100 basis points over this three-year period.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as  recent  surveys  have  shown.   These  positive  developments  have  been  supported  by  the
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  as  a  result  of  which  banks  are
passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers.  Moreover, these improvements
are not limited to interest rates: bank lending volumes have also been gradually recovering since
early 2014. Market-based funding conditions, too, have improved significantly in response to the
corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
3
The easing of financing conditions has underpinned the recovery in domestic demand, which is
now the mainstay of growth in the euro area. As the unemployment rate continues to decline
despite  a  rise  in  labour  force  participation,  households’  real  disposable  income  is  improving.
Given the broadly stable savings rate, increased labour income is translating into higher private
consumption expenditure. Business investment is also picking up as a result of the favourable
financing conditions, the need to modernise the capital stock after years of subdued investment
and strengthening corporate profitability.
From  today’s  point  of  view,  there  are  signs  of  a  stronger  global  recovery  and  a  pick-up  in
international  trade.  The  more  synchronised  economic  upswing  across  regions  should  further
support the euro area recovery.
As for price developments, after hovering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional
dips into negative territory, euro area headline inflation has again edged higher towards the end of
last year and reached 1.9% in April. This upward movement of inflation mainly reflects increases
in energy and food prices. Underlying inflation – which relates more to domestic price pressures
– continues to remain subdued, as unutilised resources still weigh on wage and price growth. In
fact, the annual rate of HICP inflation excluding food and energy has mostly remained below 1%
since late 2013.
Today,  an  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage
dynamics,  which  are  shaped  by  many  factors.  Besides  weak  productivity  developments,  the
significant degree of remaining labour market slack acts to contain wage growth. Furthermore,
the  process  of  setting  wages  is  to  some  extent  backward-looking  in  a  number  of  euro  area
countries,  reflecting  formal  and  informal  indexation  mechanisms.   Additionally,  the  timing  of
wage  negotiations  plays  a  role  in  postponing  the  point  in  time  when  growing  confidence  that
inflation is approaching the ECB’s intended medium-term level starts to become more visible in
aggregate  wage  figures.  Moreover,  weak  wage  growth  could  also  reflect  previous  downward
wage  rigidities:  difficulties  in  reducing  wages  during  earlier  stages  of  the  crisis  may  result,
5
symmetrically, in a slower upward adjustment of wages as labour market conditions improve.
4
Overall,  while  we  are  certainly  seeing  a  firming,  broadening  and  more  resilient  economic
recovery,  we  still  need  to  create  a  sufficiently  broad  and  solid  information  basis  to  build
confidence  that  the  projected  path  of  inflation  is  robust,  durable  and  self-sustained.  First,
underlying  inflation  pressures  still  give  scant  indications  of  a  convincing  upward  trend  as
domestic  cost  pressures,  notably  wage  growth,  remain  subdued. And,  second,  the  economic
recovery and the outlook for price stability remain conditional on the very substantial degree of
monetary accommodation, including our forward guidance. Without this support, the progress
towards a sustained adjustment that we see in our projections will likely be slower or even stall.
At  our  last  policy  meeting  in  April,  the  Governing  Council  took  into  account  all  available
information and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to warrant a scaling back of the
exceptional  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  We  also  reasserted  our  forward  guidance,
which is structured around conditionality and sequencing. Looking ahead to our policy meeting in
June, the Governing Council will draw on the latest information and will have new projections as
well as an updated assessment of the distribution of risks surrounding the economic outlook.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Challenges and opportunities for the European banking sector
Almost ten years have elapsed since the turn of the financial cycle. While European banks still
face a number of challenges stemming from the financial crisis, the firming economic recovery
presents  opportunities  for  them.  Overall,  the  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  in  the
household  and  corporate  sectors  is  gradually  being  completed,  not  least  as  the  result  of  our
monetary policy response.
6
Turning  to  the  financial  sector ,  European  banks  have  shored  up  their  capital  position,  with
average  Tier  1  capital  reaching  15.1%  in  the  third  quarter  of  2016,  an  increase  of  about  2.0
percentage points from 2013 and of 7.1 percentage points since 2007. Banks have disposed of
non-core assets, reduced their exposure to market risk and generally refocused their activities on
more traditional business models. Looking at asset quality, the NPL (non-performing loan) ratio
has declined from 6.7% at its peak in the third quarter of 2014 to 5.1% in the last quarter of 2016,
albeit with large heterogeneity across countries. Yet the profitability of European banks remains
weak,  below  that  observed  in  the  US  or  in Asia.  This  can  be  partly  explained  by  the  cyclical
challenges the banks have been confronted with. The combination of low economic growth with
a  protracted  period  of  low  interest  rates  has  clearly  weighed  on  their  profitability  by  exerting
downward  pressure  on  net  interest  margins.  More  fundamentally,  however,  European  banks
suffer  from  structural  challenges,  partly  attributable  to  their  high  costs.  Their  average  cost-to-
income  ratio,  which  increased  from  55%  in  2010  to  63%  in  2016,  is  very  high  by  historical
standards.
European banks need to move towards sustainable business models. In this respect, we believe
that  cross-border  consolidation  has  an  important  role  to  play.  Consolidation  is  important  for
reaping economies of scale, supporting the integration of retail credit markets without creating
competition issues in local loan and credit markets. This would also increase the resilience of the
European economy through cross-country private risk-sharing.
The banking union has created an enabling environment for cross-border integration. The post-
crisis  regulatory  framework  has  been  designed  to  cater  for  large  cross-border  institutions,
addressing  concerns  of  renewed  too-big-to-fail  problems  or  a  greater  risk  of  cross-border
contagion. Looking forward, we think that an increase in the number of pan-European banks has
the potential to improve the efficiency and resilience of Europe’s banking sector. Today’s banking
landscape  still  too  closely  resembles  a  collection  of  banking  systems  highly  exposed  to  their
domestic  economies,  with  limited  cross-border  private  risk-sharing.  The  future  banking
landscape should ideally consist of a diverse range of banking institutions, with pan-European
banks playing an important role in private risk-sharing.
For this to happen, it is essential to complete the banking union. In this union, both supervisory
responsibility and the fiscal backstop need to be at European level to underpin confidence in the
area-wide financial system in a sustainable way. Just as necessary is the establishment of a
European Deposit Insurance Scheme. The current situation, where supervision is common, but
the consequences of any bank failures are still predominantly national, should not last. In this
incomplete  framework,  national  considerations  inevitably  continue  to  affect  supervisory
decisions. This acts as a disincentive for banks to become more European. Concrete examples
include a lack of fungibility of liquidity or capital. The fact that the euro area is not considered as a
single  jurisdiction  may  result  in  the  application  of  higher  capital  buffers  to  global  systemically
important banks in the region.
The banking union is both an objective and a process of fundamental structural change in the EU
financial architecture. The next steps are clearly set out in the ECOFIN roadmap to complete the
banking  union.  Agreement  on  an  ambitious  timetable  for  its  implementation  is  now  urgently
needed.
1
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
See, for example, OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2016, Issue 2 and European Commission, European
Economic Forecast, Winter 2017.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, April 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
For  more  details  on  the  impact  of  the  TLTROs,  see  “The  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations:  an
overview of the take-up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, Box 5, ECB, 2017.
For further discussion, see “Recent wage trends in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, Box 2, ECB 2016.
See,  for  example,  “Wage  dynamics  amid  high  euro-area  unemployment”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Monthly
Report, December 2016.
See Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, May 2017 and European Financial Stability and
Integration Review 2017, European Commission, May 2017.  
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
