Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Regulatory  and  supervisory  institutional
frameworks in Europe
Opening remarks by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Seventh
Bank of Portugal Conference on Financial Intermediation, Lisbon, 7 July 2017.
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the 7th Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial
Intermediation.
This  conference  series  has  taken  place  every  other  year  since  2005  (when  it  was  called  the
“Conference on Financial Fragility  and  Bank  Regulation”).  It  aims  to  bring  together  senior  and
young researchers from academia and central banks to discuss the most recent developments
in financial intermediation, markets and regulation.
Back  in  2005,  awareness  of  the  challenges  ahead  in  terms  of  financial  stability  was  already
increasing. Some key topics were becoming important in the theoretical and policy debate:
rapid financial innovation in a context of international integration;
liquidity management practice and the associated systemic risk;
the role of central banks as lenders of last resort; and
the set of problems related to “too big to fail” financial conglomerates. 
When the international financial crisis began, followed by the European sovereign debt crisis and
the vicious circle linking sovereigns and banks in several countries, these issues became a focal
point. Many new topics also joined the research agenda, such as:
the misuse of the so-called originate-to-distribute model, in particular resorting to complex
derivatives and other opaque products;
the pro-cyclical nature of the existing capital regulation framework;
the adequacy of financial regulation and supervision frameworks. 
Banks were forced to adapt their business models and management strategies. In particular, the
very low interest rate environment and the unconventional monetary policies conducted by the
main central banks dramatically changed the operating environment and the incentives for banks
and markets. 
At present, there are four key issues that in my opinion deserve the attention of policy-
makers and researchers:
1. The regulatory and supervisory framework
An  economy’s  regulatory  framework  reflects  society’s  preferences  in  terms  of  risk  protection.
These  preferences  evolve  over  time  and  in  tandem  with  them  the  supervisory  regulatory
framework.
In  the  aftermath  of  the  recent  crisis,  the  public  asked  for  stricter  financial  and  supervisory
regulations. This led to a significant change in financial regulation, guided by two main concerns:
improving  financial  institutions’  governance  models;  reducing  their  degree  of  risk  and  creating
capital buffers to absorb risk, should it materialise.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
But more recently the idea that we have reached a point of overregulation has started to emerge
in  the  public  debate  and  consequently  proposals  for  deregulation  and  arguments  for  greater
supervision discretion have been put forward. 
This  discretion  poses  serious  problems  of  transparency  and  of  equal  treatment,  due  to  the
temptation  to  shape  the  financial  system  by  handing  regulatory  powers  over  to  supervisory
authorities. A  clear  distinction  should  be  made  between  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions.
This segregation is key to ensuring a greater balance of powers and responsibilities, allowing
proper accountability.
2. Regulatory arbitrage
The  financial  crisis  also  showed  the  limitations  of  decentralised  supervision  in  a  world  of
increasingly integrated financial markets and institutions. We are now in a process of moving
from  a  situation  in  which  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  were  of  national
competence to a situation where there are common rules and in the euro area also a common
supervisor.
A need for greater cross-border integration of financial regulation and supervision emerged from
the policy debate and motivated the still on-going reform of Basel rules and the creation of the
Banking Union in Europe.
However, the degree of implementation of the post-crisis global regulatory reform agenda across
countries varies significantly, giving rise to regulatory arbitrage. This is reflected in the search for
gaps  in  national  legislation  that  justify  avoiding  compliance  with  previous  international
agreements,  as  well  as  in  the  behaviour  of  the  authorities  that  accommodate  specific
requirements, conditions and interests of the major international financial conglomerates.
It is very important to identify and assess what the risks and cost of regulatory arbitrage are.
3. Regulatory flaws in the European regulation
The current Banking Union framework suffers from a critical weakness: its micro approach to
managing  banking  crises  disregards  the  financial  stability  risks  resulting  from  interventions  in
ailing banks. The current resolution framework does not envisage a credible public backstop and
lacks government stabilisation tools. 
In fact, the framework governing intervention in problematic banks does not take into account the
fact  that  the  need  to  preserve  financial  stability  must  always  prevail  over  the  specific  rules  of
intervention  in  banks.  As  recent  cases  illustrate,  the  European  bail-in  framework  does  not
exclude bail-out events when financial stability issues (or the public perspective of it) are at stake.
In addition, there is also the question of whether the lender of last resort is prepared and willing to
lend all the liquidity that is needed when a bank is in distress but is still solvent. Otherwise, the
trigger for a banking failure is not insolvency but illiquidity. 
Another  limitation  stems  from  the  rules  on  MREL  (minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and
eligible liabilities) and TLAC (total loss-absorbing capacity), which are good ideas for banks that
are mainly financed in the market, but do not work as expected for banks essentially dependent
on deposits. The latter are obliged to go to the markets and to issue debt with high costs that, in
all likelihood, will be taken up by other banks, thus creating negative externalities for the stability
and resilience of the financial system as a whole.
This is particularly worrying because it can undermine the construction and sustainability of the
Banking Union. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Financeable risk and risk that is acceptable to society
Banks take risks as part of their normal activity. However, when such risks are excessive they
can lead to huge losses – not only for banks and their investors, but for the whole economy. 
Regulation  plays  a  key  role  in  reducing  vulnerability  and  sources  of  risk  and  in  containing  the
costs of financial instability when it arises. Nevertheless, it should be taken into account that the
higher the capital required for the banking system, the higher the intermediation cost, decreasing
the  credit  multiplier.  A  banking  system  with  minimum  risk  means  a  banking  system  with
maximum  cost  and,  hence,  smaller  capacity  to  finance  investment.  If  it  is  accepted  that  the
financial  system  has  to  take  some  risk,  regulations  must  lay  down  how  society  should  react
when risk becomes systemic, for instance, setting out the role of the different stakeholders in
these cases.
Regulations  should  seek  to  make  the  financial  system  safer,  but  flexible  enough  to  fulfil  its
function as a driver of economic development while being adaptable to new paradigms, namely
to  those  resulting  from  technological  innovation.  Society’s  preferences  in  terms  of  financial
security  are  not  always  consistent  with  the  economy’s  financing  needs  or  risks  arising  from
innovation.
I  will  stop  here,  resisting  the  temptation  to  keep  talking  about  these  important  and  fascinating
issues related to the regulatory and supervisory institutional frameworks in Europe. Let me just
wish you a rich and fruitful debate and a very pleasant stay in Sintra.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
