Vítor Constâncio: Resolving Europe's NPL burden - challenges and
benefits
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  an
event  entitled  "Tackling  Europe's  non-performing  loans  crisis:  restructuring  debt,  reviving
growth", organised by Bruegel, Brussels, 3 February 2017.
 I am grateful for this opportunity to speak on the important issue of NPLs in European banks at
the invitation of Bruegel, a think-tank doing such significant work in shaping economic thinking in
Europe. My remarks today will be on the euro area non-performing loan (NPL) problem and on
the policy response that would be needed from a macroprudential perspective. I will first outline
the size and scope of the NPL problem. I will then put the NPL problem into a microeconomic
and  structural  context,  focusing  on  the  reasons  why  it  has  developed  this  way  and  what  the
impediments are to an exclusively market-based solution to the problem. With this in mind, I will
move  on  to  the  range  of  necessary  and  feasible  solutions,  underlying  in  particular  the  role  of
securitization schemes and the creation of Asset Management Companies (AMC) to achieve an
orderly and fast resolution of NPLs.
The NPL problem is one of the main reasons behind the low aggregate profitability of European
banks. Let me recall here that the return on equity of euro area banks has hovered around 5%,
which does not cover the estimated cost of equity. It is important to keep in mind that the issue is
not about the robustness of balance sheets as capital and provisions have significantly increased
since 2012. Indeed, whereas CET1 ratio was 7% in 2007, it reached 9% in 2012 and is now 14%.
Including provisions and collateral, the NPL coverage ratio stands at 82% on average, both for
the group of six countries with higher NPLs and for the euro area as a whole.
Asset quality issues have been brought to the fore by the global financial crisis. In the euro area,
NPL  ratios  stood  at  low  or  manageable  levels  prior  to  the  crisis. At  the  same  time,  the  NPL
problem has deep structural reasons that were further amplified with the start of the financial and
economic crisis. In fact, the surge in NPLs further revealed the limited ability of large parts of the
euro area banking system to deal with distressed debt.
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the euro area, the average NPL ratio peaked at 8% in 2013 (see Chart 1).   As the economic
recovery took hold, GDP growth resumed and unemployment started to decline, this ratio started
to fall. The reduction in NPLs has, however, been slow and heterogeneous. The ratio of NPLs is
still  at  two  digit  level  in  six  i  euro  area  countries:  Cyprus,  Greece,  Italy,  Ireland,  Portugal  and
Slovenia. Banks directly supervised by the ECB, still held €921 billion of such troubled loans at
the end of September 2016, representing 6.4% of total loans and equivalent to nearly 9% of the
2
euro area GDP.
1
The NPL outlook is also very diverse across the euro area. In two countries, Cyprus and Greece,
about  one-half  of  total  loans  are  not  performing,  accounting  for  about  one-third  of  total  bank
assets. Four countries report NPL ratios of close to 20%. On the other end of the spectrum,
many  countries  maintain  NPL  ratios  of  less  than  3%.  Despite  this  heterogeneity,  NPLs  are  a
problem with a clear European dimension, as even those countries where banks do not struggle
with asset quality, are likely to be affected by spillovers, both financial and real.
The NPL problem has no comparable dimension in the U.S. for a number of reasons ranging
from  structural,  to  regulatory-  and  tax-related  motives.  In  the  U.S.,  Government  Sponsored
Entities  (GSEs),  and  not  the  banks,  account  for  the  majority  of  mortgages  in  their  balance
sheets.  Differently  to  Europe,  regulatory  requirements  overlay  accounting  standards  imposing
the write-down of loans to their recoverable collateral value already after six months past-due, for
example. The IAS 39 accounting standard (under the incurred loss approach) and the absence of
guidance on write-off requirements tend to lengthen NPL write-offs in Europe.
The distribution of non-performing exposures by sectors is also quite mixed across countries.
Taken  together,  about  60%  of  currently  distressed  loans  were  extended  to  non-financial
companies,  of  which  about  a  third  is  related  to  lending  backed  by  commercial  property.  But
lending to households also constitutes a significant part of troubled debt exposures, accounting
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
for more than a half of the NPLs in some countries. The distribution of non-performing exposures
of high-NPL countries (with NPL ratios in excess of 10%) broadly follows this pattern (see Chart
2).
  Clearly, a sizeable part of the NPL stock is no longer a risk to bank balance sheets. Provisions,
made under applicable accounting standards, amount to about 46% of the stock of NPLs. The
remaining value of NPLs is supported by expected future recoveries. Collateral may be a major
source of value in NPLs, covering a further 36% of the total exposure, bringing total coverage to
82% on average, for the euro area, broadly in line with the figures for the high-NPL countries (see
Chart  3).  However,  it  is  very  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  access  to  that  collateral  is  often
lengthy and costly, eroding its net present value.3
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  I  said  earlier,  one  of  the  main  reasons  we  are  concerned  about  high  NPLs,  from  a
macroprudential perspective, is that they weigh on bank profitability. However, the resolution of
NPLs should not be seen as the only challenge on the way towards restoring sustainable bank
profitability and the banking sectors’ ability to lend to the real economy. Low returns on equity in
the euro area are also the result of high costs or overbanking. Only a few EU countries have
successfully  managed  these  challenges.  Sweden  and  other  Scandinavian  countries  are  a
notable example of a banking sector that achieves high profitability while not being burdened with
legacy credit quality issues or excessive cost inefficiency. Digitalisation, optimisation of human
resources and branch networks, as well as reduction of overbanking also need to be addressed,
drawing lessons from the Swedish and other case studies (see Chart 4).
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
That  being  noted,  the  resolution  of  NPLs  alone  could  lift  up  the  return  on  equity  in  several
European  countries  significantly.  ECB  staff  carried  out  some  simulations  to  demonstrate  the
potential for increases in bank profitability. In these simple and stylised settings, the assumption
was  made  that  non-performing  loans  would  be  replaced  by  new,  sound  exposures.  Interest
income would be boosted as a result, as rates charged on new business would substitute for the
lower earnings from non-performing loans. Our simulations suggest that a resolution of NPLs
could improve the aggregate return on equity of euro area banks by at least 1 percentage point,
with some sectors gaining 3 or 5 percentage points. These estimates do not account for the
benefits of lower funding cost or lower capital requirements that would be forthcoming from a
reduction of NPLs. And, this would provide even further upside to bank profitability. (See Chart 5)
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
 The capital relief from the resolution of NPLs may further spur loan supply (see Chart 6). In the
medium term, if the entire amount of capital currently tied up by NPLs is used to support new
lending, total credit volume in the euro area may increase, in the most optimistic variant, by about
2.5% and up to 6% in the group of 6 countries with higher NPLs. These numbers would likely be
higher if dynamic and confidence effects, that are not possible to account for, would be added.
Clearly,  countries  with  the  highest  NPL  ratios  and  the  least  efficient  debt  enforcement
frameworks would benefit the most.
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me now look more closely at some of the reasons for the slow resolution of NPLs.
If financial markets were fully efficient, one would assume that NPLs would be priced in a way
that  would  result  in  fast  market  clearance  and  their  removal  from  banks’  books.  Market
transactions  of  loans  are,  however  still  insufficient,  having  attained  nevertheless,  about  €200
billion of loan portfolio sales in the last three years – an amount that does not include necessarily
4
only NPLs.
5
The standard microeconomic concept of a market with asymmetric information (the problem of
“lemons”  or  bad  cars  in  the  U.S.)   is  helpful  in  explaining  the  lack  of  current  activity  in  NPL
markets. Consider that NPLs may come with a quality level that is unknown to the buyer, but can
be  discerned  by  the  seller  who  originated  and  managed  the  loan. Asymmetry  of  information
available to the seller and the buyer may then lead to an outcome where only low-quality assets,
(“lemons”) are actively traded. The uninformed buyer would not be prepared to pay a higher price
for higher-quality assets, given that they are not recognised as such. As a result they would be
retained on the books of the seller.
There  are  many  sources  of  asymmetric  information  in  the  NPL  context.  First,  while  even  the
banks  do  not  know  everything  about  their  assets,  they  certainly  have  an  advantage  over  the
investors, coming from the previous relationship with the borrower. Presence of collateral further
increases the asymmetry and the cost of investor due diligence. Furthermore, investors may fear
that  banks  cherry-pick  the  best  assets  for  themselves,  thus  reducing  the  quality  of  portfolios
offered on sale.
Beyond  market  failures,  regulatory  and  features  of  the  judicial  system,  such  as  structural
inefficiencies in debt and collateral enforcement, also contribute to the lack of market turnover.
Legal procedures needed to collect a simple claim take too long and cost too much in many euro
area  countries.  Some  of  these  costs  cannot  be  recognised  in  the  values  of  NPL,  but  rather,
according to accounting rules, are charged to the general expenses. This discrepancy between
economic and book value of NPLs is yet another disincentive to increase supply, especially for
those banks that are not sufficiently profitable or that have thin capital cushions (see Chart 7).
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the demand side, investors are also deterred by high uncertainty around recoveries and their
timing. Moreover, barriers to entry such as licensing requirements further inhibit demand in some
euro area countries.
The direct consequence of the conditions, under which the NPL market operates, is a wide gap
between bid and ask prices. The data on the size of that gap is scant but it is thought to be very
large.  For  instance,  estimates  suggest  that,  for  a  fully  collateralised  non-performing  loan,  the
discount  required  by  a  private  investor  may  exceed  40%  solely  due  to  the  cost,  time  and
uncertainty of the recoveries (see Chart 8).6
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Most of the factors contributing to the discount would not be recognised in banks’ provisioning.
Under IAS 39, the current accounting standard which is to be replaced by IFRS 9, provisions are
made under the incurred loss approach.
Investors who have limited information would use a much higher discount rate (corresponding to
the green bars in Chart 7) to reflect their uncertainty about the quality and thus the value of the
loan.  They  would  additionally  account  for  the  full  expected  cost  of  working  out  the  loan  (blue
bars). This calculation produces a wide bid ask gap.
Structural reforms that would reduce all the impediments mentioned, would raise the net present
value of the non-performing loans on bank balance sheets, thereby providing an important and
welcome buffer to absorb further losses and increase the range of options available to resolve
NPLs (see Chart 9).
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
 It would not suffice, however, to develop and stimulate market-based solutions for the high stock
of NPLs. Some assets may still not attract investor demand due to their intrinsic features and, in
the case of some assets, banks may have an advantage over investors, making in-house work-
out  of  NPL  the  preferred  option,  which  in  turn  requires  that  they  have  sufficient  capacity  to
restructure and cure troubled loans.
Comprehensive strategies are therefore needed to address the NPL problem. These strategies
should include common elements. For these elements a harmonised approach at the European
level is of utmost importance, complemented with country-specific elements in each high-NPL
constituency in the euro area.
Generally speaking, NPL resolution strategies can deploy a broad range of options available to
banks and policymakers. These options are usually complementary. Internal workout by the bank
originally  holding  the  impaired  asset  marks  one  end  of  the  spectrum  of  options  and  should
always  feature  highly  in  any  broader  resolution  scheme.  On  the  opposite  end,  direct  sales  to
investors offer an opportunity to dispose of NPLs quickly. In between, there is a range of options
such as asset protection schemes (APSs), securitisation and synthetic securitisation and the
creation  of  asset  management  companies  (AMCs),  which  in  the  past  often  involved  state
intervention (see Chart 10)
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
All of these options require a considerable push for structural reforms. To illustrate this point, let
us  consider  an  AMC  which  is  not  accompanied  by  improvements  to  the  debt  enforcement
framework. As the AMC would be in an equally difficult legal position as the originating banks, the
synergies it could reap would be very moderate. In turn, either the upfront impact of the AMC
transfers on the solvency of the banks, or the likelihood of the AMC having to shoulder the losses
would be unacceptably high.
It is therefore essential that, as part of the comprehensive strategy, governments take a range of
actions  related  to  debt  enforcement  and  reduction  of  information  asymmetries.  In  many
countries, the menu of options available to creditors in insolvency should be expanded, with an
objective of promoting early restructuring and survival of viable companies. At the same time, the
liquidation  of  non-viable  companies  and  access  to  collateral  should  be  facilitated.  Strong
implementation of the necessary legal reforms is also crucial. This involves e.g. the provision of
adequate capacity of the court system and well-functioning of out-of-court workout schemes.
Moving to information asymmetries, the quality, scope and accessibility of financial information
should  be  improved,  in  particular  with  respect  to  corporate  financial  data  and  information  on
assets of distressed debtors. Finally, remaining obstacles to third-party investment in distressed
loans should be reviewed and where possible removed.
On the supervisory side, NPL resolution has been designated as one of the top priorities of the
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  ECB  Banking  Supervision  has  prepared  an  extensive  draft
guidance  document  on  NPL,  expressing  supervisory  expectations  with  regard  to  governance,
management, recognition and valuation of NPLs, which was discussed at length earlier today.
The  powers  of  the  banking  supervisors  in  the  EU  are,  however,  legally  limited.  For  instance,
Accounting Standards, including on the imposition of provisions for non-performing assets, are
not set by supervisors.7
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Other elements are likely to be needed for a comprehensive solution. History has proven that
asset  management  companies  can  swiftly  clean  up  NPLs  from  bank  balance  sheets,  and
resolve  them  over  a  longer  period  of  time. Acquisition  of  assets  at  their  long-term  economic
value,  instead  of  market  value  which  is  depressed  by  low  liquidity  and  high  uncertainty,
minimises fire sale losses. For example Sweden, Korea, Germany, Ireland, Spain and Slovenia
used these tools to manage banking crises, often with a focus on loans backed by real estate.
While  overall  successful,  the  degree  of  success  of  such  entities  tends  to  be  linked  to  strong
governance. There is one common feature of this type of AMC: state support. Until now AMCs
have  rarely  been  established  on  a  purely  commercial  basis.  Governments  had  to  step  in  to
provide capital to banks weakened by the recognition of losses on NPLs transferred to the AMC,
and to guarantee the funding of the AMC. Privately-led solutions would be clearly preferable but
have thus far been hardly feasible.
Is there then a place for such AMCs under the current European regulatory framework which
puts the burden of managing financial crises on private creditors and investors? There is scope
for public sector involvement. It is possible to use government guarantees for funding purposes,
as  done  recently  in  Italy  in  the  context  of  bank  funding  and  securitisations  of  NPLs,  in  full
compliance  with  the  rules  and  at  a  market-consistent  price.  The  rules  also  allow  for
precautionary  recapitalisation  of  banks  by  the  public  sector  in  cases  of  significant  financial
stability  concerns,  subject  to  strict  conditions  laid  down  in  the  BRRD  (Art.  32,  4),  covering
hypothetical  losses  estimated  under  an  adverse  scenario  of  a  stress  test.  Precautionary
recapitalisations also have to respect State Aid rules that generally require bail-in of subordinated
debt  as  stated  in  the  European  Commission’s  communication  of  July  2013,  where  possible
8
exemptions are nevertheless foreseen (paragraph 45). 
The toolkit would be rounded off by two more instruments which facilitate sales of NPLs.
Clearinghouses can be established to reduce the information asymmetry. Standardised data on
individual  assets  could  be  stored  on  a  centralised  platform  at  European  level,  which  would
combine  exposures  from  multiple  banks  and  vouch  for  quality  of  the  data.  This  would  allow
investors to carry out a due diligence at low cost. Bespoke portfolios could be constructed in line
with the mandates and objectives of individual investors.
Securitisation could complement outright NPL sales. One of its advantages is that the universe
of distressed debt investors can be expanded. Thanks to the ratings given to senior tranches, a
broader  group  of  investors  could  acquire  NPLs. Additionally,  securitisation  offers  another  way
through  which  governments  may  jump-start  the  NPL  market,  for  example  by  co-investing,
together with private investors, in junior or mezzanine tranches. As with AMCs, of course, such
investment would need to be compliant with state aid requirements.
Many of these measures should not be expected to yield fruit immediately. Only AMCs, to the
extent  that  they  are  in  compliance  with  the  current  rules  and  securitisation  can  offer  a  quick
clean-up of bank balance sheets.
An AMC at European level would be a welcomed initiative, particularly because it would facilitate
raising  private  funding  in  the  market. A  true  European AMC  faces  however  difficulties  in  the
present  environment.  In  more  immediate  terms,  a  way  forward  could  be  the  creation  of  a
European blueprint for AMCs to be used at national level. This European blueprint should clarify
what is possible within a flexible approach to the existent regulation and encourage countries to
adopt all necessary measures in a well-defined time frame.
At  the  same  time,  a  European  NPL-information  platform  should  be  implemented  to  enhance
transparency and facilitate transactions.
In the medium term, the introduction of IFRS 9 and more forward-looking provisioning rules could
be conducive to faster recognition of losses. Improvements to bank practices and to data quality
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
and availability are also going to take time before progress becomes tangible.
Finally, insolvency law reforms tend to take a number of years, including the time needed to build
capacity, develop practices and test the rules in courts.
The long horizon of many measures should not reduce the sense of urgency and necessity. All
of these reforms are essential not only for the resolution of Europe’s NPL burden, and also as
prevention  of  the  renewed  build-up  of  NPL  in  future  cyclical  downturns.  Financial  benefits  of
speedy action may surface more quickly too. If these measures become credible, investors will
recognise the shift in policy and should price higher expected future returns into loan valuations.
Let  me  conclude.  While  NPLs  are  rightly  seen  as  a  problem,  their  resolution  could  unlock
significant benefits to the European banking system and the European economy.
The benefits from resolving the NPL problem are unquestionable, but a great deal of hard work is
clearly needed, on many fronts, to deliver them. Neither a partial solution, nor further waiting is an
option. Acting only on the supply side of the NPL markets and forcing banks to sell may have
serious  financial  stability  consequences.  The  resulting  transfer  of  value  from  banks  to  the
investor community would put further pressure on bank profitability, instead of relieving it. For this
reason,  a  comprehensive,  co-ordinated  effort  on  the  part  of  several  European  and  national
authorities is now crucial.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Based on the IMF Financial Soundness Indicator database.
According to the ECB Supervisory Banking Statistics.
The value of collateral reported in supervisory statistics is capped at the value of the exposure, therefore the
actual collateral pledged against NPLs is likely to be significantly higher.
See Deloitte (2016), “Deleveraging Europe 2016. H1 Market Update”.
See G. Akerlof (1970) “The market for “lemons”: quality uncertainty and the market mechanism” in The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol 84, No. 3, pp 488–500.
See Fell, J., M. Grodzicki , R. Martin and E. O’Brien (2016), “Addressing market failures in the resolution of non-
performing loans in the euro area”, Special Feature B in Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2016.
See  ECB  (2016),  “Stocktake  of  national  supervisory  practices  and  legal  frameworks  related  to  NPLs”,
September 2016.
On the possibilities of interpreting the relevant European legislation see the recent CEPS Special Report by
Bruzzone,  Cassela  and  Micossi  (2016)  “Fine-tuning  the  use  of  bail-in  to  promote  a  stronger  EU  financial
system”, CEPS Special Report No 136, April 2016.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
