Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Continuing  the  voyage  of  excellence  to  a
bright tomorrow
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  24th Anniversary  Program  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,
Manila, 3 July 2017.
 Outgoing Governor Amando M. Tetangco, Jr.; distinguished members of the Monetary Board –
Finance Secretary and MBM Carlos Dominguez III, MBM Felipe Medalla,  MBM Juan De Zuñiga,
Jr., MBM Valentin Araneta, MBM Antonio Abacan, and MBM Peter Favila; outgoing MBM members
Alfredo Antonio and Armando Suratos; esteemed former Central Bank Governors Jaime Laya,
and Jose Cuisia, Jr.; former MB Members – Raul Boncan, Ignacio Bunye, Melito Salazar, and
Vicente Valdepeñas; distinguished guests from the banking community, the business sector, and
the academe; my co-workers in the BSP in Manila, Quezon City, the regions, and the branches;
family and friends, including my wife Tess and my children Jackie, Nikko and Nesty; ladies and
gentlemen, good morning!
First of all, I wish us all a happy 24th anniversary!
Celebrating BSP’s brand of excellence
Our chosen theme for this anniversary is “excellence”, highlighting one of the BSP’s core values.
Together with patriotism, dynamism, integrity, and solidarity, excellence is the defining imprint in
every BSPer’s DNA. These values should describe who we are and what we always aspire to be
in our everyday life in BSP.
The  Japanese  equate  excellence  to  the  principle  of  “kaizen”  which,  in  English,  means
“continuous improvement”. It is an evolutionary process – a daily conscious effort to do better
than  the  day  before.  In  his  book  “The  Story  of  Philosophy”, American  philosopher  Will  Durant
summed up Aristotle’s thoughts on excellence – “We are what we repeatedly do, excellence then
is not an act, but a habit.”  Similarly, in his book “Outliers”, best-selling author Malcolm Gladwell
advocated the 10,000-hour rule.  This rule holds that at least ten thousand hours of deliberate
practice are required to achieve the level of mastery associated with being a world-class expert.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  BSP’s  journey  to  excellence  started  24  years  ago.  Hard  work  and
dedication have led us to achieve important milestones.
First, our effective conduct of monetary policy through flexible inflation targeting has led to a low
and stable inflation environment that sustains economic growth. Today, the Philippines is one of
the fastest growing economies   in the region. 
1
Second, the domestic banking system continues to be fundamentally sound and stable. Banks
are well capitalized and benefit from good asset quality, ample liquidity and healthy profitability.
By reliably providing credit to the economy and mobilizing savings, the banking system is a pillar
of sovereign strength.
Third, the BSP, as a progressive and vigilant issuer and overseer of the currency and operator of
the Philippine Payments and Settlements System (PhilPaSS), has consistently provided a safe
and efficient payments system that enables our economy to function smoothly.
We honor and thank my predecessor, Governor Say Tetangco, and the rest of our dedicated
Monetary Board members, and other stewards of our institution before them, for their collective
wisdom and for leaving us a legacy of excellence in the BSP.  With you at the helm to provide
guidance, we were able to sail the rough seas and kept the economy and the financial system on
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
an even keel for the past 12 years. Please join me in giving them a warm round of applause for a
job well done! 
Governor Say, I am truly grateful for your mentoring all these years. Yours are truly big shoes to
fill and I am thankful that I am inheriting such an exemplary and world-class institution.
My  fellow  workers,  we  have  achieved  these  significant  milestones  by  working  together  and
staying focused on pursuing our collective goals to the highest standards. This is the brand of
excellence that is truly the BSP way!
Continuity ++
I dedicate my term as BSP Governor to building and leveraging on this legacy of excellence.  We
shall endeavor to fulfill our core mandates with greater vigour and integrity to ensure that both the
economy  and  the  financial  system  remain  strong,  stable,  and  resilient  so  that  they  facilitate
transformational opportunities for all.
The BSP will continue to fine-tune our execution of monetary policy to make it even more market-
oriented. We have already started with the deployment of the interest rate corridor (IRC) system. 
Over time, the IRC is expected to aid in advancing the development of the domestic money and
capital markets based on greater reliance on the use of market-friendly instruments.  In the same
vein,  we  will  work  closely  with  other  government  agencies  and  private  sector  stakeholders  to
accelerate capital market reforms, including the development of the necessary financial market
infrastructures that provide orderly trading, clearing, and settlement of the full range of financial
transactions.   
Leveraging on the much-improved and continuously improving governance and risk management
practices  of  banks  and  other  supervised  financial  institutions,  we  intend  to  further  open  up
competitive opportunities to lower the cost of doing business, provide more customer choices,
promote efficiency, and encourage innovation. 
There are also vital pieces of legislation that we strongly support. We will advocate for their timely
enactment.  These  include  the  amendment  of  the  BSP  Charter,  the  passage  of  the  Payment
System Act (PSA) and the Islamic Banking Act, and the easing of the deposit secrecy laws. We
also join the initiative for the further strengthening of the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) to win
the  fight  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  and  thus  secure  the  integrity  of  our
financial system.
We must likewise do our part and remain focused in pursuing comprehensive reforms to enable
our economy to position well in the rapidly integrating ASEAN regional economic system.
Bringing central banking to the people: towards a truly inclusive growth
Yes,  the  Philippines  continues  to  experience  strong  economic  performance  amidst  a  stable
macroeconomic and financial environment.  But such growth, to be truly meaningful, needs to be
inclusive, to create jobs, and to improve welfare. 
The BSP has been promoting reforms in the macroeconomic and financial sectors, but we know
that these are not enough.  We have to push the envelope further. This is why the BSP has been
passionate in its pursuit of its financial inclusion advocacy.
We need to work on bringing central banking operations closer to the people.   This would entail
strengthening  our  commitment  to  advance  our  financial  inclusion,  financial  education,  and
consumer protection agenda to ensure that no one is left behind. 
As you may know, in 2015, the BSP, together with industry participants and other stakeholders,
embarked  on  an  ambitious  journey  towards  modernizing  the  retail  payment  system  in  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
country.  The National Retail Payment System (NRPS) project defines the principles and critical
elements  to  bring  about  a  safe  and  efficient  digital  payment  system.  This  can  potentially
transform  our  economy  by  enabling  greater  access  to  financial  services.    A  well-designed
payment system serves as a key pillar of an inclusive and expansive digital finance ecosystem –
one  that  is  able  to  meet  the  diverse  needs  of  all  users  in  a  manner  that  is  convenient,
sustainable, affordable, and reliable.
Our  policy  agenda  is  therefore  geared  towards  a  truly  inclusive,  strong  and  dynamic  financial
system  that  is  fully  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  domestic  economy  in  line  with  the
Government’s medium-term development plan and the AmBisyon Natin 2040.
The new frontier: voyage to a new season of excellence
As we continue our voyage to a new season of excellence, let us examine what is ahead of us…
Our sound macroeconomic fundamentals and gains from earlier reforms will continue to support
our growth prospects.  However, we need to be mindful of potential sources of vulnerabilities.
The year 2016 saw the unfolding of unexpected global events that have escalated the level of
policy  uncertainty  and  market  volatility.    We  have  to  be  prepared  as  well  for  the  seemingly
imminent wind-down of ultra-easy monetary policies in advanced economies.  We need to be
mindful  of  such  events  and  their  potentially  far-reaching  consequences  since  these  could
undermine our economic performance and disrupt our carefully-laid plans.
Moreover, rapid technological innovations in the delivery of financial products and services are
changing business models. Digital innovation is rapidly re-shaping financial services as we know
it  to  serve  a  new  breed  of  financial  consumers  who  are  young,  upwardly  mobile,  technology-
savvy, and have exacting demands for the convenient delivery of financial products and services.
The  role  of  social  media,  particularly  as  an  information  channel,  has  likewise  accelerated,
highlighting the speed at which information, both good and bad news, and perhaps even fake
news, can spread at an unprecedented speed. We cannot also be blind to the dark spectre of
cyber-crime that can quickly undermine trust in our financial system. There is no substitute for
eternal  vigilance,  timely  action,  and  public  education.    We  are  all  in  this  together  and  have  a
shared responsibility.   
As policymakers and financial supervisors, we have to be in tune with these emerging market
trends and evolving client needs, including the ‘millennial’ upside of our young population.  Indeed,
the new frontier presents central banking with challenges that have not been there before.  The
changing landscape calls for us to be more vigilant, proactive, and dynamic in responding to the
needs of our diverse stakeholders.
The way forward
For a relatively small but fast-growing and open economy such as the Philippines, fulfilling our
mandate and advocacies require an open-mindedness and a deliberate reconsideration of the
conventional  models  we  use  for  macroeconomic  management,  banking  supervision,  and
financial system surveillance. Improving analytical frameworks and processes are critical. Key to
this is the broadening of the skills and competencies of staff across the various disciplines within
our institution.
In  order  to  achieve  operational  excellence,  the  BSP  has  to  be  appropriately  structured  and
equipped to deliver on our strategic mandates.  We need to build on our inherent strengths and
earlier gains in terms of instituting enhanced corporate governance, adopting best practices, and
instilling  greater  professionalism  and  accountability.    We  need  to  constantly  work  together  to
maintain BSP’s brand of excellence.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  are  fortunate  that  we  have  a  mature  organization  that  nurtures  talents  and  provides  an
enabling  environment  for  excellence.  We  are  able  to  offer  a  competitive  compensation  and
benefits package to attract, motivate, and retain good talents. There is a competency and merit-
based  system  for  career  development  and  advancement.  We  have  an  established  wellness
program that fosters “work-life balance” for BSPers.
Under my leadership, I will continue to support the aspirations of all BSPers in terms of better
facilities,  competitive  pay  and  benefits,  and  capacity  building  opportunities  through  training,
scholarships and work development interventions.  This also includes supporting institutionalized
benefits and incentives that reward excellent performance.  To me, motivated BSPers will always
give their best to the institution. Tama ba?...
Concluding remarks:  a message of solidarity
Circling  back,  this  year’s  anniversary  theme,  “2gether  moving  4ward:  A  New  Season  of
Excellence” is a vivid reminder of the task ahead of us in the next six years.
In closing, I share with you a nugget of wisdom from an anonymous sportscaster.  He said, “You
don’t win with the best talent – you win with the five players who are able to play well together.”
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  central  banking  requires  similar  exemplary  and  coordinated  ability  to
navigate  the  currents  of  the  global  financial  markets.  We  need  to  build  on  the  trust,  loyalty,
integrity,  and  dedication  to  excellence  of  each  member  of  Team  BSP  to  achieve  our  given
mandates,  advocacies  and  collective  vision.  This  is  crucial  in  order  for  us  to  thrive  given  the
evolving demands of modern central banking.
My fellow BSPers, I have been given the immense honor and privilege of being your new team
captain. Believe me when I say that this is a role that I do not take for granted. However, I need
your prayers and support, too. They say that it can be lonely at the top. From that vantage point,
national issues and high-level problems may overshadow the needs and concerns of the BSP
community. Even when the going gets tough, my fervent wish is that I never lose sight of where I
came from. Ako ay laking BSP. Ang aking husay at lakas ay galing sa BSP. I therefore owe it to
all of you to stay connected and to continue serving the BSP community even as we all serve our
country with skill, honor, integrity, and accountability.
Our beloved Philippines has a lot of promise before it, and in your good hands, it will continue to
thrive and flourish. It is because of this promise that we must relentlessly seek excellence, not for
glory or acclaim, but for the sake of delivering the best possible service to the Filipino people.
I thank President Rodrigo Roa Duterte for this opportunity to serve.
Mabuhay ang BSP! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!
1
In  2016,  the  country’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  grew  by  6.8  percent.  It  is  higher  than  Malaysia’s  4.5
percent, Indonesia’s 4.9 percent, Thailand’s 3.0 percent, and Singapore’s 2.9 percent (Source: BSP website
available at www.bsp.gov.ph/statistics/efs_asian.asp)
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
