Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi:  Cross-border  banking  and  regulatory
reforms - implications for Africa from international experience
Opening address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Joint
IMF/BCBS/Making Finance Work for Africa Conference, IMF Africa Training Institute, Ebene, 1
February 2017.
 Managing Director of the IMF, Madam Christine Lagarde
Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Fellow Governors
Executive Directors and Senior Officials of the IMF
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
 Good afternoon
I am pleased to welcome you all to Mauritius.  I wish you a pleasant stay with us. I thank the
organizers of the Joint IMF/BCBS/Making Finance Work for Africa Conference for inviting me to
give the opening address today. May I extend my appreciation to the Mauritius IMF Africa Training
Institute for hosting this Conference.
When I was here recently, I was asked to give a closing address to a house-full audience of
course participants.  I had shared with them my personal experience as regulator of all deposit
taking  institutions  in  Mauritius.    While  narrating  to  them  a  number  of  enlightening  anecdotes
related to events leading to the revocation of banking licenses, problems associated with crisis
resolution  and  presenting  them  with  the  risks  and  challenges  that  regulators  face  in  the
globalized world, I read in their looks the enthusiasm and the eagerness to take their regulatory
and supervisory responsibilities seriously.  Interestingly, I found out that regulators in Africa are
keen to have better regulatory structures.  Understandably, one hampering factor – apart from an
acute  shortage  of  highly  skilled  and  seasoned  bank  examiners  –  that  overwhelms  all  other
considerations  is  national  interests  as  opposed  to  the  soundness  and  stability  of  financial
industries at the regional, pan-African or global level.  The political will is thus seen to be missing.
 It’s a problem not confined to Africa only.
I believe that it’s in order for me to give a very quick and broad brush-stroke of our experience
with the regulation and supervision of banking and cross-border banking activities.
Mauritius was a regional hub for payments and settlements since the 17th century. Traders from
the West, the Middle East, India and China crossing this part of the world used to regularly meet
here in Mauritius for purposes of payments and settlements. The piastres, Indian rupee, Pound
sterling, the US dollar, gold and silver used to be the means of payments and settlements. A
characteristic  feature  of  the  hub  was  free  banking.    There  was  no  regulatory  authority  and
therefore no licensing authority.  Banks used to issue their own paper currencies. And, of course,
banks  used  to  collapse  quite  often.    The  seed  of  frequent  bank  failures  resided  mostly  in  the
recklessness with which banks issued their respective banknotes. The authority’s anxiety with
regard to the sustenance of confidence and stability in the then monetary system had led to the
setting up of the Board of Commissioners of currency in 1864, the first in the world.  By the end
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the l9th century the hub had lost its significance.  Rivalries between bankers had led to the
establishment,  in  1838,  of  what  is  today  the  largest  domestic  bank  in  Mauritius.    Two  British
banks having large cross-border banking activities the world over have been present in Mauritius
for  more  than  a  century.    Soon  after  World  War  II,  it  was  realized  that  our  financial  system
needed to be regulated.  Licensing of banks was introduced.  To prevent banks from collapsing
due  to  stresses  and  strains  caused  by  massive  repatriation  of  funds,  exchange  control  was
introduced in 1951.  Ever since the establishment of the Board of Commissioners of currency a
running thread of preoccupying concern has been the soundness and stability of our financial
system.
Regulation and supervision of banks started formally in the very early 1970s. Of the 8 banks then
in operation, 5 were branches of international banks.  A mix of home-host country regulations
guided their operations.  In the first half of the 1980s, we initiated steps to gradually liberalize our
financial  sector.    In  1989,  we  established  the  offshore  banking  centre.    Two  types  of  banking
licenses were issued, one for banks carrying out exclusively offshore banking business and the
other for banks carrying out domestic banking business.  By July 1994, with the suspension of
our Exchange Control Act, the gradual liberalization of the financial sector was completed. The
heightened pace of globalization and financial integration posed serious challenges for the banks
operating  in  Mauritius  and  for  us  as  regulator.    Admittedly,  like  other  regulators  in  many
jurisdictions  we  were  not  prepared  for  the  challenges.    Subsequently,  banks  operating  in  the
offshore  sector  were  brought  within  the  purview  of  more  or  less  the  same  regulatory  and
supervisory norms as those applicable to domestic banks.  The dual-licensing regime was done
away with.
One of the most meaningful developments, yet unrecognized, in the Mauritian economy over the
last 27 years has been the introduction in 2004 of a single license regime for banks operating in
our  jurisdiction.    It  allowed  what  formerly  were  offshore  banks  to  interact  actively  with  the
domestic  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets  and  with  the  domestic  economy  in  general.
 Cross-border banking activities decisively picked up. The Bank of Mauritius Act and the Banking
Act  were  both  overhauled  and  suitably  recast  to  meet  emerging  regulatory  challenges.
 Previously, quite some prudential norms set by the Bank of Mauritius used to be introduced by
way of regulations made by the Minister of Finance. They sometimes used to be lobbied against
in the halls of Government.  By making the guidelines legal in the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, the
Bank  does  not  have  to  have  recourse  to  Government  for  issuing  guidelines  to  banks  and  is
therefore free pressures from the banking industry and other related parties.  So far, the Bank of
Mauritius has issued 35 Guidelines to the banking industry.  They all have authority.
As the financial integration accelerated, cross-border banking activities also accelerated in the
1990s.  Today, cross-border banking activities account for 60 per cent of our banking industry’s
businesses.  Total  banking  assets  are  around  300  per  cent  of  our  GDP.    The  risks  and
vulnerabilities to our financial industry and the economy are by no means negligible.  Since the
beginning  of  the  new  millennium,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  took  a  number  of  regulatory  and
supervisory initiatives a few of which are as follows:
1.  The Bank entered into MOUs on cross border supervision and information sharing with 16 of
its  counterparts.  The  MOUs  set  forth  a  statement  of  intent  between  the  Bank  and  its
counterparts to establish a framework for mutual assistance, cooperation and exchange of
information in the fulfilment of the institutions’ respective supervisory responsibilities;
2.  The Banking Act allows for cross border cooperation in terms of group audit from parent
bank of the subsidiaries and branches of foreign banks in Mauritius;
3.  Besides carrying out onsite examination of overseas subsidiaries of local banks, the Bank
has  also  engaged  with  its  foreign  counterparts  to  carry  out  joint  examinations  of  entities
falling under its purview. The Banking Act allows host supervisors to conduct examinations
of banks in our jurisdiction;
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
4.  Two years ago a huge financial conglomerate failed in Mauritius. The Bank of Mauritius Act
and  the  Banking  Act  were  amended  to  enhance  both  consolidated  and  conglomerate
supervision;
5.  The Bank of Mauritius attends the supervisory colleges of almost all the subsidiaries and
branches  of  foreign  banks  operating  in  our  jurisdiction.  The  Bank  has  a  policy  of  holding
supervisory  colleges  for  the  two  largest  domestic  banks  that  have  subsidiaries  and
branches overseas;
6.  A  major  risk  associated  with  cross  border  operations  is  money  laundering.  The  Bank  of
Mauritius  has  continuously  upgraded  its  guidelines  on  AML/CFT  in  line  with  FATF
recommendations.  Strict  enforcement  of  the  guidelines  has  led  to  severe  regulatory
sanctions against non-compliant institutions which explains why the Bank is unpopular, and
7.  Given the acceleration of cross-border banking activities, the Bank of Mauritius is currently
strengthening its risk-based supervisory framework.
These  initiatives  are  by  no  means  adequate  for  effective  regulation  and  supervision  of  our
banking industry.  A lot more has to be accomplished.  At some point in time this year, we would
be  having  a  crisis  resolution  framework  for  Mauritius.  Crisis  avoidance,  more  so  in  an
increasingly digitalized financial world, requires far bolder initiatives to strengthen regulatory and
supervisory frameworks not only in Mauritius but in every other country in the African continent.
 We are told that in the years ahead we will continue to be provided with banking and financial
services but banks, as we know them today, will no longer exist.  We, regulators, have to be
steps  ahead.    Our  regulatory  and  supervisory  experience  clearly  demonstrates  that  effective
regulatory structures for cross border banking activities are indispensably needed.  The absence
of a regional or pan-African regulatory structure is palpably felt for quite some years. The idea,
mooted already, of having a regulatory structure for overseeing banks having significant cross-
border banking activities does hold water.  This could be a starting point.
Regulatory challenges keep multiplying on the regulators’ table. For instance, we observe in our
jurisdiction here that the distinction between subsidiaries and branches are blurring. Instead of
being  incorporated  locally  as  completely  separate  legal  entities,  subsidiaries  of  big  banking
groups  are  being  organized  along  business  lines.  Different  subsidiaries  of  the  same  banking
groups are being set up in different jurisdictions with different facilities and advantages. Would a
failure of one of the subsidiaries not bring down the entire group?
Ladies  and  gentleman,  there  is  a  multiplicity  of  complex  regulatory  issues  that  need  to  be
resolved by governments and regulatory authorities in the African continent. I do not wish to pre-
empt the panelists. We have the distinguished presence of seasoned regulators as panelists for
the Conference. I am confident that we will leave this place with a lot of ideas and options to
contemplate about.
May I thank the Managing Director of the IMF Madam Christine Lagarde and the Chairman of the
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  Mr  Stefan  Ingves  for  being  with  us  during  the
Conference.    I,  once  again,  thank  the  Director  of  IMF Africa  Training  Institute  for  hosting  the
Conference.
Thank you.     
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
