Andreas  Dombret:  Germany's  banks  -  the  moment  of  truth  for
decision-makers
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Bain Bankers Lounge, Frankfurt am Main, 21 September 2017.
1. Introduction: structural change reaches a tipping point
 Ladies and gentlemen
Banking is necessary, banks are not.
Don’t worry: that’s not my view, but that of Bill Gates. What this bon mot, uttered more than 20
years ago now, tells us is that structural change in the banking sector is not as new as it might
seem.
In fact, it’s something we are almost taking in our stride these days. For years now, there has
been constant talk of upheaval and revolution, of banks dying off and structural change. But on
the face of it, not much has actually happened. One could be forgiven, then, for thinking that we
have more or less accepted structural change as an annoyance – even if it is a bearable one –
rather like a visit from the banking supervisor.
My view where technological progress is concerned is a different one. Annoying though it may be
to some, it’s no good shrugging one’s shoulders at it, nor is there any escaping it. The banking
sector has reached a tipping point in its evolution. That is, we have reached a position where
even the smallest change will unleash a wave of innovation in the banking world.
That is because technological progress always stands for upheaval, for a redirection of society’s
resources. Sooner or later, activities which once created significant value become automated,
standard processes.
And this trend has now reached the financial sector as well. Ever more once-innovative banking
operations are being standardised and performed by technology.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have a confession to make. There are some sides of structural change
which  I,  too,  struggle  to  come  to  terms  with  –  to  this  day,  I  would  much  rather  type  on  a
Blackberry than swipe on an iPhone.
But in my capacity as a banking supervisor, I do wonder that if banking is possible without banks
– who, then, will provide tomorrow’s customers with the banking services they require?
That’s not a question I can answer straight up. There are, however, five theories on the future of
banking I would like to discuss with you today. 
2. Reliance on net interest income needs to stop
Let’s begin with the question of earnings. My first theory is this. Germany’s banks and savings
banks  continue  to  be  over-dependent  on  revenues  from  interest  business.  This  is  preventing
them from being profitable in the long run.
Net interest income at German credit institutions has been shrinking for years now. To this day,
they  still  haven’t  managed  to  refocus  their  strategies  on  the  new  normal,  which  is  why  their
profitability has been ebbing away.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That  was  a  very  clear  message  from  our  low-interest-rate  survey,  which  we  released  three
weeks ago in conjunction with the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority, BaFin. Our findings
show  that  small  and  medium-sized  German  credit  institutions  are  expecting  their  profits  to
continue shrinking between 2016 and 2021, according to their planning. They are also projecting
a remarkable 16% drop in their return on total capital.
Monetary  policymakers  are  a  popular  scapegoat  for  this  malaise  –  it  is  their  low  policy  rates,
some say, which have caused earnings to dry up in the banking sector. But that, I feel, would be
oversimplifying  things.  If  the  ECB  Governing  Council  considers  an  accommodative  monetary
policy stance to be appropriate, it also needs to set interest rate levels accordingly. Monetary
policymakers  are,  after  all,  responsible  for  the  entire  euro-area  economy.  Seen  through  that
prism, banking sector profitability is just one aspect, albeit an important one.
As  understandable  as  the  criticism  directed  at  interest  rate  policy  may  seem  from  the
perspective of German credit institutions, there’s a risk they might overlook the bigger economic
picture.
I say that partly for historical reasons. Interest rate levels in Germany have generally been on the
wane  for  more  than  30  years  now,  notably  on  account  of  demographic  and  macroeconomic
factors.  Unsurprisingly,  then,  the  German  banking  sector’s  interest  margin  has  been  steadily
narrowing for more than 30 years as well. Hence, accommodative monetary policy is just one –
albeit important – aspect. That said, interest-driven business models have been under pressure
for quite some time already.
And yet we are seeing very little in the way of adjustment. The business models of small and
medium-sized German institutions, in particular, tend to be more reliant on interest business than
those  of  their  international  peers,  despite  the  fact  that  some  of  them  can  generate  sufficient
profits even in this challenging setting.
My  conclusion,  then,  is  this.  Excessively  interest-heavy  business  models  are  particularly
exposed  to  structural  change.  It  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  tap  new  sources  of
income.
3. Flight into risk isn’t the answer
One simple escape route out of this malaise, it would appear, is a flight into risk – the search for
yield is what I’m talking about here. My second theory, then, is this. Banks and savings banks
would be unwise to escape from structural change by fleeing into risk.
And the longer the low-interest-rate environment persists, the greater the risk of institutions taking
on excessive risk. After years of de-risking, we are now seeing the first signs in Germany of a
growing willingness to assume risk.
Prices  in  financial  markets  are  leaping  from  one  all-time  high  to  the  next  –  the  only  thing  is,
volatility  is  conspicuously  low,  despite  the  absence  of  a  consistently  robust  economic  and
political backdrop.
What’s the story for banks and savings banks? Interest rate risk remains at an elevated level. In
real estate business, there are budding signs that institutions are softening their credit standards.
Our low-interest-rate survey likewise points to an increase in risk propensity. One-third of small
and medium-sized German credit institutions are planning to increase their business volume and
risk  taking.  However,  they  do  not  wish  to  increase  their  capital  to  the  same  extent  –  in  the
medium term, that will erode their resilience.
As we all know, one swallow does not make a summer. Not just that, taking on more risk, in and
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of itself, isn’t a problem, not yet at least – after all, managing risk is the raison d’être of credit
institutions. I am still at ease right now, because the stress tests we conducted as part of the
low-interest-rate  survey  show  that  more  than  95%  of  banks  would  satisfy  the  broadly  based
capital requirements even in crisis scenarios.
And yet caution is warranted on two counts. For one thing, banks and savings banks need to
meticulously check whether they have tabs on the effects of the risks in their portfolios and can
handle them when a crisis strikes. For another, taking on more risk – be it through portfolio shifts
or extending the balance sheet – does nothing to resolve structural issues. At best, it will provide
short-lived respite from earnings problems.
4. Credit institutions need to be open-minded to new forms of value creation
And  that  brings  me  to  my  third  theory.  If  banks  and  savings  banks  are  to  fix  their  earnings
problems once and for all, they will need to tap new sources of income and be open-minded to
new forms of value creation. And I dare say that simply hiking the prices for existing services
won’t go far enough. Especially if competitors don’t follow suit.
I  have  little  time  for  overblown  forecasts  predicting  that  banks  and  savings  banks  will  all  be
replaced by fintechs in the future. Hugely successful though Amazon has been, town centres are
still abuzz with shoppers. As ubiquitous as smartphones are nowadays, people continue to send
letters  –  but  mail  firms  need  to  evolve  to  make  up  for  the  downturn  in  postal  business,  for
example, by delivering parcels sent by online mail order companies.
I firmly believe that credit institutions will continue to exist in the future – but only the ones which
are willing and in a position to embrace change.
No-one can say for sure what banking business will look like some years hence. Institutions can
counter this uncertainty by exploring what it is that customers – both legacy and new ones –
actually want; and also by harnessing the digital expertise of fintechs instead of regarding them
as some kind of nemesis.
Take a look at customers and you’ll see that, millennials notwithstanding, there is more than one
type of customer out there. Plenty of people still prefer to bank via traditional channels. It’s just
that their share will continue to dwindle – making structural change an increasingly pressing topic
for institutions.
I would also recommend harnessing the benefits of swarm intelligence. Open banking systems –
arrangements  where  banks  open  up  their  data  to  trusted  fintech  partners  which  then  provide
apps for bank customers – are increasingly catching on, meaning that there is scope for new fee
models and for boosting customer satisfaction.
Open banking systems do have their risks, though – in this case, cyber risks. I am pleased to
note that our low-interest-rate survey shows that institutions are planning to step up investment in
this field – but at present many of them are still vulnerable. This is a hugely important topic to me
because I feel it is still being neglected. We intend to increasingly probe the extent to which credit
institutions can handle cyber attacks.
Yet at the same time, supervisors are keen to take account of the competitive environment. The
Single Supervisory Mechanism, of which we are a member, today released a consultation on
guides concerning the assessment of licence applications – and this explicitly also addresses
the question of fintech credit institution licence applications. I urge banks and fintechs to use the
consultation phase constructively.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. Banks and savings banks must become more efficient
I come now to the cost side and to the challenge of compensating for declining income through
greater efficiency.
This brings me to my fourth theory: German credit institutions could provide their services more
efficiently. Once again, I would draw your attention to the low-interest-rate survey, whose findings
suggest that small and medium-sized German institutions are expecting their cost-income ratio
to  increase.  Unfortunately,  this  puts  German  credit  institutions  at  the  bottom  of  the  European
league.
If  the  cost-income  ratio  remains  poor  because  of  a  failure  to  significantly  bring  down
administrative costs, then more has to be done. An optimist would therefore hope that the only
reason why the numbers remain unsatisfactory is that the banks and savings banks are busy
investing  in  things  such  as  new  IT  infrastructure,  better  risk  management  systems  and  more
efficient processes. I fully support those institutions which are doing just that, but I have to say
that there are still many institutions which are not.
And I am talking here about all three pillars of the German banking system, although perhaps not
to the same extent in each case. We point out these differences in our conversations with the
sector  associations,  and  I  hope  that  what  we  tell  them  sinks  in,  because  differences  can
definitely be a sign that more has to be done in some quarters than in others.
Banks and savings banks will have to become even more efficient, and they will have to do so in
a  new,  tougher  regulatory  environment.  What  I  am  getting  at  here  is  that  the  regulatory
framework cannot be loosened so as to allow inefficient institutions to kick structural change into
the long grass.
I readily admit that credit institutions incur costs because of regulation and oversight. But a bank
or  savings  bank  which  cannot  survive  in  an  effective  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment
needs to urgently rethink its business model.
It goes without saying that adapting to the new regulatory requirements is a mammoth task, and
the uncertainty surrounding the regulatory reforms which have yet to be put in place is clearly a
problem. What will Basel III bring with it, and what will it mean for banks in the EU?
This is why we are making every effort to complete Basel III without creating excessive burdens.
Once that has been done, Basel III should, as far as possible, be implemented in a way that is
committed to the Basel rules.
But there is one thing we must ensure: namely, that we remain true to the original intention of the
Basel Accords: to provide global rules for global credit institutions. For all the others, I would like
to  see  appropriately  gradated  rules.  This  is  something  which  we  can  achieve  by  means  of
the CRR and CRD: by applying smart threshold values, below which simplified rules apply, and
by putting in place a separate oversight regime for the smaller institutions, what is referred to as
the “Small Banking Box”, which we are currently lobbying for in Brussels.
6. Not even mergers shield institutions from structural change
Ladies and gentlemen, regulation must not and never will be an instrument of structural policy.
That is something which the market players need to decide among themselves. And this brings
me to my final theory, which is that mergers and takeovers will not make banks and savings
banks immune to structural change.
Many commentators believe that fierce competition in the German banking sector  makes further
consolidation inevitable, and I for one share that view.
1
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The forms which consolidation takes will be determined by customer behaviour and the banks’
response to that behaviour. Capacity reduction by existing institutions is likely to play a major part
in this.
The specific question which we have to ask is therefore, will there be more mergers and, if so,
can they alleviate the problems associated with structural change?
Again, our low-interest-rate survey provides some interesting insights: about one in every nine of
the nearly 1,600 institutions which took part in the survey are already in the process of merging
with another institution or have specific plans to do so. And a similar number of institutions think it
a plausible proposition that they could be taken over as part of a merger in the next five years.
But I wish to warn against unrealistic expectations: there are numerous examples of mergers
which have failed. This is because, for a merger to succeed, a number of important conditions
have to be fulfilled. For example, there have to be sustainable synergies in the business models
or in regional coverage.
There  is  no  exhaustive  list  of  factors  which  determine  success,  nor  is  there  a  blueprint  for
success. German institutions must therefore perform a comprehensive health check in order to
detect avoidable problems at an early stage.
Even where mergers are successful, however, new opportunities for value creation do not come
about automatically, and customer needs are not automatically better served.
7. Conclusions
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  an  animal  that  tries  to  resist  evolutionary  change  because  it  is  not
congenial  risks  becoming  another  animal’s  dinner.  Similarly,  technological  progress  changes
value creation in the banking sector. There is no escaping this simple truth. Adapt or die.
It is undeniable that monetary policy and regulation are currently having major side effects on the
banking sector, but we cannot allow these side effects to blind us to the uncomfortable fact that it
is precisely the new, creative and innovative forces that are destroying existing structures in the
banking sector.
Every bank and every savings bank must ask itself if it wants to be part of the creative force, part
of the new structures, or part of a ruined structure. I dare to suggest that most of you wish to
belong to the first group. Do you believe that it is possible without taking courageous decisions?
Without risky decisions? Or without unpopular decisions? I do not.
Creative  decisions  presuppose  creative  questions:  questions  which  show  the  world  in  a  new
light.  In  Germany’s  banking  landscape,  the  questions  which  are  being  asked  are  all  too  often
framed in a decades-old mould of thinking. So, to misquote title of a song by German singer Ina
Deter, perhaps the country needs new bankers?
Essentially, it does, because you will not be able to lead your institutions to a new era with the old
thinking. Banks are becoming service providers with banking licences; account holders and bank
customers are becoming “users” who require a broad spectrum of flexible financial services. So,
yes, a new world needs new bankers, or at least experienced bankers who have the courage to
take innovative decisions.
My challenge to the sector is therefore to perform a mental demolition of established institutions
wherever  necessary  and  to  rebuild  them  on  green-field  sites.  Today’s  banks  will  only  be
successful tomorrow if they have enough new bankers, or take new decisions.
I will be pleased to take your questions and hear your comments.
1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
The findings of the low-interest-rate survey suggest that two-thirds of institutions are expecting competition from
other banks to increase, and no fewer than 85% of them expect greater competition from fintech companies.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
