Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The way forward for development financial
institutions
Opening address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Global  Symposium  on  Development  Financial  Institutions  “The  Way
Forward for Development Financial Institutions”, Kuala Lumpur, 19 September 2017.
 Selamat datang” and a very warm welcome. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today at this
important gathering to discuss the way forward for development financial institutions.
In 2012, the music video “Gangnam Style” by Korean pop artist PSY took the world by storm.
Being the first video to record more than 1 billion YouTube views, its infectious dance moves
have become universally recognised, transcending borders and social status.
The video marked the beginning of the rise of the Korean cultural phenomenon known as Korean
Wave  or  “Hallyu”,  a  new  growth  area  for  its  economy.  Today,  the  export  of  Korean  culture
content, including films and music, is estimated at USD83.2 billion.
In under a decade, the sector grew to contribute 0.7% to South Korea’s GDP in 2011, supported
over 67,000 jobs and generated USD3.3 billion in tax revenues.
This extraordinary rise of the Korean Wave can be attributed to the growth of investment in the
creative industry. The industry was boosted by the government’s strategy to prioritise the sector
as an engine of growth after the Asian Financial Crisis. The Korean government had earmarked
1% of the national budget for development financial institutions to kickstart the sector. Following
in their footsteps, domestic conglomerates like Samsung and Daewoo started investing in film
financing and video production.
Korea’s experience above illustrates an important lesson for economic development. Properly
structured  development  institutions  can  be  a  potent  agent  of  change  for  private  sector
investment, drive growth, and forge inclusive societies. It can do a lot of good. But in reality, the
real challenge is how to replicate the key factors that contribute to the success, and to achieve
this more consistently across different political, economic and social contexts. 
With  this  in  mind,  let  me  outline  the  crucial  factors  that  might  help  us  understand  this
phenomena:
a.  First, a mindset shift to contribute more broadly to catalyse new growth areas;
b.  Second, the need to strengthen accountability frameworks;
c.  Third, the continuous cultivation of a strong culture of innovation; and
d.  Fourth, a robust corporate governance.
Stepping up to the plate by further developing the non-lending roles
More than ever, development financial institutions need to step up to promote new growth areas.
They should perform a broader role to stimulate economic activity that would not otherwise take
place. They could also improve the quality and scale of such activities. They can provide unique
value propositions in terms of advisory and nurturing new growth sectors to become profitable
and thus, attractive for private investors. I will highlight two successful examples.
Firstly, in the Korean Wave example, they were the first to spearhead investments in the film and
music industry. At that time, commercial banks did not have the capability to assess the viability
of  the  industry,  nor  accept  the  intangible  assets  offered  as  collateral.  It  was  only  much  later,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
when  the  industry  recorded  healthy  profits  that  private  investments  followed.  The  success
speaks  for  itself.  Between  2008  and  2011,  private  domestic  and  foreign  investments  in  the
culture content industry had quadrupled to more than USD 157 million.
The  second  example  is  Uganda’s  first  ever  private  bond  issuance  by  a  multinational  mobile
telecommunications company. The provision of a financial guarantee by a development financial
institution  helped  to  connect  Uganda’s  poor  and  low  income  population  in  more  than  20  rural
communities by enabling access to telecommunication services. This culminated in the telecom
industry that now provides 135,000 jobs for Ugandans and contributes 1.4% of its GDP. 
Taking  lessons  from  these  examples,  I  believe  that  development  financial  institutions  need  to
possess three key traits to promote and champion the new growth areas:
a.  First, they must have specific mandates to develop and prioritise niche segments identified
to be of strategic and economic importance. These will give them legitimacy with funders
and partners;
b.  Second,  affiliations  with  Government,  ministries  and  agencies  to  facilitate  the  design  of
appropriate government support. This will enable them to take higher risks; and
c.  Third, a broader focus on socio-developmental goals allows risk-return trade-offs to take into
account positive externalities for the economy.
The lessons we learnt imply that leaders must recognise and align their priorities to steer their
respective  institutions  to  contribute  more  broadly  and  strategically  to  economic  development.
This  will  include  playing  a  more  active  role  in  technical  assistance,  and  serving  as  key
repositories  of  specialist  knowledge,  resource  aggregators  for  strategic  development  projects
and credible advisers to the Government.
These  ‘additionalities’  are  important  ingredients  in  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  development
financial institutions.
Strengthen  accountability  frameworks  through  performance  standards  that  emphasise
development additionalities
While the notion of additionalities is not new, their link to how the development institutions are
managed and governed remains generally weak. As a result, their important contributions are
often not translated into tangible outcomes that are seen and felt by the stakeholders and the
public at large.
This  leads  me  to  my  second  point.  Traditionally  the  achievements  of  development  institutions
have always been measured predominantly by the volume of financing provided to the targeted
sectors. There are several reasons for this. Non-financial development additionalities are harder
to quantify the cause and effects are also not always clear. As such, more effort and investments
are required to collect the data for measuring socio-economic and development outcomes that
are associated with such programmes.
However,  this  must  not  hold  back  efforts  for  us  to  do  better.  They  are  a  major  channel  for
directing development, both at an international and domestic level. It is therefore, imperative that
there  is  confidence  in  the  effective  and  efficient  use  of  funding  aid  to  achieve  the  intended
development goals. Providing this confidence can be enhanced by creating a broader and robust
mechanism to measure performance.
Performance measurement systems that accord greater quantification of development impacts
will strengthen accountability frameworks, with many attendant benefits. It will further reinforce
the Government’s developmental agenda. It will provide a mechanism to address market failures.
It will ensure that funds are allocated to the right sectors within the economy. Effectively done, it
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
will  increase  the  development  financial  institution’s  credibility,  reputation  and  potential  as  key
players in advancing socio-economic development. 
In  Malaysia,  we  are  encouraging  these  institutions  to  improve  performance  measurement
frameworks to better capture the development impact of business activities.
A  number  of  them  are  already  implementing  frameworks  to  provide  broader  performance
measures  for  value-based  intermediation  activities  (VBI)  which  focus  on  the  impact  on  the
economy, community and environment. Of particular importance, they need to measure granular
outcomes such as creation of good paying jobs and expansion of capacity and capability. 
Another  commendable  example  is  the  performance  measures  published  by  the  Industrial
Development Corporation of South Africa (IDC), which linked its activities to the creation of more
than 340,000 jobs in the economy between 2013 to 2017. Out of this, 10% were based in rural
areas. Approximately USD3.3 billion of IDC’s financing-related activities could also be traced to
the specific economic empowerment of targeted groups such as youth and women.
Cultivate a strong culture of innovation within to increase value-add and catalyse private
investment
Development  institutions  should  be  leading  innovators  in  providing  solutions  to  stimulate
investment and entrepreneurship especially in uncharted sectors. In my view, a key part of their
contribution  to  development  has  to  be  in  evolving  non-traditional  approaches  to  encourage
investments  in  targeted  sectors,  precisely  because  conventional  approaches  have  not
responded adequately. 
Indeed,  they  should  be  providing  the  richest  environment  for  adaptive  learning,  creativity  and
innovation to effectively serve their mandates. Innovation is also being supported through a “test
and  learn”  approach  which  allows  for  experimentation  by  financial  institutions  in  close
coordination with regulators. This approach promotes a deeper understanding of risks inherent in
new solutions and products, and the appropriate ways to control them. The introduction of the
regulatory sandbox in several countries, including Malaysia, to support regulatory flexibilities for
the  deployment  of  FinTech  reflects  such  a  “test  and  learn”  approach.  Development  financial
institutions should use technology to advance the cause of their mandate.
To  be  innovative,  development  financial  institutions  must  be  able  to  attract  and  retain  good
leadership and talent. KfW in Germany and Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC), two
global  development  financial  institutions,  were  recognised  as  being  among  the  top  100
employers  in  their  respective  countries  in  2017.  Well-designed  talent  strategies,  and  an
environment that nurtures experimentation and adaptive learning with appropriate oversight and
controls are key. These require bold and visionary leadership.
Another  way  to  promote  creativity  is  to  create  a  facilitative  environment  for  public  private
partnerships  provides  the  best  prospects  to  drive  innovative  strategies.  With  advances  in
technology, the scope and potential for such partnerships have increased exponentially. We see
this in partnerships between mobile network providers and financial institutions in sharing data
which can increase financial inclusion among borrowers that do not have a prior credit history.
Partnerships that leverage on e-marketplaces and social media platforms also have enormous
potential  to  increase  the  reach  and  development  impact  through  the  deployment  of  innovative
strategies.
Enhance corporate governance
For many institutions, the ability to significantly increase their impact is closely tied to issues of
corporate  governance.  Narrowly  defined  financing  targets  and  links  between  business  and
Government have led to suboptimal resource allocations, increased moral hazard, and market
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
distortions.  These  can  pose  a  drag  on  the  economy  and  the  overall  development  agenda.
Broader confidence can also take a hit on suspicion of undue preference in extending financing,
making it more difficult to mobilise resources for development.
The critical appraisal and monitoring functions are largely shaped by the strength of its corporate
governance.  These  require  competent  and  professional  boards  to  be  installed,  clear  rules  of
engagement with their stakeholders, and stronger performance management standards that are
aligned with development outcomes.
Expectations and directions for Malaysian Development Financial Institutions
I  would  also  like  to  share  some  reflections  on  expectations  and  directions  for  development
financial institutions in Malaysia
I am well aware that development financial institutions around the world, including in Malaysia,
face unique challenges. In many ways, they have to manage and balance responsibilities that are
substantially more complex than institutions with narrower profit-making mandates.
In Malaysia, these institutions have embarked on initiatives over the last decade and a half to
build  greater  financial  resilience  and  stronger  foundations  for  sound  management.  This  has
enabled  them  to  pay  an  important  counter-cyclical  role  during  downturns,  and  to  support
economic activity in targeted segments.
However,  more  effort  is  required  on  critical  appraisal  of  their  development  impact.  It  is  much
needed to sharpen the development focus, redirect and amplify the impact of financing activities.
It will also provide the impetus for them to focus on other interventions that can increase their
impact.
We  intend  to  work  with  their  leadership  and  other  stakeholders  in  Government  in  the  coming
months to address a more focused delivery of mandates. In this respect, improving performance
measurement frameworks and increasing transparency in the operations will be important areas
of focus. We need to measure the right things, measure outcomes that matter and measure
mandates that are relevant. This needs to be driven by a clear vision and strong leadership, and
uncompromising governance.
We  expect  our  development  financial  institutions  to  operate  with  the  highest  level  of
professionalism and integrity at all levels of the organisation. Indeed, we expect that given their
mandates, they would lead in demonstrating how commercial principles can be fully reconciled
with responsible finance and public interests.
There are many instances where development financial institutions can play a catalytic role in
economic development. They can open new frontiers in discovery and exploration; accelerate
poverty eradication and mitigate global climate change.
This ought to be a noble aspiration. We share a common vision for them to contribute towards
the growth potential of our economies and consequently improve the wellbeing of the people.
We have an excellent program ahead to help us move in this direction. I hope it will sow the
seeds  for  individual  and  collective  actions  that  will  both  transform  development  financial
institutions and enhance their impact.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
