PAKISTAN BANKING AWARDS 2017 LAUNCHING CEREMONY 
 Ladies and Gentlemen – Assalm o Alaykum. 
After the tremendous success of the 1st Banking Awards in 2016, I am delighted to address 
this  distinguished  gathering  of  executives  and  academicians  from  the  banking  and  finance 
sector at the Launching Ceremony of the 2nd Pakistan Banking Awards 2017. 
 As  you  are  well  aware,  the  financial  sector  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  determining  the  overall 
economic growth and development of a country.  The contribution and achievements of the 
institutions contributing to this sector should be recognized and acknowledged. 
 
The initiative of launching the first ever Banking Awards by The Institute of Bankers Pakistan 
with  Dawn  Media  Group  in  collaboration  with  A.F.  Ferguson  &  Co  in  2016,  is  indeed  a 
landmark in the history of banking in Pakistan.  
 
I  am delighted that  these prestigious awards are now  an annual affair and  encourage new 
entrants  to  make  their  mark  while  motivating  the  established  institutions  to  strive  for 
excellence.  
 These  awards  honor  and  promote  the  efforts  of  banks  for  developing  new  and  innovative 
products and services, while giving them the incentive to enhance their performance for the 
coming year. They encourage the active participation of banks by setting the benchmark and 
allowing them to gauge their standing within the industry. Most importantly, they inculcate 
a  spirit  of  healthy  competition  as  the  awards  are  a  great  source  of  pride  for  the  winning 
institutions. 
 The  distinguished  members  of  the  jury  selected  are  indeed  institutions  in  themselves  and 
are worthy to do the needful.  I am confident that like in the past, this year again complete 
transparency and secrecy will be maintained and all nominations would be made exclusively 
on merit.  This is the essence of building credibility of these awards. 
 It is a matter of satisfaction from the view  point of regulator as well that the performance 
and  contribution  of  banks  are  being  recognized  by  an  independent  body  in  a  transparent 
manner.  
 On behalf of the State Bank of Pakistan and the organizers, I urge you all to participate and 
make this magnanimous event a success. I wish you all the very best. 
 