Philip R Lane: Opening of Ireland's central bank Dockland Campus
exhibitions
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the opening of Ireland's
central bank Dockland Campus exhibitions, Dublin, 27 April 2017.
 I am delighted that you could join us this evening to celebrate the opening of our visitor centre
with two exciting and complementary exhibitions: the Euro Exhibition and Pounds, Shillings and
Independence.
I  am  particularly  delighted  that  Stephanie  Van  Delft  of  the  Communications  Directorate  at  the
European  Central  Bank  is  here  with  us  this  evening.  Stephanie,  along  with  Director  General
Communications,  Christine  Graeff,  Deputy  Director  Communications,  Thierry  Bracke  and
Director Banknotes, Ton Roos was instrumental in sharing the Euro Exhibition with us. 
But why a visitor space in a Central Bank, you may ask?
There is a simple answer to that question: we want people to understand what we do and why
we do it, in order to facilitate greater transparency and understanding of our public service role.
Central banks across the world moved to the front pages of the newspapers in 2008 and have
largely stayed there ever since.
In that time, there has been extensive debate about monetary policy, financial stability policy and
many other aspects of central banking that were previously considered arcane knowledge.
But while the effects of ECB or Federal Reserve or national central bank decisions are widely
reported upon and communicated, there is less focus on the motivation for those decisions.
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland’s  mandate  is  very  clear:  safeguarding  stability,  protecting
consumers.
Every  decision  we  take  is  in  the  public  interest  –  albeit  some  of  those  actions  may  not  be
universally popular!
Explaining the rationale for those evidence-based decisions is important to us.
While Central Bank independence is enshrined in the institutional and legislative framework of the
European Union, as well as domestic law, the flipside of that independence is accountability.
And as a public institution, we take our obligations to be fully accountable for our actions very
seriously. 
Communications and accountability are therefore key components of our Strategic Plan 2016–
2018.
We demonstrate that accountability in several ways: our Annual Report and Annual Performance
Statement  will  be  published  next  week;  we  engage  with  Oireachtas  Committees;  we  publish
minutes of our Commission meetings; we disclose operational information on our website; and
we explain our policies through a series of public speaking events and topical publications.
The visitor space is another important element of that accountability.
We  share  this  vision  with  Dublin  City  Council,  which  requires  that  landmark  public  buildings
should  have  publicly-accessible  spaces.  In  this  way  and  through  our  ongoing  work  of  our
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
outreach  and  community  programmes,  we  demonstrate  our  commitment  to  the  sustainable
development of the Docklands area and the broader national community.  
The visitor space is truly a new departure for the Bank. In this space, we will meet with the public,
hear their views, tell them about what we do and why we do it. Our visitors will range from the
local community here in North Wall quay to citizens across the country, from schoolchildren on
tours  to  civic  groups  and  everyone  in  between.  This  will  be  a  living  evolving  space  with  a
dedicated curatorial policy to ensure rotating themes and exhibitions that will always seek to be
interesting and informative.
In  tandem  with  this,  our  new  archive  on  this  floor  will  collect,  preserve,  promote  and  make
accessible records charting the history of the Bank and its contribution to the development of
Ireland.
We are opening the visitor space by jointly hosting two exciting and complementary exhibitions.
The first is the Euro Exhibition, which was created by the European Central Bank and has toured
our  colleague  Eurosystem  central  banks  (national  central  banks  of  countries  which  use  the
Euro).
This  an  interactive  exhibition  which  examines  the  development  of  euro  currency  and  includes
sections on euro banknotes and their security features, euro coinage and the history of money.
To bring a uniquely Irish focus, we have created another exhibition which celebrates the 90th
anniversary of the Currency Commission, the forerunner to the current Central Bank.
The exhibition tells the story of the development of Ireland’s currency following our emergence as
an independent state. To note just one highlight from the exhibition, it features the work of the
committee (chaired by WB Yeats) that was appointed to select designs for the new coinage.  In
addition to the well-known winning designs, the exhibition also includes fascinating 3-D prints of
other submissions from a range of international competitors.
There  are,  of  course,  too  many  individuals  to  thank  for  their  hard  work  in  bringing  the  Visitor
Space and the opening exhibitions to fruition.
But  I  would  like  to  especially  mention Pounds,  Shillings  and  Independence  curator  Padraig
Clancy  and  designer  Tom  Meenaghan;  production  company  Alphaset;  Laura  McNicolas  and
Anne-Marie Hourihane of 925 Productions who provided the documentary film – Mr Yeats and
the Beastly Coins; translator Séamus Ó Coileáin; photographer Ruth Carden; and all those who
contributed to the exhibition, including our staff member who led this work, Ciara Lawler.
I’d also like to thank the architects from Henry J. Lyons, who designed the space, Dublin City
Council,  our  Archivist,  Ross  Higgins,  and  many  teams  across  the  Bank  including  Facilities
Management, Fusion, Security and Porters.
To conclude, I hope you enjoy this event and that you will return to visit us with your friends and
families.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
