Carolyn Wilkins: Canadian economic update – strength in diversity
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the
Associates of the Asper School of Business, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 12 June 2017.
Introduction
 I am very pleased to join you here in Winnipeg. Thank you to the Associates of the Asper School
of Business for the invitation.
I was able to get out for a run this morning at The Forks. It is a beautiful area, and I was struck by
the impressive architecture of the Canadian Museum for Human Rights.
I am looking forward to visiting it this week. The museum reminds us that all people are worthy of
respect and dignity, regardless of their differences. The 150th anniversary of Confederation of
Canada  is  the  perfect  opportunity  to  reflect  on  the  strength  that  comes  from  diversity.  Just  a
couple of weeks ago, the Bank of Canada issued a commemorative bank note that celebrates
the diversity of our nation builders and of our landscape.
Diversity comes in many forms, and today I will speak about economic diversity and the strength
that  comes  from  having  multiple  sources  of  growth.  As  you  will  remember,  the  Canadian
economy was hit hard by the collapse in oil prices in 2014. The adjustment to lower oil prices is
now largely behind us, and we are looking for signs that the sources of growth are broadening
across sectors and regions. As I will explain, the signs are encouraging.
My colleagues and I spend a lot of time poring over data to see how the economy is evolving.
Data  rarely  tell  the  whole  story,  though,  which  is  why  we  also  spend  a  lot  of  time  talking  to
people, firms, financial market participants, industry associations, labour groups and others. We
do this through formal surveys on important economic issues and through outreach discussions.
And, for years now, the Bank has held one of its Board of Directors’ meetings outside Ottawa
every year.
In  fact,  there  is  a  Board  meeting  in  Winnipeg  this  week,  and  we  will  have  an  opportunity  to
exchange  views  with  local  business  people  and  other  community  members.  We  are  looking
forward  to  these  discussions  because  this  province  is  a  vibrant  microcosm  of  the  Canadian
economy.
While Manitoba has a number of unique dimensions—ranging from world-class ballet to world-
class winters—it shares almost the same structure as the overall Canadian economy when it
comes to sources of gross domestic product (GDP) (Chart 1).
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Manitoba’s diverse economy has been a source of strength over the past decade. Its economy
has expanded by slightly more than 2 per cent a year on average since 2006. That is about half a
percentage point higher than the Canadian economy overall for the same period.
As I talk about economic diversity today, I will first explain why it matters to a central bank whose
main goal is to achieve low, stable and predictable inflation. I will then walk you through what key
sets of information are telling us. Finally, I will outline some of the issues that we are considering
as  we  prepare  for  our  next  economic  update.  This  will  be  published  in  our Monetary  Policy
Report on 12 July, along with our interest rate decision.
Why diversity matters
Diversity comes in many forms. Let me mention two that relate to the Canadian economy. The
first  is  diversity  with  respect  to  our  nation’s  industrial  structure,  in  other  words,  the  range  of
goods and services produced in Canada. This is important because sectoral diversity makes the
economy more resilient—although not immune—to shocks. It is the economic equivalent to not
putting all of our eggs in one basket. Anyone who has attended business school or managed an
investment portfolio will be familiar with the benefits of diversification.
Let us remember, Canada has benefited over history from its wealth in natural resources.  But
when oil prices fell from their highs in mid-2014, the regions of Canada that rely on the oil and
gas sector were hit hard. As these regions underwent a difficult adjustment process, sectors in
other  parts  of  the  country  were  able  to  help  absorb  the  slack  that  was  created.  The  service
sector was a primary force. That demonstrates the benefit of diversity in the Canadian economy.
1
Monetary  policy  stimulus  and  a  lower  dollar  together  provided  critical  support  to  aggregate
demand and facilitated the adjustment of labour and capital. You will remember that the Bank of
Canada reduced the policy rate by 50 basis points in 2015, to near-historical lows.
The second form of diversity—which I will focus on today—relates to the sources of economic
growth. Generally speaking, while growth might bounce around from quarter to quarter, it is more
likely  to  be  sustainable  over  the  medium  term  if  its  sources  are  broad-based.  For  example,
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth in exports helps generate the income required to sustain growth in household spending
without  the  need  to  borrow  from  abroad.  Similarly,  demand  growth  is  more  likely  to  be
sustainable  if  matched  by  growth  in  capacity-enhancing  business  investment.  There  are  also
important sectoral and geographic aspects to sustainability.
While broad-based growth is desirable, it is not under the direct control of monetary policy, and it
is not our objective. We target a 2 per cent inflation rate. That means that it is the outlook for
overall  inflationary  pressure  and  related  risks  that  matters  most  when  we  consider  the
appropriate stance for monetary policy. So even if only a few sectors were expanding enough to
absorb the excess capacity in the aggregate economy, we would need to take the appropriate
monetary policy action to meet our inflation target.
So let us look at how the economy has been performing recently.
Signs that growth is broadening
When  we  assess  the  extent  to  which  the  sources  of  growth  are  broadening,  we  look  at  the
economy from a number of perspectives. These include the progress made in adjusting to lower
oil prices, the range of industries that are growing and the evolution of the labour market. As I
discuss each in turn, I will point to some signs that growth is broadening across regions and
sectors, although not to the same extent.
Adjustment to lower oil prices
Let us start with the adjustment to lower oil prices. In 2015 and 2016, the starkest effects of the
drop in oil prices on GDP were in business investment. Firms in the oil and gas sector cut capital
spending in half, shutting down oil rigs and cancelling investment plans. Investment in the rest of
the economy was also subdued, in part as a result of the weakness in non-commodity exports,
especially last year. The economy kept growing, thanks to household spending, and activity was
concentrated in regions where the energy sector was not as important.
Today, as we move past the adjustment to lower oil prices, we are seeing the economy pick up.
A couple of weeks ago we got the national accounts data from Statistics Canada for the first
quarter of this year. It was pretty impressive, with growth at 3.7 per cent. And the figures show
business investment growing again. This is in large part because capital expenditures in the oil
and  gas  sector  have  bounced  back.  That  is  good  news.  That  said,  investment  growth  in  this
sector is likely to moderate if oil prices stay around where they are today. More generally, ongoing
uncertainty  about  the  policies  of  the  US  administration  is  weighing  on  investment  plans. And,
given how business investment has declined in the past two years, we flagged it as one of the
downside risks to the outlook in our April Monetary Policy Report.
Growth  in  the  first  quarter  was  also  fuelled  by  the  usual  suspects—consumer  spending  and
residential  investment.  However,  growth  in  the  housing  sector  is  expected  to  slow  from
exceptionally high rates, and we are already seeing this in the most recent data on housing starts
and resales. It is too early to tell how the recent housing measures introduced in Ontario will
ultimately affect activity and prices in and around Toronto. In Vancouver, when similar measures
were introduced last year, we saw the market cool for a period of time. But it is picking up again.
So, given we expect household spending to slow somewhat, it could surprise us and provide an
unexpected boost to growth in the near term, which is another risk we mentioned in April. Higher-
than-expected  spending,  if  funded  by  credit,  could  add  to  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  household
sector.  We  have  been  monitoring  these  for  some  time  and  highlighted  them  in  last
week’s Financial System Review. In this regard, the recent policy measures taken by federal and
provincial governments are welcome.
If there was one disappointment in the first-quarter figures, it was exports. We actually saw a
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
decline of exports of services, which had been performing very well. At the same time, goods
exports were flat. We have been working hard to understand the forces behind the data.
Stepping back from the quarterly data, there are other signs of adjustment. We see indications
that demand in energy-intensive provinces is strengthening, after having fallen in 2015 and the
first half of 2016. You just need to look at motor vehicle sales and housing resales (Chart 2).
One challenge we have when assessing the geographic diversity of growth is that it takes longer
for provincial data to be published—this year’s data on growth by province will not be available
until well into 2018. That is why Bank of Canada staff recently developed models to get a timelier
2
 These models point to a broadening in provincial activity this year, in
read on provincial GDP.
contrast to the lopsided growth we have seen over the past couple of years (Chart 3).
We  also  see  a  regional  broadening  of  demand  in  the  results  of  our  most  recent Business
Outlook  Survey.  This  survey  asks  100  businesses  every  quarter  about  things  like  sales,
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
employment  and  investment  intentions.  Executives  across  the  country  responded  more
optimistically  about  their  future  sales  and  their  investment  plans  than  they  were  just  a  few
quarters ago.
Range of growing industries
We also see a broadening when it comes to growth across industries (Chart 4).   We can see
the adverse effect the oil price shock had on goods production in 2015 and the first half of 2016.
The fact that growth was positive overall was due to a resilient service sector. As the oil and gas
and related sectors stabilized, the goods sector as a whole started contributing again.
3
What is encouraging is that this growth is not being driven by just a few key industries. The data
show that more than 70 per cent of industries have been expanding—a rate we have not seen
since the oil price shock. That is the kind of diversity that helps support strong and sustained
4
overall growth.
When we think about the main drivers of economic growth, many of us picture industries like
mining,  motor  vehicles  or  aerospace.  While  these  sectors  still  matter  a  great  deal  to  the
economy, many service industries are increasing in importance. Computer systems design and
related services have been growing nearly 10 per cent in the past year. This sector is now as big
in  Canada  as  motor  vehicles  and  aerospace  combined.  It  is  not  all  about  computers—more
areas  of  the  service  sector,  such  as  financial  services  and  air  transportation,  are  engines  of
growth. This is helping to support the household spending we have seen.
Labour market developments
Let me turn now to labour markets. Developments here are largely consistent with the evolution
of  economic  activity  I  just  discussed.  It  is  not  surprising  that  job  growth  in  the  past  couple  of
years  had  been  concentrated  in  services,  offsetting  significant  losses  in  goods  employment.
Jobs in goods-producing industries are now on the rise, and the share of sectors adding workers
is growing.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some sectors stand out. The technology sector has been creating a lot of jobs, many of which
are very well paid. Other sectors that have seen strong job growth include finance and insurance,
health care and education.
As  sources  of  growth  become  more  diverse,  gains  in  employment  are  spreading  across  the
country (Chart 5). Now, we know that the adjustment in the labour market is still under way in
some regions, and this is difficult for many people and their families. Alberta and Newfoundland
and Labrador, in particular, have not recovered all the jobs lost in the aftermath of the oil price
shock. 
Taking care of business
Being  able  to  judge  the  sustainability  and  evolution  of  growth  is  critical  for  a  forward-looking
central  bank  that  targets  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  To  meet  this  objective,  we  use  our
policy  interest  rate  to  stimulate  or  slow  economic  activity,  depending  on  how  we  judge  the
evolution of inflationary pressures. Once inflation reaches our target, maintaining it there requires
growth  to  be  sustained  at  the  economy’s  speed  limit—what  we  refer  to  as  “potential  output
growth.” Low, stable and predictable inflation, in turn, allows people to make financial decisions
with more confidence.
Monetary policy actions influence financial conditions and economic decisions right away but can
take as long as two years to have their full effect on inflation. To ensure that inflation gets back to
target on a sustainable basis, we must consider not only current economic conditions but also
how they will evolve. If you saw a stop light ahead, you would begin letting up on the gas to slow
down smoothly. You do not want to have to slam on the brakes at the last second. Monetary
policy must also anticipate the road ahead.
Right now, slack in the economy is still translating into inflation that is below our target. Headline
inflation  stood  at  1.6  per  cent  in April,  in  part  because  of  the  transitory  effects  of  competition
among food retailers. We look at several measures of core inflation to see past the transient
volatility in headline inflation.  These measures have drifted down in recent quarters and range
from  1.3  to  1.6  per  cent.  This  is  consistent  with  the  lagged  effects  of  excess  supply  in  past
quarters.  
5
Other indicators also point to ongoing spare capacity. We have seen moderate growth in wages,
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and the number of hours that people work has only recently picked up, although employment
growth has been strong. Our base-case projection in the April Monetary Policy Report was for
the output gap to close sometime in the first half of 2018 and inflation to return sustainably to
target around the same time.
We are in the process of doing our next projection, which will be released in July. We will digest
all the new data since the April Report and update our assessment of inflationary pressures. We
will also look at how the main risks we highlighted in that report have evolved. I have already
mentioned  the  risk  of  slower  investment  growth  and  the  risk  of  stronger  growth  in  household
spending. We also underscored the risk that even stronger growth in the United States could
lead  to  a  big  jump  in  business  confidence,  igniting  “animal  spirits”  as  John  Maynard  Keynes
would have put it. And, given that we do not know how much capacity might be rebuilt as the
economy  expands,  we  pointed  to  the  possibility  that  potential  growth  may  be  stronger  than
assumed in our base-case projection. 
We  are  all  acutely  aware  of  the  uncertainty  around  the  policies  of  the  US  administration—
whether it is about trade, tax or the regulatory environment. We already factored in some of the
effects of that uncertainty in our April outlook. Until we get more information, it will be difficult to
gauge  the  impact  of  any  proposed  policy  changes  more  precisely.  This  will  likely  remain  an
important  uncertainty  in  our  projection,  but  life  goes  on  and  decisions  must  be  made  in  the
meantime.
Our  judgment  on  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  based  on  the
outlook for inflation and on the full range of risks—both upside and downside—to that outlook. An
important aspect of our inflation assessment is that the economic drag from lower oil prices is
now largely behind us. And the 50 basis point reduction in our policy rate in 2015 has facilitated
this adjustment. As growth continues and, ideally, broadens further, Governing Council will be
assessing  whether  all  of  the  considerable  monetary  policy  stimulus  presently  in  place  is  still
required.
Conclusion
Time to wrap up.
There are still risks to the Canadian economic outlook. That said, when you look at the economy
from different perspectives, there is reason to be encouraged. Growth has been robust in recent
quarters.  As  we  celebrate  Canada’s  150th  birthday  and  the  strength  that  comes  from  the
diversity of its people, we are seeing the benefits of its economic diversity as well.
The  strengthening  economic  activity  in  regions  and  sectors  that  rely  on  energy  is  working  to
diversify the sources of growth across the country. And, while there is still room for improvement
in the labour market, stronger growth is translating into job gains across a wider range of regions
and sectors.
At present, there is significant monetary policy stimulus in the system. As we work toward our
interest rate decision on 12 July, we will be focusing on the data and talking to many people like
you to get a better sense of what is happening on the ground.
One thing that remains clear is the Bank’s commitment to achieving its inflation target so that
Canadians can make their financial decisions with more confidence. 
1
2
3
S.  S.  Poloz,  “Riding  the  Commodity  Cycle:  Resources  and  the  Canadian  Economy”  (speech  to  Calgary
Economic Development, Calgary, Alberta, 21 September 2015).
T. Chernis, C. Cheung and G. Velasco. “A Three-Frequency Dynamic Factor Model for Nowcasting Canadian
Provincial GDP Growth.” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2017–8 (June 2017).
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
The goods sector includes oil and gas, mining and manufacturing, while the service sector includes trade,
transportation, digital and professional services, health care, education and public administration.
To examine the breadth of activity over a given period of time, we constructed a diffusion index that includes the
22 subcomponents of GDP at basic prices and measures the proportion that are growing. This index has been
increasing since the third quarter of 2016.
The measures are CPI-median, which is based on the price change located at the 50th percentile (in terms of
the CPI basket weights) of the distribution of price changes; CPI-trim, which excludes CPI components whose
rates of change in a given month are located in the tails of the distribution of price changes; and CPI-common,
which tracks common price changes across categories in the CPI basket.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
