Viral V Acharya: A bank should be something one can "bank" upon
Speech by Dr Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the Federation
of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry - FICCI Ladies Organisation, Mumbai Chapter,
Mumbai, 28 April 2017.
 I am grateful to my colleagues and teams at the Reserve Bank of India for many stimulating
discussions and insights, to many banking sector stalwarts of today and the past, and to several
practitioners  and  policy-makers  in  sectors  and  institutions  related  to  the  resolution  of  bank
stressed assets. All errors remain my own.
I am grateful to the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry – FICCI Ladies
Organisation, Mumbai Chapter, for inviting me to speak today. I salute FLO’s mission, and wish
the very best to the incoming office bearers on their efforts to empower and educate women,
unlocking a potential workforce for the Indian economy that can both balance gender distribution
of jobs and identify new sources of enterprise and entrepreneurship. I hope that by explaining
today the important role that banks play in an economy, I can make a small contribution, offering
if  not  a  flower  at  least  a  petal,  to  help  the  financial  planning  undertaken  by  women  workers,
educators and entrepreneurs.
I wish to try and simplify the mechanics of how a bank works, why we put our savings into banks,
what does a bank do with our savings, when should we question which bank are we banking
with, and why when such questions are asked en masse, is there a banking crisis and economic
growth comes to a screeching halt. I will then draw implications for the current condition of the
Indian banking sector and suggest some ways to restore it to healthier levels.
The gist of what I want to say can be summarized in one line message – A Bank Should Be
Something One Can “Bank” Upon, inspired by the real meaning behind banking upon something,
a statement of credibility, of confidence, of trust – something that ideally a bank must earn over
time by making prudent choices.
To understand this, we need to first grasp three simple concepts: what are bank deposits, what
are bank loans, and that bank deposits can be demanded immediately by depositors but bank
borrowers may not repay their loans exactly at that time.
So let us work step by step.
What are bank deposits?
In its simplest form, my bank deposit is an amount of saving I have deposited into an account at
a bank on my street corner. Once I have created the deposit account and put my savings into it, I
can withdraw up to that amount at will. A deposit is something that the bank owes me; in other
words, it is the bank’s liability.
Crucially, the deposit can be redeemed with immediacy. I can show up at the bank ATM or at the
bank teller, demanding that my money be paid back to me – Show me the money! Why might I
need to do this? A bank deposit is the place where I save for the rainy day – my health expenses,
my tuition fees, my day to day expenses. Some of these needs are predictable, some random;
each  time  I  withdraw  at  the ATM  or  the  teller,  or  write  a  cheque  or  do  a  wire  transfer,  I  am
demanding  my  money  from  the  bank.  Each  instance  I  do  not  demand  my  money  back,  I  am
rolling over the deposit to the next instance.
Bank deposits are thus savings that I have kept with a bank. I trust them to be safe and to be
demandable at will. I am happy to earn a low interest rate on them as they provide me valuable
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
liquidity services, allowing me to meet my day to day and the occasional lumpy payment needs.
What are bank loans?
There are many depositors like me parking their savings in the bank. Viewed this way, the bank is
a safety vault or a storage technology. However, most of the time, the deposits are not being
withdrawn and are simply being rolled over. Even when withdrawn, the deposits are not being
redeemed at the same time. For instance, my health expenses are not coincident with those of
my neighbor. In other words, there is much saving in the bank that is lying idle.
Let us now bring into picture others in the economy who are potential borrowers. A bright young
woman down the street has been a successful consultant, but wants to have a shot at building a
new enterprise. She needs financing beyond her savings to put her bright ideas to test. There is
a  new  construction  just  completed  and  several  young  couples,  first-time  home  buyers,  are
looking to purchase houses there. They have some capacity to make down-payments for the
properties but must avail of extra monies that they can repay over the course of their lives. An old
family  needs  money  for  medical  expenses  to  treat  a  long-term  illness.  They  cannot  afford  to
spend out of their savings, but they do own a property against which they would like to borrow.
These potential borrowers can visit the bank branch to meet such financing needs. The bank
makes loans to these individuals and families, assessing their ability to repay the loans, signing
appropriate agreements to claim repayments in due course, and attaching the property and other
assets  as  collateral  that  it  can  have  access  to  in  case  the  repayments  fall  through  for  some
reason.
Such  loans  are  bank’s assets. They typically earn a higher rate of interest than bank deposits
and make banking activity an attractive proposition.
Demand deposits are short-term; bank loans are long-term
This way, a bank takes shape. It has liabilities, the right-hand side of its balance-sheet, in the
form of deposits that must be repaid when depositors so demand; it has assets, the left-hand
side of its balance-sheet, in the form of bank loans that have some fixed points of time at which
the bank can command repayments.
By being so organized, the bank is performing the economic function of maturity transformation.
A deposit, which is potentially demandable at any instance, has effectively been lent out through
financial intermediation in the form of a longer-term bank loan that is not making repayments at
each instance.
And yet… the beauty of the arrangement is that most of the time, this works out. The day my
health expenses arise and I take out money from the bank, my neighbor and others have likely
received monthly paycheques, a part of which remain deposited in the bank, or that same day
some loan repayments have been made, extending the savings pool of the bank and allowing it to
meet my deposit withdrawals.
In background, financing has been made available to new entrepreneurs, first-time home buyers
and aging parents. Their undertakings are creating a whole second-round of economic activity, in
the  form  of  job  creation  at  new  enterprises,  construction  and  cement  industry,  and  medical
services and hospitals. Those involved in these activities have their own saving and borrowing
needs, and will in turn deal with their banks.
Banking, in this manner is the life-blood of an economy, channels savings in the form of
demand deposits into borrowings in the form of bank loans or bank credit, fuels and lubricates
growth, and improves everyone’s welfare.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
All of our lives would be easy, including of central bankers, if banking worked as serenely as I
have described so far. But, of course, that would be too good to be true. There are risks, there
are tools to deal with these risks, and yet occasionally, there are banking crises. So let me turn to
these next.
What are the risks from maturity transformation and how can a bank manage them?
What if by coincidence, the bank receives a series of withdrawal requests at once. There could
be an epidemic in the area of its operations; may be the bank serves a community that is buying
a lot of gold for Akshaya Tritiya; or there is a wealth shock to the farming community it serves
due to poor monsoon and new deposits do not come in at the expected rate.
In  such  a  scenario,  when  many  depositors  need  to  withdraw  their  monies  at  once,  the  bank
faces risk from  maturity  transformation.  Given  the  coincident  money  demand,  it  is  no  longer
sufficient to simply manage deposit withdrawals with new deposits and repayments on existing
loans. What options does the bank have to manage these risks to ensure that it will show the
money to its depositors when they need it and thus retain their trust?
To  this  end,  let  me  briefly  introduce  three  concepts: bank liquidity, bank capital, and inter-
bank markets.
Bank Liquidity
One simple idea is that a bank need not deploy all of its deposits for extending bank loans. It can
save  some  purely  as  a  reserve  or  a  buffer  to  meet  the  unexpected  coincidence  in  deposit
withdrawals.  The  benefit  of  such  bank liquidity is that it is an impeccable defense as long as
withdrawals are smaller than the size of the reserve. The cost is that by not being able to extend
bank loans on part of its deposits, economic activity is compromised.
Bank Capital
Another idea is that a bank need not fund its extension of bank loans only with deposits in its
liability structure. It can also raise some other forms of non-demandable liabilities. For example,
the banker can put his own capital, beyond the savings needs, into the bank. A large bank can
also raise public equity by being listed on a stock exchange. This way, the impact of the bank’s
unexpected deposit withdrawals can be made smaller relative to the overall size of the bank and
the loan repayments it receives.
Such bank capital would be supported through profits that a bank makes, by charging loan rates
that exceed deposit rates and net of the costs of its operations. Bank capital would then be the
first line of defense in case bank faces unexpected withdrawals: bankers can take less bonus out
of the bank; dividends being paid out to bank equity could be temporarily suspended; and in fact,
bankers and equity owners can inject new finance to meet the temporary needs anticipating that
future profits will nevertheless render such capital injection profitable for them.
Inter-bank Markets
An even more involved idea is for the bank to try and raise liquidity on the fly, from other banks
(more  generally,  other  financial  intermediaries).  Not  all  banks  may  be  in  regions  hit  by  the
epidemic or natural disaster. As long as these banks trust that the bank in need of liquidity only
has a temporary need but has a high quality of long-term assets otherwise, they can lend their
liquidity surplus to the bank in need. This would be an inter-bank deposit. At other times, the
surplus bank may be unprepared to deposit its money but instead may simply buy some of the
needy bank’s assets, creating an inter-bank market for asset sales.  In extremis, the surplus
bank can simply assume all liabilities of the needy bank, and in return, take over the entire bank
itself, creating a market for inter-bank mergers.
 
3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
It should be clear then that a bank has many tools to manage the risk of maturity transformation,
the  risk  that  deposits  are  demanded  with  immediacy  while  its  assets  are  yet  to  make  full
repayments. The worse the quality of its assets, the less a bank can rely on cash flows from
assets to meet unexpected withdrawals, and the more it must pre-arrange in the form of liquidity
and  capital.  The  tools  –  liquidity,  capital  and  inter-bank  markets  –  are  not  mutually  exclusive
though they clearly affect each other, and are more attractive at some times than others.
With such tools to manage its risks, can we not always bank upon our bank?
One possibility is that the bank has raised little equity capital and also held little liquidity of its own.
Once depositors know this, they realize that the only way they can be redeemed against their
withdrawals is if the bank can use inter-bank markets to raise liquidity. As I explained, this would
be  possible  only  if  the  bank’s  assets  are  deemed  good  enough  to  repay  the  inter-bank
transaction in future. But then the following question arises: what if the asset quality of the bank is
suspect as it has betted the bank’s money on the upside leaving depositors at risk of losing their
savings if the bets don’t pay off? And, even if the asset quality is not entirely suspect, what if the
inter-bank markets dry up themselves, which could happen if there is in fact no healthy bank, or
only a few healthy banks around as most banks betted the economy’s savings imprudently?
Systemic shock, bank runs, financial disintermediation
In  essence,  if  an  economic  tsunami  –  like  a  massive  house  price  crash  or  global  economic
collapse or underperformance in many industrial sectors – comes and hits the banking system,
and it had chosen to remain heavily exposed to it by being on the shores, so that a large portion
of its assets is deemed to be risky at once, then an unexpectedly large deposit withdrawal could
be rather hard to meet for any bank. Worse, when this happens, if some depositors start being
repaid by the bank, other depositors fear that bank liquidity is getting depleted and their savings
might be at risk given the underlying assets are either not safe or not liquid enough in inter-bank
markets. Now, these depositors may start demanding their deposits too. And a bank “run” starts.
Fearing  the  asset-quality  signal  revealed  by  such  a  run  at  one  bank,  depositors  could  start
running on other banks too, especially ones with similar assets and a full-fledged banking panic
takes hold.
When this happens, the entire banking system is at the risk of being disintermediated; payments
and settlements of financial transactions can come to a standstill; banks have no capacity on
balance-sheet to make new loans to new entrepreneurs, first-time home buyers and old families;
the economic activity can come to a grinding halt. There are banks around, but no banking, the
1
life-blood of the economy, to channel savings to productive uses and for job creation.
The present Indian context
Let  me  now  turn  to  what  all  this  means  for  the  present  Indian  context.  To  put  things  in
perspective, let me mention that the recently released Global Financial Stability Report by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) brings out the following salient facts:
1.  Indian industrial sector is now among the most heavily indebted in the world in terms of the
2
ability of its cash flows to meet its bank loan repayments  ;
and,
2.  Indian banking sector comes out as worse-off compared to other emerging economies in
terms of how little bank capital it has set aside to provision for losses on its assets, i.e., on
3
its non-performing loans, made primarily to the industrial sector.
What does it mean to have little bank capital as provision for losses? I like the following analogy.
A bank not keeping adequate capital buffer to absorb losses on its loans that are more or less
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
known to be arriving soon is akin to not preparing to rescue with emergency a person who has
slipped  off  the  terrace  of  a  skyscraper,  and  instead  in  the  midst  of  his  almost  surely  fatal
descent, hoping that the laws of gravity would somehow freeze and work differently this time.
While such under-provisioning problem extends to some of the private banks too, the scale of the
problem is three to four times magnified in case of public sector banks.
By  and  large,  this  scenario  meets  the  adverse  conditions  of  the  narrative  I  provided  about
banking and banking panics. But in our context, several questions immediately come to mind:
Why should I worry about whether I can bank upon my bank when my deposit is insured by the
government? More so, if my deposits are with a state-owned bank? Why should I bother about
my bank’s asset quality?
The double-edged sword of deposit insurance and state ownership of banks
Answering  these  questions  is  crucial  to  understanding  how  our  banking  sector  problems  are
likely to play out. A moment of reflection reveals that as long as I trust the deposit insurance and
the guarantee of the state behind the public sector banks, I have no good reason to run and pull
my deposit out of an insured deposit or a state-owned bank. The catch is this. When banks are
in poor health, it does affect the potential borrowers. Once a bank’s asset quality is adequately
impaired, the bank does not grow its lending book much with fresh loans. Bank management of a
thinly capitalized bank is interested in primarily making two kinds of loans. First, ever-greening of
existing bad debt – throwing more money after the bad, so as to help the borrower repay past
loan,  not  acknowledge  its  true  quality,  and  simply  kick  the  can  down  the  road.  Second,  risky
loans that give banks high returns so that it can make a last-ditch effort to rebuild capital quickly –
doubling up bets in a casino when first round of gambling has all gone sour. Faced with such
borrowing prospects, healthy borrowers who have access to alternate forms of finance may be
able to switch out of bank borrowing. Financial intermediation, however, is likely to grow at an
anemic pace, and many deserving borrowers such as the ones I have alluded to, likely to remain
starved of credit.
Ironically,  the  presence  of  large  safety  net  of  deposit  insurance  and  state  ownership,  which
ensure that there are likely to be no bank runs, end up eroding any disciplining force that gets the
bank  health  restored  to  a  state  where  the  economy  can  bank  upon  its  banks  to  perform  the
economic function of fueling and lubricating growth. Deposit insurance and state ownership help
the sick patient survive but on their own do not guarantee good health; they may prevent financial
instability but do not restore credit growth to levels that a vibrant economy needs.
And, indeed, recent global experience has shown that governments need to be watchful as to
how large the safety net adds up to relative to its own capacity to provide for it. Countries such as
Ireland and Spain engaged as a response to their banking sector woes in 2008 with massive
guaranteeing  of  bank  deposits  and  other  liabilities.  This,  however,  ended  up  being  a  Pyrrhic
victory  as  they  emerged  with  troubled  balance-sheets  themselves,  raising  their  debt  to  Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) ratios from healthy to questionable levels, and triggering sovereign debt
crises. [SLIDESHOW]
Bank resolution options
It  is  with  the  objective  of  avoiding  such  a  contingency  under  any  circumstance  that  I  wish  to
propose that we deal with the ailing public sector banks in creative ways instead of just propping
4
them up with state aid.
Let  me  elaborate.  We  keep  hearing  clarion  calls  for  more  and  more  government  funding  for
recapitalization of our public sector banks. Clearly, more recapitalization with government funds
is essential. However, as a majority shareholder of public sector banks, the government runs the
risk of ending up paying for it all. The expectation of government dole outs might have been set
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
by  the  past  practice  of  throwing  more  money  after  the  bad.  Take  for  instance  our  bank
recapitalization plan of 2008–09 after the global financial crisis: banks that experienced the worst
outcomes received the most capital in a relative sense. Most of these banks need capital again.
We  must  not  allocate  capital  so  poorly,  recreate  “Heads  I  Win,  Tails  the  Taxpayer  Loses”
incentives, and sow the seeds of another lending excess. There are better ways to do it. Let me
offer five options:
1.  Private capital raising: The healthier public sector banks could have raised private capital
by  issuing  deep  discount  rights  in  2013,  and  some  can  still  do  so  now.  They  must  be
required to do this to share the government’s burden of recapitalizing banks. It might be a
good  way  to  restore  some  discipline  and  get  the  bank  shareholders,  boards  and
management to more seriously care about the quality of lending decisions.
2.  Asset sales: Some banks will have assets or loan portfolios that are in good enough shape
to be sold in the market. Modern banks no longer just make bank loans but also hold non-
core assets such as insurance subsidiaries, market-making divisions, foreign branches, etc.
Such non-core assets can be readily sold. Other assets could be collected across banks
and organized into different risk profiles, so as to build transparency and trust with healthier
banks and other intermediaries with an interest in purchasing them. Such asset sales can
generate some of the needed recapitalization.
3.  Mergers: As many have pointed out, it is not clear we need so many public sector banks.
The system will be better off if they are consolidated into fewer but healthier banks. After all,
we  do  have  cooperative  banks  and  micro-finance  institutions  to  provide  community-level
banking. So some banks can be merged, as a quid pro quo for timely government capital
injection  into  the  combined  entity.  It  would  offer  the  opportunity  to  rejig  management
responsibility away from those who have under-performed or dragged their feet the most.
Synergies  in  lending  activity  and  branch  locations  could  be  identified  to  economize  on
intermediation costs, allowing sales of real estate where branches are redundant. Voluntary
retirement schemes (VRS) can be offered to manage headcount and usher in a younger,
digitally-savvy talent pool into these banks. Historically, bank stress of the order we face has
almost always involved significant bank restructuring.
4.  Tough prompt corrective action:  Undercapitalized  banks  could  be  shown  some  tough
love and be subjected to corrective action, such  as  the revised  Prompt  Corrective Action
(PCA) guidelines recently released by the Reserve Bank of India. Such action should entail
no  further  growth  in  deposit  base  and  lending  for  the  worst-capitalized  banks.  This  will
ensure a gradual “run-off” of such banks, and encourage deposit migration away from the
weakest public sector banks to healthier public sector banks and private sector banks. It is
not rocket science to figure out where the growth potential in our banking sector lies and
deposit growth should be allowed to reflect that.
5.  Divestments:  Undertaking  these  measures  would  improve  overall  banking  sector  health,
creating  an  opportune  time  for  the  government  to  divest  some  of  its  ownership  of  the
restructured banks, as it has over time in many other sectors of the economy. Perhaps re-
privatizing some of the nationalised banks is an idea whose time has come? All this would
reduce the overall amount the government needs to inject as bank capital and help preserve
its  hard-earned  fiscal  discipline,  which  along  with  stable  inflation  outlook  and  the  diverse
nature of our growth engine, appears to have made India the darling of foreign investors at
the  present  moment.  We  should  grapple  this  macroeconomic  stability  to  our  shores  with
hoops of steel.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me conclude
I wish to encourage you to reflect on all this, read about the current state of Indian banking sector
in newspapers and economic writing, try to make sense of it from first principles, and ask the
question if we have a banking sector that our economy can bank upon.
At any rate, I hope that I have provided enough food for thought for the weekend so when you do
a financial transaction next week – with a bank, a mutual fund, a stock broker, or an insurance
company – you will be tempted to follow the river along which the money flows in that transaction
from its source to its destination, invariably finding a few banks along the way!
And if you find the rafting exciting enough, do apply to the Reserve Bank of India where we are
looking to rebalance our gender distribution of personnel that has gone a bit askew. We are ready
to have in our workforce dedicated women such as all of you. Thank you.
1
2
3
4
Interestingly,  the  word  “bankruptcy”  –  a  term  used  to  describe  the  situation  when  a  borrower  defaults  on
repayments  to  be  made  –  derives  from  the  Italian  term  “banca  rotta”,  or  a  “broken  bank”,  describing  the
depositors of a bank breaking the bench or the counter of the teller in the Republic of Genoa when the banker
was unable to meet their demands on deposit withdrawals.
Figure 1.15, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2017
Table 1.2, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2017
The part of the speech that follows builds and expands upon the section on Bank Resolution in my speech
“Some Ways to Decisively Resolve Bank Stressed Assets”, February 21, 2017, delivered at the Indian Banks’
Association Banking Technology Conference, Hotel Trident, Nariman Point, Mumbai.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
