Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Malaysian banking industry challenges
and developments
Speech by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  Association  of  Money  Services  Business  Annual
Dinner 2017, Kuala Lumpur, 29 April 2017.
 It is my great pleasure to be here with you this evening at the annual dinner of the Malaysian
Association of Money Services Business. I remember a time six or seven years ago when the
Bank  gathered  the  industry  together  at  the  auditorium  in  the  headquarters  of  Bank  Negara
Malaysia to explain the new legislation that was being introduced for the industry. The industry
then, and the industry today, is almost unrecognisable. You would have heard this said a few
times now, and I think it keeps getting mentioned because the change has been so striking.
Tonight, the industry will recognise companies that are leading the way in terms of exemplary
customer service to the public, as judged independently by a global consulting firm. This is yet
another reminder of how far the industry has come.
In the last six years, the industry has almost doubled the value of money services transactions
conducted  through  licensed  MSB  companies.  We  estimate  that  this  included  about  43%  of
worker  remittances  previously  conducted  through  informal  or  illegal  channels,  that  are  now
captured within the formal system.  On average, MSB companies have increased their turnovers
by  more  than  16%.  More  than  half  of  the  industry  today  is  made  up  of  MSB  companies  with
annual turnovers of at least RM50 million, compared to only a third of the industry operating at
this level 6 years ago. The public can conduct money changing and remittance transactions at
over  2,500  locations  nationwide,  more  than  double  the  number  of  access  points  in  2011. An
increasing  number  of  companies  are  also  offering  online  options  for  customers  to  conduct
remittance and money changing transactions.
The Bank is also happy to note that the industry received a positive assessment under the most
recent mutual evaluation exercise conducted on Malaysia by the Asia Pacific Group (APG) on
Money  Laundering.   As  you  know,  the APG  is  an  international  organisation  committed  to  the
implementation  and  enforcement  of  international  standards  against  money  laundering  and  the
financing of terrorism, working closely with organisations like the Financial Action Task Force, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The assessment is a rigorous process, so a
positive assessment is something that the industry can take great pride in.  
In its most recent 2015 report, the APG specifically noted that mitigation of money laundering and
terrorist  financing  risks  in  the  MSB  sector  has  improved  significantly  in  recent  years,  while
acknowledging  that  there  are  challenges  among  smaller  companies  that  we  are  collaborating
together  with  the  industry  to  address.    One  of  the  key  steps  that  we  are  taking  is  to  provide
compliance  officers  with  appropriate  training,  and  then  supporting  them  to  be  professionally
accredited. 
The MSB industry in Malaysia is also highly competitive, with among the lowest remittance costs
in comparison with other markets.  I know that this has been an issue of some concern among
some players in the industry as margins have continued to narrow. As in any other industry, an
environment  of  healthy  competition  that  delivers  more  choice,  provides  better  service  and
encourages innovation, generally benefits society.  Tonight’s awards are a good example of MSB
companies  that  have  stepped  up  to  deliver  an  outstanding  customer  experience  in  order  to
attract and retain customers. 
Many strategic partnerships between companies in the industry have also been formed over the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
years in response to greater competition.  This has unlocked value for the companies by opening
up new business opportunities and increasing cost efficiencies. Throughout history, whether in
an organisation, an industry or a nation, progress and development have always been achieved
through a process of creative destruction, adjustment and evolution. 
The industry will continue to transform and evolve, and in the process, it become more efficient
and advanced in delivering superior products and services to the public. Bank Negara Malaysia
remains  committed  to  ensuring  that  the  market  for  money  services  continues  to  function
efficiently and sustainably in the best interests of consumers, and a competitive market is an
important part of this process. 
The industry’s remarkable development has not gone unnoticed.  More than a few countries have
been  interested  to  study  and  learn  from  Malaysia’s  experience.  This  prompted  Bank  Negara
Malaysia to document the industry’s transformation in a box article that we published in our latest
edition  of  the  Financial  Stability  and  Payment  Systems  Report.    Today,  the  industry  stands
among the more developed money services markets in the world and our MSB companies have
a good reputation that will open doors for growth opportunities both within and outside Malaysia. 
The  industry’s  credibility  has  also  avoided  the  negative  impact  from  de-risking  strategies  by
banks that have been experienced in other countries.
We should not forget however that good reputations are hard to earn, and easily lost.  So while
we have come a long way, a number of priorities must continue to stay in clear focus for the
industry to progress further.  
Let me just mention three of these priorities. 
First, we must continue  to  work  at  reducing  transactions  that  are  conducted  through  informal
channels – in particular, through education and enforcement activities.   Since 2012, the Bank
has taken enforcement actions against 140 illegal MSB operators.  This included criminal and
civil actions pursued against over 70 companies.  We will continue to intensify our efforts on this
front.
Second, we must continue to raise compliance and professional standards across the industry,
regardless of size. Every company that holds a licence must be able to meet the expectations
that have been set to protect the integrity of the financial system and provide a high standard of
service  to  the  public.    Over  the  years,  more  companies  have  been  given  licences  for  longer
periods. This means that we have seen good improvements in the quality of compliance and
operations.    Companies  that  continue  to  receive  shorter-term  licences  need  to  take  stronger
measures to address the issues that we have raised. 
Third,  we  should  expect  that  financial  markets  will  continue  to  remain  volatile  in  the  period
ahead.  It is therefore important for the industry to improve market arrangements to ensure that
MSB  companies  will  be  able  to  respond  efficiently  to  changes  in  demand  for  currencies  by
consumers  and  businesses.  Such  arrangements  have  to  include  better  planning  and
management of currency stocks as well as sourcing strategies to ensure the ready supply of
currencies at efficient market rates.    
Tonight’s  MSB  customer  experience  awards  reflects  an  industry  that  aspires  to  place  the
customer first. A price advantage can be lost easily to your competitors, but a strong customer
service culture is much harder to copy. Those of you that voluntarily took part in this process are
sending a clear signal that your company and this industry takes customer service excellence
seriously.  The idea of customer service excellence is not only about the quality of service; it is
also about the industry conducting itself in a way that builds trust in the industry.
The Association therefore is to be commended for undertaking this initiative, as should all MSB
companies that have supported it.    
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am also very happy to note the Association’s launch of the MSB App this evening —- which will
provide consumers with convenient access to price comparisons, locations of MSB companies,
customer reviews, and avenues to lodge complaints and report illegal MSB activities.
This App reflects an increasingly digitalised society and business environment where demands
for greater transparency, convenience and consumer engagement have become the norm. 
The  MSB  App  is  a  great  example  of  how  financial  technology,  or  fintech,  is  changing  how
customers  experience  financial  services.  The  possibilities  are  almost  boundless  as  we  are
discovering through Bank Negara Malaysia’s recently launched “fintech hacks”.  This is a project
where we are inviting the public to submit ideas to improve financial services. 
Let me mention some of the suggestions we have received in the area of money services. 
Allow tourists to exchange their unused foreign currencies for e-money that can be used to
make purchases at any airport merchant worldwide.
Develop  a  peer-to-peer  currency  exchange  app  that  will  allow  travellers  to  meet  up  and
exchange currencies.
Provide an app that will allow individuals to book and pay for foreign currencies using their
mobile phones, and have the currencies delivered directly to them.
And enable e-KYC for remittances.
These  represent  opportunities  for  MSB  companies  to  innovate  and  continuously  improve  on
products and services that are meeting the needs of today’s consumer. Companies can also
come forward and test their ideas in Bank Negara’s Regulatory Sandbox, and we will facilitate a
safe environment for companies to develop viable solutions to identified problems.
This is the time for MSB companies to be forward-looking, not hold on to the past; to be agile and
responsive  to  change,  not  slow  to  evolve;  to  be  bold  and  ambitious,  not  reactive;  and  to  be
secure in strong professional and ethical standards for conducting business, and not exposed to
practices that can harm the industry’s image and reputation. 
The Bank has every confidence in the industry’s ability to grow and develop further from strength
to strength, well supported by a dynamic Association that has had a key role in driving many of
the accomplishments that have brought the industry to this point.   
On that note, thank you for having me here this evening. Congratulations to all the recipients of
the  customer  service  excellence  awards,  and  all  MSB  companies  that  are  present  here  for
supporting the important work of the Association.  On the part of the Bank, we look forward to the
implementation of the industry’s five-year strategic blueprint up to 2020. Bank Negara Malaysia
will  continue  to  engage  constructively  with  the Association  and  industry  on  these  initiatives  to
develop a modern, dynamic and progressive industry.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
