Vítor Constâncio: Interview with CNBC
Interview  with  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  CNBC,
conducted by Ms Annette Weisbach in Sintra on 27 June, published 28 June 2017.
 Mr Constâncio, we’re talking about a lot of economic issues here in Sintra: the output
gap, productivity, but also innovation. What does that all mean for your monetary policy?
Constâncio: Beyond the point that these are important subjects for any economy looking ahead,
it’s also important for monetary policy because this concept of output gap dimension – which is
the difference between where output is at the moment compared with the potential output as it
could be – this is a very important concept for monetary policy decisions, because what we want
when we want to, say, bring inflation closer to 2%, is for aggregate demand to put pressure on
supply in order for prices to go up. And when the difference between the actual output and the
potential is negative, as is the case, then we have to close that difference.
That difference depends on the way we see and calculate the potential, which is a very difficult
issue in economics, and there are all sorts of different estimates, but what it means is that all
central banks have to analyse very carefully and take a view on what is the degree of slack in the
economy,  because  that’s  crucial  for  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  being  more  expansionary,
less expansionary: it depends on that. So all this discussion about potential growth, productivity
going forward, all that is important to see where this slack in our economies is going, and to take,
then, monetary policy decisions.
Slack in the economy seems to be the buzzword also here in Sintra. Listening to the
President’s  speech,  of  course  slack  is  super-important  to  determine  whether  we  can
look through a period of low inflation, so where do we stand here now? Can we look
through it, or is it still worrisome, where we stand when it comes to inflation?
Constâncio: It’s very difficult for any central bank to have a very firm view on the slack. All central
banks  struggle  to  interpret  where  exactly  is  the  situation,  and  in  central  banks  we  use  many
variables to try to gauge what is this slack, this difference that is in the economy. What we can
say now is that what we observe is that domestic factors of inflation, starting with wage costs
and then also price decisions, are not responding the way we would expect in view of what are
the more common estimates of this slack. So we have to ask ourselves – are these measures of
the economy correct? Should we look to other variables?
The President, in the speech, precisely pointed out that looking to unemployment as an indicator
of  this  slack  in  the  economy,  the  unemployment  rate  now  is  9.3%,  according  to  the  normal
international  standard  of  measuring  unemployment;  but  if  we  adopt,  as  in  the  US,  a  broader
concept of unemployment – which in the US they call U6 – then unemployment in the euro area
is at 18%, where it is at 9% in the case of the US. Which would imply that the slack is then bigger
than we could judge some time ago. That being the case, it justifies fully what the President said
at the end of his speech: that we need persistence. If we want to bring inflation to our target of
below but close to 2%, then we have to persist in the type of monetary policy that we have been
adopting.
But looking at the market reaction, the market took the speech quite hawkish, meaning
concentrating on the optimistic comments about inflation, the economy, perhaps also the
political  tailwind.  So  is  the  market  right  to  read  your  communication  style  as  more
hawkish than before?
Constâncio:  It’s  always  very  difficult  to  interpret  the  reaction  of  markets.  I  will  not  try  to  say
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
rationalise or explain; the reaction of the market was what it was. But I will say that the speech of
the President, if one reads it completely, it’s totally in line with the statement we had in Tallinn in
our monetary policy meeting there; the speech that he also made at the European Parliament;
and here it was along the same lines. He recalled that domestic drivers of inflation, measured by
the  underlying  inflation,  are  still  subdued,  and  that  we  need  to  be  sure  that  when  we  get  to
inflation close to 2% it’s a durable situation and a self-sustained situation that can go on without
the  high  degree  of  accommodation  that  we  have  now:  so  all  these  conditions,  he  reaffirmed
them, and then talked precisely about the need to persist and about the need to be prudent in
talking about premature withdrawal of stimulus.
So in other words we are not closer to an exit, not even a baby step closer, with the
forum here in Sintra?
Constâncio: Well, we are not predicting what the Governing Council will do. We are not trying to
do that. This is the assessment that we have been producing also as a result of monetary policy
meetings of the Governing Council itself, like the more recent one we had. So it’s going along the
same lines. Personally, I don’t see anything in the speech that would be different from, say, the
previous two main interventions about monetary policy done by the President.
Let us talk about one area of optimism, and that’s the political tailwind. How confident are
you  about  the  state  of  the  political  European  landscape  now?  Is  there  more  of  a
momentum for reforms now?
Constâncio: Crises are always bad for the social and political mood, and recoveries are always
good. And so there is a bit of a recovery, which is becoming stronger, and that, of course, has
had its effects, in the mood of societies, of public opinion, and also in the political sphere. That’s
what I think the President indicated, and indeed, there were fears, especially from outsiders, that
some  of  the  political  developments  in  some  European  countries  would  go  in  the  direction  of
creating some doubts, which were dispelled. So that’s what he refers to.
But  throughout  all  this  period  there  is  one  thing  that  is  important  to  recall:  if  you  go  to  the
Eurobarometer that is the result of surveys in all Member States, you see throughout all these
years, all these years, that the support for the euro – being in favour of the single currency, the
euro – has been stable at around 70% of Europeans in the euro area countries; and that in all
countries there was a majority supporting the euro. A majority in all countries. The numbers are
different according to the different countries, but in all they are the majority. So this has been the
support  that  the  project  has  benefited  from,  and  the  present  recovery  has  indeed  reinforced
those views.
But we are talking about reforms as well. We’re talking about the banking sector: the
European banking sector is not as strong as it should be. Just over the weekend we
have seen two Italian banks getting state aid, so it was hugely criticised. Why did they get
that exception, that they’re allowed to have state aid?
Constâncio: It is not an exception. Everything is foreseen in the laws. BRRD, the directive on
resolution  of  banks,  was  not  applied  because  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  decided  that
these  two  banks  did  not  deserve  to  be  resolved,  which  according  to  European  law  means
rescuing some part of the banks, and that the banks should go into liquidation. But going into
liquidation  means  that  state  aid  rules  apply,  so  any  public  money  then  requires  two  things.  It
requires that shareholders and subordinated debt-holders participate in the costs, which is the
case in the two banks, because they go to the entity with the bad assets…
But not senior bond holders?
Constâncio:  No,  but  the  point  –  if  the  solution,  for  instance,  under  BRRD,  had  been  applying
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
precautionary recapitalisation in that case also senior bond holders would not have been bailed
in. So it’s not much difference from a situation of precautionary recap, which is foreseen in the
law. It’s not an exception. It’s not a special privilege. Everything was decided according to the two
laws  that  apply  in  these  cases,  with,  in  the  case  of  the  BRRD,  the  potential  exception  of
precautionary recap, which is in the law, and state aid rules. This was applied. At the same time,
as a result of state aid rules, and logic, policy, the overall capacity of the banking sector in Italy
went down. So there was downsizing; there was restructuring. Indeed, everything was applied
according to European legislation.
Is that just the beginning now for the Italian banking sector? As we all know, it has a
huge slab of NPLs. Can we be prepared for more of these kind of…
Constâncio: I don’t anticipate anything of that sort. There is the situation which was announced
also during these days that is about to be concluded regarding Monte dei Paschi di Siena, but
that has been discussed with the European authorities, and very likely it will have, as was stated
in the past few days, a solution very soon for that case.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
