 South African Reserve Bank 
An address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the 60th anniversary celebration of the Bank of Ghana 
 Accra, Ghana 
 18 August 2017 
 The changing role of the central bank in economic policy 
  Governor Addison, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 It is a great honour for me to address you on this auspicious occasion. Thank you 
for the invitation. 
 The Bank of Ghana has been operating for 60 years. Much has changed over this 
period  in  terms  of  its  role  and  operations.  This  is  not  surprising,  as  the  historical 
backdrop in which central banks have had to operate has kept changing over the 
decades. 
 Central  banks  in  the  developing  world  often  play  a  vital  role  in  economic 
policymaking, but that role tends to change as the economy and financial markets 
develop and new institutional capacity evolves. This is true of many African central 
banks. Similarly, in the advanced economies, the role and even mandates of central 
banks  have  come  under  intense  scrutiny  and  challenge,  and  many  have  found 
themselves with broader mandates and a wider scope of responsibilities in the wake 
of the most recent global financial crisis. 
 Numerous roles have been assigned to central banks over the years, many of which 
do  not  have  to  be  performed  exclusively  by  these  institutions  and  could  also  be 
 Page 1 of 12 
carried out by others. Apart from supporting state financing during times of crisis, 
two  main  functional  roles  have  traditionally  been  at  the  heart  of  central  banking: 
maintaining price stability (subject to the monetary regime) and maintaining financial 
stability. This includes crisis prevention and management and resolution as well as 
the promotion of financial development in the economy. How these roles have been 
interpreted and implemented and their relative emphasis, however, has continued 
to evolve over time in response to changing circumstances. 
 Today, central banks have many other functions, some of which have also evolved 
over  time.  In  South  Africa,  apart  from  the  price  stability  and  financial  stability 
objectives,  the  responsibilities  of  the  central  bank  include  the  printing  of  physical 
notes and coin, the regulation and supervision of the banking system, ensuring the 
effective  functioning  of  the  national  payment  system,  and  managing  the  foreign 
exchange reserves of the country. 
 However, in the African context, central banks have had to take on other roles as 
well.  This  is  partly  due  to  a  relative  scarcity  of  skills  and  other  resources  in  the 
context of pressing developmental needs. In some African countries, central banks 
have an explicit developmental role. In Nigeria, for example, the central bank plays 
a  significant  role  in  providing  finance  to  the  agricultural  sector.  How  multiple 
developmental needs are dealt with differs from country to country. As is often the 
case when it comes to policy prescription, there is no ‘one size fits all’ solution. 
 In my remarks to you today, I give you a perspective of how South Africa has dealt 
with  changing  demands  and  circumstances, particularly  since  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
 The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has been confined to a relatively narrow 
and traditional mandate. We do not play a central role in development issues, as 
there  are  specialised  institutions  for  these  purposes.  The  Land  and  Agricultural 
Development Bank of South Africa, as its name suggests,  provides financing and 
technical  assistance  to  the  farming  community.  The  Industrial  Development 
Corporation  provides  loans  to  facilitate  industrial  development.  The  Development 
Bank  of  Southern  Africa  specialises  in  funding  for  infrastructure  expenditure  in 
 Page 2 of 12 
Southern  Africa.  There  are  also  a  number  of  institutions  that  specialise  in  the 
financing and promotion of small businesses. 
 Why  does  the  SARB  not  engage  in  developmental  activities  beyond  those 
traditionally  in  the  ambit  of  central  banking?  The  short  answer  is: because  South 
Africa has institutions that are better equipped to do so than us. There is no reason 
for these activities to be conducted by central banks. By the same token, there is no 
reason  why  central  banks  should  not  undertake  such  activities  if  resources  and 
capacity are limited in the rest of the economy. It should, however, be remembered 
that central banks are not elected and hence it is preferred that their mandates are 
specific and narrowly defined. 
 There  should  also  be  a  clear  delineation  between  the  balance  sheets  of  these 
different activities of central banks – to avoid any conflicts of policy objectives, but 
also to ensure that these activities are not financed through direct loans from the 
central bank, i.e. through money creation. Under these circumstances, the role of 
the central bank would generally be to disburse funds that are raised in the capital 
markets at competitive rates, or that are funded by grants from government and/or 
multilateral organisations. There is no inherent reason why the central bank would 
have  the  advantage  of  assessing  the  needs  of  these  sectors  relative  to  the 
specialised  institutions  that  would  have  the necessary  expertise  to  do  so.  Having 
separate institutions helps to avoid conflicts over resources within the central bank 
and  reduces  the  possibility  of  the  politicisation  of  monetary  policy,  which  could 
ultimately undermine central bank independence. 
 The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  changed  markedly  during  the  1980s,  in  line  with 
global  developments.  Price  stability  became  an  important  focus,  particularly 
following the emergence of inflation that followed the collapse of the Bretton Woods 
era and the 1973 oil crisis. During this period, there was a general move away from 
direct controls and quantitative restrictions and ceilings to the targeting of monetary 
aggregates  in  the  context  of  more  liberalised  financial  markets.  Interest  rates 
became  the  main  instrument  of  monetary  policy,  and  during  the  1990s  the  trend 
moved away from a focus on intermediate targets to targeting inflation directly. 
  Page 3 of 12 
In  2000,  South  Africa  adopted  an  inflation-targeting  framework,  with  government 
and  the  SARB  agreeing  on  a  target  range  of  3-6%.  Similar  developments  were 
evident in many other African countries, including in Ghana, which adopted inflation 
targeting  in  2011.  While  the  operational  framework  had  changed,  the  underlying 
objective of price stability did not. 
 During the 1990s, the SARB’s primary mandate was written into the country’s new 
Constitution.  This  mandate  was  and  remains  the  protection  of  the  value  of  the 
currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in the country. 
We  are  given  constitutionally  entrenched  independence  in  carrying  out  this 
objective. This approach is not very different from that of the Bank of Ghana, whose 
‘monetary policy objective is to ensure price stability – low inflation – and, subject to 
that, to support the government’s economic objectives, including those for growth 
and employment’.1 
 Having a price stability objective does not, however, necessarily resolve the debates 
about the broader role of monetary policy in the economy or reduce the pressure on 
central  banks  to  play  a  more  prominent  role  in  stimulating  growth.  As  a  flexible 
inflation-targeting central bank, we do not ignore growth or employment. In carrying 
out our price stability mandate, we have always been highly sensitive to the growth 
needs of the economy and to the implications of our policies for growth. Ideally, we 
would  try  to  conduct  a  contracyclical  monetary  policy:  tightening  policy  when  the 
economy  is  overheating  with  inflationary  pressures  evident,  and  providing  some 
stimulus  or  accommodation  when  the  economy  is  in  a  downturn  –  and  when 
inflationary pressures are benign. 
 This  approach  is,  of  course,  standard  textbook  prescription.  Admittedly,  we  have 
faced a number of challenges, not least of which is the fact that the breaches of our 
target  range  have  generally  been  the  result  of  supply-side  pressures,  including 
international  oil  prices,  food  prices,  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand.  These 
exogenous forces have at times pushed us in the direction of procyclical monetary 
policy. Although we do try to look through the first-round effects of these pressures 
and only react to the emergence of second-round effects, our objectives are at times 
                                                      
1   Bank of Ghana website (https://www.bog.gov.gh/) 
 Page 4 of 12 
criticised  for  not  being  sufficiently  pro-growth.  Furthermore,  in  times  of  very  slow 
growth, as is currently the case in South Africa, there are those who see monetary 
policy as a solution to the growth problem, despite the fact that monetary policy has 
a very limited ability to change the long term growth potential of an economy. 
 While we see some role for monetary policy in a cyclical context, we view our main 
contribution to growth as being in the provision of a stable and enabling environment 
for investment and employment creation – through maintaining price stability. Price 
stability also has other important social outcomes, not least of which is the protection 
of the poorest in society from the ravages of inflation. The poor are the least able to 
hedge against price increases. However, we are very clear that monetary policy has 
a  limited  role  to  play  in  addressing  structural  growth  problems  in an  economy.  In 
other words, monetary policy has a limited impact on potential output.  This is the 
role of other policies. 
 The decade from the mid-1990s  was a period of widespread adoption of inflation 
targeting  in  the  advanced  economies  and  in  a  number  of  emerging  market 
economies. It was also the period of the ‘great moderation’, which some analysts 
interpreted  as  the  end  of  the  business  cycle.  Asset  markets  were  booming  and 
global inflation was low, as were interest rates. In fact, in the early part of the 2000s, 
only  a  handful  of  countries  were  experiencing  double-digit  inflation.  The  role  of 
central  banks  was  increasingly  seen  as  simply  maintaining  this  benign  inflation 
environment. 
 At  the  same  time,  there  were,  however,  increasing  concerns  that  the  excessive 
leverage created by the low interest rate environment could pose financial stability 
risks.  The  prevailing  view  at  the  time  was  that  low  inflation  would  be  a  sufficient 
condition for financial stability. It was also generally believed that it was not the duty 
of  central  banks  to  deal  with  financial  stability  risks.  This  view  was  epitomised  in 
Alan Greenspan’s address at the 2003 Jackson Hole Symposium where he argued 
that not only were central banks not well equipped to recognise asset price bubbles, 
but that they also did not have the tools to deal with such excesses – and that the 
best they could therefore hope to do was to clean up once the bubble had popped. 
  Page 5 of 12 
Dissenting  voices,  notably  from  Bill  White  and  Claudio  Borio2  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS),  maintained  that  asset  prices  were  in  bubble 
territory,  driven  by  excessive  bank  lending.  This  view  argued  that  central  banks 
should not have a narrow focus on inflation and that they should rather lean against 
this excessive leverage with higher interest rates and focus on the financial cycle, 
which  is  typically  longer  than  the  business  cycle.  This  would  have  implied 
significantly  higher  interest  rates  than  those  prevailing  before  the  global  financial 
crisis, despite the low inflation environment. 
 At that stage, when it came to financial stability, the focus of central banks was on 
the  microprudential  regulation  and  supervision  of  individual  banks  and  on  the 
banking system as a whole. Not much attention from a policy perspective was given 
to  asset  markets.  The  trend  was  also  increasingly  more  towards  a  ‘light  touch’ 
regulation of banks, with moves in a number of countries to more self-regulation. 
The  macroprudential  view  was  not  very  widespread.  At  that  time,  many  central 
banks  had  only  implicit  financial  stability  mandates  or  no  mandate  at  all  in  this 
respect. 
In  South  Africa, 
for  example,  although 
the  SARB  had  explicit 
microprudential responsibilities for regulating and supervising individual banks, we 
did  not  have  an  explicit  mandate  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  broader  financial 
system. 
 I should point out that while many central banks were responsible for bank regulation 
and supervision, this is not necessarily an exclusive central bank function. In South 
Africa, for example, this responsibility was transferred from the then Department of 
Finance  to  the  SARB  only  in  1986.  In  a  number  of  countries,  for  example  in  the 
United  Kingdom  (UK)  and  Australia,  this  function  was  transferred  out  of  the 
respective central banks in the 1990s to independent regulators. The UK move was 
reversed in the post-crisis period with the establishment of the Prudential Regulation 
Authority within the Bank of England. 
 The  global  financial  crisis  brought  the  need  for  a  broader  financial  stability  focus 
starkly to the fore. The dangers that some were warning about were real, and the 
                                                      
2   See,  for  example,  the  article  titled  ‘Should  monetary  policy  lean  or  clean:  a  reassessment’  by  W  White, 
published in Central Banking 19(4) in 2010. 
 Page 6 of 12 
consequences of ignoring them were disastrous. It also became clear that inflation 
targeting on its own was not sufficient to guarantee financial stability. Central banks 
then found themselves with an increased number of responsibilities. Not only were 
they expected to play a leading role in responding to the global recession; they were 
now also given explicit financial stability mandates. 
 The role that central banks play in combatting inflation is clear-cut, but their role in 
financial stability is less so. This is because financial stability is multifaceted, and 
because not all aspects of financial stability are within the control of the central bank. 
In general, therefore, financial stability is a shared responsibility. 
 While it has now been generally accepted that financial stability should be an explicit 
focus of policy, there is no complete unanimity about where this responsibility should 
lie and which instruments should be used. The debate has partly centred around the 
relationship between monetary policy and macroprudential policy.  If interest rates 
are  used  for  macoprudential  policy  purposes,  it  could  result  in  potential  conflicts 
between monetary and financial stability policies. 
 An  example  is  Sweden,  where  the  Riksbank  attempted  to  deal  with  a  perceived 
financial stability risk of sharply rising house prices and burgeoning household debt 
by raising interest rates in 2010 – even though inflation was below target and the 
unemployment forecast was above the estimated long-run sustainable rate. This led 
to inflation falling well below the target and rising unemployment, forcing a reversal 
of the monetary policy tightening. 
 One view, put forward by the BIS and others, has argued in favour of using interest 
rates as a financial stability tool, but with policy focusing on the financial cycle. This 
would result in tighter monetary conditions in the event of excessive leverage, even 
if inflation risks were relatively low. The advantage of using interest rates is that it 
affects all parts of the financial sector, although this could be a disadvantage at the 
same time, as interest rates are seen to be a ‘blunt tool’, impacting on the cost of 
credit in areas where this is not desired. Using the interest rate tool could also result 
in  higher  inflation  variability.  Although  there is  evidence  that  raising  interest  rates 
 Page 7 of 12 
can reduce leverage and reliance on short-term funding, some analysts have argued 
that the required levels could be prohibitively high and impact negatively on growth. 
 Others, however, have argued that these two policy objectives should be separated, 
with  different  tools  applied  to  different  objectives.  Lars  Svensson,  for  example, 
argues  that monetary policy  and financial  policy  are  different  and  distinct  policies 
that  should  be  conducted  independently  and  with  different  instruments,  although 
each policy should take account of the other.3 
 The well-known Tinbergen rule suggests that there should be the same number of 
instruments  as  there  are  targets.  If  the  same  instrument  is  used  for  multiple 
objectives, conflicts could occur and trade-offs could be required. According to this 
view,  interest  rate  policy  should  remain  a  monetary  policy  tool  and  be  the  main 
instrument to control inflation. Other policies, which could be well targeted,  would 
need to be introduced in order to deal with financial stability risks. 
 This suggests a need for a different committee, separate from the monetary policy 
committee. Although it does not necessarily follow that such a committee should be 
located within the central bank, it is generally the model that is followed. Sweden is 
a notable exception, where the responsibility for financial stability lies outside the 
central bank. 
 There  are  strong  arguments  for  locating  the  financial  stability  function  within  the 
central bank. Charles Goodhart argues that the essence of central banking lies in 
its power to create liquidity by manipulating its own balance sheet, i.e. to lend either 
to an individual bank or to the market as a whole. To quote him: 
 “It would cause massive complications if liquidity management remained the sole province 
of the central bank while a separate financial stability authority was to be established without 
any command over liquidity management. I infer from that that the financial stability authority 
has to be given command over liquidity management; but that also implies that the financial 
                                                      
3   Svensson,  L  E  O.  (2014).  ‘Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  are  different  and  normally  best  conducted 
independently’. Paper presented to European Central Bank Forum on Central Banking. 
 Page 8 of 12 
stability  authority  would  have  command  over  the  central  bank  balance  sheet.  Indeed  the 
financial stability authority would then, de facto, become the true central bank.”4 
 There  are  practical  advantages  to  allocating  monetary,  microprudential  and 
macroprudential policy responsibilities to a single institution. Such an arrangement 
makes  the  coordination  of  different  policies  much  easier,  be  it  through  crisis 
prevention  or  crisis  management.  This  is  particularly  relevant  during  times  of  a 
financial  crisis  when  the  situation  tends  to  deteriorate  very  rapidly  and  quick 
responses are required. 
 In South Africa, we have adopted the latter approach. The responsibility for financial 
stability  has  been  given  explicitly  to  the  SARB,  and  is  overseen  by  an  internal 
Financial Stability Committee (FSC). The FSC monitors the broader financial system 
but does not regulate or supervise individual banks. This remains the responsibility 
of  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  at  the  SARB.  This  department  will  be 
transformed  into  a  Prudential  Authority  (PA)  in  terms  of  the  Financial  Sector 
Regulation Bill (FSR Bill) that has recently been through the parliamentary process 
and currently awaits the signature of the President. Once established, the PA will 
regulate 
individual  banks, 
insurance  companies,  and 
financial  market 
infrastructures,  while  the  Financial  Sector  Conduct  Authority,  previously  the 
Financial  Services  Board,  which  oversaw 
the 
insurance  sector,  will 
take 
responsibility for market conduct. 
 The FSR Bill also provides for the establishment of a Financial Stability Oversight 
Committee, chaired by the SARB Governor and including representatives from the 
Bank,  National  Treasury,  and  other  financial  regulators.  The  objective  of  this 
advisory  committee  is to  support the  SARB  in  protecting  and  enhancing  financial 
stability and to facilitate cooperation and coordination of action among the financial 
sector regulators and the SARB in financial stability matters. Within the SARB, the 
formulation  of  macroprudential  policy  is  the  responsibility  of  the  FSC.  While 
monetary,  macroprudential  and  microprudential  policy  are  all  separate  functions 
within the SARB, their coordination is facilitated by being within the same institution 
and through some degree of overlapping membership of committee structures. 
                                                      
4   Goodhart, C. (2010). ‘The changing role of central banks’. Bank for International Settlements Working Papers 
No. 326. 
 Page 9 of 12 
This raises the question as to the nature of macroprudential tools. Many countries 
are still grappling with this concept. Part of the challenge is that financial instability 
could  emanate  from  multiple  and  sometimes  unexpected  sources.  A  number  of 
different tools are required to deal with different eventualities. We are also unsure 
as  to  how  effective  such  tools  would  be  and  because  institutional  structures  and 
banking  systems  vary  widely,  we  cannot  assume  that  policies  which  work  in  one 
country would necessarily work in others. 
 The  SARB’s  approach  is  set  out  in  a  paper5  released  for  comment  in 
November  2016.  The  macroprudential  instruments  that  are  being  considered  are 
classified  into  three  categories,  namely  capital-based  instruments  (including 
countercyclical  capital  buffers,  sectoral  capital  requirements,  and  dynamic 
provisions),  asset-side  instruments  (including  loan-to-value  and  debt-to-income 
ratio  caps),  and  liquidity-based  instruments  (including  countercyclical  liquidity 
requirements). These tools are intended to target the sources of systemic risk, such 
as  liquidity  and  maturity  mismatches,  leverage,  and  interconnectedness.  The 
advantage of using a more targeted, or function, approach is that it can cover the 
shadow-banking  sector,  asset  markets,  and  the  non-financial  sector  as  well. 
Financial vulnerabilities do not only emerge from the banking sector. 
 At this stage, the main policy decision that is made in the FSC relates to the Basel III 
countercyclical capital buffer. This is a potential capital add-on to bank capital should 
the committee decide to increase the capital requirement of the banking sector as a 
whole during an upswing, and should the ratio of credit growth to GDP6 be above its 
long-term trend. This would then be reversed during a downswing. Up to now, this 
requirement has been set at zero, as the credit gaps are very low. 
 At present, the focus of the FSC is on identifying any vulnerabilities that could cause 
systemic  risk.  This  is  done  by  monitoring  potential  risks  to  the  system  through 
assessing  various  macroprudential  systemic  risk  indicators.  These  indicators 
include macroeconomic, financial sector, market-based as well as other qualitative 
indicators.  Should  any  mitigating  actions  be  required,  the  FSR  Bill  provides  the 
                                                      
5   South African Reserve Bank. (2016). ‘A new macroprudential policy framework for South Africa’. 
6   gross domestic product 
 Page 10 of 12 
SARB  with  the  powers  to  advise  and/or  direct  financial  regulators  to  take  certain 
actions; this is done through the FSC. 
 Having these additional responsibilities comes with its own set of challenges. The 
expanded  mandate  of  financial  stability  in  itself  may  have  implications  for  central 
bank  independence.  Compared  to  financial  stability,  monetary  policy  decisions, 
while not easy, are nevertheless more straightforward and better understood by the 
public. These decisions generally involve the use of one tool (the interest rate), and 
there is a clear objective. 
 It is important to appreciate that financial stability is not an end in itself but rather a 
means to an end, generally regarded as an important precondition for sustainable 
economic  growth,  serving  the  constitutional  mandate  of  the  SARB.  A  financial 
stability mandate is however more complicated, as it is a shared responsibility. The 
political economy aspect of this comes out strongly when we  distinguish between 
crisis  prevention  and  crisis  management  or  resolution.  The  policy  tools  are  more 
directed at particular sectors, and may therefore be more politically sensitive as the 
distributional impacts are more apparent than in the case of monetary policy. There 
could be perceptions of particular institutions or sectors being favoured over others. 
 In  particular,  crisis  management  generally  involves  lender-of-last-resort  facilities 
and/or providing some sort of assistance to banks that need it. These are inevitably 
quasi-fiscal decisions or actions, as they either directly involve government money 
or  could  lead  to  losses  on  the  central  bank  balance  sheet,  which  are  potentially 
losses for government. As we saw during the global financial crisis, there were often 
political tensions between the need to save individual institutions in order to prevent 
the whole system from collapsing and the moral hazard concerns of bailing out large 
institutions.  However,  even  crisis-prevention  tools  may  be  politically  unpopular, 
especially in good times. 
 Furthermore, as has been argued in an International Monetary Fund staff discussion 
note7,  financial  stability  is  difficult  to  measure  but  crises  are  evident,  so  policy 
                                                      
7   Bayoumi,  T  et  al.  (2014).  ‘Monetary  policy  in  the  new  normal’.  International  Monetary  Fund  staff  discussion 
note. 
 Page 11 of 12 
failures  are  observable,  unlike  successes.  As  noted  in  the  paper,  ‘central  banks 
would  find  it  difficult  (even  ex  post)  to  defend  potentially  unpopular  measures, 
precisely because they succeeded in maintaining financial stability’. Any perceived 
failures  on  the  financial  stability  front  have  the  potential  to  undermine  monetary 
policy independence through a general loss of credibility of the central bank. 
 In conclusion, the role of central banks has changed since the global financial crisis. 
There is a sharper focus on financial stability issues, and there is also a different 
way of looking at these issues. This, however, does not mean that other areas of 
policy have been downplayed. In the wake of the crisis, central banks were relied 
upon, possibly excessively so, to help the recovery from the global recession and to 
avoid deflation. The recovery has taken some time.  Fortunately, there appears to 
be a sustained recovery in the global economy, and there are now tentative moves 
by central banks in the advanced economies to normalise monetary policy settings. 
 It would also appear that the concerns that extraordinary monetary accommodation 
would  generate  widespread  inflation  have  not  transpired.  Although  central  banks 
have  been  given  expanded  mandates,  the  role  of ensuring  price  stability  has  not 
been  undermined  or  minimised.  It  is  as  important  and  as  relevant  as  ever,  and 
remains a crucial pillar of central banking. 
 Thank  you  again,  Bank  of  Ghana,  for  the  honour  of  addressing  you  at  this 
celebration of 60 years of central banking in your country. 
 Page 12 of 12 
