François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Special  address  on  the  French
National Strategy for Financial Education
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  4th
OECD/GFLEC global policy research symposium to advance financial literacy "Addressing the
needs of youth", Paris, 24 May 2017.
 Accompanying slides.
Your Highness (Queen Máxima of the Netherlands), Mr. Secretary General,
ladies and gentlemen,
2
1
I am delighted to be here with you today for this symposium on financial literacy. Indeed, French
citizens  have  high  expectations  about  financial  education:  [slide  2]  78%  believe  that  financial
literacy  should  be  taught  at  school  and  65%  believe  that  access  to  it  would reduce  over-
indebtedness  and  financial  vulnerability.   Academic  research  by  Annamaria  Lusardi  and
Olivia Mitchell  confirms its importance, as does our own research in France   [slide  3].  If  we
consider the three "standard" questions used to assess awareness of interest rates, inflation and
risk diversification, only 30% of those surveyed answered all three questions correctly, which is
lower than in other European countries. Furthermore, in France some of the worst results were
obtained by the youngest age group, as well as the oldest. However, there is more at stake: this
represents a  challenge  for  democracy.  Providing  our  fellow  citizens  with  the  keys  to
understanding complex economic debates is a matter of respect. There's no use in complaining
about  "populism",  which  incidentally  is  a  label  that  is  too  easily  used,  if  we  can't  provide  the
"people" with the ability to ask the right questions and then evaluate the answers.
3
France has therefore made a firm commitment to implement a strategy for financial education
based on the principles set out by the OECD and endorsed by the G20 leaders. Work on the
strategy began in 2013 and on 20 December of last year, the Minister of the Economy called the
first meeting of the National Committee for Financial Education. This Committee brings together
relevant  administrations  and 
finance  sector
professionals,  and  gives  the  political  impetus  at  the  very  highest  level.  The  Minister  also
reaffirmed the role entrusted to the Banque de France of conducting the national strategy. Before
continuing with a presentation of our first collective achievements, I would like to focus on the role
of the Banque de France.
institutions,  consumer  associations  and 
 1. The Banque de France, the conductor of the national strategy
[slide 4] The Banque de France has concrete, everyday experience of our fellow citizens' needs
in  terms  of  information  and  explanations  through  its  three  core  tasks  of  monetary  strategy,
financial stability and services to the economy. For example, as part of the over-indebtedness
procedure  managed  by  the  Banque  de  France,  each  year  we  provide  solutions  to  more  than
200,000 households experiencing financial difficulties. And for several years now, the Banque de
France has been striving to improve the financial literacy of the general public, and particularly
that  of  our  younger  generations.  This  has  involved  ongoing  vocational  teacher  training  in  the
framework  of  the  21  academic  partnership  agreements  signed  with  the  Ministry  of  Education
thanks to our nationwide presence, as well as [slide 5] ambitious projects such as “Citéco”, the
Cité de l’économie et de la monnaie. Citéco is an innovative and recreational museum dedicated
to economics, money and finance, that will open its doors to the public at the end of 2018 in the
newly renovated Hôtel Gaillard in the 17th arrondissement of Paris.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, the Banque de France plays the role of conductor of the French national strategy for
financial education [slide 6], in order to mobilise and coordinate the activities of all stakeholders,
be they associations, institutions or finance sector representatives. Through these partnerships,
we can thus ensure that efforts are stepped up to raise awareness and train as many people as
possible.  There  are  three  aspects  of  our  collective  goal  [slide  7]:  first,  we  aim  to  reach all
members of the public, young people of course, teachers, students and financially vulnerable
people, as well as all our fellow citizens over their entire lifetimes; second, we will deal with all
subjects,  from  budgetary  to  financial  and  economic  questions,  in  order  to  provide  the  basic
knowledge  required  in  all  these  fields  to  better  understand  and  therefore  make  informed
decisions;  and  lastly,  we  will  use all relevant means  to  pass  on  this  financial  knowledge  as
widely as possible, including websites, efforts on the ground and partnerships.
2. The strategy is being quickly and effectively implemented
[slide 8] On 24 January 2017, the dedicated financial education internet portal, "mes questions
d'argent.fr", went on line. This portal is intended to become the primary information source for all
our  fellow  citizens  looking  for  answers  to  their  day-to-day  banking,  budgetary,  economic  and
financial questions, and a first milestone of 200,000 consulted pages has already been reached.
Access through the portal is simple and quick; in three clicks users can access free content
carefully  chosen  for  its  educational  qualities,  neutrality  and  freshness.  We  have  opted  for  a
similar approach to the Dutch "Money Wise" platform, in that it is both practical, with a limited
amount of entries and materials, as well as cooperative, offering a variety of sources from all of
our partners.
In order to ensure that the national strategy is rapidly implemented, we rely on the Operational
Committee,  which  I  chair,  and  which  is  responsible  for  management  and  coordination.  Our
roadmap for 2017 is clear: during the first half of the year, operational objectives will be defined
and  available  resources  will  be  identified;  and  during  the  second  half,  a  robust  and  effective
assessment methodology will be developed.
We  are  already  actively  working  on  introducing  specific  mechanisms  for people in financial
difficulty and students.
To  help  those  experiencing  financial  difficulties,  we  are  working  closely  with  social  service
providers  to  produce  practical  educational  materials  covering  seven  concrete  subjects:
budgeting,  relationships  with  banks,  credit,  bank  payment  incidents,  banking  inclusion,  over-
indebtedness and complaints. From June 2017, these materials will be made available to social
workers and associations so that they can be used with people in financial difficulty. By the end
of the year, the Banque de France's teams have planned to hold nearly 900 meetings to present
in detail these educational materials, as well as the "mes questions d'argent" portal, to 14,000
social service providers.
For students, in December 2016 the Ministry of Education set up a group of experts in which the
Banque  de  France  and  the  French  Institute  for  Public  Financial  Education  actively  participate.
The  group's  objective  is  to  develop  appropriate  educational  materials  that  help  teachers  to
introduce primary school pupils to the concepts of money, budgeting, credit and savings, and
then to build on that knowledge in secondary schools and, if possible, up to the age of 18. The
first  information  kits  approved  by  the  group  of  experts  will  be  supplied  to  teachers  for  the
beginning of the new school year in September 2017. The Banque de France will promote their
use to teachers in academies in accordance with its brief defined by the Ministry of Education.
  2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Allow  me  to  conclude  by  quoting  the American  musician,  Pete  Seeger,  who  had  these  wise
words: "Do you know the difference between education and experience? Education is when you
read the fine print; experience is what you get when you don’t."  And I would add that it is financial
education that should make all the fine print understandable.
4
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
"Éducation financière : connaissances et pratiques des Français". Survey on the financial literacy of French
people carried out by the French public opinion institute, IFOP, for the Ministry of the Economy and Finance in
September 2016.
Lusardi A.  and  Mitchell  O.  S.  (2014),  “The  Economic  Importance  of  financial  literacy:  theory  and  evidence",
Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1), pp. 5-44.
L.  Arrondel,  M.  Debbich  and  F.  Savignac  (2013),  “Financial  Literacy  and  Financial  Planning  in  France",
Numeracy, Vol. 6, Iss. 2, Article 8. L. Arrondel, M. Debbich and F. Savignac (2015), “Stockholding in France: the
role of financial literacy and information", Applied Economic Letters, Vol. 22, Iss. 16, pp. 1315–1319. L. Arrondel,
M. Debbich and F. Savignac (2015), “Does financial literacy influence financial decisions?", Banque de France,
Rue de la banque No 2. www.banque-france.fr/uploads/tx_bdfgrandesdates/RDB_02.pdf.
Pete Seeger in “Loose Talk", ed. by Linda Botts, 1980.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
