   Benoît Cœuré: The international dimension of the ECB’s asset purchase 
programme 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 11 July 2017. 
 Large-scale  asset  purchase  programmes  have  become  an  integral  part  of  the  set  of 
unconventional tools central banks use to achieve their domestic objectives.[1] 
When faced with negative output gaps and policy interest rates approaching their effective 
lower  bound,  these  programmes  have  given  central  banks  an  essential  tool  to  continue 
providing additional monetary accommodation, and prevent their domestic economies from 
falling into a deflationary trap. 
Yet,  in  a  world  of  integrated  financial  markets,  purchase  programmes  do  not  only  have 
domestic effects. This has been recognised by policymakers in the past. For example, there 
has been a lively debate about the effects of the Federal Reserve’s purchase programmes on 
financing conditions in emerging market economies.[2] However, less attention has been paid 
to this aspect in the case of the euro area – that is, the international spillovers of the ECB’s 
asset purchase programme (APP).  
This is what I would like to discuss in my remarks today. Specifically, I plan to cover two topics. 
First, I will review what we know about the APP’s effect on net capital flows out of the euro 
area. And second, I will look at whether these capital flows have depressed exchange rates 
and, as a result, diverted demand away from other economies. 
My main message is that the ECB’s APP does appear to have triggered substantial capital 
flows  across  borders.  But  it  is  far  from  clear  whether  this  explains  the  depreciation  in  the 
effective exchange rate of the euro. In fact, asset purchases affect the exchange rate in broadly 
the  same  way  as  conventional  monetary  policy  –through  expectations  of  interest  rate 
differentials.  
Moreover, while unconventional monetary policies may drive down exchange rates, it does not 
make  them  a  zero-sum  game.  The  evidence  suggests  that  the  demand-boosting  effects 
dominate  – that  is, the spillovers from  our  unconventional  monetary  policies  have  boosted 
growth and inflation prospects, not only in the euro area but also globally. 
Post-APP international capital flows  
Let’s start, then, by trying to get a sense of how strong international capital flows have been 
since we began our large-scale asset purchases. In other words, to what extent has there been 
a rebalancing towards foreign assets? Here some stylised facts from the euro area balance of 
payments data are instructive. 
On slide 1 you can see that capital flows have indeed been considerable in the past few years. 
At their peak around the middle of 2016, net capital outflows – measured here in terms of  
12-month moving sums – reached nearly 5% of euro area GDP. Never before in the history of 
the euro area have capital flows been so high.  
Of course, in the absence of a counterfactual, we do not know how much of this is actually the 
result of our monetary policy measures. After all, investment decisions reflect a number of 
factors, including risk perceptions and, importantly, the yield that investors can earn abroad. 
Often, capital flows also simply reflect new investments and savings – just think about the euro 
area’s  growing  current  account  surplus  –  or  they  can  be  distorted  by  tax  and  regulatory 
arbitrage.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Yet, it is striking to see that the turnaround in capital flows from net inflows to net outflows 
started  in  mid-2014,  just  when  we  had  announced  our  credit  easing  package  and  when 
expectations  were  gradually  building  among  market  participants  that  we  would  also  begin 
purchasing government bonds. 
Slide 1 also tells a second story – that among the various investment opportunities available 
to investors, virtually all net capital outflows have been concentrated in purchases of foreign 
long-term debt securities. Equity investment, by contrast, has hardly changed in net terms over 
time. 
At  face  value,  this  suggests  one  tentative  conclusion:  large-scale  purchases  of  sovereign 
bonds encouraged some investors to rebalance their portfolios towards the closest substitute 
– bonds issued by other sovereigns. This could be described as textbook quantitative easing 
(QE)[3], not least because these flows likely reflect the impact of our measures on bond prices 
in the euro area. According to ECB estimates, our monetary policy measures have contributed 
to reducing euro-area long-term risk-free rates by around 80 basis points since June 2014.[4] 
As a result, spreads over bonds issued by non-euro area sovereigns have increased notably.  
For example, towards the end of last year the spread between ten-year US Treasuries and 
equivalent German Bunds hit levels above 200 basis points – its highest level since the fall of 
the  Berlin Wall.  On  average  last  year,  the  spread  was  around  60  basis points  higher than 
during the six months leading up to the launch of our credit easing package. And the observed 
spread already reflects the likely impact that increased purchases of foreign bonds has had on 
their prices. In other words, while our measures can be expected to have contributed to a 
widening of spreads, foreign rebalancing is likely to have caused the spreads to narrow. The 
net effect is what we see reflected in prices today. 
ECB internal model analysis confirms that yield spreads are an important driver of international 
portfolio flows.[5] 
On slide 2 you can see that yield differentials between euro area government bonds and those 
issued by non-euro area governments of advanced economies can explain a significant part 
of  net  debt  outflows  over  the  course  of  last  year.  Risk  aversion  can  explain  much  of  the 
remainder.  
Now,  net  outflows  in  debt  securities  can  mean  two  things:  either  euro  area  investors 
increasingly moved domestic funds abroad, or foreign investors – those resident outside the 
euro area – have sold euro area bonds. Both mechanisms are part of the type of portfolio 
rebalancing that policymakers typically have in mind when thinking about asset purchases. In 
practice, they can reinforce each other and this is what we have been seeing in the euro area. 
Consider slide 3. Here you can see that euro area investors have been a major driving force 
behind the net outflows. In fact, since the start of the APP in March 2015, net purchases by 
domestic investors have been almost entirely in the form of long-term foreign fixed income 
securities. There have been anticipation effects, but the chart strongly suggests that net debt 
outflows accelerated as the APP continued and decelerated only when we decided to reduce 
the pace of our monthly purchases in December last year. 
Although it is unclear to what extent these flows ultimately influence bond prices, the pattern 
of international capital flows at least encourages discussion about the stock versus flow effects 
of central bank asset purchases – an interesting angle that should be explored further in future 
research. 
On slide 4 you can see that euro area investors did not only choose to rebalance into the 
closest substitute, namely government bonds, but also predominately into the safest of the 
issuers. Around two-thirds of net outflows went into securities issued by issuers in the United 
States, United Kingdom, Japan, Sweden and Canada. By contrast, and contrary to what has 
often been discussed in the wake of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase programmes, there 
was hardly any investment into emerging market economies, including the BRICs – Brazil, 
Russia, India and China. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   So  euro  area  investors  deliberately  chose  to  redirect  some  of  their  funds  into  the  closest 
substitute. Slide 5 shows the extent of this rebalancing more clearly. Since the start of the APP, 
euro  area  investors  alone  accounted  for  more  than  half  of  foreign  purchases  of  US  debt 
securities. History suggests that these shares are unusual for the euro area. 
The other side of the coin is the behaviour of non-euro area investors. You can see this on 
slide 6. In net terms, foreign investors have been neither large sellers nor large buyers of euro 
area assets in recent months – the solid blue line is close to balance.  
But this masks a significant difference between asset classes: foreign investors have been 
large buyers of euro area equity, while they were actively selling euro area bonds throughout 
most of last year, thereby reinforcing the actions of domestic investors.  
Broadly speaking, this means two things: first, our policy measures have boosted confidence 
in the euro area’s growth prospects, which has brought foreign investors back to euro area 
stock markets. This confidence effect has also been confirmed in empirical studies.[6] 
You can see clearly on slide 6 that this trend essentially started after the announcement of the 
outright  monetary  transaction  (OMT)  programme  in  mid-2012  and  that  inflows  accelerated 
further in the aftermath of our credit easing package of June 2014. By the end of 2014, shortly 
before we announced purchases of government bonds, annual inflows into euro area stock 
markets by non-residents had reached 4% of euro area GDP – the highest on record. Policy 
stimulus  and  measures  to  repair  the  bank  lending  channel  were  clearly  seen  as  having  a 
positive effect overall on the euro area economy. 
The  second  thing  to  note  is  that  some  selling  of  euro  area  bonds  by  non-residents  is  a 
mechanical  feature  of  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme. What  I  mean  by  that  is  that 
foreign  investors  are  holding  a  relatively  large  share  of  outstanding  euro  area  government 
bonds. For example, when we started the APP in March 2015, non-euro area investors were 
holding nearly 75% of German Bunds with maturities of seven to ten years. So it should not 
come as a surprise that around 45% of our purchases of government bonds have been with 
investors resident outside the euro area.[7]  And if these foreign investors decide not to reinvest 
the proceeds from the sale in the euro area, a net outflow is recorded.[8] 
This  feature  makes  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme  structurally  different  from  its 
counterpart in Japan, for example, where at the start of the Bank of Japan’s quantitative and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  2013  less  than  10%  of  outstanding  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) were held by foreign investors. As a result, it is mainly domestic 
investors that have significantly reduced their JGB holdings in response to QQE. 
And as you can see on slide 7, they did not rebalance their portfolios towards foreign bonds: 
in the first two years after the start of QQE there were hardly any net outflows in debt securities 
despite a massive widening in international spreads following the US “taper tantrum” in mid-
2013. Instead, QQE initially led to strong inflows into Japanese equities – a confidence effect 
similar to the one I have just described for the euro area. However, these inflows reversed 
relatively quickly.[9] 
In the United States, by contrast, the holding structure of the Treasury market is more similar 
to  that  of  the  euro  area  bond  market,  but  actual  purchase  patterns  are  notably  different. 
Specifically, although non-residents owned around 60% of marketable US Treasuries in 2008, 
empirical evidence suggests that they were not the ones selling directly and indirectly to the 
Federal Reserve under its various rounds of QE.[10]  You can see this on slide 8. In fact, 
perhaps with the exception of the first round (“QE-1”), foreign investors continued to pile into 
US Treasuries, in particular after the third round (“QE-3”).  
This is not to say that quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve did not boost international 
capital flows. In fact, numerous studies, albeit mostly reliant on event studies over short periods 
of time, tend to suggest that it triggered sizeable flows into emerging markets, in particular after 
QE-2.[11]  Yet, net portfolio flows, as you can see on slide 8, paint a broadly different picture 
of post-QE portfolio rebalancing than that seen in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   I see three main factors that can explain the difference in post-QE debt flows in the United 
States and the euro area.  
First,  the  yield  differential:  ten-year  US  Treasuries  and  equivalent  German  Bunds  were 
generating,  on  average,  broadly  the  same  return,  in  local  currency,  during  the  Fed’s  QE 
programmes from late 2008 to early 2013. But, as I hinted at before, yield differentials were 
quite  different  in  recent  times.  Since  the  start  of  the  APP  in  March  2015,  ten-year  US 
Treasuries have been yielding, on average, around 170 basis points more than ten-year Bunds 
– an enormous difference that, to a large extent, reflects the divergence in monetary policy 
cycles that emerged in the wake of the euro area’s sovereign debt crisis. As a result, portfolio 
rebalancing  during  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme  has  been  more  attractive  for 
investors than it was during the Fed’s QE programmes. 
The second factor is negative rates. In addition to yield differentials, the absolute yield level 
may also matter for investors, particularly if rates are negative. It may be no coincidence that 
net bond outflows were among the largest when ten-year German Bund yields hit a low of 
nearly -20 basis points last summer. In a recent survey among foreign central banks, 70% of 
the respondents reported that negative interest rates in the euro area had encouraged them 
to adjust their allocations to the euro.[12] 
This  emphasises the  strong  amplifier  effect  of  negative  rates  – they  are  highly  effective  in 
boosting  portfolio  rebalancing  effects,  both  domestically  and  across  borders,  exactly  when 
monetary accommodation might be needed the most. 
And third, we have political uncertainty and the role of the US dollar in the international financial 
system. The US dollar is the main reserve currency and US Treasuries are the world’s most 
important safe haven asset, and as such benefit from a liquidity advantage. Hence, in periods 
of  elevated  uncertainty, such  as  after  Brexit,  investors  may  overweight US  Treasuries  and 
underweight European assets. So, rebalancing out of US Treasuries is always likely to be more 
limited than out of any other safe security.  
At this point I would like to draw three preliminary conclusions.  
One is that unconventional policy measures can significantly boost confidence, leading foreign 
investors to review their international portfolio allocations, in particular with regard to equity. 
A second conclusion is that the extent to which investors rebalance their portfolios towards 
foreign bonds is likely to depend on the structure of local bond markets, in particular the holding 
composition,  and  the  risk-adjusted  return  investors  can  expect  to  receive  from  switching 
domestic and foreign bonds. 
This means that there can also be noticeable differences between euro area countries, as can 
clearly be seen when looking at the recent behaviour of Japanese investors. Slide 9 shows 
that Japanese investors accumulated large positions in French securities in the aftermath of 
the launch of the APP, while at the same time selling German Bunds – a rebalancing within 
the currency union that likely reflected yield and safety considerations.[13] 
And a third conclusion, more specific to the euro area, is that any future decline in the pace of 
our asset purchases is unlikely to have much direct negative impact on emerging markets, 
given that flows have been very limited.  
Capital flows and exchange rates 
So, the evidence is fairly clear that asset purchase programmes are associated with net capital 
flows, and probably also with changes in relative asset prices. This brings me to the second 
part of my remarks: the cross-border effect of asset purchases on exchange rates.  
Two questions stand out. Do large-scale asset purchase programmes lead to exchange rate 
depreciation in the initiating country? And, if so, does monetary easing produce a beggar-thy-
neighbour effect for other economies? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  first  point  to  note  is  that,  during  announcements  of  asset  purchase  programmes,  the 
currencies of all major central banks have indeed tended to depreciate. You can see this on 
slide 10, which shows, for all countries, the cumulative short-term impact of selected major 
announcements of asset purchase programmes and negative rates, or both. 
Of course, exchange rates often change before actual announcements in anticipation of policy 
actions. In the case of the euro area, for example, studies of a larger number of events that 
include such prior signals and comments by policymakers find that the APP may have led to a 
depreciation of the euro of up to 12% against the US dollar.[14] 
What is more, ECB in-house research suggests that negative rates not only amplify portfolio 
flows, they also amplify exchange rate movements. ECB staff estimate that the reduction in 
the deposit facility rate from 0% to -0.2% in the second half of 2014 led, cumulatively, to a 
1.9% depreciation of the euro against the US dollar, of which 0.5 percentage points were due 
to the non-linear effects of interest rates moving into negative territory.  
These non-linear effects could be related to the amplification of the carry trade channel, where 
currencies  with  negative funding  costs  may  become the  preferred  short  leg for  carry  trade 
strategies.[15]  Negative rates can therefore amplify the initial volatility-supressing effect of 
asset  purchases  on  carry  trades.  The  lower  the  rates,  the  stronger  these  effects  can  be 
expected to be. This applies not only to the euro area but, as you can see on slide 10, also to 
Japan. 
It is tempting to think that currency movements related to asset purchase programmes are a 
direct consequence of their impact on the supply of and demand for currency when investors 
rebalance their portfolios across borders. The truth, however, is that the direction of causality 
is much less clear in practice. Indeed, a recent Deutsche Bundesbank study finds that actual 
purchases  under  the  APP  have  not  led  to  statistically  significant  euro  exchange  rate 
movements.[16] 
I see two main reasons for this. 
First, since exchange rates are asset prices that react in real time, they incorporate forward-
looking  expectations  –  most  importantly  expectations  about  short-term  interest  rate 
differentials.  For  instance,  as  you  can  see  on  slide  11,  since  the  launch  of  the  APP,  the 
EUR/USD exchange rate has often closely mirrored two-year interest rate differentials between 
Germany  and  the  United  States.[17]  Capital flows,  by  contrast,  have tended  to  respond  to 
interest rate differentials with a delay. 
In other words, rather than driving exchange rate depreciation, capital flows typically take place 
after this depreciation has already happened. One reason for this delayed response may be 
that, during asset purchase announcements, asset managers achieve an immediate change 
in portfolio weights without active sales or purchases via “passive” rebalancing – that is, the 
change in the exchange rate and asset prices.[18] 
This disconnect between the exchange rate and capital flows is consistent with the empirical 
finding that the exchange rate is mostly affected by the signalling channel of monetary policy 
– that is how policy decisions affect the expected future path of short-term interest rates. ECB 
research  finds  that  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  exchange  rate  in  response  to  the  APP 
announcement in January 2015 occurred mainly through this signalling channel, including the 
added credibility asset purchases provide to that expected path.[19] The portfolio rebalancing 
channel, by contrast, played much less of a role.[20] In this sense, the effect of asset purchases 
on exchange rates is not fundamentally different from conventional interest rate policy. 
The second reason to be sceptical about capital flows affecting the exchange rate is linked 
more to the structure of foreign exchange markets. For example, a large share of euro foreign 
exchange  transactions  –  84%  –  is  initiated  outside  the  euro  area,  notably  in  the  City  of 
London.[21] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    As a result, they do not necessarily give rise to capital flows that affect the euro area. They 
are  undertaken  offshore.[22]  The  fact  that  foreign  exchange  trading  in  euro  is  so  active  in 
financial  centres  outside  the  euro  area  helps  explain  why  there  is  often  little  correlation 
between cross-border capital flows and the euro’s exchange rate in the short to medium term. 
In addition, portfolio outflows from the euro area – although large in size relative to economic 
activity – remain very small relative to overall transactions in euros in the foreign exchange 
market.  They  account  at  most  for  0.2%  of  daily  transactions  in  the  euro-dollar  pair,  for 
instance.[23]  And to the extent that such investments are hedged, the link between capital 
flows and exchange rate becomes even more tenuous. 
Exchange rate spillovers and currency wars 
Still, even if other effects of unconventional monetary policy, rather than capital flows, are the 
main influence on the euro exchange rate, the question of economic spillovers remains. This 
brings us to the “currency war” criticism of monetary policy.[24] 
Those taking this line argue that currency depreciation caused by unconventional policy easing 
can divert domestic expenditure away from foreign imports, thus creating a zero-sum game.  
Clearly such arguments need qualifying. 
One  way  to  do  so  is  to  use  NiGEM,  a  well-known  global  macroeconomic  model  with  an 
articulated external sector and international trade and financial linkages. Given the difficulties 
of capturing large-scale asset purchases in this model, policy easing at the lower bound is 
proxied by central banks imposing negative interest rates. 
What you can see on slide 12 are two things. Scenario 1 portrays the impact of a multilateral, 
simultaneous cut in policy rates by the G-3 central banks, bringing rates into negative territory 
in all jurisdictions, including in the US. Scenario 2 involves a deepening of negative rates in 
the euro area only.  
The scenarios illustrate two things.  
First, the exchange rate channel is less important than most observers believe. Look at how 
similar the response of economic activity in the euro area is under the two scenarios, even 
though the exchange rate depreciation is less than half under the multilateral case. Clearly, 
the expansionary effect of monetary policy easing is the dominant factor – in practice probably 
even more so as evidence is growing that the exchange rate pass-through to final consumer 
prices has steadily fallen in recent years.[25] 
Second,  unilateral  policy  actions  are  not  a  zero-sum game.  Scenario  2 demonstrates  that, 
although the currencies of our trading partners appreciate, a unilateral cut in the euro area 
interest rate is a net positive for all countries individually, and for the global economy as a 
whole. That is, if unconventional monetary policy helps prevent a country stuck at the lower 
bound from being a drag on global demand, all countries can benefit. This has also been well 
documented in the academic literature.[26] 
In the case of the euro area, the demand-augmenting effects are clearly visible. For example, 
since  we  introduced  our  credit  easing  package  in  mid-2014,  net  exports  have  hardly 
contributed to GDP growth. The recovery has been driven almost entirely by domestic demand, 
supported by a virtuous circle between rising employment, labour income and consumption.  
Certainly, if we abstract for a moment from the fact that mark-up adjustments could have taken 
place, the fall in the euro exchange rate may have helped exporters hold onto their market 
shares as world trade stalled. But by far the most dominant effect of our monetary policy has 
been to encourage these domestic growth forces.  
In other words, far from “beggaring its neighbours”, monetary policy easing by the ECB has 
added to global demand and thereby stabilised the global economy, in particular after the euro 
area had been a major drag on global growth for many years. In the last three years the euro 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   area’s share of global growth has become much more significant, contributing 0.5 percentage 
points, on average, to the 1.9% growth in advanced economies.  
Moreover, we also responded to a number of significant common, global shocks, such as the 
protracted period of low oil prices and the slowdown in growth in emerging market economies, 
which threatened not only the achievement of our price stability objective, but also that of many 
other  central  banks.  So,  the  combined  effects  of  stabilising  the  euro  area  economy  –  a 
significant source of demand for many countries – and cushioning global shocks contributed 
to putting global growth back on it current path.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Asset purchase programmes have been instrumental in easing monetary policy at the effective 
lower bound in major advanced economies. A wealth of evidence suggests that these policies 
have successfully boosted economic growth and inflation prospects. At the same time, they 
have clearly had spillover effects on other countries via capital flows and relative asset price 
movements.  
The evidence does not suggest, however, that these capital flows have led to major exchange 
rate  movements.  Rather,  exchange  rates  have  responded  to  forward-looking  interest  rate 
differentials.  Asset  purchase  programmes,  together  with  negative  interest  rates,  may  have 
exacerbated those differentials through signalling and non-linear effects, but their effect on 
exchange rates is, by and large, not fundamentally different from conventional policy.  
What is more, currency depreciation is a side-effect of policy and neither its main transmission 
channel, nor its objective. Monetary policy actions aimed at supporting domestic price stability 
objectives in advanced economies have been clearly positive for the global economy, mainly 
by stimulating employment, incomes and, ultimately, economic growth.  
This is particularly the case in the euro area, which, thanks to a rich set of carefully calibrated 
monetary policy measures, is now adding to, rather than subtracting from, global growth. In 
this  sense,  the  view  that  asset  purchase  programmes  in  large  advanced  economies  have 
encouraged harmful currency wars is misleading. The world of monetary policy is not an arena 
where central banks engage and compete for advantage. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Endonotes 
[1] I would like to thank Roland Beck, Arnaud Mehl and Martin Schmitz for their contributions 
to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.  
[2] See, for example, Rajan, R. (2014), “Competitive monetary easing: is it yesterday once 
more?”, remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, April 10; and Bernanke, B. S. 
(2015),  “Federal  Reserve  Policy  in  an  International  Context”,  paper  presented  at  the  16th 
Jacques  Polak  Annual  Research  Conference  hosted  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund, 
Washington, DC, 5 and 6 November.  
[3]  For  a  discussion  of  the  transmission  channels  of  QE,  see  e.g.  Cœuré,  B.  (2015), 
“Embarking on public sector asset purchases”, speech at the Second International Conference 
on Sovereign Bond Markets, Frankfurt, 10 March.  
[4] See e.g. ECB (2017), “Impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures on financing conditions: 
taking stock of recent evidence”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2.  
[5]  See  ECB  (2017),  “Analysing  euro  area  net  portfolio  investment  outflows”,  Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 2.  
[6] See Fratzscher, M., et al. (2014), “ECB unconventional monetary policy actions: market 
impact,  international  spillovers  and  transmission  channels”,  paper  presented  at  the  15th 
Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference; and Georgiadis, G., and Gräb, J. (2016), “Global 
financial  market  impact  of  the  announcement  of  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme”, 
Journal of Financial Stability, 26, pp. 257-265.  
[7]  See  ECB  (2017),  “Which  sectors  sold  the  government  securities  purchased  by  the 
Eurosystem?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4.  
[8] Slide 6 also shows that there have been net inflows by non-residents into short-term debt 
securities, which likely reflects the temporary placement of excess liquidity of foreign investors 
with no access to the ECB’s deposit facility. See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Bond scarcity and the 
ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the Club de Gestion Financière d’Associés en 
Finance, Paris, 3 April.  
[9] The reversal was probably reinforced by the Japanese government’s decision, in April 2015, 
to increase the Government Pension Fund’s investment in foreign equities (the Government 
Pension Fund is the largest of its kind in the world).  
[10] See Carpenter, S., Demiralp, S., Ihrig, J., and Klee, E. (2015), “Analyzing Federal Reserve 
asset purchases: From whom does the Fed buy?,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 52, 
pp. 230-244.  
[11]  See,  for  example,  Neely,  C.  (2010),  “The  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases  Had  Large 
International Effects”, Working Paper Series, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; Fratzscher, 
M., Lo Duca, M. and Straub, R. (2013), “On the International Spillovers of US Quantitative 
Easing,” Discussion Papers, DIW Berlin; Moore, J. et al. (2013), “Estimating the Impacts of 
U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies’ Local Currency Bond Markets”, Staff Reports, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, No 595; Rogers, J. H., Scotti, C. and Wright, J. H. (2014), 
“Evaluating  Asset-Market  Effects  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy:  A  Cross-Country 
Comparison”, International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  Board  of Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, No 1101.  
[12] See also ECB (2017), The International Role of the Euro, July. The share of the euro in 
global  foreign  exchange  reserves  actually  increased  in  2016,  even  after  controlling  for 
valuation effects arising from exchange rate movements. This suggests that adjustments in 
the holdings in question were limited or concerned official reserve holders with small holdings.  
[13]  The  sharp  decline  in  flows  to  France  towards  the  end  of  2016  and  early  2017  likely 
reflected political concerns.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   [14] See Altavilla, C., Carboni, G. and Motto, R. (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and 
financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No. 1864.  
[15] This is consistent with net short positioning against the euro between May 2014 and May 
2017  in  weekly  data  on  commitments  of  traders  collected  by  the  U.S.  Commodity  Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC).  
[16] See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), “The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the exchange 
rate of the euro”, Monthly Report, January.  
[17]  The  recent  decoupling  suggests  that  factors  other  than  relative  monetary  policy 
expectations  are  likely  to  have  contributed  to  a  stronger  euro  in  recent  months,  such  as 
changes in risk premia. Market observers have pointed, for instance, to signs of unwinding of 
what they called the “reflation trade” in US financial assets, and to improved sentiment towards 
the euro area in the wake of the French presidential elections.  
[18] See Bubeck, J., Habib, M., and Manganelli, S. (2017), “The portfolio of euro area fund 
investors and ECB monetary policy announcements”, mimeo, ECB, presented at the joint ECB-
BoE-IMF workshop on “Spillovers from macroeconomic policies”, Washington D.C., 26 April.  
[19] See Andrade, P., Breckenfelder, J., De Fiore, F., Karadi, P. and Tristani, O. (2016), “The 
ECB's asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper No. 1956, and 
the literature quoted in there.  
[20] See Georgiadis and Gräb, op cit.  
[21] This refers to the location of the initiating sales desk, which may not coincide with the 
location of the trading desk. See ECB (2017), The international role of the euro, July.  
[22] And, sometimes, even in co-locations where high-frequency trading firms’ computers are 
in the same data centres as exchange servers.  
[23] Based on euro area portfolio investment abroad, measured in terms of 12-month moving 
sums, which peaked in early 2015, suggesting a level of €2 billion per day (assuming that there 
are 250 business days). This compares with $1.2 trillion worth of daily transactions in the euro-
dollar pair, according to the BIS Triennial Survey of April 2016.  
[24]  For  an  earlier  discussion,  see  Cœuré,  B.  (2013),  “Currency  fluctuations:  the  limits  to 
benign neglect”, speech at the luncheon panel: Currency Wars and the G-20’s Goal of Strong, 
Sustainable,  and  Balanced  Growth,  Conference  on  Currency  Wars:  Economic  Realities, 
Institutional Responses, and the G-20 Agenda, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 
Washington, D.C., 2 April.  
[25] See e.g. ECB (2016), “Exchange rate pass-through into euro area inflation”, Economic 
Bulletin, July.  
[26] See also Caballero R., Fahri, E. and Gourinchas, P. O. (2015), “Global Imbalances and 
Currency  Wars  at  the  ZLB”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  21670,  The  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, who show that in a global liquidity trap expansionary monetary policy 
around the zero lower bound in one country alleviates the global asset shortage and stimulates 
the economy in all countries, thereby being a positive-sum remedy in contrast with zero-sum 
exchange rate devaluations. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     13 
      14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     15 
