Governor Veerathai’s Statement  
  
Your Excellency, Fellow Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Members of the press, 
 A very good afternoon to you all, 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  our  distinguished 
guests to this special event before the year ends. Let me 
extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  Governor  Agus  and 
Governor Muhammad Ibrahim  who have both travelled 
to Bangkok specifically for this occasion.  
 The year of 2016, which is coming to the end soon will be 
remembered  by  economists  and  financial  professionals 
as  a  year  of  the  unexpected,  beginning  from  China's 
circuit  breaker  in  the  very  first  week  of  the  year,  to 
negative  policy  rates,  to  Brexit  and  the  US  elections. 
Greater  uncertainties  now  hang  over  the  global 
economy.  Fortunately,  our  ASEAN  region,  with  its  high 
potential, is a bright spot in the world. This is therefore 
 1 
time for us to navigate today’s uncertainties through our 
concerted  efforts  to  bring  out  the  potentials  of  our 
ASEAN region.  
 What  we are witnessing here today is a  renewal of the 
spirit  of  regional 
integration  by  relying  more  on 
collaboration  to  serve  as  a  key  driver  for  sustainable 
growth to benefit all of us. 
 The  MoUs  that  we  are  about  to  sign  will  provide 
flexibilities  on  foreign  exchange  regulations  for  the 
settlement  of  trade  and  investment  in  local  currencies, 
resulting  in  greater  efficiency  and  convenience  for 
businesses. Another key merit of this framework is that 
businesses will be able to better manage exchange rate 
risks.  This  is  because  our  local  currencies  are  generally 
correlated  with  each  other.  Also,  there  will  be  less 
reliance on currencies of advanced countries which last 
year account for over 85 percent of Thailand’s trade with 
Indonesia and Malaysia.  
  2 
You  may  recall  that  earlier  this  year,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia and the Bank of Thailand implemented a ringgit-
baht arrangement in March as a pilot project. Since then, 
we have seen a noticeably narrower spread between the 
ringgit  and  the  baht.  Moreover,  we  have  noted  an 
increasing  number  of  businesses  applying  this  local 
currency scheme in their day-to-day business conduct. 
 Today, I am very delighted that Bank Indonesia is carrying 
on  this  initiative  by  signing  the  MoUs  with  both  Bank 
Negara Malaysia and the Bank of Thailand. I really hope 
that  this  scheme  will  continue  to  expand  to  other 
countries  in  the  region.  Ultimately,  this  would  be  one 
important step closer to having greater regional financial 
integration in ASEAN. 
 On  this  note,  may  I  invite  Governor  Agus  to  say  a  few 
words, and followed by Governor Muhammad Ibrahim. 
 Thank you. 
  3 
