Andreas  Dombret:  Election  time(s)  in  Europe  -  challenges  on  the
way to economic recovery
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at a Public Seminar at the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 23 May 2017.
 1. Introduction
Prof. Shinohara
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the kind introduction. I am honoured to be speaking at the University of Tokyo, one
of the finest universities in the world.
Today, more than 13 million people live in the extraordinary city of Tokyo – it is one of the largest
cities on the planet. Almost 600 years ago, in 1457, Tokyo was established as “Edo", a small,
virtually  unknown  fishing  village.  Growing  from  of  a  small  community  of  fishers  into  such  a
tremendous city represents a major accomplishment, the outcome of human cooperation.
It is said that it takes a village to raise a child. What this proverb reflects is the common sense
that it takes more than two parents to integrate a child fully into a community.
It  is  used  widely  in  different  contexts;  for  example,  some  researchers  tend  to  begin  their
acknowledgements by saying that “it takes a village to write a book."
The frequent use of this expression mirrors a simple truth about human society: our success as
a species is rooted in our capacity to work together to achieve security and welfare; especially in
our modern-day societies, in which we divide labour and where specialisation is becoming ever
more prevalent, great achievements are always the product of a team – or a “village".
Everybody’s  individual  contribution  is  highly  important,  and  a  certain  degree  of  competition
among individuals is healthy for innovation and for being productive; but success on a large scale
– think of skyscrapers and building cities like Tokyo, monetary systems, or combating climate
change – such achievements are possible only if we cooperate; this is a precondition for modern
society.
This  is  true  of  the  small  village,  it  is  true  of  the  nation  state,  and  it  is  also  true  of  the  “global
village” to which all human beings belong. Achieving a prosperous post-war international order
has been a remarkable success, in other words: we have created a global village out of many
smaller villages.
Is this post-war order under threat from populism? Are populist election victories the result of
conflicts within societies that could soon also become conflicts between societies?
Wherever  I  go  these  days  on  whatever  continent,  such  questions  seem  to  be  on
everybody’s  mind.  In  my  speech  today,  I  will  talk  mostly  about  these  fears  as  they  present
themselves in Europe, focusing on some of the economic factors behind the current surge in
populism. My main message is that protectionism and confrontational politics pose a threat to
our security and our welfare. They would divide our villages and weaken them. But our security
and  our  welfare  would  be  threatened  just  as  much  by  sticking  to  the  established  regime  of
international trade and cooperation. That would mean overlooking the fact that economic change
creates winners and losers in the village, thereby frustrating those who have lost the most. We
need to find a middle way.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2.  Election times: The euro area economy and rising populism
So let’s start with Europe’s current economic condition. Since the financial crisis, the pace of
recovery in the euro area has been slower than it has been in the United States, not to mention
the emerging economies. Lately, however, there have been signs of a broad economic recovery.
For the euro area, recent figures held a positive surprise – with sound GDP growth of 0.5% for
the first quarter of 2017. Unemployment stood at 9.5% in March, down from its peak of 12% in
2013. But a recent study has shown that the labour market in the euro area is in worse shape
than the official job figures suggest, with workers unlikely to see real increases in pay because of
the level of underemployment.  A measure of “slack” in the labour market indicates that about
15% to 18% of the euro area workforce are without jobs or would like to work more – which is
nearly double the official unemployment rate. Underemployment is even growing in weaker labour
markets, such as those in France and Italy.
1
The  still  weak  labour  market  in  many  regions  of  the  euro  area  is  one  of  the  gravest  ongoing
consequences of the recent financial crisis and an indication that the recovery is still weak. This
is particularly true with respect to the high level of underemployment in peripheral regions and
among young people.
Thus, while the recent growth figures make the euro area economy look increasingly healthy, it
becomes clear on closer inspection that a lot still remains to be done in order to move onto a
sustainable, integrative path of prosperity.
And  that  may  already  give  you  some  indication  as  to  why  protectionism  has  been  on  the
increase.
Ever  since  the  UK  vote  for  Brexit  in  June  2016,  there  has  been  much  talk  about  the  rise  of
populism  in  Europe.  National  elections  in  Austria,  the  Netherlands,  France,  Italy  as  well  as
regional elections in Germany and several other countries have seen populist parties on the rise,
and public debate has been circling around the issue.
Even  though  extremist  parties  have  not  gained  government  control  in  Europe,  they  have  had
some impact on the public discourse. And even though the recent Austrian, Dutch and French
elections confirmed pro-European politicians, it is clear that the tide of populism has not receded.
How  can  we  make  sense  of  this?  The  whole  debate  is  spinning  around  a  number  of  issues,
some directly, some only loosely connected. But, at least from an economic point of view, there
seems to be one topic that unifies these debates: a growing percentage of people seems to be
voting against what has been a common denominator of politics for quite some time now: the
belief that global economic liberalisation and cooperation, “globalisation” for short, is a good thing
for everyone in our societies.
Should we ignore these votes? Should we simply be opposed to them? I believe that we cannot
afford  to  do  that.  There  are  too  many  people  involved  to  simply  dismiss  them.  We  must  dig
deeper to understand the underlying causes.
3.  It’s the economy, stupid! Reasons for the populist surge
The discussion about the root causes of rising populism is typically divided into two streams:
One  is  about  national  identity  and  citizenship,  the  other  is  about  economic  distribution.  Both
strings play an important role, but I will focus my remarks on the issue of economic distribution.
Economic distribution is just an abstract term with a very concrete meaning: that any economic
change will create winners and losers. Every innovation means that more use is made of some
resources than of others – this can improve our welfare, our health, and our environment. One
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
basic idea of a market economy is that creative destruction brings progress; yet, such a market
economy will at least temporarily leave people without a job, or force them to move to another
sector or another location. Unless losers find opportunities to offset their losses, they have an
incentive to oppose change.
So  what  changes  might  be  responsible  for  rising  political  opposition?  Well,  there  are  several
candidates, as can be seen from the debate about the repercussions of a market economy – but
let me focus on globalisation and technological change.
First, there is international trade. Many attribute a considerable part of the rise in populism to a
desire for greater protectionism of domestic industries – this seems to be true at least with a
view to US presidential elections, the Brexit vote, and the recent French presidential election.
It is often argued that free trade puts workers of specific industries out of a job and that rising
international  competition  leads  to  lower  wages  and  inferior  working  conditions.  How  do  such
claims stand the empirical test?
We  know  that  trade  increases  overall  economic  welfare  owing  to  economies  of  scale  and
comparative advantages. But we have also known for quite some time that international trade is
likely to create winners and losers within a society.  As such, there is considerable evidence that
international trade pushes some people in import-competing industries out of jobs and reduces
4
their wages.  There is even evidence that this leads to greater political polarisation.
2
3
In sum, it is clear that trade boosts overall welfare, but that it also affects many people negatively.
As  much  as  some  critics  of  globalisation  seem  to  forget  the  substantial  welfare  gains  from
international trade, so do the cheerleaders of globalisation appear to forget that trade comes with
substantial redistribution and negative effects on some parts of a country’s population.
Let’s leave this much debated subject and turn to the second topic, which is at least as important
as a factor of economic change – I am referring to technological change, and its latest stage:
“digitalisation".
In the context of rising populism, technological change has been identified with robots replacing
manufacturing  jobs  and  software  replacing  low-creativity  middle  class  jobs.  Several  studies
present  educated  guesses  about  how  many  jobs  will  become  obsolete  over  the  next  few
decades. They see 9% to 57% of all jobs in developed economies as being potentially at risk of
5
being replaced by robots.
How accurate is this picture? Well, some of these figures probably exaggerate what is going to
happen.  Yet,  there  is  evidence  that  a  number  of  low  and  medium-skilled  jobs  subject  to
6
automation have seen declining employment levels and wage stagnation or even wage loss.
Similarly,  recent  research  on  US  manufacturing  sectors  between  1993  and  2007  shows  that
each new robot introduced per thousand workers reduced the employment to population ratio by
7
0.34 percentage points and cut wages by about 0.5%.
In  sum,  technological  change  and  digitalisation  have  delivered  massive  welfare  gains  for  our
societies, and will most likely continue to do so. Yet, there is growing evidence that technological
change also means job losses for some parts of the workforce and that these are jobs with lower
education profiles.
If we take the perspective of the cooperative village: Villagers in the past specialised in a given job
profile – such specialisation made possible a division of labour, thereby benefiting all the village’s
inhabitants. When the acquired skills are no longer needed, this has consequences, because
people lose their jobs or their working conditions change. In simple terms, technology and trade
disrupt the status quo, they creates winners and losers. They change how a village cooperates.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is clear that our societies face tremendous challenges from economic change: the creative
destruction  of  the  market  economy  –  and  globalisation  and  digitalisation,  in  particular  –  are
restructuring our economies and having redistributive consequences. This cannot be ignored or
healed with a few patches.
Therefore,  all  their  benefits  notwithstanding,  globalisation  and  digitalisation  have  had  negative
effects for a significant number of people. Furthermore, foreign competition often serves as an
emotionally satisfying scapegoat for many problems. Moreover, a lot of people who see these
developments and hear such allegations fear that they might lose out in the future, too. Put these
individuals all together, and you get a group that can be easily mobilised.
But, whatever we do, we should take care not to throw out the baby with the bathwater: Trade
and  technological  change  are  both  catalysts  for  tremendous  welfare  gains  in  our  society.
Resorting to protectionism and holding on to unproductive technologies would mean discarding
something that is worth keeping: resorting to protectionism would severely weaken the welfare
gains  of  large-scale  cooperation.  Clinging  to  old  technologies  merely  to  prevent  redistribution
would cause economic harm – just think how damaging it would be to stick with coal for our
supply of energy rather than using renewable sources.
4.  What can be done? Improving, not ending global and European integration
But  what  can  we  do  instead?  To  answer  that,  we  should  first  clarify  the  question.  I  think  the
question should really be: How can we harvest the fruits of trade, technological change and a
market economy without dividing our societies to a point where social cohesion breaks down? In
other  words,  how  can  the  village  become  more  prosperous  without  becoming  splintered  into
much smaller communities that are in conflict with each other?
One important thing to remember is that, while trade and technology play a role in redistribution
and restructuring, they are by no means the sole drivers of such developments – just think of the
increase in inequality or low productivity growth in both Europe and the US.
The point is that building walls and limiting technological change will not solve the problems that
our  economies  are  facing;  moreover,  even  when  smart  policies  are  chosen  to  balance  the
negative repercussions without undermining trade and technology (too much), this will not solve
all the problems – globalisation is only partially responsible for the negative outcomes that some
are witnessing.
So what then can we do? That’s for politicians and their sovereigns to decide. But, based on the
facts that I have discussed, there are a few lessons to be learned.
With respect to the degree of international cooperation, I suggest two things: First, resorting to
protectionism will help no one. It will hurt all citizens. Rather, we should use the gains from trade,
but also find mechanisms that help those who lose out from trade. Second, the same principle
applies with respect to cooperation within the European Union – all EU citizens have benefited
immensely from the EU, but the single market has also led to a restructuring of the economies,
and  this  is  especially  true  of  the  euro  area.  We  should  strive  not  only  to  maintain  these
achievements, but also to make them better, so that they work for everyone.
This will not be enough to solve the problems of restructuring and redistribution that arise from
trade, technological change and further economic developments.
If we want to foster our economy with a complex division of labour – that is, our modern village –
we have to deal with the redistributive and restructuring tendencies. If we want to foster a global,
market-based economy and liberal democracy, policies need to help those on the losing side of
redistributive and restructuring tendencies so that they still feel that they have a stake in society.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
What could be on such a wish-list of policies for Europe’s economy to recover?
Well,  this  could  include  giving  those  who  lose  out  from  globalisation  and  digitalisation  a  fair
chance to reintegrate into the system and compensating them for losses.
It should include implementing more sustainable growth-enhancing policies; these should target
investment in infrastructure and innovation – and that does not just mean road infrastructure and
internet connections, but much more complex investments such as in child welfare and health
care.
And  it  does  include  not  depending  on  growth  alone,  since  many  policy  problems  cannot  be
solved  by  means  of  higher  GDP  growth  –  instead,  what  is  required  are  demand  policies  of
sustainable  resource  utilisation  and  intelligent  countermeasures  against  rising  inequality:  for
example,  increased  public  expenditure  on  extending  educational  opportunities  for  everyone  in
society as a whole.
One  final  point  is  especially  important  in  my  eyes:  we  have  to  tackle  these  challenges  rather
sooner  than  later.  Some  may  feel  comforted  by  the  fact  that  populist  parties  performed  less
successfully  than  expected  in  the  Dutch  and  French  elections;  but  this  is  no  time  for
complacency.  Populism  is  not  a  mere  short-term  electoral  challenge.  It  has  a  strong  base
among  economically  frustrated  individuals.  This  frustration  must  at  least  be  taken  seriously  ‒
otherwise it will come back with a vengeance in elections at a later date. We must identify the
underlying problems and do our best to fix them.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
We live in a global village; European citizens live in the village that is the EU – it will take these
villages, together with our local communities, to raise future children; it takes these villages and
their division of labour to continue our security and welfare.
Villages prosper through cooperation, not through conflict – 15th century Edo was no different
from our global village and from the EU.
But why is populism on the rise? I have talked about the economic side of this issue. People vote
for populists, because globalisation and technological change – together with further economic
and non-economic forces – have been penalising significant segments of societies in developed
economies.  If  we  want  to  secure  a  global,  market-based  economy  and  liberal  democracy,
policies need to help the losers from redistributive and restructuring tendencies so that they have
the chance to remain active citizens of their societies.
Think of the modern version of the division of labour in a global village: The baker or investment
banker owes a debt of gratitude to their doctor, if she saves their children’s lives. But the doctor
also  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude,  as  she  would  not  be  able  to  specialise  in  a  particular  area  of
medicine in the first place, without someone else baking her bread or investing her money. In a
complex  economy  we  all  rely  on  each  other,  on  the  contribution  made  by  everyone  to  the
economy.
A cooperative society means progress and therefore change – as brought to us by international
trade and technological advances. Protectionism and confrontational politics would threaten this
progress; it would threaten our security and our welfare.
But  simply  sticking  to  the  established  regime  of  international  trade  and  cooperation  would
likewise threaten our security and our welfare; because that would mean ignoring the fact that the
current approach has also led to many people in our societies losing out. If we do not take the
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
needs of such people seriously, we will undermine the social fabric of our global village and our
local villages – and that is how social cohesion is weakened and populism is fuelled.
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
European Central Bank (2017), Assessing labour market slack. ECB Economic Bulletin, 2017(3): 31–35.
WF Stolper & PA Samuelson (1941), Protection and Real Wages. The Review of Economic Studies, 9(1): 58–73.
See, for example, for the US: DH Autor, D Dorn & GH Hanson (2013), The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States. The American Economic Review, 103(6): 2121–2168; JR
Pierce  &  PK  Schott  (2016),  The  Surprisingly  Swift  Decline  of  US  Manufacturing  Employment.  American
Economic Review, 106(7): 1632–62.
See, for example, D Autor et al (2016), Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising
Trade  Exposure.  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  22637;  for  Germany:  C  Dippel,  R  Gold  &  S  Heblich  (2015),
Globalization and its (dis-)content: Trade shocks and voting behaviour. NBER Working Paper No. 21812.
M Arntz, T Gregory & U Zierahn (2016), The Risk of Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries. OECD Social,
Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 189, OECD; World Bank (2016), World Development Report
2016: Digital Dividends.
G Michaels, A Natraj & J Van Reenen (2014), Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries
over Twenty-five Years. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1): 60–77; M Goos & A Manning (2007), Lousy
and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in Britain. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118–
133; DH Autor, F Levy & RJ Murnane (2003), The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical
Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1279–1333.
D Acemoglu & P Restrepo (2016), The Race Between Machine and Man: Implications of Technology for Growth,
Factor Shares and Employment. NBER Working Paper No. 22252.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
