   31.082017 
Welcome address 
First Annual Research Conference of the Banco de España 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor  
 
  Buenos días, good morning to everybody. 
Let me welcome you all to the first Annual Research Conference of the Banco de España. 
We  plan  to  make  this  conference  our  main  research  event  each  year.  So,  we  hope  that 
today’s edition is the first of many to come. Our aim is to bring together scholars and policy-
makers to express views and discuss on the key policy questions for central banking, both 
from an academic and a practical perspective. 
The  conference  reaffirms  the  Banco  de  España’s  commitment  to  research  as  an 
indispensable tool for economic policy-making.  Good research strengthens the foundation 
of our policy framework and lays the groundwork for the models we use in our economic 
and monetary policy analysis. 
The Banco de España commits significant resources to research. Let me give you some 
figures. Currently, according to the IDEAS database, our Bank ranks third in research among 
national central banks in the Euro zone. In 2016, researchers at the Bank published more 
than 30 working papers. Indeed, research is not a matter of quantity, but of quality; in the 
last few years our researchers  have published in top journals such as  Econometrica, the 
American  Economic  Review,  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  the  various  American 
Economic Journals and the Journal of Monetary Economics, just to mention a few examples. 
Over  the  last  three  years,  fifteen  young  economists  holding  PhDs  from  renowned 
international universities have joined the Bank’s staff.  I am pretty confident that our research 
output will be improved and enhanced in the future. 
Challenges for macroeconomic research 
Today  and  tomorrow  you  will  be  talking  essentially  about  macroeconomics.  Looking 
forward, macro policies, monetary, fiscal, and macroprudential policies, are facing a number 
of challenges that require deep theoretical and empirical analysis. 
Perhaps, first of all, we need to understand the causes and consequences of the current 
levels of low inflation in most developed economies, despite the fact that most major central 
banks have introduced unprecedented monetary measures to support activity and growth.  
Several explanations, ranging from a “debt supercycle” to a secular stagnation have been 
proposed. If natural rates at very low or even negative levels are here to stay, central bankers 
will have to rethink our standard toolbox and to decide which policy measures put in place 
during the last decade should be maintained. In this respect, I think that the first paper of 
the conference, which analyzes the effects of negative nominal interest rates, will offer new 
insights on this important topic. 
Secondly,  we  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  links  between  monetary  policy, 
macroprudential policy and financial stability.  
The  financial  crisis  underlined  how  an  impaired  financial  system  could  cause  severe 
economic damage and disrupt the transmission of monetary policy. Moreover, following the 
financial  crisis,  many  central  banks  have  provided  with  new  macroprudential  tools  that 
remain  largely  untested.    The  question  of  which  should  be  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
 3/4 
 financial crisis prevention or mitigation is still far away from reaching any definite answer.  
Several papers in this conference will deal with this important issue. 
Third,  we  need  to  have  a  better  understanding  of  how  monetary  policy  and  other 
macroeconomic policies are transmitted.  
By  now,  it  is  clear  that  the  standard  new  Keynesian  framework,  which  still  shapes  our 
general view of the basic elements of monetary policy, has some relevant shortcomings. For 
example, recent research has underlined how additional channels related to household and 
firm  heterogeneity  may  provide  a  more  realistic  depiction  of  how  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies  affects  the  economy,  modifying  –or  even  overturning-  some of  the  prescriptions 
derived  from  models  with  representative  agents.  This  is  a  line  of  research  linking  both 
empirical and theoretical work that may have consequences for our work as central bankers. 
Your discussions over the next couple of days will help to improve our understanding of 
some of these complex issues, ranging from the emergence and consequences of bubbles 
in asset markets,  to the role of individual heterogeneity in the transmission of macro policies 
and in the aggregate incidence of financial frictions. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to say that both policymakers and academics face new challenges 
in our understanding of how central banks should act in order to fulfill our mandates and 
maximize the welfare of the citizens we work for. Meetings such as this Conference provide 
an excellent opportunity to strengthen the links between central bankers and academics.  
 I wish you a very productive meeting and a pleasant stay in Madrid, expressing my gratitude 
for your attendance to this First Annual Research Conference of the Banco de España.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
 4/4 
 