Mario Draghi: Address to mark the launch of the new €50 banknote
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  The  ECB  and  Its
Watchers XVIII Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April 2017.
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon  to  launch  the  new  €50  banknote.  This  is  the
culmination of a huge amount of research and dedication from my colleagues in the ECB and the
Eurosystem,  and  I  applaud  them  for  producing  another  first-rate  product. Although  banknotes
may  not  receive  as  much  attention  as  other  aspects  of  our  monetary  policy,  they  are  a
fundamental part of what we do. And in some ways their role is even more important in the euro
area than in other parts of the world.
Though electronic payments are becoming more popular, cash is still our most important means
of  payment.  A  soon-to-be-published  survey  on  cash  use,  carried  out  on  behalf  of  the  ECB,
shows that over three-quarters of all payments at points-of-sale in the euro area are made in
cash. In terms of transaction values, that’s slightly more than half. So even in this digital age,
cash remains essential in our economy.
And  this  is  particularly  the  case  for  the  €50  note,  which  is  our  most  important  denomination.
There are more than 9 billion of them in circulation, accounting for 46% of all euro banknotes.
That’s more than the total number of banknotes issued at the time of the euro cash introduction
in 2002.
So it’s clear that, for the economy to function, people must be able to have trust in cash – it has
to  be  robust,  easy  to  check  and  readily  available. And  perhaps  most  importantly,  it  has  to  be
secure:  we  need  to  stay  ahead  of  counterfeiters,  who  might  undermine  the  public’s  trust  in
money. This is why we always put innovation at the heart of our banknote development and strive
to use the latest and most efficient banknote technology.
The new €50 note, for example, incorporates all the improved security features of the new €20
note, making it even more resistant to counterfeiting than the first series. It is also more user-
friendly for visually impaired people, thanks to bolder large letters and numbers on the front and
tactile marks near the edges.
And  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  public  is  familiar  with  the  new  note,  the  Eurosystem  has
conducted a wide-ranging communication campaign, aiming to reach its audiences via multiple
channels. This has given our stakeholders the necessary information about the banknote and its
security features.
But there is also another reason why banknotes are a fundamental part of what we do – one
which is more significant for the euro area than for others. In a multi-country union such as ours,
it is inevitably harder to create a shared identity than in a single nation state with its own culture
and history. The euro is something we all have in common – it is a tangible symbol of European
unity.
Holding a euro banknote and knowing that it can be used in 19 countries is a reminder of the
deep integration Europe has attained. Indeed, when asked about the most important elements of
European identity, the single currency is the one most frequently quoted by euro area citizens
after  democracy  and  freedom. And  in  spite  of  the  difficulties  in  recent  years,  support  for  the
single currency now stands at 70%, equalling the highs recorded in the pre-crisis period.
With the collaboration of the national central banks, credit institutions and banknote equipment
manufacturers, hundreds of thousands of machines and devices have been updated during the
last nine months, meaning that – starting today – the new €50 banknote is available.
1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
