BANK OF BOTSWANA 
 2017 MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT 
 by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor 
 February 27, 2017  
 Introduction 
It is indeed a great pleasure and honour to welcome all of you, on 
behalf  of  the  Board,  management  and  staff  of  the  Bank,  to  the 
launch  of  the  2017  Monetary  Policy  Statement.  This  is  an 
important  and  priority  occasion  in  the  annual  calendar  of  events 
for  the  Bank.  We  are  therefore  most  grateful  to  all  of  you, 
Distinguished Guests, for gracing the occasion with your presence 
this morning.  
 The launch and dissemination of the Monetary Policy Statement is 
consistent  with  the  key  governance  imperatives  of  transparency 
and  accountability  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
monetary  policy.  The  Statement  seeks 
to  promote  an 
understanding of the conduct of monetary policy and its objectives 
and, accordingly, guide the public’s formation of expectations.  It is 
on  this  occasion,  that  the  Bank  reports  on  inflation  trajectory  and 
policy  performance  as  articulated 
in 
the  previous  year’s 
Statement;  outline  and  convey 
the  Bank’s  perspective  on 
economic  and  other  policy  developments;  and,  in  turn,  how  the 
Bank intends to respond and implement monetary policy.  
 Esteemed  Guests,  I  would  like  to  start  with  recognition  of  the 
immense  contribution  of  the  past  leadership  of  the  Bank  in  the 
design and shaping of the current monetary policy framework, and 
in  particular,  my  predecessor, 
former  Governor,  Ms  Linah 
Mohohlo.    She  presided  over  important  innovations  that  helped 
engender  policy  credibility  and  performance  in  meeting  the 
inflation objective as well as fostering effectiveness and stability of 
the banking system. As you would be aware, inflation in Botswana 
has  been,  since  June  2013,  either  within  or  below  the  desired 
objective  range.  This  is  the  single  most  important  contribution  to 
demand  management  and  macroeconomic  stability  that  you  can 
ask of your Central Bank. 
 Indeed, the Bank’s primary statutory mandate is to maintain price 
stability.  Along  with  this  mandate,  the  Bank  is  responsible  for 
promotion of a safe and sound financial system as well as efficient 
payments  infrastructure.  Price  stability,  which  is  defined  as  low, 
stable  and  predictable  level  of  inflation,  fosters  mobilisation  of 
savings,  productive  investment,  prudent  allocation  of  credit  and 
international  competitiveness  of  domestic  firms.    In  turn,  a  sound 
and  stable  financial  system  is  potentially  more  effective  in  policy 
transmission  and 
facilitating  economic  activity 
through 
the 
provision  of  liquidity  and  risk  mitigation.  Therefore,  Honourable 
Minister, let me reaffirm that the Bank’s mandate is aligned to, and 
supports, the national objective of sustainable economic growth. 
  2 
Improvement to the Monetary Policy Framework 
Distinguished  Guests,  I  will  now  mention  some  of  the  important 
elements of the evolution of the  monetary policy  framework, over 
the  past  two  decades.  First,  is  the  clarity  and  definition  of  the 
inflation  objective  and 
identification  of 
the  medium-term 
performance  horizon.  Second,  development  of  supporting 
infrastructure and internal capacity to operate the forecasting and 
policy  analysis  system  that  guides  monetary  policy  decisions. 
Third,  the  Bank  formalised  the  institutional  arrangements,  in  the 
form of a Monetary Policy Committee whose regular meetings are 
followed by a Press Release, as well as publication of the Annual 
Monetary  Policy  Statement  and  Mid-Term  Review.  In  addition, 
changes  in  the  exchange  rate  policy  framework  also  helped 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  the 
adoption  of  the  crawling  band  exchange  rate  framework  since 
2005 and, later, public disclosure of the weights of the constituent 
currencies  in  the  Pula  basket  as  well  as  the  rate  of  crawl,  has 
supported  the  Bank’s  focus  on  the  inflation  objective.  This 
transparency  in  the  management  of  the  exchange  rate  helps  to 
anchor  policy  credibility  and  predictability  and,  therefore,  informs 
expectations and economic decisions.  
 As 
the  Bank  continues 
to 
focus  on  refining  and  making 
improvements, it has been the intention to enhance transparency 
and  interaction  with  the  market,  as  circumstances  would  be 
propitious,  with  a  view  to  further  buttressing  policy  transmission 
and  credibility.    In  this  regard,  the  Bank  will,  henceforth,  pre-
 3 
announce  the  dates  for  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
meetings for the ensuing half year; and, convene a Media Briefing 
following  each  meeting  of  the  MPC  to  announce  the  policy 
decision.  I  hasten  to  add,  Distinguished  Guests,  that  these 
initiatives are premised on availability, and should be a catalyst for 
development,  of  an  appropriate  market 
infrastructure  and 
expertise,  such  as  informed  and  robust  market  analysis  and 
strong  financial  journalism,  as  well  as  organised  debt  and  credit 
markets.  
 Honourable  Minister,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  my  message  today 
also  addresses  three  other  areas.    First,  I  will  briefly  examine 
global trends that have influenced inflation in Botswana; second, I 
will  highlight  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  both  internationally 
and  here  at  home;  and,  finally,  I  will  provide  the  medium-term 
inflation outlook and, consequently, the likely policy stance. 
External Economic Developments 
Looking  back,  it  is  estimated  that  global  output  growth  was  3.1 
percent  in  2016,  compared  to  3.2  percent  in  2015,  and  weaker 
than  the  projection  of  3.4  percent  early  in  the  year.    The  lower 
growth  rate  resulted  from  subdued  economic  activity  in  both 
advanced and emerging market economies, while low commodity 
prices  continued  to  weigh  down  on  economic  performance  in 
commodity  exporting  countries.   International  oil  prices,  however, 
recovered  during  2016,  partly  in  response  to  the  agreement  by 
major  producers  to  reduce  production;  therefore,  potentially 
generating upward pressure on inflation.  Following a generalised 
 4 
decrease  in  the  previous  two  years,  global  food  prices  also 
increased in 2016. 
 Due  to  these  factors,  global  inflation  increased  slightly  from  2.8 
percent  in  2015  to  2.9  percent  in  2016,  but  much  lower  than  the 
forecast  of  3.4  percent  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  As  regards 
Botswana’s trading partner countries, inflation remained low in the 
Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDR)  countries  (comprising  the  United 
States  of  America,  euro  zone,  China,  Japan  and  the  United 
Kingdom).    Average  inflation  for  these  countries  increased  from 
0.7 percent to 1.7 percent in the same period.  In contrast, inflation 
in  South  Africa  breached  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range, 
peaking at 6.8 percent, mainly because of weakness of the South 
African  rand  and  food  price  pressures.    Overall,  average  inflation 
for the trading partner countries increased from 2.8 percent to 4.2 
percent during 2016. 
 Domestic Inflation 
In  Botswana,  inflation  was  low  and  stable,  and  fluctuated  around 
the  lower  end  of  the  desired  objective  range  of  3  percent,  hence 
broadly consistent with projections for the year.  Inflation reached 
a record low of 2.6 percent in August 2016. The low rate of annual 
price  increase  was  generalised  across  most  categories  of  goods 
and  services.    However,  food  price  inflation  increased  from  0.7 
percent in 2015 to 3.9 percent in 2016.  Also, the reduction of 3.3 
percent  in  fuel  prices  in  2016  was  small  compared  to  a  15.7 
percent decrease in the prior year.   
 5 
 In addition to benign external price developments, modest inflation 
in  Botswana  was  also  indicative  of  subdued  domestic  demand, 
against 
the  background  of  sluggish  economic  activity  and 
restrained growth in personal incomes.  Among the influences on 
domestic  demand  are  growth  in  government  expenditure,  wages 
and  credit.    Taking  these  three  elements  in  turn,  government 
expenditure  increased  by  9.7  percent  in  2016,  virtually  the  same 
rate  of  expansion  as  in  the  previous  year.    It  should  be 
recognised, 
in 
this  respect, 
that 
the  short-term 
impact  of 
government  spending  on  domestic  demand  is  moderated  to  the 
extent  that  a  significant  component  involves  infrastructure  and 
capacity  development.  In  the  context  of  Botswana,  this  type  of 
spending  tends  to  be  import  intensive  and,  also,  the  economic 
benefits  of  such public  investments  are  derived  in  the  medium  to 
long term.  
 Turning  to  wage  developments,  it  is  notable  that  government 
recurrent expenditure included a 3 percent salary increase for the 
public  service,  which,  as  a  matter  of  practice,  guided  parastatal 
and  private  sector  wage  adjustments.  Thus,  in  2016,  wages 
increased,  generally,  by  5.2  percent,  therefore,  with  a  modest 
impact on demand and inflation.  
 On  credit  developments,  growth  in  commercial  bank  credit  fell 
from  7.1  percent  in  2015  to  6.2  percent  in  2016  in  the  context  of 
subdued  economic  activity  and  restrained  growth  in  personal 
 6 
incomes, which influenced both the demand and supply side. The 
Bank  also  recognises  challenges  in  the  transmission  of  the 
prevailing  policy  rates  to  lower  lending  interest  rates.  The 
challenges  relate  partly  to  structural  issues,  such  as  uncertainty 
about  sustainability  of  funding  sources  and  associated  balance 
sheet  restructuring  as  well  as  tighter  lending  criteria  by  banks.  
Against  this  background,  the  annual  expansion  in  lending  to 
households  fell  from  12.8  percent  to  7.6  percent  and  included 
lower growth for personal loans and mortgages.   
 In  contrast,  growth  in  business  credit  increased  to  4.2  percent, 
from  a  contraction  of  0.3  percent  in  2015,  but  with  varying 
performance  across  sectors.    Overall,  the  moderate  increase  in 
bank  lending  supports  economic  activity  and  it  is  broadly 
consistent with growth of nominal GDP. 
 Monetary Policy Implementation in 2016 
Honourable  Minister  and  Esteemed  Guests:  Monetary  policy  was 
predominantly  accommodative  in  advanced  economies,  with  low 
levels  of  interest  rates;  in  some  instances,  interest  rates  are 
negative,  while  liquidity  support  to  the  financial  sector  was 
maintained.    In  this  regard,  notable  developments  include  the 
reduction  of  interest  rates  in  the  United  Kingdom  aimed  at 
mitigating  the  adverse  impact  of  the  decision  to  leave  the 
European Union (Brexit) and the second increase in interest rates 
in  the  United  States  of  America  since  2008,  given  progress  in 
attaining full employment and price stability. 
 7 
 For  emerging  market  economies,  the  direction  of  policy  changes 
was  mixed, 
invariably 
reflecting  differing  macroeconomic 
circumstances.  Closer  to  home,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
increased  the  policy  rate  by  75  basis  points  to  7  percent  during 
2016 in order to anchor inflation expectations around the country’s 
target range of 3 – 6 percent. 
 Domestic Monetary Policy Implementation 
For  its  part,  the  Bank  continues  to  conduct  monetary  policy 
through  a  forecast-based  policy  framework  that  informs  the 
appropriate  response  to  deviations  of  inflation  from  the  desired 
objective  range.  The  analysis  also  involves  assessment  of 
divergence  of  actual  output 
(GDP) 
from  potential  output 
(technically  known  as  the  “output  gap”),  which  is  the  primary 
indicator  of 
the  direction  of 
future 
inflation.  The 
forecast 
incorporates  projections  of 
foreign 
inflation,  exchange  rate 
movements  and  changes  in  domestic  administered  prices  and 
taxes.    In  addition,  the  Bank  undertakes  a  careful  evaluation  of 
risks  associated  with  the  projected  outlook.  In  determining  the 
appropriate  policy  response,  the  inflation  forecast  is  considered 
alongside  indicators  of  financial  stability  and  economic  activity, 
including  relevant  information  from  the  Business  Expectations 
Survey conducted biannually by the Bank.  
 Monetary policy during 2016 was conducted in an environment of 
below-trend  economic  activity  and  a  positive  medium-term 
 8 
inflation  outlook,  providing  scope  for  policy  easing.    Indeed,  the 
Bank  Rate  was  reduced  further  by  half  a  percentage  point  to  5.5 
percent  in  August.  Accordingly,  commercial  banks  also  reduced 
the prime lending rate by half a percentage point to 7 percent.  
 Nevertheless,  there  was  a  build-up  of  excess  liquidity  in  the 
banking  system  as  commercial  bank  credit  expansion  slowed 
relative 
to 
the 
increase 
in  deposits.  Monetary  policy  was 
implemented  with  a  view  to  encourage  productive  commercial 
bank  lending  and  market  efficiency,  as  well  as  ensuring  cost-
effective  absorption  of  excess  liquidity  in  the  banking  system, 
through  a  limited  issuance  of  Bank  of  Botswana  Certificates 
(BoBCs). This was balanced with the need to keep money market 
interest  rates  aligned  with 
the  monetary  policy  stance,  a 
consideration  that  allowed  for  some  flexibility  in  the  issuance  of 
BoBCs.  
 Honoured  Guests,  as in  the  previous  years,  monetary  policy  was 
also  implemented  in  a  way  that  safeguards  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.  Notably, the slower household credit growth was 
in  line  with  modest  increase  in  personal  incomes,  while  the 
restrained expansion in mortgage lending was also consistent with 
a  weaker  residential  property  market.  In  this  respect,  the  ratio  of 
non-performing  loans  to  total  credit  was  modest  at  just  under  5 
percent.  Overall, the banking system satisfied, and in most cases, 
significantly  exceeded  the  minimum  prudential  requirements, 
 9 
which  is  indicative  of  a  generally  healthy,  sound  and  stable 
financial system.  
   Economic Outlook and Projections 
Now  looking  ahead,  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  grow  by 
3.4  percent  in  2017.  The  projected  improvement  is  premised  on 
anticipated  stronger  emerging  market  economies,  including  a 
recovery  from  recession  in  Brazil  and  Russia.    In  advanced 
economies,  growth  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  relatively  low 
oil prices, improving labour markets and possible fiscal stimulus in 
the  United  States  of  America.    Nonetheless,  global  economic 
performance  is  subject  to  uncertainty  of  the  policy  environment 
associated  with  the  potential  for  inward-looking  and  protectionist 
trade  policies  as  well  as  geopolitical  tensions.  Other  downside 
risks  emanate  from  persistence  of  tight  financing  conditions  in 
some key markets and subdued commodity prices. 
 Global inflation is forecast to be 3.3 percent in 2017 as advanced 
economies reflate to achieve the desired targets and as the effect 
of  the  earlier  decrease  in  energy  prices  dissipates.    In  emerging 
market economies, inflation is expected to moderate as the effect 
of  previous  currency  depreciation  tapers  off  in  2017.  In  this 
environment,  it  is  anticipated  that  monetary  policy  will  remain 
accommodative  in  most  economies,  complemented  by  measures 
 10
aimed at facilitating effective financial intermediation and fostering 
resilience of the financial sector to support economic activity.  
 Domestic Economy 
As  the  Honourable  Minister  indicated  in  the  2017/18  Budget 
Speech, the domestic economy is forecast to grow by 4.2 percent, 
an  improvement  from  the  estimated  2.9  percent  for  2016. 
Furthermore,  the  budgeted  6.5  percent  expansion  in  government 
spending,  in  2017/18,  should  continue  to  be  supportive  of 
domestic demand. Government spending comprises elements that 
generate  both  short-term  growth  supporting  demand  and 
expansion of productive capacity which, potentially, should sustain 
future growth prospects.  
 The  exchange  rate  policy  will  continue  to  complement  the 
monetary  policy  framework  and  it  augurs  well  for maintenance  of 
international  competitiveness  of  domestic 
industries  and 
macroeconomic  stability.    As  announced  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year and consistent with Botswana’s trade pattern, the weights of 
the  constituent  currencies  in  the  Pula  basket  were  adjusted  from 
50 percent each to 45  percent for  the  South  African rand and  55 
percent for the SDR. Also, effective January 1 this year, the Bank 
is implementing a modest upward rate of crawl of 0.26 percent for 
the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate,  lower  than  the  0.38  percent 
in  2016. 
  The  upward  crawl  reflects 
the  achievement 
in 
maintaining domestic inflation at a rate lower than the average for 
the trading partner countries. 
 11
 Overall,  both  external  and  domestic  pressures  on  inflation  are 
expected to be benign, and it is projected that inflation will remain 
within  the  3  –  6  percent  objective  range  in  the  medium-term, 
although,  in  the  near-term,  it  is  expected  to  rise  modestly.    This 
forecast 
takes 
into  account  possible 
increase 
in  some 
administered prices, the impact of which, however, is not expected 
to  result  in  short-term  inflation  over-shooting  the  upper  boundary 
of the objective range of 3 – 6 percent. Having said so, it is worth 
underscoring the point that any upward adjustment in these prices 
that  is  substantially  beyond  current  projections  presents  upside 
risks to the inflation outlook. In contrast, downside risks to inflation 
arise  from  the  expected  restrained  growth  in  global  economic 
activity  and  the  tendency  of  technological  progress  to  result  in 
lower prices as well as a possible decline in commodity prices.  
 Conclusion and Monetary Policy Stance 
Distinguished  Guests,  as  I  conclude  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to 
restate that current projections, based on available data, suggest 
that  inflation  in  Botswana  will,  in  the  medium-term,  remain  within 
the  Bank’s  objective  range  of  3  –  6  percent.    This  positive 
medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  is  in  the  context  of  anticipated 
higher  GDP  growth  in  2017  and  a  sound  and  stable  financial 
system.  Therefore,  prospective  developments  augur  well  for 
maintenance of an accommodative monetary policy that supports 
productive  lending  to  businesses  and  households.  The  Bank’s 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  focus  on 
 12
entrenching  expectations  of  low,  predictable  and  sustainable 
inflation,  through  timely  responses  to  price  developments;  while, 
at the same time, taking due care to ensure that policy decisions 
are  consistent  with  enduring  financial  stability  and  supportive  of 
sustainable economic growth.  
 Honourable  Minister  and  Distinguished  Guests,  it  is  important  to 
note  that  the  continuing  success  in  containing  inflation  within  the 
desired 3 – 6 percent medium-term inflation objective, to which the 
Bank  remains  fully  committed,  must,  in  the  end,  involve  the 
cooperation  of  all  key  players 
in 
the  economy,  namely, 
Government,  parastatals  and  the  private  sector,  for  the  good  of 
the country as a whole. 
 Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  remind  the  Media  about  the 
scheduled Press Briefing, to be held tomorrow morning at 1130 in 
the Bank, after the first MPC meeting of the year.  The Briefing will 
cover both this  Monetary  Policy  Statement and announcement of 
the Monetary Policy Committee decision.  
 Honourable  Minister,  Distinguished  Guests;  I  thank  you  for  your 
kind attention. 
 13
