Carl-Ludwig Thiele: From Bitcoin to digital central bank money - still
a long way to go
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  roundtable
discussion, London, 20 September 2017.
 David
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted that the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum has invited me to share
my thoughts with you here today. The OMFIF – an independent think tank for central banking,
economic  policy  and  public  investment  –  has  made  quite  a  name  for  itself.  Independence,
especially, but also freedom from political responsibility, is a precious asset.
London has always been one of my favourite destinations, and it is an ideal venue for discussing
new  virtual  currencies.  Not  just  on  account  of  London’s  immense  importance  as  a  financial
centre, but mainly because of the City’s understanding of markets and market trends.
This understanding encompasses the major role played by central banks and financial market
infrastructures. It was, after all, Walter Bagehot, who, in his 1873 treatise Lombard Street, laid
the very foundations of how we see central banks nowadays.
In this work, Walter Bagehot gives the following characterisation of London’s bankers:
“The name ‘London Banker’ had especially a charmed value. He was supposed to represent, and
often did represent, a certain union of pecuniary sagacity and educated refinement which was
scarcely to be found in any other part of society."
1. Trust – the foundations underpinning our money
That quote is taken, as I said, from Bagehot’s book Lombard Street: A Description of the Money
Market, in which he also mentions the main questions facing the financial system:
“Credit  means  that  a  certain  confidence  is  given,  and  a  certain  trust  reposed.  Is  that  trust
justified? And is that confidence wise? These are the cardinal questions. To put it more simply,
credit is a set of promises to pay; will those promises be kept?"
That brings us to the nub of the matter. Money, ladies and gentlemen, is all about trust. The key
to a stable currency is trust.
The  original  promise  of  Bitcoin  was  to  forge  a  “trustless”  payment  system  –  that  is,  one  that
required  no  trust.  I  quote  from  Satoshi  Nakamoto’s  paper  from  2008  (Bitcoin: A  Peer-to-Peer
Electronic Cash System):
“What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust,
allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted
third party."
I  feel  that  too  little  attention  is  being  paid  to  Nakamoto’s  primary  goal  of  constructing  a
groundbreaking, trustless electronic payment system which, like cash, would facilitate peer-to-
peer (P2P) transactions. At the same time, Nakamoto was looking to create a currency which
was not based on trust. This aspect – forging a new currency that does away with central banks
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
– has become a major talking point in the current debate. I have come here today to explain why
a trustless currency is not feasible, and I will also argue that the merits of blockchain can be
harnessed more readily with trustworthy institutions than without.
To get a grasp of Bitcoin, we need to put our minds to the essence of money. There are two
types of money. Money as a commodity, and money as a claim.
Money as a commodity, that could be a commonly used consumer good which is mostly non-
perishable.  Cigarettes,  for  instance,  were  used  as  a  money  substitute  in  Germany  after  the
Second World War.
But equally, money could be a durable good – gold being the most prominent example of this.
Gold is extraordinarily durable, and it has an intrinsic value as a sought after industrial metal, say,
or as jewellery. Indeed, for centuries, delivering gold was regarded as the ultimate form of settling
a claim.
Consumer and durable goods which can be used as money substitutes both have an intrinsic,
consumption or utility value.
Virtual currencies, meanwhile, which are transferred much like goods, are a fabrication. That is
not to consign them straight to the category of “fraud". Yet they have no intrinsic value, just an
exchange value. You can’t consume or use them, only exchange them.
On the other hand, there is money as a claim. The bulk of our money – central bank money and
commercial bank money – is a claim on either the central bank or a commercial bank.
Every euro in cash and every euro in credit balances in TARGET2represents a liability for the
Eurosystem. And the euro is backed by the Eurosystem with its constituent central banks, one of
which is the Bundesbank.
Unlike consumer or durable goods, central bank money does not have any consumption or utility
value. And  the  issuing  central  bank’s  credit  quality  and  integrity  is  reflected  in  the  value  of  its
currency. The value of a currency, then, hinges on trust in the central bank.
Not  just  that:  the  issuer  –  so  in  the  euro’s  case,  the  Eurosystem  –  takes  collateral  from  its
monetary policy counterparties as a “deposit” for providing euro currency. That indirectly anchors
the euro in the real economy.
Virtual currencies, by contrast, have no issuer, no footing in the real economy. No one has to
redeem  them.  They  are  a  fabrication  and  propagate  according  to  a  fictitious  set-up  in  virtual
systems which, in some cases, can be altered or newly created at the whim of a small group of
participants. What is more, their governance regime is opaque, if not to say obscure – not to
mention the fact that the identity of the participant or participants – no one knows for sure how
many there are – behind the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto remains shrouded in mystery.
Virtual currencies are exchanged in the same way as goods, but they have no intrinsic value of
their own. That is undoubtedly one reason why their value is highly volatile. Over the long term,
that naturally also exposes Bitcoin holders to the risk of total loss. For us, Bitcoin is not money, it
is a speculative plaything. The great number of sometimes dubious initial coin offerings is a clear
indication that Bitcoin is more of a funding instrument.
To  repeat:  it  is  more  of  a  speculative  plaything  than  a  form  of  payment.  Hence  my  repeated
warnings against investing in virtual currencies. We are witnessing a remarkable increase in the
value of some virtual currencies. But that does not alter the risk of total loss.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Blockchain/DLT in the world of payments
For us, Bitcoin’s most important contribution is the underlying blockchain technology, or to put it
more broadly, distributed ledger technology (DLT). This technology could help boost efficiency in
payment and settlement processes.
That is why we have been looking at this technology from three different perspectives. First, the
Bundesbank  develops  and  runs  major  payment  and  settlement  systems,  often  in  conjunction
with other central banks, and in this context we explore innovative technical capabilities which
can contribute to their stability and efficiency.
Second, the Bundesbank acts as a catalyst to forge improvements in payment operations and
settlement  structures.  The  better  the  Bundesbank  grasps  the  practical  implications  of
technologies  or  processes,  the  more  forcefully  it  will  be  able  to  present  its  arguments,  which
always  aim  to  preserve  the  stability  and  enhance  the  efficiency  of  payment  and  settlement
systems.
Third, the Bundesbank monitors the stability of systems and tools used in the field of payments
and settlement. Being able to gauge the relative merits of state-of-the-art technology is a key skill
in this regard. That is why the Bundesbank – much like other central banks worldwide – has been
putting  a  great  deal  of  thought  into  DLT,  even  though  this  technology  is  still  very  much  in  its
infancy.
Potentially,  distributed  data  storage  means  that  DLT  can  simplify  reconciliation  processes
associated  with  complex  work-sharing  value  added  chains.  DLT  is  seen  as  having  disruptive
potential  since  it  generally  allows  transactions  to  be  carried  out  directly  –  that  is,  without
intermediaries.
Developed  originally  for  the  virtual  currency  Bitcoin,  DLT  will  nonetheless  require  extensive
modifications if it is to be adapted to the needs of the financial sector. For one thing, the legal
framework as it stands requires participants to be identifiable, transactions to be kept secret from
third parties, and transactions to be settled with finality.
For  another,  transaction  throughput  needs  to  be  high.  That  said,  some  of  the  consensus
mechanisms,  as  they  are  known,  absorb  so  much  time  and  energy  that  efficient  settlement
seems  barely  possible.  Furthermore,  they  require  substantial  additional  data  transfers,  which
adds to the costs.
For comparison purposes, the Bitcoin network, at its peak, settles roughly 350,000 transactions
worldwide  every  day,  and  given  its  current  configuration,  appears  to  be  running  at  almost  full
capacity.  The  German  payment  system  alone,  meanwhile,  processes  more  than  75  million
transactions on average every business day, according to the data for 2016.
The traditional answer to the problem of mounting complexity in the interactions of a multitude of
independent participants has been to use a central bank – an institution which centralises the
settlement of payment transactions. Hence the name: Central. Bank. This arrangement channels
the  many  different  bilateral  payment  flows  and  order  books  into  larger  flows  which  are  then
routed via or by the central bank and posted in a central bank account. That was a huge step
towards greater stability and efficiency in the world of payments.
As a matter of fact, that is why we are seeing a trend towards centralisation and hierarchical
structures in the development of basic blockchains as well. There are multiple reasons why a
pure P2P settlement arrangement does not appear viable.
A pure P2P world appears unfeasible without trusted institutions. I call this factor the lack of a
real reference framework. Bitcoins, you see, are merely virtual, and they change hands between
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
virtual participants. They never leave the Bitcoin blockchain, and they will never have a real point
of reference until they are exchanged for real currency, which takes place outside the blockchain.
Once  real  transactions  come  into  play,  a  real  point  of  reference  is  needed.  You  can  trade  a
house on the blockchain in the form of a virtual token. But on the blockchain, that tells you nothing
about  whether  the  house  even  exists,  whether  it  has  the  features  it  is  said  to  possess,  and
whether it belongs to the seller in the first place. To verify all those things, there needs to be a
trustworthy outside third party.
The basic matter of a participant’s personal identity needs to be verifiable outside the blockchain.
Only then can we conduct real transactions with that participant.
That is why I feel that the purported goal of settling transactions without trustworthy third parties
is a pie in the sky proposition.
All in all, we are highly sceptical about the extent to which DLTcan be put to use in the financial
sector. Given the current state of the art, it is somewhat unlikely that DLT will become a widely
used application in individual and retail payments.
In  the  field  of  securities  settlement,  though,  the  shrinking  processing  times  and  reconciliation
costs might prove to be a more important factor and suggest that DLT does have its uses.
The Deutsche Bundesbank is analysing the pros and cons of DLTin a project it is running with
Deutsche Börse. While this project indicates that DLT does indeed have its functional merits, it is
still  unclear  how  far  DLT  also  has  the  edge  over  today’s  technology  in  terms  of  security,
efficiency, costs and speed.
3. Central bank-issued digital currency
When  using  DLT,  the  question  might  arise  in  future  as  to  whether  central  bank-issued  digital
currency could be provided for the safe settlement of larger transactions.
Central  bank-issued  digital  currency  would  rank  alongside  cash  and  credit  balances  with  the
central bank as another form of central bank money, and it would also need to be posted as a
liability on the central bank’s balance sheet.
There  are  several  technical  options  in  terms  of  the  form  this  would  take.  Transfers  could  be
value-based (like cash) or account-based (like deposits), anonymous or registered, its use could
be restricted – in terms of amount or payment purpose, say – and it could be remunerated or,
like cash, earn no interest.
The specific design dictates not just how far the supposed benefits of DLT-based central bank-
issued digital currency will come into play, but also the macroeconomic repercussions, which
also need to be factored into any overall verdict on its merits.
Arguably,  the  most  important  question  here  concerns  who  exactly  should  be  allowed  to  use
central bank-issued digital currency, or, to be more specific, whether central bank-issued digital
currency  should  be  issued  to  non-banks  as  well.  Because  if  that  were  the  case,  we  would
probably see substitution effects between the different forms of money. Confining its use to the
settlement of transactions among banks, on the other hand, would not involve any substantial
changes over the status quo.
In particular, non-banks could convert their sight deposits at banks into central bank-issued digital
currency  if  storage  as  an  entry  on  the  distributed  ledger  appears  more  secure  and  more
convenient than hoarding it as cash.
Significant parts of non-banks’ sight deposits being shifted into a blockchain, however, and no
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
longer  being  available  to  the  credit  institutions  as  virtually  unremunerated  funding  might  have
considerable repercussions for the interest margin, the scale of lending as well as the business
models in the banking system and the banking system’s structure.
Moreover, simply expanding the monetary base accompanied by sight deposits being shifted into
central bank-issued digital currency would require a larger amount of collateral and would thus
have a significant impact on the structure and risk profile of the central banks’ balance sheets.
There is a wide variety of potential monetary policy and stability policy implications. And these are
currently  being  investigated  by  a  number  of  central  banks.  As  things  stand,  the  likely
consequences remain to be seen.
In a nutshell, the title of my speech today: “From Bitcoin to digital central bank money – still a long
way to go” sums up the status quo of our considerations.
The road to a digital central bank – assuming there would be any benefits in the first place –
would be a very lengthy one. At present, there is not even a recognised basic blockchain. Major
consortiums are developing different types of basic blockchains, each with their own particular
features. Not all of them can be used in the financial sector.
At  the  same  time,  applications  for  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  being  developed  on
these shifting sands. There is a lot going on in this field. Technology has been advancing at a
pace unseen in the past decades.
4. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
For  us  as  a  central  bank,  trust  is  our  most  precious  asset.  When  questions  of  fundamental
importance arise concerning the monetary system or the settlement of payments or securities,
we cannot stand on the sidelines.
In  its  capacity  as  an  operator,  supervisor  and  catalyst,  the  Bundesbank  analyses  all  the  key
technical issues so that it can actively shape the ongoing conversation about DLT by contributing
insights of its own.
Our intention is to proceed in an objective and transparent manner. We wish to neither hype up a
“hot topic” nor hinder the development of highly promising innovations. In the field of payments
and settlement, for which I am the competent Executive Board member at the Bundesbank, the
stability and efficiency of systems alone is our primary concern.
So  from  that  vantage  point,  healthy  scepticism,  coupled  with  curiosity  and  critical  analysis,  is
warranted when it comes to both DLT and central bank-issued digital currency. Central bank-
issued digital currency, I believe, is currently an unrealistic prospect.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
