Opening Speech by Ms Caroline Abel, Governor of Central Bank of 
Seychelles at the Alliance for Financial Inclusion’s 13th Consumer 
Empowerment and Market Conduct and 8th SME Finance Working 
Group Meetings 
 March 13 – 17, 2017 
Venue: Savoy Resort and Spa 
 Honourable Ministers, Dr Peter Larose and Mr Wallace Cosgrow,  
Dr. Alfred Hannig, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion Executive Director, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning and thank you everyone for being here today.  On behalf 
of the Central Bank of Seychelles, I am very pleased to welcome you all 
to  the  8th  SME  Finance  and  13th  Consumer  Empowerment  and  Market 
Conduct  Working  Group  Meetings  and  the  Public-Private  Dialogue 
Training on Small Merchants.  It is indeed our pleasure to co-host an AFI 
event for the first time in Seychelles.   
 For  those  of  you  not  familiar  with  Seychelles,  we  are  a  group  of  115 
islands with a land area of 456 sq. km and 1.2 m sq. km of sea.  We have 
a  population  of  93,000  with  a  diverse  ethnicity  which  underscores  our 
official languages of Creole, English and French.  About half of the area 
of Seychelles is protected which consists of national parks, including two 
World Heritage Sites as declared by UNESCO: namely the atoll of Aldabra 
which is home to giant tortoises and the famous botanical garden of the 
Vallée de Mai on Praslin which has the native Coco de Mer, the largest 
seed in the world.  Given the unique biodiversity of Seychelles, the Central 
Bank showcased this fact through the new family of banknotes and coins 
which was unveiled in December last year, which is Seychelles’ Unique 
Biodiversity  –  the  Backbone  of  Our  Economy.  The  new  banknotes  and 
coins  represent  the  Seychelles’  endemic  flora  and  fauna.    We  face  the 
limitations  and  constraints  typical  of  Small  Island  States  that  have  few 
inhabitants and limited natural resources.  We are a developing economy 
that  is  heavily  dependent  upon  tourism  and  fisheries  and  the  financial 
services sector is currently the third pillar of the economy.  
 With that said, I would like to proceed with providing a brief background 
on the initiatives undertaken by the authorities to develop the Seychelles’ 
financial sector.  Seychelles has made significant progress since 2008 in 
actively  reforming  its  financial  sector.    In  late  2008,  we  embarked  on  a 
macro-economic reform program with the support of the IMF that provided 
the  platform  for  fundamental  changes  in  the  country's  economic  and 
financial  landscape  of  which  the  establishment  of  a  modern  payment 
system  was  seen  to  be  a  key  component.    Since  then,  a  number  of 
milestones have been achieved including:  
-  The  introduction  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles  Immediate 
Transfer  Service  (CBSITS)  creating  an  interbank  platform  for 
effecting payment transactions. 
-  The establishment of an Electronic Cheque Clearing (ECC) system 
allowing for a same day cheque clearing process via the electronic 
exchange of cheque images.  
-  The Seychelles Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT) as an alternative 
means for interbank funds transfer.  
-  The introduction of the first Securities Exchange. 
-  The  licensing  of  the  first  payment  service  provider  to  offer  mobile 
payment services.  
-  The  implementation  of  the  electronic  payment  gateway  for  the 
payment of Government services.  
-  Commissioning  of  a  number  of  feasibility/diagnostic  studies  in 
respect 
to  Government  payments, 
remittance  market, 
the 
implementation of a Central Securities Depository and that of a Real 
Time Gross Settlement System. 
 Albeit,  all  the  progress  made,  there  are  still  important  milestones  that 
remain  to  be  achieved  in  order  to  further  develop  the  financial  sector, 
especially where adoption of innovative payment systems and consumer 
empowerment  are  concerned.    In  this  context,  the  Cabinet  of  Ministers 
approved  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Implementation  Plan  in 
November,  2014.  The  Plan  serves  to  provide  the  Government  and  all 
stakeholders with a clear guidance in key policy areas for financial sector 
development.  It is a nation-wide document detailing the strategies of the 
Seychelles  Government  to  strengthen  and  deepen  the  financial  sector 
with  the  ultimate  objective  of  enhancing  the  country’s  economic 
development.  The key strategic objectives are: 
-  Strengthening the financial sector’s legal and regulatory framework.  
-  Developing  the  national  payment  system  and  other  relevant 
financial infrastructures.  
 Improving access to credit of small and medium enterprises.  
-  Strengthening the regulation and supervision of non-bank financial 
institutions. 
-  Developing the capital markets.  
-  Other  relevant  cross  cutting  issues  such  as  consumer  protection, 
financial literacy and financial inclusion. 
As part of the output of the Plan, a financial literacy baseline survey was 
commissioned  last  year  with  the  aim  of  gauging  the  level  of  financial 
literacy  of  the  population  and  provide  an  assessment  of  its  needs, 
including the identification of possible target groups.   The survey was the 
first of its kind to be conducted in the country and will be a crucial element 
in the drafting of a national strategy for financial education.  Similarly, a 
survey was also completed last year under the SME Development project.  
The survey had as objective to provide disaggregated data about SMEs 
that  will  be  used  to  review  SMEs  development  issues  across  various 
population segments and training needs.  As a result, the following were 
identified as challenges that inhibit SMEs from access to markets:  
-  Where markets are present, the site are not serviced with necessary 
social amenities. 
-  SMEs lack market information and marketing skills. 
-  Lack of adequate local markets.  
 Inadequate,  inefficient  and  ineffective  distribution  and  supply 
network in the local market, such that products/service takes time 
before reaching target markets. 
-  Limited  capacity  to  meet  SME  expectations  in  terms  of  providing 
finance as well as providing non-financial support.  
-  Entrepreneurship skills training into both practical and non-practical 
sector specific training in order to achieve relevancy to the needs of 
the small business community. 
 As you may all be aware, SMEs play critical role in the country’s economic 
development.  SMEs  are  often  considered  as  the  drive  to  creating  local 
demand and consumption. In fact, SMEs related matters are high priorities 
on  the  government  agenda.    On  that  note,  the  Central  Bank  in 
coordination  with  government  is  closely  working  with  the  commercial 
banks in light of the risks associated with SME finance, to come up with a 
strategy for SME lending. 
 The Central Bank is also currently engaged in exploring the feasibility to 
expand participation in the Credit Information System (CIS) to all lenders 
not regulated by the Central Bank, including government lending agencies 
or programs and commercial firms that engage in hire‐purchase activities. 
In this regard work is being undertaken with the  World Bank to enact a 
Credit Information System law which would broaden the scope of the CIS 
in Seychelles to include other entities and activities that are not regulated 
by  the  Central  Bank.    Furthermore,  with  the  aim  of  modernising  the 
national  payment  system,  by  broadening  the  scope  of  innovative 
payments  schemes  and  reducing  paper  instruments  as  a  means  for 
payment, the Central Bank in collaboration with the Seychelles Banking 
Association  are  looking  into  the  possibility  of  implementing  a  national 
payment switch.   
 Ladies and gentlemen, with no doubt, services provided by the financial 
system  has  a  prime  impact  on  economic  growth.    The  level  of 
development  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  growth  of  businesses, 
enhancing  innovation  and competition.   It  is  however,  equally  important 
that  in  support  of  the  broader  objective  of  financial  sector  development 
and  financial  inclusion,  access  to  financial  services  are  of  the  highest 
quality and convenience, affordable and also operated in an environment 
where  consumers  are  adequately  protected.    Ensuring  that  there  is  an 
effective consumer protection framework to address the balance of power 
between  financial  institutions  and  their  consumers  is  vital  in  order  to 
enhance  public  confidence  in  the  financial  system  and  the  use  of 
innovative financial services. 
 There  is  no  need  for  me  to  overemphasise  that  consumer  education, 
consumer  empowerment  is  fundamental  across  all  levels.    Financially 
literate  and  empowered  consumers  interact  more  effectively  and 
assertively  with  financial  services  providers,  ultimately  leading  to  them 
attaining their financial objectives.  Essentially, consumer empowerment 
is instrumental in supporting financial inclusion policies.  Now, whilst it is 
important  for  consumers  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  acquiring  the 
necessary financial knowledge and skills, it is important to reiterate that 
authorities  and  financial  institutions  should  devote  resources  and  work 
towards  establishing  mechanisms  that  support  financial  consumer 
empowerment.  
 Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank AFI for organising such 
forums  as  they  provide  us,  policy  makers  with  the  opportunities  to 
exchange experiences on the different policy decisions taken in our own 
jurisdictions.  Years ago, productivity was attributed to those who retained 
the  most  knowledge.    Today,  however,  productivity  and  efficiency  is 
attributed to combining expertise with the experience and intelligence of 
peers discharging similar functions.  Let us continue to learn from each 
and  showcase  the  results  that  our  forum,  the  Alliance  for  Financial 
Inclusion  can  bring  to  the  world  stage.    We  in  Seychelles,  we  are  very 
fortunate  to have  you  on  our shores  at  this  present time as  the subject 
matters on the agenda are very pertinent to our country.  I encourage my 
colleagues  from  the  Central  Bank  and  the  two  respective  government 
Ministries to have maximum participation and interaction. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your attention and I 
wish you all fruitful deliberations over the course of the coming days and 
to our foreign guests an enjoyable stay in Seychelles. 
 Thank you. 
