Yves  Mersch:  Aligning  accountability  with  sovereignty  in  the
European Union - the ECB's experience
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the ECB Legal Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 4 September 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Let me also welcome you on behalf of the Executive Board to the ECB Legal Conference 2017.
Today and tomorrow we will discuss matters that are relevant not just to the ECB and the legal
community, but also to the public. The legal order indeed has a direct impact on all our daily lives.
And it is of crucial importance to what we do at the ECB. With the ratification of the EU Treaties,
the  citizens  of  Europe  made  us  independent  and  gave  us  a  clear  mandate.  So  it  is  entirely
legitimate that we are held to account. We need to be able to show that we continue to act in
accordance with our mandate; we do not need to enter into a contentious debate about changing
it.
In  fact,  the  demand  for  accountability  has  been  increasing  across  advanced  economies  and
across  institutions.  It’s  a  trend  that  reflects  questions  stemming  from  the  crisis  as  well  as
societal and technological change – people want more answers, more quickly. But we need to be
mindful  that  direct,  instant  and  constant  communication  does  not  necessarily  translate  into
stronger  accountability.  In  our  constitutional  democracies,  parliaments  and  courts  provide
fundamental checks and balances, for good reasons.
The increased attention and stronger scrutiny we are facing at the ECB also reflects the growing
importance  and  more  direct  impact  of  decisions  taken  at  European  level.  Citizens  in  Europe
witness the power exercised by EU institutions – and they want to be able to see that it is not
wielded arbitrarily or from behind closed doors.
Today,  I  will  discuss  how  these  trends  are  affecting  the  ECB. And  I  will  aim  to  draw  some
conclusions  on  how  to  align  accountability  with  sovereignty  in  the  EU’s  multilevel  governance
framework at a time when, according to the latest Eurobarometer survey , 68% of those polled
say they feel they are citizens of the EU as well as citizens of their own country.
Independent, accountable and European
1
The survey shows that trust in the ECB has increased, albeit from a lower level than trust in
other public institutions. Still, during the crisis, reduced trust in public institutions tempted some
people to reopen the debate on central bank independence. They often argued that independence
was incompatible with accountability on the basis of the trends I have described.
A critical assessment of why trust in public institutions fell is important, but questioning central
bank independence is not the right approach – subjecting central banks to political influence is
unlikely  to  make  them  more  trusted.  We  know  the  economic  argument  –  empirical  evidence
shows that political influence is more likely to lead to short-termism and make the central bank
less  effective  in  preserving  price  stability.  But  there  is  also  a  political  argument  –  political
influence does not necessarily mean stronger legitimacy, precisely because it is likely to arouse
the  suspicion  that  the  central  bank  is  politically  motivated  and  may  therefore  deviate  from  its
mandate  for  political  reasons.  So  I  would  argue  that  independence  does  not  weaken
accountability, it strengthens it.
Accountability,  in  turn,  ensures  that  independence  does  not  lead  to  arbitrariness  and  that  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
is 
fulfilled.  So,  proper  accountability  arrangements  strengthen 
for
mandate 
independence. And they reinforce each other as cornerstones of central banks’ legitimacy and
effectiveness.
the  case 
At  the  ECB,  our  monetary  policy  mandate  is  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  And  when  the
governors of the national central banks (NCBs) attend the Governing Council meetings, they are
not representing their respective countries. They are there in a personal capacity and represent
the interests of everyone in the euro area. So it is appropriate that we are held to account at
European level, while the NCBs explain monetary policy decisions at national level.
Importantly, explaining decisions is not synonymous with exercising accountability. In principle,
where  a  competence,  such  as  monetary  policy,  has  been  fully  transferred  to  European  level,
accountability should be practised at that level. This ensures that everyone in Europe has the
same ability to hold us accountable through the same bodies, namely the European Parliament,
complemented by judicial review by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU). In other
words, a single monetary policy requires single accountability, but in a multinational setting it can
be explained through various channels.
Attempting to strengthen political ties to national political systems, “renationalising” accountability
through the back door, if you will, would only risk undermining the singleness of monetary policy
and threaten its independence. People and markets would end up suspecting that the ECB is
responding to national interests instead of acting in the interests of the euro area as a whole.
Accountability during crises
Central  banks  played  a  key  role  in  managing  the  crisis  and  implemented  some  controversial
measures. Understandably, this triggered a demand for stronger scrutiny. The ECB was among
the institutions that took such measures: preserving price stability was particularly challenging in
an Economic and Monetary Union that was still incomplete. We were facing doubts about the
integrity of the single currency, not to mention a unique institutional environment that lacked crisis
management capacities.
We  increased  our  accountability  and  transparency  in  line  with  the  essential  role  we  played  in
managing the crisis. And this was not only driven by external demands. It was in our own interest
to provide the public and the markets with a comprehensive analysis of the economic situation
and  monetary  policy  decisions.  For  instance,  we  decided  to  publish  the  accounts  of  the
Governing Council’s monetary policy meetings. Of course, this higher level of transparency had
to be counterbalanced by the need to maintain the frank and dynamic exchanges which make for
efficient  collegial  decision-making.  The  accounts  offer  a  fair  and  balanced  reflection  of  policy
deliberations  by  Governing  Council  members.  They  aim  to  provide  clear  and  accurate
information that elucidates the message, rather than overloads it with detail. However, there is a
caveat: the growing importance of forward guidance has increased the risk of self-censorship in
the official discussions.
Since the start of the crisis we have substantially increased our interaction with the European
Parliament, our key counterpart in terms of accountability. In addition to the regular hearings, the
ECB now participates in exchanges of views. The number of MEPs’ written questions to the ECB
has also considerably increased; the average number of replies to the Parliament per year has
risen tenfold compared with the pre-crisis period. This is partly a reflection of the fact that we
now  have  a  broader  role,  albeit  mostly  in  relation  to  financial  assistance  programmes  and
banking supervision.
Alongside this increased accountability, the CJEU has become more involved in judicial review of
our actions in recent years. On the one hand, the Court has exercised its powers in relation to a
wide range of central bank decisions and policies. Recent cases have seen it review not only
monetary  policy  and  supervisory  decisions,  but  also  technical  advice  provided  within  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
framework of the Troika and central banking policies, even where they do not involve the exercise
of  our  decision-making  powers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Court’s  decisions  have  far-reaching
implications, as recent rulings have confirmed that individuals can also challenge our conduct by
seeking damages, in addition to asking the Court to annul our decisions for reasons of illegality.
We  need  to  ensure  that  all  our  actions,  even  when  we  are  not  exercising  our  core  decision-
making powers, also comply with the legal requirements that are intended to confer fundamental
rights on individuals at EU rather than national level.
The  European  Ombudsman  and  the  European  Court  of  Auditors  also  play  a  role.  The
Ombudsman  can  act  in  matters  involving  the  ECB  regarding  transparency  and  good
governance, while the Court of Auditors examines our operational efficiency. The European Anti-
Fraud  Office  has  the  power  to  conduct  administrative  investigations  within  the  ECB  for  the
purposes of fighting fraud, corruption and other illegal activity, as well as to investigate serious
matters relating to the discharge of officials’ professional duties.
Finally, we are also subject to the scrutiny of the European Data Protection Supervisor, which
monitors  and  ensures  that  data  protection  legislation  is  appropriately  applied  to  our  data-
processing operations.
Aligning accountability with sovereignty in the EU
The ECB’s monetary policy provides an example of how sovereignty and accountability can –
and,  ideally,  should  –  be  aligned  when  transferring  a  competence  to  European  level.  It  also
shows  that  it  is  possible  to  keep  pace  with  events  and  meet  the  demand  for  greater
accountability from society, while respecting essential principles enshrined in primary law.
However, there are two challenges in this regard that I would like to discuss as they also have
broader relevance for the EU, with its unique institutional framework.
First, the distinction between the euro area and the EU means that it is more difficult to fully tailor
accountability to euro area tasks. In particular, the European Parliament does not sit in euro area
composition when discussing euro area matters, even though it would be common sense for it to
do so.
Second,  accountability  and  sovereignty  also  need  to  be  proportionate  in  areas  that  are  not
exclusively dealt with at EU level but of shared competence.
For  instance,  more  specific  arrangements  within  our  accountability  framework  have  been
established  for  banking  supervision.  Although  the  SSM  Regulation  and  interinstitutional
arrangements focus mainly on relations with the European Parliament and the EU Council, the
SSM Regulation also provides for specific reporting requirements to national parliaments. This
reflects the significant potential impact of microprudential supervision on banks, their customers
and public finances at national level and justifies ad hoc reporting at different levels. At the same
time, the national competent authorities remain accountable at national level for their tasks in the
context of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. These arrangements are, however, incomplete as
the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  backstop  is  not  operational,  and  neither  is  the  European
deposit insurance scheme.
For other bodies, such as the European Stability Mechanism, the situation is somewhat more
complex  and  blurred.  It  was  created  on  the  basis  of  intergovernmental  arrangements  and  for
tasks where the EU only has a coordination role, and where the European Parliament is not yet a
counterparty  in  terms  of  accountability.  So  a  balance  needs  to  be  found.  On  the  one  hand,
accountability should be assigned to national parliaments for decisions that are fully in the hands
of national authorities. On the other hand, it would seem appropriate for the European Parliament
to be accountable for decisions that affect the interests of the EU as a whole.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Addressing the risk of an “accountability deficit”
Let me conclude.
Accountability and sovereignty need to be aligned to address risks of a perceived “accountability
deficit”.
The development of the ECB’s accountability practices has ensured continued effective scrutiny,
even as our role expanded as a result of the crisis. In turn, this has allowed the temptation of
renationalisation to be resisted, in keeping with our European mandate.
Public  opinion  surveys  suggest  that  Euroscepticism  is  now  receding.  But  we  should  not  be
complacent, as trust in the ECB is only gradually returning.
Moreover, while European policies have assumed a stronger role over time, in many areas they
still  overlap  with  national  policies.  In  those  areas,  confusion  over  the  assignment  of
responsibilities and accountability arrangements threatens efficiency and legitimacy. We should
reflect on how it can be addressed.
And there is a need for us to complete not only the banking union, but also the institutional set-up.
This includes the ongoing debate on a euro area finance ministry and a euro area composition of
the European Parliament.
This is important for two reasons. First, it would be a true reflection of a functioning democracy
where sovereignty has been either fully transferred to EU level (e.g. monetary policy) or is shared
between national and EU levels (e.g. prudential policies).
And second, liability and control need to be aligned – he who pays the piper calls the tune. When
taxpayers’ money is involved at European level, a European control function is called for.
If, going beyond the Westphalian paradigm, EU citizens can receive rights and obligations not
only through the national sovereignty channel but also directly through the EU channel, we need
to adjust the institutions. This was already recognised at the Maastricht Treaty conference on
political union in 1990. On a final note, let me just add that the return to intergovernmentalism for
fear of Treaty changes will destroy the EU, as Europe, over the centuries, has repeatedly seen
the breakdown of such alliances of dominant states.
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  attention.  I  look  forward  to  the  many  fruitful  discussions  and
exchanges we will no doubt have at this conference.
1
Standard Eurobarometer 87.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
