Yannis Stournaras: Entrepreneurship, NPL resolution policies and
economic growth prospects in Greece
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event hosted by Piraeus
Bank, Athens, 28 March 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to share my
thoughts on the growth prospects of the Greek economy and the role of entrepreneurship and
NPL  resolution  policies.  Today,  the  long-term  growth  prospects  of  the  Greek  economy  are
significantly  improved  compared  to  seven  years  ago  as  the  economy  has  been  undergoing
significant rebalancing and adjustment, despite the missteps and delays that occur from time to
time. 
The  improved  macroeconomic  fundamentals  open  up  significant  investment  opportunities.
Entrepreneurship can transform these improved opportunities in actual economic growth, new
jobs and social prosperity. Banks play an important role in providing finance to entrepreneurs to
make this transformation possible. 
Greek banks have not been able so far to provide the necessary credit to companies as they are
burdened with a high share of non-performing loans (NPLs). This may change in the future due
to a number of ongoing initiatives. Resolution of NPLs may foster economic growth significantly
as it will enable a productivity-enhancing reallocation of capital and employment from non-viable
to viable companies and sectors. 
that  has  eliminated 
Since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, Greece has implemented a bold programme of
economic  adjustment 
improved
competitiveness.  Between  2009  and  2016,  the  general  government  deficit  shrunk  by
approximately 14 percentage points of GDP. The primary balance, adjusted for the effect of the
business  cycle,  improved  by  about  17  percentage  points  of  potential  GDP.  This  achievement
represents  one  of  the  largest  fiscal  adjustments  ever  undertaken  and  is  twice  that  of  the
adjustment in other Member States that were under EU-IMF programmes. 
fiscal  and  external  deficits  and 
On external adjustment, the current account also marked a significant turnaround improving by
about 15 percentage points of GDP compared to 2008; in the last two years, it has effectively
been in balance. Competitiveness has been restored, reflecting the effect of structural reforms in
the labour and product markets. As a result, the share of exports in GDP increased from 19% in
2009  to  30%  in  2016  with  most  of  this  increase  stemming  from  exports  of  goods.  In  fact,
according to Eurostat data, Greece’s exports of goods have increased by 43% since 2009 in real
terms, compared to 42% for the euro area and 47% for Germany, Europe’s export engine. 
This rebalancing of the economy towards a new, outward-looking growth model has particular
significance for the prospects for entrepreneurship. A few figures are indicative of the forces at
work. Between 2010 and 2015, the relative price of tradables versus non-tradables rose by about
10%.  Whereas  both  sectors  have  been  hit  hard  by  the  recession,  the  tradable  sector  has
performed  better  than  the  non-tradable  sector  as  outward-looking  companies  increased  their
exports, taking advantage of the improvement in competitiveness. As a result, the relative size of
the tradable sectors, measured by Gross Value Added, grew by approximately 12% in volume
terms  and  by  about  24%  in  nominal  terms.  Finally,  in  terms  of  employment,  the  size  of  the
tradable sector increased relative to the non-tradable sector by around 8%. 
These figures would improve further if the already implemented reforms were to be enhanced by
those  planned  under  the  ESM  programme.  Based  on  estimates  of  the  OECD,  the  full
implementation of all reforms, both those undertaken and those scheduled, is expected to boost
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
real GDP over a 10-year-horizon by about 13%. And this figure excludes a further positive effect
from structural reforms which cannot be easily quantified such as the modernisation of public
administration  and  the  judiciary  system,  the  strengthening  of  insolvency  regulations  and  the
resolution  of  non-performing  loans.  In-house  work  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  points  to  similar
estimates of the effects of structural reforms with the main effect coming from higher total factor
productivity (TFP) growth. 
The strengthening of the long-term prospects of outward-looking firms requires a further opening-
up of international trade, participation in global value chains and closer trade links with countries
and businesses with cutting-edge technology. In this way, inherent structural weaknesses that
hamper the market penetration of Greek products (such as product quality, protected designation
of origin and branding, red tape, etc.) can be overcome. Additionally, improved financing terms
and conditions would be forthcoming. 
But  prospects  for  entrepreneurs  are  also  closely  related  to  the  paths  taken  by  the  various
programme reviews. After the successful completion of the first review, a positive momentum
developed  which  affected  confidence  and  liquidity.  A  number  of  key  indicators  of  economic
activity,  such  as  industrial  production,  retail  sales,  dependent  employment  flows  and  private
consumption, improved. Bank deposits stabilised and emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) for
Greek banks fell. These developments pointed at that time to a recovery starting from the second
half of 2016 and continuing through 2017 and 2018. 
This outlook is still possible in principle despite the deterioration in confidence and the weakening
of  short-term  indicators  in  recent  months,  which  is  associated  with  the  delay  in  closing  the
second review. For the time being, the delay in closing the second review has weakened but has
not  reversed  the  positive  momentum  of  economic  activity.  However,  any  further  delays  could
derail the recovery of the economy and put at risk the growth, fiscal and financial targets. 
But entrepreneurship does not just require confidence. Reforms, that are part of the programme
measures,  also  need  to  be  implemented.  Particular  emphasis  should  be  put  on  simplifying
investment  licensing  procedures,  reducing  the  administrative  burden  on  businesses  and
facilitating competition, opening up the remaining regulated professions and network industries,
modernizing and strengthening public administration, enhancing judicial efficiency, speeding up
court proceedings and of course reducing personal and corporate taxation. Emphasis needs to
be placed on restraining and restructuring non-productive spending and making a more effective
and  efficient  use  of  the  public  sector’s  assets,  creating  in  this  way  incentives  to  increase
investment and employment which will contribute to increased potential output. 
For  their  part,  the  Institutions  should  show  more  flexibility  in  the  area  of  fiscal  targets  and
government  debt  relief.  According  to  estimates  from  the  Bank  of  Greece,  a  lowering  of  the
general government primary surplus target after 2020 to 2 per cent of GDP, from the 3.5 per cent
that is envisaged now, would be consistent with debt sustainability if combined with some mild
debt relief measures and structural reforms to raise potential growth. The easing of the primary
surplus targets, together with the implementation of the agreed structural reforms, would put the
necessary conditions in place for a gradual lowering of tax rates, with positive multiplier effects
on economic growth. 
Finally, there is the issue of what debt relief measures. The short-term measures decided at the
Eurogroup  meeting  of  the  5th  of  December  last  year  are  a  positive  step  and  are  expected  to
reduce public debt as a ratio of GDP by 20 percentage points by 2060. 
However,  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public  debt  going  forward,  additional  medium-term
measures are necessary. When the debt-to-GDP ratio is above 100%, measures that reduce
interest payments on debt can improve the ratio quicker than a rise in the primary balance. For
example,  with  a  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  180%,  a  1  percentage  point  reduction  in  the  effective
interest rate on debt will reduce the ratio of debt to GDP by 1.8 percentage points. By contrast, a
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
rise in the primary surplus by 1 percentage point of GDP lowers the debt-to-GDP ratio by only 1
percentage point (assuming that the fiscal multiplier is 0 which, as we well know, is not). 
Now,  the  interest  burden  of  Greek  public  debt  is  low  until  2021  but  increases  substantially
thereafter because of payments of deferred interest on the EFSF loans and interest on new debt
issued  in  financial  markets. An  exercise  done  at  the  Bank  looks  at  the  impact  of  smoothing
interest  payments  for  EFSF  loans  over  time.  The  results  of  these  simulations  suggest  that,
extending the Weighted Average Maturity of interest payments for EFSF loans by 8.5 years, while
simultaneously allowing primary surpluses to decline to 2% of GDP after 2020, debt sustainability
is safeguarded. 
This  exercise  is  indicative  of  how  admittedly  mild  debt  relief  measures  can  have  significant
effects on the debt profile with no cost for the creditors. Of course, were the interest smoothing
accompanied by higher growth, as a consequence of lower primary surpluses, then the debt-to-
GDP profile and gross financing needs would be even more favourable. Alternatively, if interest
rate smoothing were to occur and the costs shared equally between Greece and the ESM, this
would also lead to more favourable outcomes. 
Turning now to the role of the banking sector in providing necessary credit to finance dynamic
businesses, the issue of non-performing loans remains the greatest challenge. The stock of non-
performing  loans  (NPLs)  has  reached  unprecedented  levels,  with  the  deterioration  in  asset
quality being widespread. There is no doubt that one of the main drivers of the sharp rise of NPLs
has been the deep and prolonged economic recession and its impact on the financial condition of
households and the non-financial corporate sector. However, other factors related to structural
impediments also played a role: the ineffectiveness of judicial procedures; excessive borrower
protection; the preferential claims of the State and Pension Funds on the proceeds of liquidations
as against other classes of creditors; the unfavourable tax treatment of provisioning and write-
offs; the lack of an out-of-court-workout framework; and the absence of a secondary market for
distressed debt. 
The Bank of Greece and the government have implemented several measures to address the
long-standing impediments that dampened banks’ efforts to deal with the problem. As a first step,
the Bank of Greece conducted a troubled asset review to assess the operational preparedness
and  effectiveness  of  banks’  established  policies  and  practices  to  deal  with  the  large  scale
resolution of troubled assets. Following this, the Bank enhanced the supervisory and regulatory
framework. It issued guidelines regarding NPL management with a key requirement being the
establishment of a well-defined governance structure with an internal independent NPL workout
unit.  It  introduced  the  Code  of  Conduct  regarding  the  interaction  of  credit  and  other  financial
institutions with borrowers in arrears. 
Recently,  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in  close  cooperation  with  the  banking  supervision  arm  of  the
European  Central  Bank,  has  designed  an  operational  targets  framework  for  the  reduction  of
NPLs,  supported  by  several  Key  Performance  Indicators.  The  selected  targets  and  key
performance indicators are both action-oriented and results-oriented and provide a granular view
of the key asset quality metrics of the bank, the management actions to reduce NPEs and the
effectiveness of these actions. Banks have agreed ambitious but achievable targets, which were
submitted at the end of September 2016, with a 3-year time horizon. The goal is to reduce NPLs
by  around  40  billion  euros  by  end-2019.  The  targets  set  take  into  account  the  intrinsic
characteristics of each bank’s portfolio, organization and capacity. At the same time, banks have
developed 
into  account
tailored  models 
macroeconomic assumptions. 
the  operational 
to  calibrate 
targets, 
taking 
The key performance indicators are monitored on a quarterly basis through extended prudential
reporting,  and  the  Bank  of  Greece,  to  enhance  transparency  and  market  discipline,  has
committed to publish a relevant progress report every quarter. Based on the first report already
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
published,  the  targeted  reduction  of  NPLs  is  on  track,  although  the  main  reduction  is  not
expected to take place before the end of 2018-beginning of 2019. 
The  government,  for  its  part,  has  improved  the  regulatory  framework  related  to  the  law  on
overindebted households. It has amended the Code of Civil Procedure, with a focus, inter alia, on
changing the hierarchy of creditors and how proceeds are allocated in cases of liquidation. The
capacity and efficiency of the judicial system have been enhanced, albeit with implementation
being  somewhat  behind  schedule.  In  addition,  the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Greece  have
developed  a  framework  for  non-bank  credit  servicing  firms  and  the  sale  of  NPLs,  with  two
companies having received a license so far, while other applications are being reviewed. 
The  above  initiatives  are  about  to  be  significantly  enhanced  by  the  implementation  of  further
policy actions that are in the pipeline. Specifically, important steps are being taken regarding the
revision  of  the  out-of-court  workout  in  order  to  facilitate  coordination  among  banks  and  other
creditors, including the State and social security funds. Significant focus will be on standardizing
procedures  for  small  business  professionals  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  to  ensure  a
rapid, effective and transparent resolution of arrears. In addition, the revision of bankruptcy law is
expected  to  streamline  procedures,  allowing  for  creditor-led  restructuring  for  companies  with
negative net worth, while the tax treatment of impairment losses and loan write-offs is in the final
stages  of  being  legislated.  On  the  remaining  steps,  it  is  important  that  bank  managers  and
employees  acting  in  good  faith  in  managing  non-performing  loans  should  be  protected  from
criminal  prosecution,  while  the  platform  for  electronic  auctions  should  become  operational.
Additionally, the full deployment of debt information / counseling centres across the country will
facilitate borrowers’ understanding of the optimum solutions to managing their loans. 
The  full  implementation  of  the  above  reforms,  in  conjunction  with  a  more  active  NPL
management policy on the part of banks is beneficial from both a micro and a macro prudential
perspective. It can improve the financial soundness of banks; it will free-up capital that can be
directed  to  productive  sectors  of  the  economy,  resulting  in  an  increase  in  productivity  and
potential growth. Finally, it will diminish the power of strategic defaulters who, until now, see no
immediate consequences from failing  to  pay. A  conservative  estimate,  based  on  a  sample  of
13,000  firms  with  loans  that  exceed  one  million  euro,  indicates  that,  on  average,  one  in  six
companies appear to strategically default, while anecdotal evidence suggests that this value is
significantly higher for smaller businesses and households. 
On the macroeconomic implications of NPLs, the academic literature has established a strong
two-way  relationship  between  macroeconomic  developments  and  asset  quality.  The  profound
and well-documented negative relationship between economic growth and NPLs is enriched by
recent  studies  that  also  identify  a  negative  feedback  effect  from  the  banking  sector  to  the
economy.  The  size  of  that  feedback  is  related  to  the  ability  of  banks  to  channel  savings  to
investment, to allocate risks and to transmit monetary policy decisions to the real economy. This
ability has also been found to be related to bank-specific drivers, such as management quality,
the level of capital, cost efficiency and risk preferences. 
In  particular,  one  of  the  main  channels  through  which  financial  developments  can  have  a
feedback effect on the macro economy is through the capacity of banks to lend to the economy,
the so-called “balance sheet channel”. The reduction in NPLs can weigh positively on the supply
of credit by unlocking bank capital and funding for the financing of productive companies. The
reduction  in  NPLs  improves  the  profitability  of  banks  through  higher  interest  income,  reduced
provisioning  or  write-offs  and  reduced  administrative  expenses  for  the  monitoring  and
management of NPLs. At the same time, by removing doubts about the bank’s future revenues, it
allows  banks  to  benefit  from  lower  funding  costs.  Such  developments  positively  affect  loan
supply. In addition, as impaired assets carry a higher risk weight, a lower level of NPLs allows
banks to be more aggressive in funding investment opportunities, unconstrained by a scarcity of
capital or the distraction of managements’ attention to the management of a large-scale troubled
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
assets portfolio. 
1
In addition, a lower level of NPLs improves the allocation of credit from non-viable firms that are
kept artificially alive to viable firms. According to research by the OECD, when more industry
capital is sunk in non-viable (“zombie”) firms, the average viable firm undertakes less investment
than otherwise . Hence, a rise in the fraction of non-viable firms in the economy crowds out the
growth of more productive firms, thus reducing the efficiency of capital allocation and causing a
slow-down in multifactor productivity growth. Simulations by the OECD suggest that reducing the
share of capital of non-viable firms in Greece to the minimum across OECD countries would be
associated with a gain in investment for a typical viable firm of 4.7% per annum. This number is
economically very significant. It is indicative of the potential gains of NPL resolution for corporate
investment, aggregate productivity and long-term economic growth. The policy implication is that
there is considerable scope for policy reforms that facilitate NPL resolution in order to improve
productivity-enhancing capital reallocation in the Greek economy. 
On top of the above, the economy is also positively affected from the demand side, the so-called
“borrower balance-sheet channel”. From a debt overhang perspective, non-financial corporations
with loans in arrears might have less incentive to invest in new projects in order to avoid using
the upside potential to service current debt. In addition, higher lending rates seen in countries
with  prolonged  NPL  problems  weigh  negatively  on  credit  demand.  Higher  lending  costs  drive
firms  to  utilise  internal  sources  of  financing,  resulting,  on  average,  in  the  avoidance  of  large
investment  projects.  A  reduction  in  NPLs  has  the  reverse  effect,  improving  the  willingness,
incentives and ability of economic agents to invest in new projects. 
The practical implications of NPLs for growth opportunities are evident when looking at European
data  on  bank  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households.  The  contraction  of  bank
lending is particularly pronounced in countries suffering from high levels of NPLs. At the same
time, Member States with high NPL ratios have also experienced below average GDP growth,
consistent with the below-average propensity to invest that NPLs generate. The opposite picture
is found for the Member States that exhibit a lower level of NPLs. 
Therefore, the effective management of NPLs is of the utmost importance for a country’s growth
opportunities. Banks − benefiting from improved asset quality, profitability and liquidity − will be in
a better position to reduce the cost of credit risk and lending spreads. This amounts to a pivotal
development  for  the  competitiveness  of  the  non-financial  corporate  sector  in  an  international
environment of ultra-low interest rates. It also facilitates the reduction in the debt servicing costs
of  households  that  mitigate  the  impact  of  reduced  household  gross  disposable  income.  The
above  is  to  the  benefit  of  the  real  economy  as  the  unlocking  of  funding  and  the  improved
business  climate  impacts  positively  on  the  setting-up  of  new  businesses,  investment,
employment  and  growth.  In  sum,  we  would  move  to  a  virtuous  circle  where  improved  asset
quality positively affects GDP growth, in turn leading to a further reduction of NPLs and so on. 
In conclusion, Greece is poised to return to economic and financial normality and to shift to a
new, outward-looking and sustainable growth model, based on tradable goods and services. The
economic  adjustment  and  structural  improvements  over  the  past  years  have  opened  up
significant investment opportunities. To reap the benefit of these opportunities though, there are
certain preconditions: first, the completion of the second review with no further delay; second,
the consistent and determined implementation of the programme in conjunction; third, a more
realistic  approach  by  all  parties  to  the  fiscal  mix  and  government  debt  burden.  Such
developments,  together  with  the  cleaning-up  of  banks’  balance  sheets  will  set  in  motion  a
virtuous circle, paving the way to the full return of the Greek economy to normality.
1
Adalet  McGowan,  M.  D.  Andrews  and  V.  Millot  (2017):  The  walking  dead:  Zombie  firms  and  productivity
performance in OECD countries. OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 1372.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
