Elvira Nabiullina: Overview of Russia's fiscal and monetary policy
Speech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the panel meeting of 
the Russian Federation’s Ministry of Finance, Moscow, 20 April 2017.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Medvedev, and good afternoon to my esteemed colleagues.
For us here at the Bank of Russia, the Ministry of Finance is our closest and most important
partner. It is not for nothing that we are brought together in a single understanding of fiscal and
monetary authority. And of course our measures – monetary policy on the one hand, and fiscal
policy on the other – are closely intertwined, and have an influence on one another. We share the
responsibility of maintaining economic stability between us.
The financial system was the first to take the hit of external shocks experienced two years ago.
And since that time we have often needed to make tough, and sometimes unpopular, decisions.
In  our  view,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  in  making  conservative  fiscal  policy  decisions,  and  in
consistently  holding  the  course  towards  reducing  the  budget  deficit  and  towards  reducing
dependence on oil revenues, has made a significant contribution to the preservation of stability
and provided support to adaption processes in the economy. Major credit is due to the Ministry of
Finance  for  the  fact  that  the  Russian  economy  now  feels  more  secure  and  macroeconomic
indicators are normal.
The current economic situation in general looks very promising. When making decisions about
monetary policy in March, we were considering the possibility of continuing to reduce the key rate
in the second quarter, if the economic situation develops in accordance with our forecasts. In
March  inflation  went  down  to  4.3%,  and  according  to  assessments  on  17 April  inflation  has
already fallen year-on-year to 4.1%, which is very close to target. The rate of inflation going down
more quickly gives us room to reduce the key rate as early as April. I would even suggest that at
the next Board of Directors’ meeting, set to take place in a week, there may be discussion about
lowering the rate from between 25 to 50 basis points.
In general, when carrying out monetary policy, we will be sticking to a careful and considered
approach, taking into account risks and uncertainties, including movement in the behaviour of oil
prices,  and  we  will  be  keeping  monetary  policy  moderately  tight  in  order  to  keep  the  rate  of
inflation at around 4%, and to foster the reduction in inflation expectations.
The strategy of fiscal consolidation elected by the Ministry of Finance, along with the planned
reduction in the budget deficit, will enable stabilisation of state finances. From the point of view of
monetary policy, for us it is important that the elected strategy limits inflation risks arising from
fiscal policy. Fiscal policy impacts on monetary policy and vice versa, therefore it is important for
us to have a regimen of ongoing consultation on this issue. And I hope that we will be continuing
this dialogue once you have started (and you practically already have) work on the budget this
year.
Last  year  the  Ministry  of  Finance  announced  its  plan  to  move  to  fiscal  rule,  and  this  year  the
transitional  provisions  for  this  plan  have  already  begun.  The  Bank  of  Russia  welcomes  this
decision. The move to fiscal rule will enable the Russian economy to become less dependent on
oil  price  fluctuations;  it  will  support  macroeconomic  stability  and  provide  more  predictability  in
policy making, as well as more predictability and reliability in the movement of interest rates in the
economy.
Fiscal rule in conjunction with inflation targeting will enable stabilisation of the impact on the real
rate of the ruble; it will decrease the volatility of the ruble, which, though having already lessened
significantly, nevertheless still poses a concern to Russian production and business.
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since February of this year, the Bank of Russia, acting as an agent for the Ministry of Finance,
has  been  making  purchases  of  foreign  currency  on  the  domestic  market  as  part  of  the
transitional provisions to fiscal rule.
This is a mechanism to mitigate the influence of commodity market fluctuations on the Russian
economy,  until  such  a  time  as  these  fiscal  rules  have  been  consolidated  in  the  Russian
Federation’s Budget Code. The Bank of Russia is acting so as to ensure that these purchases
do not lead to an increase in the rate of the ruble.
At the same time, the rate of the ruble remains floating, and continues to be influenced by market
factors.  However  the  impact  of  operations  conducted  on  the  nominal  exchange  rate  is  very
limited, as the volume of monthly currency purchases will not exceed the volume of additional
monthly  budget  oil  and  gas  revenue  from  the  excess  of  the  actual  oil  price  levels  that  are
budgeted.
I  would  also  like  to  point  out  that  the  short-term  inflation  risks  associated  with  the  Ministry  of
Finance  starting  to  make  foreign  currency  purchases,  evaluated  by  the  Bank  of  Russia  in  its
decision-making processes at the start of the year, have not been realised.
Clarity is extremely important for monetary policy, not only in relation to the budget, but also to
changes in the tax system. Now both a tax manoeuvre and other taxation innovations are under
discussion. And in our view during such discussions it is very important to take into consideration
the possible impact on inflation and inflationary effects, and to make informed decisions on this
basis. We hope that this will also be carried out by the Ministry of Finance and the government, in
collaboration with the Central Bank.
We also are in support of the project – long under discussion – for the issuing of OFZ securities
to  the  population. Aside  from  anything  else,  for  us  this  is  a  development  which  will  increase
effectivity of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and as for the people – it provides
them with an absolutely reliable and profitable alternative to deposits. We are not anticipating any
negative impact on the banking system – currently the volume of such securities is not large, and
under conditions of excess liquidity a small flow of funds in the form of OFZ deposits will not
prove  problematic  for  banks.  Another  project  concerning  government  debt  is  the  issuing  of
renminbi-denominated  sovereign  bonds.  In  our  view,  the  issuing  of  renminbi-denominated
sovereign  bonds  will  provide  Russian  corporate  issuers  with  a  benchmark  for  borrowing
securities. Major Russian issuers have already expressed interest in this financial instrument.
All necessary financial infrastructure has now been created, and changes to the law have been
introduced  accordingly.  We  are  in  cooperation  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  currently
there  are  no  obstacles  to  this  project’s  deployment.  We  can  now  say  that  technically  we  are
ready to issue these securities.
In his speech Mr. Siluanov already mentioned some important initiatives, and here I would like to
add  to  this  list  those  initiatives  which  we  consider  to  be  important  for  the  development  of  the
financial sector.
One of the major projects we are working on in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance is the
reform of the leasing industry. We discussed this topic in meetings with Mr. Shuvalov, and we
have  now  drafted  a  bill  which  is  being  readied  for  submission  to  the  state  Duma.  The  main
features of this bill include:
- Creation of a registry of leasing companies
- Determination of the minimal capital of leasing companies
- Increase in transparency of leasing companies
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In our view it is extremely important, and already now being taken into account, that the leasing
portfolio is valued at 3.2 billion rubles. This is a very large number, and, of course, it is important
that this industry, which is important to the economy’s development, is sustainable, transparent
and adequately regulated.
The  series  of  drafted  laws  has  passed  the  first  reading  in  the  state  Duma,  and  now  there  is
serious work to be done in preparing them for the second reading. The most important of these
is  the  introduction  of  a  unified  system  for  evaluating  business  reputation,  management
qualification requirements and requirements for the founders and owners of non-bank financial
institutions. Such requirements are already defined in the banking system, and it’s very important
to increase the responsibility of the owners and management of financial organisations for their
sustainability  and  good  governance,  and  in  our  opinion  it  is  very  important  to  bring  in  similar
norms for non-banking organisations too.
Another  draft  law  currently  in  the  Duma,  and  now  particularly  important,  aims  to  improve  the
effectivity of regulation in the fight with insider trading and market manipulation. At the moment
our legislation lags behind global practices. We understand what an urgent topic this is, and in
order  to  make  our  economy  more  attractive  to  investors  there  should  of  course  be  effective
mechanisms in place to counter insider trading and market manipulation.
The  next  important  issue  is  the  bill  concerning  a  financial  Ombudsman  for  the  rights  of
consumers of financial services. Recently at the State Council Presidium there was discussion
about  rights  protection  for  consumers  of  financial  services,  and,  of  course,  a  financial
Ombudsman  could  be  one  of  the  instruments  used  to  increase  the  effectivity  of  consumers’
rights  protection.  We  propose  to  bring  this  in  gradually. And  here,  too,  I  hope  I  can  count  on
support for this project from the Ministry of Finance and the government and state Duma as a
whole.
These bills are in the process of being finalised before submission to the state Duma.
Firstly, for us it is important that a bill toughens liability for false statements in the financial sector.
We are carrying out major work on improving the cyber resilience of financial organisations and
combatting  cyber  attacks.  So  it  is  important  for  us,  taking  into  account  the  benefits  of  digital
technology  development  for  the  financial  sphere,  to  provide  an  adequate  level  of  security  and
protection  from  risks.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  to  amend  the  law  in  order  to  establish  legal
requirements for the protection of financial organisations’ information and to combat theft of their
clients’ funds. We are now working on drafting this bill, too.
And also worthy of note is our work, together with the Ministry of Finance, on the initiative for the
pension savings formation model through Individual pension capital. By our estimate, the work on
this project is now quite advanced. We have undertaken a few rounds of both departmental and
expert discussions. I very much hope that these changes will be accepted, as they will provide
citizens with better quality of life, and generate a long-term source of funding for the economy,
which is vital for investment development.
And the last thing I wanted to mention, which I believe to be particularly important – when working
on scenarios, on forecasts, on the budget – is our interaction with the Ministry of Finance and the
Ministry of Economic Development in preparing a firmly grounded medium-term macroeconomic
forecast.  Because  this  forecast  provides  direction  not  only  for  the  budget,  but  also  for
businesses in our economy and economic subjects, and I hope that this work will also help to
ensure  consistency  of  views  on  macroeconomics  and  economic  policy,  because  this  is  also
very important.
In the last two years we really have been consistently working together, and in our opinion this
work has indeed paid off. And to wrap up I would like to extend my thanks once again to all the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
staff of the Ministry of Finance for the constructive cooperation that we have developed, for your
high professionalism, and for your responsible and involved attitude to work. And we hope that
such cooperation will continue into the future.
I wish you all success. Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
