Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developments in the global Islamic finance
industry
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the International Shari'ah Research Academy for Islamic Finance Alumni Hi-Tea,
Kuala Lumpur, 5 September 2017.
 I would like to thank ISRA for inviting me to this event with alumni of various nationalities and to
deliver some remarks. We take pride in knowing that you have been enrolled to pursue studies in
among the world’s leading universities in the field of Islamic finance and Shariah such as the
International Islamic University Malaysia and Yarmouk University in Jordan.
I  believe  that  with  the  knowledge  and  competencies  gained,  you  will  now  have  a  deeper
understanding and appreciation of the fundamental importance of Shariah in Islamic finance. This
deeper understanding and knowledge of Shariah matters serve as a springboard for you to play a
meaningful role in the future development of the Islamic finance industry.
Role of the alumni in developing the global Islamic finance industry
Globally,  Islamic  finance  has  been  making  headways  as  it  makes  its  presence  felt.  Many
jurisdictions  have  offered  Islamic  finance  as  part  of  their  banking  system’s  products  and
services.  This  is  good  progress.  But  Islamic  finance  should  not  be  looked  upon  as  a  value
proposition only for the Muslims. This thinking, in my view, is regressive. Islamic finance is for all.
It incorporates universal concepts and values that cater to all and sundry. An important distinction
that is worth reminding.
As Islamic finance progresses, it will encounter many new challenges. Many of these challenges
will be unprecedented and will vary from one country to another. It is from this perspective that as
a collective, we need to collaborate even more closely to resolve some of the problems and bring
Islamic finance to become an inherent part of society.
Whatever we do today, will determine the shape and direction of the industry. For many of you
who will become future thought leaders in Islamic finance, take the many opportunities that will
come before you, to sharpen and deepen your skills and knowledge. Collaborate, respect and
embrace  each  other’s  views  on  various  matters,  no  matter  how  far  apart  you  are  in  your
opinions. Celebrate diversity of views. Avoid polemics that trivialise issues. Debate and discuss
the more important matters that concerns the ummah. Think, dig deeper and be innovative in
approaching  problems  and  solutions.  Look  at  substance  rather  than  form.  Let’s  not  be
argumentative. Let’s not get trapped into matters of no significance. Let’s practice and live the
norms and the values that led to the glory days of many civilisations.
You are a privileged group. As members of a highly diverse and global group of scholars, you are
well positioned to make a difference to the world through Islamic finance. Since its inception in
2006, 86 recipients from 20 countries have been awarded the Shariah Scholarship Award. Right
now, we have 40 recipients from 12 countries. Given such diversity with global orientation, it is
only fitting to label this programme as the ISRA Global Scholarship. Our aspiration is that this
programme will continue to grow and makes a difference. We aspire that ISRA Global Scholars
are acknowledged as potential game changers for the industry and a product of a highly rigorous
selection process.
Ideas to further contribute towards the industry’s transformation
I  would  like  to  raise  three  issues  for  your  consideration  as  alumni  of  the  Shariah  Scholarship
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Award.
First, continuously push and expand the frontiers of knowledge in whatever role you are in. As
scholars,  we  know  intimately  the  importance  of  knowledge  and  research.  Research  is  where
breakthrough thinking should originate, especially in the area of applied research that is solution-
driven and industry-related. But this will necessitate us to develop a greater understanding on the
real issues facing the industry. It also necessitates us to learn other disciplines as well, just like
the  great  scholars  of  yesteryears  that  venture  into  other  areas  of  studies.  They  became  very
innovative because of the varied disciplines. Only then, are we able to develop practical and cost-
effective solutions.
For example, most Islamic Finance industries around the globe are still domestically oriented and
a majority of them still engage in consumer credit and simple form of banking products. If Islamic
Finance were to expand we need to go beyond these domains. Scholars and researchers need
to  think  through  what  it  takes  to  internationalise  the  industry,  how  to  enhance  cross  border
transactions  of  Islamic  Finance  services  or  how  products  could  be  structured  to  meet  the
sophisticated needs of the economy.
Second, broaden your worldview to think about all issues surrounding the ummah, not just those
directly  within  the  realm  of  Shariah  and  Islamic  finance  today.  We  now  see  many  traditional
sectors ripe for disruption, with incumbents blindsided by new technologies and new business
models. Islamic Finance will not be isolated from these rapid changes.
The Islamic finance community must be innovative and competitive to fulfil the needs of Islamic
Finance  users  and  ensure  products  and  services  offered  remain  relevant.  That  would  entail
understanding issues faced by society at large. Some of the most critical issues confronting the
economy and society all over the world include accessibility to affordable housing, quality of living
standards, and better avenues to good healthcare and education. How could Islamic finance and
Shariah scholars contribute towards solving some of the problems in the real world? How should
Islamic finance position itself to become the preferred solutions providers on issues faced by the
real economy and society?
Third, start “walking the talk”. As scholars, you will have plenty of ideas about how to make the
world a better place. I call on you to translate these ideas and proposed solutions into concrete
actions. We have enough of polemics and preaching. You will likely need to work with others to
make this happen. Therein lie my earlier point that I alluded, that we need to create a culture of
greater  collaboration  and  respect  between  the  world  of  academia,  regulators  and  industry
players.  My  hope  is  that  applied  research  and  the  development  Islamic  finance  becomes
mutually-reinforcing,  a  “virtuous  circle”,  where  extensive  research  translates  itself  into  great
solutions which can then be used to propel Islamic Finance to a new level of excellence. But it
will require us to strengthen the linkages in transforming research insights into practice. You can
do your part in promoting this close association through active engagements with the industry or
by being a member of working groups to look into specific areas with the regulatory authorities.
Conclusion
I certainly hope you would find time to reflect on your past, and to think about what you could
contribute for Islamic finance and the ummah in the future. You were once ISRA scholarship-
holders, but even as you enter a different phase of your career, you continue to remain life-long
scholars. Continue to pursue the love of knowledge, and use it to make the world a better place.
Let me conclude this remarks by quoting a hadith; “He who introduced some good practice in
Islam which was followed after him (by people), he would be assured of reward like one who
followed it”. (Narrated by Sahih Muslim).
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
