Vítor  Constâncio:  Challenges  faced  by  the  European  banking
sector
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Risk  &
Supervision  2017  Conference,  organised  by  the  Italian  Banking  Association  (Associazione
Bancaria Italiana), Rome, 14 June 2017.
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Italian  Banking Association  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this
important event.
Euro area banks have faced a number of headwinds since the financial crisis. As a result, euro
area  banks  have  raised  significant  amounts  of  capital  which  have  led  to  a  substantial
strengthening of solvency ratios: average common equity tier 1 capital (CET1) increased from
7%  in  2007  to  14%  at  present.  The  solvency  position  of  European  banks  is  thus  robust.  The
lingering concerns about their condition relate primarily to their low profitability, an issue that has
already lasted several years.
The  subdued  profitability  is  reflected  in  depressed  bank  valuations.  Despite  a  broad-based
improvement in bank valuations in recent quarters, a wide dispersion persists between euro area
and U.S. banks’ valuations. While euro area banks’ price-to-book ratios have recovered from the
lows of mid-2016, the  gap  between  euro  area  and  U.S.  banks’  valuations  remains  significant,
with an average price-to-book ratio of 0.77 against 1.26 for U.S. listed banks.
The  large  cross-sectional  variation  of  price-to-book  ratios  within  the  euro  area  partly  reflects
cyclical factors, as the  pace  of  economic  recovery  varies  across  countries,  but  possibly  also
differences in the progress made by institutions in tackling structural challenges. To give you an
idea, average price-to-book-value is 0.94 for Spain, 0.75 for Italy, 0.76 for France and 0.42 for
Germany.
In the euro area, listed banks aggregate return on equity (ROE) stood below 3% in 2016, a slight
decline  from  the  previous  year.  In  international  comparison,  euro  area  banks’  financial
performance continues to lag behind that of most of their global peers: in 2016, U.S. average
ROE stood at 8% with Nordic banks above 9%, led by Swedish banks with 12% ROE, a notable
performance in a country where key official interest rates are negative and much lower than in
the euro area. Regarding cross-country differences, listed Italian and German banks recorded
negative average ROE in 2016 which, in the case of Italy was due to sharp increases in loan
impairment charges at some banks, mainly linked with increased efforts to clean up their balance
sheets. In other large euro area countries, French and Spanish listed banks recorded a ROE of
5% and 7%, respectively.
The continued weakness in bank profitability reflects a number of cyclical and structural factors.
A key cyclical challenge is linked to the difficulties in increasing revenues in a low nominal growth
and low interest rate environment and a relatively flat yield curve. As a matter of fact, net interest
income declined somewhat in 2016, as the compression of margins was only partly offset by
increased credit growth albeit still at moderate levels.
While  profitability  headwinds  stemming  from  cyclical  factors  should  abate  as  the  economic
recovery  progresses,  structural  challenges  remain  and  need  to  be  tackled.  These  include  the
large stock of non-performing loans (NPLs), a legacy of the 2008 financial crisis, cost inefficiency
and excess capacity. Let me address each of these factors in turn.
A  large  stock  of  legacy  NPL  in  some  euro  area  countries  continues  to  dampen  profitability
prospects. The average NPL ratio for euro area banks at just above 2% in 2007, reached 8% in
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2013 and stands now at 6%. For the six “high-NPL” national banking sectors, the averages went
however from 5% in 2007 to 23% last year.  Elevated loan impairment costs remain an important
driver  of  low  profitability  in  “high-NPL”  countries.  Indeed,  following  the  capital  and  provision
increases since the financial crisis, the NPL issue does not primarily concern solvency but rather
banks’ profitability. The coverage of NPLs by provisions and collateral is, on average, 82% in the
euro  area  and  80%  in  Italy.  Net  NPLs  are  therefore  reassuring,  from  a  solvency  perspective.
Profitability however, is affected by the lower returns provided by the NPLs, given the weight of
gross exposures in total assets. The share of total assets that generates lower revenues than full
performing loans is a considerable European problem: gross NPLs represent 4% of total assets
of euro area banks against only 0.8 % for U.S. banks. The figure for Italy however stands at 11%,
thereby with an unavoidable significant impact on profitability, despite the visible reduction in the
NPL ratio for the system since the peak in 2013. Naturally, high NPLs also tie up capital, erode
funding,  as  well  as  operational  capacity,  thereby  constraining  banks’  ability  to  support  the
economic  recovery.  Despite  a  visible  reduction  in  system-wide  NPL  ratio  in  Italy,  progress  in
reducing stocks of high NPLs to manageable levels remains insufficient.
Amid  continued  difficulties  in  boosting  revenues,  remaining  cost-inefficiencies  also  weigh  on
banks’ profitability. On aggregate, euro area banks’ cost-efficiency has deteriorated somewhat
since  2010,  based  on  both  a  cost-to-income  and  a  cost-to-assets  basis  and  compares
unfavourably with some international peers, most notably the Nordic countries.
Against  this  background,  for  many  euro  area  banks,  a  return  to  sustainable  profitability  is
increasingly dependent on improvements in operational efficiency. A cross-country comparison
suggests that the relative importance of physical versus digital distribution channels may be one
of  the  differentiating  factors  across  countries  in  terms  of  cost  efficiency,  as  illustrated  by  the
positive  correlation  between  branch  network  reduction  since  the  late  90s  and  the  usage  of
internet banking in EU countries.
Structural challenges to profitability in some banking sectors are also linked to industry structure
and  excess  capacity.  In  addition  to  banks’  efforts  to  improve  operational  efficiency  via  cost-
cutting, consolidation could bring some profitability benefits at the sector level. These could be
particularly  relevant  in  countries  where  banking  systems  remain  fragmented  and  are
characterised by low market concentration and high cost-to-income ratios. Ideally, consolidation
should  go  hand-in-hand  with  greater  geographical  diversification.  This  would  allow  banks  to
achieve  economies  of  scope  and  scale  from  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions,  thereby
also contributing to greater macroeconomic risk-sharing by diversifying country risks.
The way forward
Looking forward, there are several ways of estimating what could be “realistic”, longer-term ROE
targets for banks. In terms of historical comparison, we need to bear in mind that high leverage
observed  in  pre-crisis  years  can  flatter  measured  profitability.  Therefore,  an  upper  bound
estimate for ROE targets could be derived by multiplying pre-crisis return on assets (ROA) ratios
by  the  current,  structurally  lower  leverage  multiples.  From  another  perspective,  the  long-term
average  of  banks’  estimated  cost  of  equity  (i.e.  the  rate  of  return  investors  expect  from  an
investment in bank equity) is a useful benchmark. In addition, survey-based information on banks’
own estimates of long-term sustainable ROE can complement approximations of what could be
sustainable  levels  of  profitability.  Combining  estimates  from  these  different  approaches,  we
arrive at a target range of 8-10% ROE for euro area banks.
Should we expect banks’ profitability to reach their “sustainable” targets over the next 3-5 years?
Even in a benign scenario of a robust economic recovery, this may not necessarily be the case.
For instance, in its latest Global Financial Stability Report, the IMF argues that even in a cyclical
2
upturn, many euro area banks may not be able to raise their profitability to a sufficient degree.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Against  this  backdrop  of  cyclical  and  structural  challenges  to  banks’  profitability,  possible
solutions include: (i) revenue growth; (ii) cost efficiency improvements; (iii) consolidation through
mergers and acquisitions; and (iv) NPL resolution.
The  first  avenue  that  banks  may  want  to  explore  is  to  revisit  their  revenue  growth  strategies,
particularly in the field of fees and commissions that still show relatively low levels in international
comparisons.
Adjustments to the business model could also include actively targeting a change in the product
mix, seeking adjustments to the funding structure or increasing the geographic diversification of
activities.
These discussed strategies have limitations, as they require capital, entail risks or on account of
competitive pressures. From a financial stability perspective, one should also be mindful of the
3
possible impact of revenue diversification on bank performance and riskiness.
As highlighted earlier, many euro area banks continue to operate with relatively high cost levels,
which constitute a drag on efficiency and hamper the sector’s ability to generate sufficient net
income.  Improving  cost  efficiency  is  therefore  another  strategy  some  banks  should  pursue  in
order to return to more sustainable levels of profitability.
Cost reductions and efficiency improvements can be achieved in a variety of ways, ranging from
more traditional measures such as downsizing, branch closures to the adoption of new, cost-
saving technologies aiming at digitalising financial intermediation services such as increasing the
reliance on internet-based banking. There is significant room to improve cost efficiency among
euro area banks considering that the ratio of costs to total assets is, on average, 1.4% for euro
area banks, and just half of that, 0.7%, for Swedish banks.
Apart from potentially reducing costs, a higher reliance on digitalised forms of financial services
may  also  result  in  more  contestable  bank  retail  markets,  as  it  becomes  easier  for  bank
customers to “shop around” and compare bank products and prices.  This, in turn, may have a
positive impact on the sector’s overall efficiency.
4
It  should  be  acknowledged  though  that  cutting  costs  is  easier  said  than  done.  It  may  entail
substantial  upfront  investments  and  costs  (e.g.  new  IT  systems,  compensation  for  staff
reductions),  may  be  hampered  by  country-specific  legal  and  institutional  settings  and  may  be
surrounded  by  non-negligible  execution  risks.  The  more  capital-constrained  banks  especially
may therefore face difficulties undertaking radical cost reduction schemes.
Another avenue towards improving efficiencies and eliminating redundancies is through banking
sector  consolidation  via  mergers  and  acquisitions  (M&A).  Well-managed  M&As  can  deliver
important cost synergies (e.g. lower administrative expenses, branch rationalisation) as well as
revenue  synergies  (e.g.  lower  funding  costs  of  the  merged  unit)  that  might  contribute  to
improving the banking sector’s profitability prospects.
M&A activity has, however, remained subdued in recent years, in particular cross-border M&As.
In the ECB’s latest Financial Integration Report, we document that M&A activity in the euro area
banking sector has been on a declining trend since 2000, and in particular in the aftermath of the
5
crisis. This is especially true as regards cross-border mergers.
there 
In  general, 
financial
stability.  Banking sector consolidation could strengthen the market power of the merged entities
which may help them restore profitability.
is  an  ambiguous  relationship  between  consolidation  and 
6
At  the  same  time,  by  lowering  competition,  consolidation  may  increase  the  costs  of  retail
financial services for households and firms  and may also provide disincentives to keep costs
7
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
under control. These negative effects are likely to be more pronounced in the case of domestic
M&As, whereas cross-border mergers should be broadly neutral in terms of immediate impact
8
on market concentration.
In this context, let me reflect on the Italian perspective. The Italian banking sector is one example
among euro area countries where there seems to be scope for further consolidation. Indeed, in
terms  of  standard  concentration  measures  the  Italian  banking  sector  is  among  the  least
9
concentrated in Europe.
This has been duly recognised by the Italian authorities, which in recent years have introduced a
number of measures aimed at consolidating and modernising the Italian banking sector, such as
the reform of the mutual banks , the reform of the cooperative banks , and the self-reform of
the banking foundations.
10
11
12
These are important steps to facilitate further consolidation of the sector which are welcomed in
Italy and elsewhere in the euro area.
Excess  capacity  and  fragmentation  along  national  lines  are,  to  some  extent,  hampering  the
profitability and performance of some euro area banking sectors. The banking union, including
single supervision and resolution mechanisms, in principle provides ideal conditions for banks to
reap the benefits of new cross-border merger and acquisition opportunities.
13
However, progress in both domestic and, in particular, cross-border bank consolidation remains
limited  to  date.  Ultimately,  the  euro  area  economy  needs  banks  that  are  large  and  efficient
enough to operate and diversify risks on a cross-border basis within a European single market,
but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the Single Resolution Fund. This would
make the most of the banking union while improving the trade-off between financial stability and
economic efficiency.
One potential deterrent of further consolidation at the domestic and euro area level is the high
NPL stock that I just mentioned, which may reduce the attractiveness of potential targets in some
jurisdictions. This is another reason why resolving the NPL problem is of utmost importance.
Resolving the NPL problem
Resolution of the NPL problem is first and foremost a task for the banks. Should NPL markets be
fully efficient, it would be straightforward to sell the NPLs to other investors. We know however,
that the NPL markets in the EU are shallow. Notwithstanding the recent pick-up in transactions,
only a small fraction – less than 10% – of the stock of EU NPLs changed hands over the last
twelve months.
14
Notwithstanding the existing obstacles, a wide range of solutions to the NPL problem is available
to banks and policy-makers.
Internal  work-out  would  always  feature  among  the  available  tools.  In  this  vein,  ECB  Banking
Supervision has recently issued guidance to improve bank capabilities in working out NPLs, as
these  vary  significantly.  Direct  sales  could  be  complemented  by  securitisations,  asset
management companies, and NPL trading platforms that may be used to transfer the risk of NPL
work-out outside of the banking sector to those who may be better suited to recover value.
Clearly, more needs to be done to fully unlock the potential of market-based solutions to the NPL
issues. Due to asymmetric information between the investor and the seller of NPLs, and to very
long duration and high cost of debt enforcement procedures, there is a wide bid-ask spread in
the NPL markets. The exact data on that gap are difficult to come by. Estimates suggest that it
might reach up to 40% for a fully collateralised loan.
15
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reduction of that gap, which has many causes, requires a comprehensive strategy. Determined
structural  reforms  should  play  a  prominent  role  in  the  action  plan  for  national  and  European
authorities, regardless of the actual solutions adopted by individual countries.
For instance, debt enforcement procedures should be streamlined, and their cost lowered. This
may  require  in  particular  that  judicial  and  out-of-court  capacity  is  increased.  To  mitigate  the
information asymmetry, access to financial information about distressed debtors and public data
registers  should  be  made  easier.  Investment  in  improving  quality  of  that  information  is  often
needed, and may be rewarded by investors with higher transaction prices.
Within the comprehensive strategy, there may be a role for national governments to support the
correction of the NPL market failure. Necessary structural reforms may require a lot of time to
yield fruit and to earn credit with investors. This is a very tangible issue also in Italy, where recent
reforms  of  the  debt  enforcement  claims  have  not  yet  produced  the  expected  results,  and
therefore have not influenced NPL prices to the desired extent.
Asset management companies (AMCs) may aid in correcting the market failure. They can swiftly
clean  up  NPLs  from  bank  balance  sheets,  and  resolve  them  over  a  longer  period  of  time.
Acquisition  of  assets  at  their  long-term  economic  value,  instead  of  market  value  which  is
depressed by low liquidity and high uncertainty, minimises fire sale losses. Sweden, Germany,
Ireland,  Spain,  Slovenia  and  Korea,  for  example,  used  these  tools  to  manage  their  banking
crises, often with a focus on loans backed by real estate. There is one common feature in this
type of AMC: state support. By putting capital and funding guarantees at stake, governments can
signal their commitment to the structural reforms and bring forward the related benefits. A similar
role may be played by securitisation schemes.
16
The  EU  legal  framework  does  not  close  the  door  to  setting  up  an  AMC  with  government
sponsorship. The rules also allow for precautionary recapitalisation of banks by the public sector
in cases of significant financial stability concerns, subject to strict conditions laid down in the
BRRD (Art. 32, 4), covering hypothetical losses estimated under an adverse scenario of a stress
test. Precautionary recapitalisations also have to respect State Aid rules that generally require
bail-in  of  subordinated  debt  as  stated  in  the  European  Commission’s  communication  of  July
2013, where possible exemptions are nevertheless foreseen (paragraph 45).
Let me remark here that, in the steady state, this would not be a major issue as “bail-in-able”
debt  would  in  principle  only  be  sold  to  knowledgeable,  qualifying  investors,  capable  of
understanding  the  related  risks.  That  unfortunately,  is  now  not  the  case:  our  resolution  rules
entered  into  force  before  the  requirements  for  MREL  i.e.  the  specification  of  “bail-in-able”
securities, entered into force. However, the rules give scope to address valid concerns about
retail  investors  through  compensation.  The  European  Commission  recently  announced  what
could become an important initiative: a proposal regarding a comprehensive strategy to deal with
NPLs in Europe, including a blueprint for national AMCs accompanied by a clarification of the
regulatory aspects involved.
The new European Regulation on recovery and resolution deserves full support as it represents
a change from easy public bailouts to a new culture of private bail-in, minimizing moral hazard.
Notwithstanding this, the regulation does not ignore financial stability considerations. “We have to
bear in mind that it is not only direct public support for banks that has a cost for taxpayers, but
also financial instability – indeed, the costs of the latter may, in some circumstances, be higher.
Compare the worldwide costs for taxpayers stemming from the absence of public intervention to
rescue Lehman Brothers, with the zero cost for taxpayers following the USD 700 billion injection
into U.S. banks in 2008 (which have been totally repaid by the banks). In other words, financial
instability can have a meaningful cost to taxpayers even if it is not visible in the very short-term –
a notion that all policy-makers should keep in mind.
17
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
I have highlighted a number of structural, cyclical and legacy-related challenges confronting the
euro area banking sector. We need to recognise the progresses made in increasing robustness
of euro area banks, the establishment of the banking union, the firming of the economic recovery
due to the ECB monetary policy, with the consequent improvement in banks’ future profitability as
recognised  by  the  stock  market  in  the  recent  quarters.  Much  still  needs  to  be  done  to  fully
overcome the consequences of the financial crisis and fully restore the condition of all national
banking sectors.
The first line of response obviously lies with the banks that have to adjust their business model to
the new environment, entailing new regulation and increased competition from non-bank financial
institutions  and  market-based  finance  as  well  as  from  technological  innovations  in  financial
services.  The  adjustment  is  already  underway  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  banking  industry,
even  after  some  restructuring  and  downsizing,  will  continue  to  play  a  dominant  role  in  the
financing of the European economy.
Public authorities, regulators as well as supervisors, also have to do their part by providing the
proper incentives to steer and support a strong and efficient banking sector that the European
economy crucially needs.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See Constâncio, V. (2017), “Resolving Europe’s NPL burden: challenges and benefits” at Bruegel Conference,
February. NPL ratio is defined as NPLs as a share of total loans.
See IMF, GFSR April 2017.
The  literature  provides  mixed  evidence  on  the  benefits  of  revenue  diversification;  see  e.g. Altunbas,  Y.,  S.
Manganelli,  and  D.  Marques-Ibáñez  (2011),  “Bank  Risk  During  the  Financial  Crisis  –  Do  Business  Models
Matter?”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1394 ; Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga (2010) , “Bank Activity and
Funding Strategies: The Impact on Risk and Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 626–650;
Köhler, M. (2015 ), “Which Banks are More Risky? The Impact of Business Models on Bank Stability”, Journal of
Financial Stability, Vol. 16, pp. 195–212; DeYoung, R. and K. P. Roland, (2001), “Product Mix and Earnings
Volatility  at  Commercial  Banks:  Evidence  from  a  Degree  of  Total  Leverage  Model”, Journal  of  Financial
Intermediation, Vol. 10, pp. 54–84; and Stiroh, K. J, (2004), “Diversification in Banking: Is Noninterest Income the
Answer?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 36(5), pp. 853–882.
See  Gropp,  R.  and  C.  Kok  (2017),  “Competition  and  contestability  in  bank  retail  markets”,  forthcoming  in
Handbook on Competition in Banking and Finance (eds. J. Bikker and L. Spierdijk), Edward Elgar Publishing.
See ECB Financial Integration in Europe, May 2017. The report also provides an in-depth review of the literature
studying the costs and benefits of bank consolidation.
For references to the literature, see ECB Financial Integration in Europe, May 2017.
See e.g. Corvoisier, S. and R. Gropp, (2002), “Bank concentration and retail interest rates”, Journal of Banking
and  Finance,  Vol.  26,  pp.  2155–2189;  Focarelli,  D.  and  F.  Panetta,  (2003),  “Are  mergers  beneficial  to
consumers? Evidence from the market for bank deposits”, American Economic Review, Vol. 93, pp. 1152–1171.
See ECB Financial Integration in Europe, May 2017.
For instance, the share of the 5 largest credit institutions in total banking sector assets was just 43% in Italy
compared to an average of 63% across the euro area countries (based on 2016 data). Similarly, the Herfindahl
index (another market concentration measure) for Italy was 0.045 in 2016 compared to an average across the
euro area countries of 0.12. Only Germany, Luxembourg and Austria have a less concentrated banking sector
than Italy.
Through various modifications of the Consolidated Act of Banking and Credit Laws (Legislative Decree No. 385
of 1 September 1993).
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
As part of the package of measures included in the Decree-law No. 18 of 14 February 2016.
As reflected in the protocol of intent signed on 22 April 2015 by the Minister of the Economy and Finance and by
the Chairman of the Association of Foundations and Savings Banks (“ACRI”).
In fact, there is some empirical evidence that euro area banks operating in less-concentrated markets tended to
be  less  profitable  in  the  period  between  1991  and  2013;  see  special  feature  by  Kok,  C.,  C.  Móré,  and  C.
Pancaro, “Bank profitability challenges in euro area banks: the role of cyclical and structural factors”, in ECB
Financial Stability Review, May 2015.
The total volume of transactions in the loan portfolio market – including also non-distressed portfolios – in
Europe amounted to about €103 billion in 2016, which is less than 10% of the EU NPL stock. See Deloitte
(2017), “Uncovering opportunities in 2017. Deleveraging Europe 2016–2017”.
Fell, J., M. Grodzicki, R. Martin and E. O’Brien (2016), “Addressing market failures in the resolution of non-
performing loans in the euro area”, Special Feature B in ECB Financial Stability Review, November 2016.
See Fell, J., C. Moldovan and E. O’Brien (2017), “Resolving non-performing loans: a role for securitisation and
other financial structures?”, Special Feature C in ECB Financial Stability Review, May 2017.
Constâncio, V. (2016), “Challenges for the European banking industry”, speech at the Conference on “European
Banking Industry: what’s next?” , organised by the University of Navarra, Madrid, 7 July 2016.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
