Urjit R Patel: Resolution of stressed assets - towards the endgame
Speech by Dr Urjit R Patel, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Inaugural Session 
of the "National Conference on Insolvency and Bankruptcy: Changing Paradigm", Mumbai, 19 
August 2017.
 1. Honourable  Finance  Minister,  Shri Arun  Jaitley;  Chairman  SEBI,  Shri Ajay  Tyagi;  Chairman
IBBI,  Dr.  Sahoo;  Managing  Trustee,  National  Foundation  for  Corporate  Governance,  Shri
Chandrajit Banerjee; ladies & gentlemen. At the outset, I would like to compliment the organisers,
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Insolvency & Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) and the National
Foundation  for  Corporate  Governance,  for  arranging  a  conference  on  such  a  critical  national
issue.  The  gross  NPA  (GNPA)  ratio  of  the  banking  system  at  9.6  per  cent  and  the  stressed
advances ratio at 12 per cent as of March 31, 2017, on the back of persistently high ratios in the
past few years is, indeed, a matter of concern. 86.5 percent of the GNPAs are accounted for by
large borrowers, i.e., borrowers with aggregate exposure of   5 crores and above. The challenge
in dealing with the issue gets accentuated when observed against the capital position of some of
the banks, particularly public sector ones.
2. Swift,  time-bound  resolution  or  liquidation  of  stressed  assets  will  be  critical  for  de-clogging
bank  balance  sheets  and  for  efficient  reallocation  of  capital.  The  Government,  IBBI  and  the
Reserve Bank have been working together to comprehensively address the challenge through a
multi-pronged approach. In brief remarks today, I intend to highlight the key dimensions of this
convergent approach and share the underlying thinking.
3. The  specific  measures  taken  over  the  last  few  months,  both  by  the  Government  and  the
Reserve  Bank,  to  strengthen  the  legal,  regulatory,  supervisory  and  institutional  framework  are
aimed at the ultimate objective of facilitating quick resolution of stressed assets in a time-bound
manner. The sense of urgency imbued in these measures is reflective of the intent not to allow
things to drag any further. The recent measures address, inter alia, two key lacunae in the earlier
framework:  one,  the  absence  of  a  hard-coded,  time-bound  period  for  resolution;  and  two,  the
agency and coordination failures at banks and Joint Lenders Forums (JLF) in pushing through
viable restructuring plans.
I. Strengthening the Legal Framework
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
4. The enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC) is a watershed towards
improving the credit culture in our country. Prior to the IBC, India had multiple laws that governed
various facets of a corporate rescue and/or insolvency process, without having a comprehensive
legal framework that envisages a holistic process applicable to troubled or defaulting companies.
The  IBC  provides  for  a  single  window,  time-bound  process  for  resolution  of  an  asset  with  an
explicit  emphasis  on  promotion  of  entrepreneurship,  maximisation  of  value  of  assets,  and
balancing the interests of all stakeholders.
5. For  a  creditor,  an  asset,  in  most  cases,  is  more  valuable  when  it  is  a  going  concern  and
generates adequate cash flow, as compared to an asset under liquidation. IBC puts a time limit
of 180 days (extendable by a further 90 days) within which creditors have to agree to a resolution
plan,  failing  which  the  adjudicating  authority  under  the  law  will  pass  a  liquidation  order  on  the
insolvent company. So the threat of liquidation, which could potentially result in larger losses for
the creditors as a whole, should be sufficient incentive for them to ensure efficient coordination
during the insolvency resolution period so as to quickly arrive at a decision.
6. For the promoter, the biggest cost of being pushed under IBC may be the possibility of losing
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  firm  to  potential  bidders.  This  should  incentivise  the  firms  to  avoid  defaults  and  not  over-
borrow in the first place. This would improve ex-ante the credit culture in the country.
Turning to the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance: this has since been passed by
both Houses of Parliament, under the expert stewardship of the Finance Minister.
7. The size and nature of the NPA problem necessitated concomitant measures to signal intent
and commitment of the Government and the Reserve Bank to meet the challenge squarely. The
IBC  was  in  place  but  the  required  action  in  respect  of  the  large  stressed  accounts  was  not
forthcoming on the part of banks and JLFs. Part of the inertia may have to do with the initial days
of the IBC; but part of it was also the typical (and severe) agency and moral hazard problems of
not resolving NPAs when the banking sector is majorly government-owned.
8. It was to address this market failure that the need for statutory backing to the Reserve Bank to
direct  reference  of  cases  under  IBC  was  considered  necessary.  The  Banking  Regulation
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2017 empowers the RBI to issue directions to banking companies to
initiate an insolvency resolution process in respect of a default, under the provisions of the IBC. It
also enables the Reserve Bank to issue directions with respect to stressed assets and specify
one or more authorities or committees with such members as the Bank may appoint or approve
for appointment to advise banking companies on resolution of stressed assets.
Follow-up action by the Reserve Bank
9. Pursuant to the promulgation of the Ordinance, the Reserve Bank identified a set of accounts
to be referred for resolution under IBC, based on the recommendations of an Internal Advisory
Committee (IAC). The process adopted for identifying the entities was consistent with the object
of making quickest recovery of economic value. The classification criteria recommended by the
IAC was based on an intelligible differentia (quantum, materiality, as well as age as of the NPA)
and had close nexus with the underlying object of the IBC and the Ordinance.
10. It must be emphasised, however, that being referred for insolvency process under IBC does
not necessarily mean that the company is being liquidated. It simply puts a timeline within which
the various stakeholders have to come up with a feasible resolution plan, to be approved by at
least 75 per cent of the Committee of Creditors; only if this effort fails would the company end up
in liquidation.
II. Evolving regulatory framework
11. The continuing endeavour of the Reserve Bank has been to strengthen the supervisory and
regulatory  framework  to  ensure  timely  recognition  and  disclosure  of  incipient  stress  and  to
facilitate effective and meaningful resolution.
12.  In  particular,  the  decision  to  do  away  with  the  regulatory  forbearance  regarding  asset
classification on restructuring of loans and advances effective April, 2015, was a significant step
from the perspective of aligning the regulatory norms with international best practices.
13.  The Asset  Quality  Review  (AQR)  exercise  undertaken  in  2015–16  was  a  critical  step  in
recognising the aggregate stock of non-performing assets across the banking system – it was a
form of “catch-up”. In tandem, a series of measures were put in place to provide a mechanism
for  coordinated  resolution  of  stressed  assets.  Further,  additional  tools  to  deal  with  problem
assets were also introduced, in the absence of an effective resolution framework. These tools
primarily facilitate optimal structuring of credit facilities, ability to change ownership/management,
and help restructuring of stressed assets. A framework was put in place for greater transparency
in sale of stressed assets by banks with a view to ensuring the sale is at market determined
prices.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
14. The system of ‘Prompt Corrective Action’ (PCA) under which specific regulatory actions are
taken by RBI if banks breach certain trigger points has recently been revised. This ensures timely
supervisory  action  in  case  of  problem  banks  following  a  rule  based  approach.  The  PCA’s
objective and design is to strengthen a bank’s fundamentals and imbue confidence.
15. Weak credit discipline in banks, right from the appraisal to sanction stage, is one of the main
bank specific factors in the build-up of stressed assets. The risk based supervisory process of
the Reserve Bank keeps flagging some of these risks which are taken up with the institutions
concerned  for  remedy.  However,  in  order  to  ensure  an  effective  enforcement  action  on  the
specific  violations/breaches,  a  separate  Enforcement  Department  has  been  established.  The
mandate  of  the  Department  is  to  develop  a  rule  based,  consistent  framework  to  deal  with
breaches  of  law,  rules  and  directions.  Effective  deterrence  enforced  through  such  actions  is
expected to contribute to strengthening the credit culture overall.
16. During the Annual Financial Inspections (AFIs) of the banks, it is usually observed that there
is a divergence between the NPAs and provisions declared by the banks and those assessed
during  the  AFI  process.  This  has  adverse  implications  on  timely  recognition  of  actual  risk,
trustworthiness  and  transparency  of  books  of  accounts,  management  effectiveness,  etc.
Accordingly, in order to address this asymmetry, disclosure requirements have been put in place
– banks have to disclose in their annual accounts the details of such divergences where these
exceed specified thresholds.
17. The recent decision by SEBI that requires listed entities to disclose defaults on, inter alia,
bank  loans  within  one  working  day  can  make  a  huge  difference  in  the  credit  culture.  If  my
understanding is correct: effectively, a one-day default by bank debtors will result in all bank loans
to the debtor entity being generally classified as ‘default’ by the rating agencies, with attendant
implications for risk weights on such exposures and capital requirements by the banking system.
III. Institutional measures
Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC)
18.  Setting  up  of  CRILC  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  2014  filled  a  critical  gap  in  addressing  the
information asymmetry regarding NPAs at the system level by facilitating collection of data on all
borrowers’ credit exposures across the banking system. Having the aggregate view of borrower-
wise and bank-wise exposures provided the requisite tool for supervisors as well as lenders to
track the incipient stress in a particular account in a timely manner. In fact, without CRILC the
AQR would not have been possible.
Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) Mechanism
19. The Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy in January 2014, with the
objective  of  addressing  coordination  problems  in  large,  consortium  accounts,  envisaged
constitution  of  the  JLF.  Specifically,  one  of  the  key  problems  with  the  framework  was  the
dissenting  creditor  exception  that  held  up  the  restructuring  process  in  many  cases.  In  other
words,  what  economists  call  the  inherent  agency  and  incentive  failures  due  to  pivotal  voting
constrained the JLFs from achieving the very objective they were envisioned for.
20. Some of the above issues were addressed in May 2017, immediately after the promulgation
of the Ordinance. The norms for consent required for approval of a proposal was changed to 60
percent by value instead of 75 percent earlier. Banks who were in the minority on the proposal
approved by the JLF were required to either exit by complying with the substitution rules within
the stipulated time or adhere to the decision of the JLF; “cram downs” are now feasible. The
participating banks were mandated to implement the decision of the JLF without any additional
conditionality. Also, the Boards of banks were advised to empower their executives to implement
JLF  decisions  without  further  reference  to  them.  These  instructions,  aimed  at  reducing  the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
coordination problems among lenders while trying to resolve stressed assets outside the purview
of the IBC, will hopefully result in speedier decisions amongst the lenders.
Overseeing Committee
21.  In  order  to  strengthen  the  role  of  the  Overseeing  Committee  (OC),  the  Reserve  Bank,  in
exercise of powers vested under Section 35 AB of the Ordinance, brought the OC under its aegis
with an expanded membership to review the process followed by banks for restructuring outside
the IBC. This was necessary to reinforce the statute-backed authority of the OC to review the
processes and provide requisite comfort to the lenders, particularly public sector banks, to agree
to a market-determined haircut as part of restructuring.
IV. The fiscal dimension
22.  The  success  and  credibility  of  all  the  resolution  efforts  detailed  above  would  be  critically
contingent on the strength of the public sector balance sheets to absorb the costs. It is clear that
PSBs will need to take haircuts on current exposures under any resolution plan agreed within or
outside  the  IBC.  Higher  provisioning  requirements,  on  this  count  as  well  as  other  factors,  will
affect the capital position of several banks. This would necessitate a higher recapitalisation of the
public  sector  banks.  The  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  are  in  dialogue  to  prepare  a
package of measures to enable PSBs to shore up requisite capital in a time-bound manner. The
measures could include a combination of capital raising from the market; dilution of government
holdings; additional capital infusion by the Government; mergers based on strategic fit; sale of
non-core assets etc.
V. Conclusion and way forward
23.  The  multi-pronged  approach  outlined  above  is  an  on-going  process.  The  early  signs  are
encouraging.  However,  we  all  must  realise  that  it  will  be  a  long  haul  before  the  intended
objectives are fully achieved. There could be initial glitches and unanswered questions but these
will get resolved as the process advances. The IBC process itself will evolve as case history of
various NCLT/NCLAT judgements build up.
24. The contours of the approach to be adopted for other non-performing accounts are being
worked  through.  We  must,  however,  stress  that  the  exercise  of  powers  by  the  RBI  vested  in
Sections 35 AA and 35 AB cannot be a regular, steady state approach. The lenders have been
adequately empowered under the IBC to take necessary action upon default. It is now incumbent
upon all lenders to effectively leverage these powers through proactive, timely references under
IBC on their own.
25. Even under IBC, huge responsibility is cast upon the Committee of Creditors to agree to a
viable restructuring plan in each admitted case within the prescribed timelines. The creditors, in
particular banks, will need to devote adequate resources and strengthen internal processes to
focus on these cases as the number is only going to go up.
26. In conclusion, I must reiterate the intent and resolve on the part of the Government and the
regulators to collectively address the problem of stressed assets in the system. There are pains
and costs to be borne, but as long as the end-game is a desirable goal, these should be worth it
for placing the private economy structurally on a path of sustained growth.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
