Yves Mersch: Economic and financial priorities for relaunching the
Eurozone and the EU
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Eurofi Financial Forum, Tallinn, 14 September 2017.
A window of opportunity
 Half a year ago, newspapers across the continent and beyond were brimming with stories about
Euroscepticism. By now, and contrary to these stories, we have seen that pro-European policies
can  garner  political  support.  The  latest  Eurobarometer  survey  shows  that  Euroscepticism  is
receding and that trust in the EU and the euro continue to increase.
At  the  same  time,  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  improved
considerably in the last years: since early 2015, euro area GDP growth has been solid in every
quarter  with  an  average  of  1.9  %  in  annualised  terms;  more  than  six  million  jobs  have  been
created since the recovery began in the last quarter of 2013; employment has surpassed its pre-
crisis peak of early 2008. Nevertheless, there is still considerable slack in a number of euro area
countries which are burdened with high unemployment. Stock imbalances also remain in other
areas,  such  as  the  level  of  NPLs  in  the  euro  area  banking  sector,  or  the  large  negative  net
international investment positions in countries that in the years prior to the crisis were running
high current account deficits. Thus, there is a clear need for further action.
The favourable economic as well as political environment present a unique window of opportunity
to fix the shortcomings of our economic and monetary union and relaunch the Eurozone – as the
title of this session suggests. The June 2015 Five Presidents’ report presented the outline of a
roadmap to that effect; the European Commission’s reflection paper on the deepening of EMU
further developed the contours of a roadmap. Before going into the specifics, let me make a few
more general remarks.
Learning from history – strengthening the Union
Let  us  not  forget  that  the  EU  is  a  union  of  Member  States  but  it  also  has  to  be  a  union  of
European citizens. Their elected representatives at the European level and the Union institutions
should  drive  the  agenda  on  the  future  of  the  EU,  not  a  few  Member  States.  As  much  as  I
welcome  a  Franco-German  initiative  to  revive  the  debate  on  EMU  deepening,  this  should  not
become an alternative or parallel process that might come at the expense of other, in particular
smaller Member States. History teaches us that European integration has been most successful
when  it  was  based  on  the  community  method,  not  intergovernmentalism.  This  is  because  it
allows  all  Member  States  to  commonly  share  sovereignty  in  a  democratic,  transparent  and
inclusive manner.
Speaking as a central banker of a genuinely European, you might even say federal institution, let
me  elaborate  further  on  this  institutional  point.  We  should  avoid  entertaining  the  illusion  that
competences  have  been  effectively  transferred  to  the  European  level,  even  if  this  may  be de
jure  the  case,  when  they  are  still  largely de  facto  controlled  at  the  national  level.  This  risks
creating confusion among citizens who are legitimately asking for effective policies that address
their needs.
On  the  contrary,  if  we  want  to  progress  along  the  path  of  further  European  integration,  there
needs  to  be  alignment  of  sovereignty  and  responsibility  on  the  one  hand  and  legitimacy  and
accountability on the other hand. In other words, where competences are given to the European
level,  they  should  be  part  of  the  Union  framework,  with  clear  institutional  independence,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
instruments  to  accomplish  the  responsibilities  transferred,  full  democratic  accountability  and
judicial control. For me, the single monetary policy framework put in place and enacted in the EU
Treaties  provides  a  fine  example  to  that  effect.  Europe  seems  less  effective  in  areas  were
competencies are shared between the Union and the national level, even in cases where the
Union  is  imposing  a  rule-based  framework.  Europe  is  even  less  effective  in  areas  where  the
intergovernmental approach is indefinitely preferred over the Union method.
Financial and economic priorities
Let me be more concrete now on what I consider to be the EMU deepening priorities:
Financial Union: Completing the Capital Markets Union (CMU) and Banking Union should
be among our top  priorities.  They  are  each  other’s  natural  complements.  Both  a  genuine
CMU and a true Banking Union not just support a homogenous and smooth transmission of
the ECB’s monetary policy measures, but they ensure that savings are allocated in the most
efficient way to productive use in the form of investment across the area, regardless of their
national location. In creating an ever more robust financial integration, we will facilitate private
risk-sharing  which  will  help  to  make  our  economy  more  resilient  to  shocks  and  we  will
become less reliant on public risk sharing to do this job. In particular Banking Union must not
be left unfinished, given the importance of the banking sector in the financing of the euro
area economy. A single currency for all euro area citizens needs to be complemented by a
single banking system so that ‘a euro is a euro’ is the shared conviction of everyone holding
it in his pocket or in a bank deposit.
Fiscal and economic governance: While the economic governance framework has been
strengthened in response to the crisis, we see that the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and
the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  (MIP)  are  insufficiently  delivering  on  guiding
countries  to  implement  comprehensive  structural  reforms  and  to  live  up  to  fiscal  policy
recommendations. The implementation of the country-specific recommendations is poor, to
say the least. A full, transparent and consistent implementation of the rules is thus essential,
also to build confidence and trust for further steps in terms of sovereignty sharing.
At the same time, other European instruments can also be of help in providing carrots, not just
sticks. For example, the instruments of the Single Market are not yet used to their full potential in
the field of economic policies also to induce further reform momentum. Technical support from
the  European  level,  for  example  through  the  Commission’s  Structural  Reforms  Support
Program, can also support reform efforts. And the EU budget can play a role – albeit in a limited
way – in providing public goods to EU citizens.
A euro area fiscal capacity with own resources managed at the central level could undoubtedly
do much more, in particular to pursue union-wide macroeconomic stabilisation goals, by offering
funding to member countries hit by external shocks for purposes that would otherwise remain
unfunded. Public investment funding offers a good example, when looking at what crisis-hit euro
area countries did in the earlier years of this decade.
There  can  be  no  question  that  such  a  pooling  of  resources  requires  sufficient  economic
convergence among participating countries and effective borrowing constraints at the Member
State  level.  This  begs  the  question  of  how  to  design  this  convergence  process.  The  key
challenge will be how to create a conditionality architecture that supports reforms while setting
the right incentives in order to avoid the creation of a transfer union. But it would be a fallacy to
believe  that  an  intergovernmental  approach  could  do  a  better  job  at  this  than  the  Community
method. Building coalitions of the ‘willing’ to make progress in this direction would in my view also
be the wrong approach.
Of course, a euro area fiscal instrument will require adequate institutional backing which in turn
might  necessitate  a  change  to  the  Treaties.  The  appetite  for  such  an  endeavour  has  been
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
notoriously low for many years. However, the fear of Treaty change should not deter us from
discussing what is necessary to put our Economic and Monetary Union on a more solid footing. I
remain convinced that European nations and citizens are willing to share more sovereignty in
policy areas where national member states are increasingly less able to tackle the challenges on
their own. But citizens rightly ask for a concrete roadmap in which policy fields sovereignty need
to be shared and how such powers at the central level are controlled and legitimised. Once we
have convincing answers to these questions, Treaty change will lose its trepidation.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
