  Commencement Address  
by  
AGUSTÍN CARSTENS,  
Governor of the Bank of Mexico, 
at the School of Global Policy and Strategy,  
University of California San Diego 
June 2017 
 Thank you, Executive Vice Chancellor Peter Cowhey, Acting Dean Gordon Hanson, faculty, 
parents, spouses, partners, children, friends, and members of the Class of 2017. It is an honor 
to celebrate with you today. To you, Class of 2017, my warmest congratulations and heartfelt 
good wishes. As we say in Mexico, Muchísimas felicidades.  
Not only have you earned your degree from this distinguished program in a world-
class university; you have been living and studying in a very beautiful, unique place in North 
America  and  indeed,  the  world:  this  dynamic,  vibrant,  multicultural  and  international 
metropolitan area on the Pacific Rim, at the western extreme of the nearly 2,000 mile-long 
U.S.-Mexico border.  
May you have long and successful careers as policymakers.  
  You just finished your degree, and you have a state-of-the-art toolkit to go into the 
real world and contribute towards making it a better one. So you are in top shape, ready to 
go.  
 1 
Since the day I last wore a cap and gown, I been in some way involved in making or 
influencing  economic,  fiscal,  and,  above  all,  financial  and  monetary  policies,  both  at  the 
national and international levels. And if there is one thing I have learned about policymaking, 
it is respecting the life-cycle of policies.  
We  can  think  of  a  policy  life-cycle  as  a  sequence  of  stages:  conceptualization  and 
design; formalization, for example through a legislative process; implementation; evaluation 
and maintenance; and finally, adjustment. Usually the first three stages are the most exciting 
and  the  ones  that  garner  the  most  attention.  But  the  last  two  stages,  evaluation  and 
maintenance and adjustment, are the most critical to long-term success. 
In  other  words,  once  a  policy  has  been  formulated  and  implemented,  over  time, 
responsible  policymakers  must  remain  both  vigilant  and  flexible—to  be  willing  to  take  a 
wrench to it. We must be more than just the makers of policy; we must also supervise policies 
and, as needed, adjust them. Without an appreciation for the life-cycle of a policy, it becomes 
easy to take its early successes for granted.  
And this is a typical and very serious mistake. 
Public policy can and should help people live better lives. What are the best policies? 
That is not so much the question I want to address today, although I will say something about 
it,  but  rather,  that  as  policymakers  we  must  recognize  the  reality  that  time  changes  many 
things. Unintended consequences of policies may become apparent. Over time, there may be 
new  priorities,  new  perceptions,  new  paradigms.  New  constraints.  A  new  generation  with 
new concerns. 
 We might think of any given policy as a house. The roof might leak. The electrical 
wiring may need updating. Maybe the family grows and needs more rooms—maybe there 
needs to be a whole new floor.  
 2 
 In the real world, this one that has given me so many grey hairs, there is no perfect 
policy. But there are many policies that are good, and that can be made better. Much better. 
I would like to share with you three examples.  
 First: Globalization and the North American Free Trade Agreement 
In  the  many  decades  after  World  War  II,  in  what  is  often  called  the  Pax  Americana,  the 
world’s economies experienced a wave of globalization. This was largely because the victors 
in that war, the United States and its allies, rather than further weaken their already defeated 
enemies, as might have been expected, they sought something better, something of a higher, 
more  noble  spirit.  In  concrete  terms,  they  decided  to  seek  greater  free  trade  and  greater 
financial integration through international cooperation, following a rules-based approach.  
In 1944, with the end of that terrible war in sight, the United States and forty-three 
other countries including Mexico sent delegates to the resort town of Bretton Woods, New 
Hampshire to iron out the founding agreements for what are known as the Bretton Woods 
Institutions.  These  multinational  institutions  include  the  World  Bank,  the  International 
Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization (previously known as GATT).  
This goal of shared prosperity through peaceful cooperation was also the impetus for 
the  European  Union,  which  began  as  a  plan  to  avoid  another  European  bloodbath  by 
intertwining the economies of France and Germany.  
In  the  broad  scheme  of  things,  this  post-World  War  II  decades-long  wave  of 
globalization has led to large cross-country capital and foreign direct investment flows. Many 
countries have reaped the gains from trade through the more efficient allocation of resources 
that results when they can exploit their respective comparative advantages.  
 3 
 For developing countries this wave of globalization has also meant greater access to 
skills and technology, and this has prompted the modernization of many regions, including 
much of South East Asia and Latin America. 
 Recent decades have also seen the fall of the Berlin Wall and the breakup of the Soviet 
Union, bringing much of Eastern Europe into global economic networks.  
We have witnessed the spectacular rise of China as an economic superpower. Most 
of the clothing most of us are wearing today is probably made in China. Perhaps your shoes, 
your wallet, your watch, and your smartphone. That so many things would have been made 
in and imported from the Peoples Republic of China would have been unthinkable as late as 
the early 1980s, when I was in graduate school. 
From  a  global  perspective,  in  this  period  of  the  Pax  Americana  we  have  seen  a 
dramatic decline in extreme poverty.  
Another trend in the post-war decades that is easy to miss, for we can always find 
flaws—certainly  they  have  them—these  multinational  Bretton  Woods  institutions  have 
played  an  important  role  in  promoting  better  governance  throughout  the  world  by 
emphasizing  the  need  to  foster  strong  and  legitimate  institutions,  to  hold  policymakers 
accountable, and to make the policymaking process more transparent. 
For  example,  one  of  the  three  main  roles  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is 
surveillance  of  the  economic,  financial,  fiscal,  and  external  situations  of  its  member 
countries. This is done periodically through peer review exercises, each one concluding with 
recommendations that it continues to monitor. 
This grand arc of the post-World War II period, this Pax Americana, has also seen 
the astonishing growth of international trade. On the one hand, with greater trade consumers 
and workers have benefitted all over the world.  
 4 
I share the strongly held view that free trade among countries contributes to  faster 
economic growth and greater aggregate well-being. However, it is evident that in any given 
country  not  all  members  of  society  benefit  from  freer  trade.  In  an  ideal  world,  through 
appropriate policymaking, there would be schemes of compensation so that everyone might 
be  satisfied. But the honest truth is that there are no examples of a seamless compensation 
processes. Therefore, we periodically hear the voices of those who have been left behind.  
As I said, once a policy has been formulated and implemented, over time, responsible 
policymakers  must  remain  both  vigilant  and  flexible.  We  must  evaluate  policies  and,  as 
needed, adjust them. 
The North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, which includes Canada, the 
United States, and Mexico, and was signed in 1994, is a case in point. All three nations have 
enjoyed substantial gains as a result of NAFTA. It is more than a trade agreement; NAFTA 
should also be understood as a production sharing agreement, helping North America  remain 
competitive against fierce global competition.  
But for all of NAFTA’s benefits, greater economic integration has also brought about 
uneasiness.  
It has meant rapid change. 
It has also meant an uneven distribution of the gains. This transition to a more efficient 
allocation of resources has not come without costs, and the burden of adjustment has fallen 
on certain sectors and types of employment in all three countries. 
Also, in this same period new technology has made many jobs obsolete.  
Moreover, the complementary policies that were intended to cushion the effects on 
workers have not always worked as they were intended. 
NAFTA is a good policy. But it is subject to improvement.  
 5 
It is fair to say that, to some extent, policymakers have neglected its downsides for 
too many years. We took its early successes for granted. We have also neglected to extoll, 
explain, and communicate, its very real and very substantial net benefits.  
This  has  led  to  a  growing  resentment  against  NAFTA  in  some  pockets  of  the 
population and the idea that reversing the integration of the region could somehow improve 
things for those who have found their world changed for the worse—whether by NAFTA or 
by other factors, such as technological change. 
The  truth  is,  to  turn  our  backs  on  the  economic  integration  of  North  America—of 
Canada,  the  United  States,  and  Mexico—would  be  extremely  costly  for  all  concerned.  In 
NAFTA what we have is a framework for mutual cooperation.  
What  I  want  to  say  is,  it  is  important  not  to  forget  the  need  to  work  with  other 
countries, to improve the value of our relationships with each other.  
And in NAFTA, this framework for mutual cooperation that we have, can be made 
better. 
It is my hope that in all three countries policymakers can modify, can modernize our 
North American Free Trade Agreement so that its benefits are preserved and enhanced, and 
more people in the region can benefit. North America can be converted into the most resilient 
and prosperous region in the world. We have what is needed to achieve that, but we need to 
work  together  to  accomplish  it.  Many  of  you  will  be,  or  will  influence,  the  policymakers 
attending  to  these  issues.  Remember,  the  house  has  a  good  foundation.  Let’s  give  it  the 
maintenance and adjustment it deserves.  
 Second: The Global Financial Crisis 
 6 
 In  the  1980s  the  United  States  and  advanced  economies  in  general  entered  into  a 
period we economists call the Great Moderation. Macroeconomic conditions and prices were 
characterized by historically low volatility. It was commonly assumed that in such relative 
tranquility and with other favorable economic conditions any buildup of financial risks would 
not be a concern. Many policymakers began to take macrofinancial stability for granted. They 
overlooked  the  accumulation  of  serious  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system,  both 
nationally and internationally.  
These  vulnerabilities  included  the  accumulation  of  excessive  private  sector  debt; 
inadequate monitoring and managing of banks’ risks; heavy reliance on very short-term debt 
funding;  and  the  increasing  use  of  new  and  exotic  financial  instruments,  traded  mostly  in 
what we refer to as the “shadow banking” system, that is, financial intermediation that takes 
place outside the traditional regulatory and supervisory framework.  
Many of these financial instruments were exotic indeed— futures, options, elaborate 
combinations of puts and calls and asset-backed securities of every size and shape and stripe, 
most especially mortgage-backed securities. Issuing and trading in these exotic instruments 
generated  bonanzas,  yet  it  seemed  too  many  of  even  the  most  experienced  financiers  that 
these instruments could only be fathomed by triple PhDs in rocket science. Bank owners and 
bank regulators oftentimes simply did not fully understand what these instruments were, how 
they were traded, and the jaw-dropping risks that were piling up for the system as a whole. 
On the regulatory side, dangerous vulnerabilities appeared as well: a lack of attention 
to systemic risks in the financial system, and an over-reliance on markets to self-discipline. 
In other words, complacency kicked in. 
One of the most important factors triggering the global financial crisis of 2008 was 
that  in  the  previous  years  housing  prices  in  the  United  States  had  stopped  rising.  In  the 
7 
 absence  of  these  many  vulnerabilities,  this  might  have  had  only  minor  consequences.  But 
with  these  vulnerabilities,  the  U.S.  and  other  major  financial  centers,  now  complexly 
interconnected  through  the  “shadow  banking”  system,  slid  to  the  verge  of  collapse.  The 
financial system was saved, but it was badly damaged. Above all, trust in the regulators and 
in the system itself was damaged.  
Policies cannot do what they are intended to do without adequate political support 
and that requires trust. Trust that policymakers will not only make good policy but that, over 
time, they will remain vigilant, not complacent, and they will be flexible, always willing to 
get in there, root around in the basement, climb up and look into the attic. Fix what needs 
fixing. Update what needs updating.  
As  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  it  has  been  my  firsthand  experience  that  the 
community of financial policymakers of the  most  relevant countries has taken the lessons 
learned from this crisis to heart. Many years of hard and cooperative work in many countries 
and among them has been done to improve the stability of both domestic and international 
financial systems. Of special note is the work of the Financial Stability Board created by the 
G-20  group  of  countries  that  encompasses  over  80  percent  of  the  world’s  GDP.  But  this 
should  be  a  permanent  effort.  And  here  too,  many  of  you  will  be,  or  will  influence,  the 
policymakers attending to these issues.  
 Third and final example: Taming Inflation in Mexico. 
Here a key point I want to stress is that in the real world policymaking responsibilities 
usually belong not exclusively to specific individuals but also to institutions. 
 8 
Strong institutions ensure continuity of policy that transcends individuals and passing 
fashions, and they can inspire trust when their policies and actions are transparent and they 
are held accountable.  
For  decades,  Mexico  struggled  under  the  painful  burden  of  double-digit  and 
sometimes even triple-digit inflation. In 1993 the Mexican Congress ratified an amendment 
to the Constitution that granted autonomy to the Central Bank, that is, to the Bank of Mexico, 
the  nation’s  monetary  authority.  This  amendment  also  established  as  its  sole  mandate  the 
pursuit of a low and stable rate of inflation. 
The Bank of Mexico serves and is accountable to the citizens of Mexico. Specifically, 
the  law  requires  the  Bank  of  Mexico  to  be  accountable  to  the  Mexican  Senate.  What 
“autonomy” means is that, by law, no longer can any governmental authority, such as the 
President, the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Senate, strong-arm the Bank of Mexico into 
providing credit, that is to say, printing money for public spending.  
For Mexico, autonomy for the central bank has been a seachange. 
Over the last decades Mexico’s inflation has been brought down to remarkably lower 
and  more  stable  levels.  In  the  1980s  it  averaged  69  percent,  and  20  percent  in  the  1990s. 
Inflation then declined to 5 percent in the first decade of this century, and to only 3.8 percent 
so far this decade.  
Not only has there been a substantial reduction in the rate of inflation; its volatility 
and persistence have declined as well. What this means is  that, in comparison to the past,  
now the effects of changes in relative prices over inflation tend to be transitory and of lower 
magnitude.  
This has contributed to the deepening of the Mexican financial system. Back in 1994, 
the Mexican government could borrow to a maximum term of one week. Today the Mexican 
9 
 government regularly issues bonds in pesos at fixed rates of interest with a maturity of 30 
years.  
Moreover, with lower inflation, the ratio of private sector credit to GDP has increased 
since  the  mid-2000s,  contributing  to  higher  sustainable  growth.  Financial  inclusion  has 
deepened,  reaching  the  base  of  the  pyramid.  Today  Mexico’s  financial  system  is  well-
capitalized and the Bank of Mexico’s international reserves are at historic highs. 
I have spoken of the importance of vigilance. The Board of Governors of the Bank of 
Mexico has sought to enhance confidence in the institution and improve the effectiveness of 
its  monetary  policy  by  adjusting  it  as  required  and  becoming  more  open  about  how  its 
decisions are taken.  
This openness, this greater transparency and accountability, have helped the Bank of 
Mexico achieve two key goals. First, this has enhanced the legitimacy of monetary policy. 
Second, with greater trust in the institution, the Bank of Mexico is able to take less aggressive 
measures than might otherwise be required to counter any given economic shock. This means 
lower social costs for achieving our inflation target. 
The  bottomline:  Creating  and  nurturing  the  right  institutions  is  essential  for  good 
policy over time. 
 Let me wrap up. Again, Class of 2017, I sincerely congratulate you. Now may you go 
out into the real world and make good policies, and then continue, vigilantly, to make them 
even better. 
 Thank you very much. 
 10 
