Takako  Masai:  Economic  activity,  prices,  and  monetary  policy  in
Japan
Speech by Mr Takako Masai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with
business leaders, Ehime, 31 August 2017.
*   *   *
I. Developments in economic activity and prices
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices.
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  July  19  and  20,  2017,  the  Bank  of  Japan  published
the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report.  In  this  report,  the  Bank
presented its projections for Japan's economic activity and prices through fiscal 2019.
I will explain developments in economic activity and prices by presenting the main content of the
Outlook Report.
A. Overseas economies
Let  me  first  touch  on  developments  in  overseas  economies.  The  Bank's  assessment  is  that
overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole.
In terms of the outlook, advanced economies are projected to continue growing steadily and a
recovery  in  emerging  economies  is  likely  to  take  hold  on  the  back  of  the  steady  growth  in
advanced  economies  and  the  effects  of  policy  measures  taken  by  emerging  economies.  A
similar view was presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in July 2017
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy has continued to recover, mainly in
household spending, owing to a steady improvement in the employment and income situation. As
for  the  outlook,  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue  to  see  firm  growth  driven  by  domestic
private demand.
The  European  economy  will  likely  follow  a  moderate  recovery  trend,  while  uncertainty  --
associated with political issues such as those regarding negotiations on the United Kingdom's
exit from the European Union (EU) and with the European debt problem, including the financial
sector -- is likely to be a burden on economic activity.
The Chinese economy will likely continue to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities
conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner.
Other emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies have picked up on the whole,
reflecting in particular a pick-up in exports, a bottoming out of commodity prices, and the effects
of these economies' stimulus measures. These economies are likely to increase gradually, due
mainly to the spread of the effects of steady growth in advanced economies.
B. Japan's economy and price developments
1. Current situation
Now I would like to discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan.
The Bank's assessment is that Japan's economy is expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle
from income to spending operating. In fiscal 2017 to date, the Bank has revised its economic
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessment upward twice. These revisions are based on its judgment that a positive output gap
has taken hold, as evidenced by the fact that industrial production has been on an increasing
trend,  reflecting  the  increases  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  that  labor  market
conditions have continued to tighten steadily.
On the domestic demand side, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing
trend,  with  corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment  improving  and  across  a  wider  range  of
industries. According to the June 2017 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in
Japan), business plans for fiscal 2017, especially those of large enterprises, showed firms' solid
stance. This is evidenced by, for example, the fact that fixed investment on a basis close to GDP
definition saw a year-on-year increase of 5.9 percent -- a level clearly exceeding the past average
of  4.3  percent  for  the  June Tankan  surveys  during  the  period  of  fiscal  2004-2016.  Private
consumption has increased its resilience against the background of steady improvement in the
employment and income situation, and housing investment has been more or less flat. Exports
have been on an increasing trend against the backdrop of developments in overseas economies
that I mentioned earlier.
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items
less fresh food is in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent.
2. Outlook
I will now look at the outlook for Japan's economy during the projection period, which covers from
fiscal  2017  through  fiscal  2019.  The  economy  is  likely  to  continue  its  moderate  expansion.
Domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend on the back of highly accommodative financial
conditions  and  fiscal  spending  through  the  government's  large-scale  stimulus  measures.
Exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing trend along with the improvement in
overseas economies. Reflecting this outlook, Japan's economy is likely to maintain growth at a
pace  above  its  potential  mainly  through  fiscal  2018.  In  fiscal  2019,  it  is  expected  to  continue
expanding, although the growth pace is projected to decelerate due to a cyclical slowdown in
business fixed investment and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. Looking at the
medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the July 2017 Outlook Report, the real GDP
growth rate is projected to be 1.8 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.7
percent for fiscal 2019.
Let me explain the outlook in detail by major component. Business fixed investment is likely to
continue  increasing  moderately.  This  is  because,  in  a  situation  where  extremely  stimulative
financial conditions are maintained, fixed investment will be positively affected by (1) high levels
of  corporate  profits,  (2)  fiscal  measures  including  projects  conducted  under  the  Fiscal
Investment  and  Loan  Program  and  tax  reductions  for  capital  investment,  and  (3)  moderate
improvement in growth expectations. Specifically, an increase is likely to be seen in investment,
particularly  (1)  that  related  to  the  Olympic  Games  and  urban  redevelopment  projects,  (2)  in
efficiency-improving  and  labor-saving  machinery  and  equipment  in  order  to  deal  with  labor
shortages,  and  (3)  in  research  and  development  for  growth  areas.  Private  consumption  is
expected to continue increasing moderately as the employment and income situation continues
to improve, and housing investment is expected to remain more or less flat. Exports are likely to
be firm as a trend for the time being, underpinned by those of capital goods and IT-related goods
-- in which Japan has a comparative advantage. Thereafter, they are expected to continue their
moderate increasing trend, due mainly to the improvement in overseas economies, albeit with a
decline in IT-related demand following the current increase. Industrial production is projected to
continue on a moderate increasing trend -- despite being affected by the cycle of global demand
for IT-related goods -- as the recovery in emerging economies takes hold and the effects of the
set of stimulus measures become evident.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to increase toward
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
around 2 percent. This is because, although upward pressure of energy prices is likely to wane
gradually, firms are likely to gradually shift their stance toward raising wages and prices with an
improvement in the output gap, and inflation expectations are expected to accelerate moderately.
Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the July 2017 Outlook Report,
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  is  projected  to  be  1.1
percent for fiscal 2017, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2018, and -- on a basis excluding the effects of the
scheduled consumption tax hike -- 1.8 percent for fiscal 2019.
II. The Bank's monetary policy
Next, I will talk about the Bank's monetary policy.
A. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) with yield curve control
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  in  September  2016,  with  a  view  to  achieving  the  price
stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, the Bank decided to introduce QQE with
Yield  Curve  Control  as  a  means  of  strengthening  the  framework  for  monetary  easing.  This
consists of two major components.
The first is an "inflation-overshooting commitment" in which the Bank commits itself to continuing
to expand the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI exceeds
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  and  stays  above  the  target  in  a  stable  manner.  Japan's
economy has suffered from deflation for more than 15 years, since the late 1990s, with the year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI being about zero or slightly negative. It seems that one of the
reasons why it has been taking time for the deflationary mindset to be dispelled in Japan is that
households and firms have been adaptive to the deflationary environment. Given this, I believe it
is  important  that  the  Bank  demonstrate  its  unwavering  determination  through  such  a
commitment so that the perception that prices of goods and services are supposed to go up
every year by around 2 percent becomes firmly entrenched among people.
The second component is "yield curve control" in which the Bank controls short-term and long-
term interest rates. In the current framework, it sets the short-term policy interest rate and the
target level of the 10-year Japanese government bond (JGB) yields as its operating targets. At
present, in the guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term rate at minus 0.1
percent and the target level at around 0 percent, and conducts JGB purchases so as to achieve
this  target  level. Almost  a  year  has  passed  since  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  with  Yield  Curve
Control. Under this framework, the yield curve has been formed smoothly so far in a manner
consistent with the guideline for market operations.
Since the introduction of QQE in 2013, the basic transmission channel of monetary easing has
been  the  reduction  in  real  interest  rates,  and  the  current  framework  --  QQE  with  Yield  Curve
Control -- is designed to amplify monetary easing effects when the outlook for economic activity
and  prices  improves.  In  that  case,  there  would  be  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  in
accordance with such improvement. The degree of monetary easing will increase if the Bank
contains such upward pressure and thereby maintains the shape of the yield curve.
B. Toward achieving the price stability target
The Bank projects that the timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching about 2
percent  will  be  around  fiscal  2019.  In  the  Outlook  Report,  the  Bank  has  delayed  such  timing
several times, and I acknowledge that there is some criticism on this point. The Bank certainly
aims to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, and the delay in
such timing is not desirable. However, what I believe is important for the Bank is -- in the event
that  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  cannot  be  achieved  due  to  economic  and  price
developments  at  the  time  --  to  thoroughly  explain  the  reasons  behind  the  target  not  being
achieved and to implement monetary policy so that the economy will follow a path toward the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
target. After  all,  it  is  well  known  that  the  policy  framework  of  inflation  targeting  is  expected  to
perform the role of a communication tool.
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  in  the  range  of  0.0-0.5
percent,  meaning  that  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2
percent. Nevertheless, my view is that the momentum toward achieving the target has started to
steadily increase. In this regard, let me highlight two points.
First, although it has been said that wages have not been increasing as expected, scheduled
cash  earnings  have  continued  to  rise  for  more  than  two  years.  Let  me  also  note  that,  as
scheduled cash earnings have been rising steadily at small firms, where the majority of workers
are employed, a clearly increasing number of households can now feel that their wages actually
have been rising. This is highly important in terms of raising people's inflation expectations.
The second point is that there clearly has been a growing impetus toward raising productivity,
due in part to labor shortages. As I noted earlier, investment that serves a positive purpose --
such as that in efficiency-improving and labor-saving machinery and equipment, and in research
and development for growth areas -- is expected to further rise, and this will likely contribute to
improving productivity. Moreover, it has become easier for firms to take advantage of such new
information technologies as artificial intelligence (AI) and the Internet of Things (IoT). Let me also
mention  that  the  government's  latest  growth  strategy,  the  Investments  for  the  Future  Strategy
2017  --  which  was  decided  by  the  Cabinet  in  June  2017  --  emphasizes  the  importance  of
promoting comprehensive policies with the aim of improving productivity in the economic society.
In  addition  to  such  policy  measures  being  steadily  pursued  by  the  government,  the  Bank's
initiatives to maintain highly accommodative financial conditions and ensure the overcoming of
deflation will continue to foster positive developments among firms. In my view, this will lead to
improvement in productivity and ultimately to a rise in the potential growth rate.
The initiatives of the public and private sectors, such as those just mentioned, have been carried
out in a remarkably wide range of fields. The promotion of women's participation in the economy
-- the next topic I will touch upon -- is one example.
III. Women's participation in the economy and increase in Japan's growth potential
In April 2016, the Act on Promotion of Women's Participation and Advancement in the Workplace
was fully enforced. Since then, it has become a mandate for business entities to formulate and
make  public  their  action  plans  that  incorporate  numerical  goals  toward  promoting  women's
participation in the workplace, and to disclose information on women's job choices. While the Act
has been enacted as a temporary legislation with a 10-year term limit, it aims at actively providing
women with opportunities for  employment  and  promotion.  In  that  sense,  it  clearly  differs  from
past  ones  for  which  the  key  element  was  a  ban  on  gender  discrimination.  Let  me  note  that
business entities that are mandated to disclose information in accordance with the Act include
government agencies, local governments, and large private-sector corporations. The Bank also
has disclosed information in accordance with the Act, and in May 2017, it gained the highest level
of  the  "Eruboshi"  award  --  a  certification  from  the  Ministry  of  Health,  Labour,  and  Welfare  for
excellent implementation of initiatives toward promoting women's participation and advancement
in the workplace.
With the full enforcement of the Act, Japan has entered a new stage of women's participation in
the economy. Such participation is placed at the center of the government's Japan Revitalization
Strategy, and is essential in terms of increasing the growth potential.
A. Women's participation expected to increase labor supply
The labor force participation rate of women by age group in Japan has been known to form an M-
shaped  curve,  where  the  rate  temporarily  dips  for  the  age  group  in  which  many  women
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
experience childbirth and provide childcare. Recently, however, women in this age group seem
to be increasingly participating in the labor force, and the temporary dip in the rate clearly has
moderated.  Looking  at  the  breakdown  of  the  number  of  workers  by  gender  over  the  past  five
years,  that  for  women  has  been  increasing  --  despite  the  decline  in  the  overall  working-age
population -- and therefore it can be assessed that women's participation in the labor force has
been  progressing  smoothly.  Furthermore,  such  developments  have  been  spreading  across
Japan. I should note that the estimated number of women who wish to work still stands at about
2.74 million, which shows that women continue to constitute a considerably large potential labor
force. Japan's economy currently faces severe labor shortages, and a worsening of this situation
is  inevitable  amid  the  further  decline  in  the  working-age  population.  The  Organisation  for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) estimates that, if women's labor participation
rate in Japan were to remain the same over the next 20 years, the labor supply would contract by
17 percent; meanwhile, if women's participation rate were to converge with that of men over the
next  20  years,  the  fall  in  labor  supply  would  be  limited  to  5  percent. As  a  result,  GDP  would
1
increase by almost 20 percent over the two decades.
B. Expectations for improving firms' competitiveness
In addition to the impact on labor supply of women's participation in the workplace, improving
firms' competitiveness through the promotion of such participation will become more important.
In the annex to the Regional Economic Report released in June 2017, the Bank introduced some
recent  initiatives  taken  by  firms  to  raise  productivity  through  the  following  two  innovations
2
associated with the promotion of women's participation in the workplace.
First was an initiative -- through product innovation -- that created potential demand by making
use of women's viewpoint and sensibility in developing and providing new products and services.
The annex presented examples of a case in which firms succeeded in discovering demand that
led to boosting their corporate performance, such as the following: a hotel that had commonly
been used for business trips conducted a renovation of guest rooms and a renewal of amenity
goods  by  adopting  suggestions  from  women  employees,  and  this  led  to  acquiring  female
tourists. I think that having such a successful experience even once will enable firms to take a
more  positive  stance  toward  going  through  the  trials  and  errors  of  reforming  their  business
models.
Second was an initiative -- through process innovation -- that consequently led to improvement in
business efficiency as a result of measures implemented in the process of promoting women's
participation  in  the  workplace,  such  as  redressing  of  long  working  hours  and  labor-saving
investment. It may seem that redressing of long working hours spurs labor shortages. However,
the annex in fact presented an example of efforts made by firms in which they eliminated tasks
that  fell  short  of  being  necessary,  as  a  result  of  the  fact  that  working  hours  were  forcibly
shortened and there was no choice but to reduce the amount of work.
C. Opportunity to increase the economic growth potential
I  would  like  to  highlight  again  that,  at  present,  not  only  are  firms  facing  the  challenge  of  labor
shortages,  but  they  also  have  more  opportunity  to  take  advantage  of  such  information
technologies  as  AI  and  the  IoT.  In  other  words,  there  is  an  environment  in  which  firms  are
encouraged to reform their business models. One option for firms at this time is to aim at starting
a business revolution by using women's participation and advancement in the workplace as a
driving  force,  as  this  momentum  is  increasing,  due  in  part  to  the  government's  support  that  I
mentioned earlier.
1
The  OECD  estimates  the  effects  of  women’s  labor  force  participation  rate  on  labor  supply  under  the  two
scenarios based on the following assumptions: (1) the labor force participation rates for both men and women
remain constant from 2011 to 2030 at the rates observed in 2010, and (2) the labor force participation rate for
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
men stays the same from 2011 to 2030 at the rate observed in 2010 while that for women gradually increases
from 2011 to 2030, reaching the 2010 rate for men by 2030. For details, see OECD (2014), Japan: Advancing
Inclusive  Growth,  OECD  Publishing,  Paris.
the  Third  Arrow 
dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264215955-en.
for  a  Resilient  Economy  and 
2
The annex to the Regional Economic Report is available only in Japanese.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
