Lynn Patterson: Markets calling - intelligence gathering at the Bank
of Canada
Remarks  by  Ms  Lynn  Patterson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Calgary
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Society, Calgary, Alberta, 28 June 2017.
 I would like to thank Scott Kinnear and Harri Vikstedt for their help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
Good afternoon. Thank you for that kind introduction.
As participants in today’s marketplace, you are likely experiencing how quickly technology and
markets are evolving. And I can relate. The changes that I saw during my years in fixed-income
and equity markets were remarkable. Shortly before I began working in fixed-income markets, if
you wanted to sell a bond, you would make a phone call and follow up with a teletype message
with all the details. Then, someone in your back office would physically descend into a vault to
pull  the  bond  and  have  it  delivered  to  the  buyer  by  hand.  Imagine  how  sluggish  that  process
would seem to today’s traders who transact and settle securities worth millions of dollars with a
couple of taps on the keyboard. 
The shifts in market function and participation that we are seeing globally today are as dramatic.
Some stem from central bank actions in certain jurisdictions, such as quantitative easing and
negative interest rates. Others are the result of regulatory reform, new technologies and investor
preferences. Think, for example, of the influx of investors in the commodity space using indexed
and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Or how high-frequency trading (HFT) firms are compressing
bid-ask spreads in the futures and equity markets. Or the development in Canada and globally of
central counterparties for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and repos.
Keeping up to date on new trading practices and how the markets are functioning is important to
the  Bank  of  Canada.  Our  mandate  is  to  “promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of
Canada.”  So we closely monitor the vigour and health of the financial system.
1
My responsibilities at the Bank include the oversight of our activities in financial markets. This
includes market intelligence, which is my topic today.
Now  market  intelligence  can  take  many  different  forms,  including—in  its  broadest  sense—the
macroeconomic insights we gain from talking face to face with businesses operating in the real
economy. This includes the important work done by our regional teams on a quarterly basis for
our Business Outlook Survey.
I  can’t  emphasize  enough  how  critical  these  real-time  perspectives  are  to  our  overall
understanding of economic developments, particularly during periods of heightened uncertainty.
They  provide  us  with  timely  insights  that  we  wouldn’t  have  been  able  to  see  in  the  data  until
months later. In my remarks I will highlight an example of how this feeds into our policy decision
making. But my focus today will be on the intelligence we gather from financial markets.
Let me start by expanding on the significance of the Bank’s market intelligence. I will then explain
how we gather it and how that has evolved. Finally, I will share with you what we are learning and
how we use what we learn.
Our need to know
The  market  intelligence  we  gather  is  a  critical  complement  to  our  analytical  work.  Often,  in
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
interpreting data, or through our modelling, we develop a view about the future direction of the
economy  or  inflation.  Our  intelligence  work  then  offers  us  an  opportunity  to  corroborate  or,
occasionally, refute what we see in the data. It helps us fill in the pieces of the puzzle that may be
missing or that need greater clarity so that we can refine our judgment surrounding the outlook. It
can give us new insights into how markets are functioning and responding to regulatory or other
changes. All of this helps us shape Bank policies and is integral to our core functions. Let me say
a few words here about those functions.
First is the conduct of our inflation-targeting monetary policy. We have successfully maintained
inflation close to our 2 per cent target since 1995. The policy’s effectiveness depends on the
efficient transmission of our rate decisions through to capital markets. It is therefore essential
that  we  have  a  solid  understanding  of  how  those  transmission  channels  function  and  are
evolving.
Second, we act as fiscal agent for the federal government, managing its reserves, auctioning its
bonds  and  managing  its  cash. And  that  is  why  it  is  important  for  us  to  assess  how  market
developments could influence these activities.
Third, we are responsible for promoting the efficiency and stability of the financial system. We do
this in a number of ways. We consider financial stability issues in our decisions and operations.
We provide liquidity facilities and serve as lender of last resort. And we oversee the key payment
clearing and settlement systems that support the Canadian economy and financial markets. So
we  need  to  understand  how  market  developments  could  affect  the  financial  system,
vulnerabilities  to  it  or  the  effectiveness  of  our  tools.  I  should  underline  that,  payment  and
settlement  systems  aside,  we  do  not  have  regulatory  responsibilities  for  financial  market
participants. This is actually helpful and conducive to open, two-way exchanges. At the same
time, we maintain regular and open dialogue with the federal and provincial authorities that do
exercise such responsibilities. And we share with them our analysis of potential vulnerabilities
2
and risks.
The Governor of the Bank of Canada is a member of the Senior Advisory Committee, a non-
statutory body that discusses macroprudential policy. Its other members are the Federal Deputy
Minister  of  Finance,  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  the  Chair  of  Canada  Deposit
Insurance Corporation, and the Commissioner of the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada.
Our intelligence gathering supports these functions by ensuring that we remain well informed of
market  activity  and  structure.  This  is  by  no  means  a  new  activity  for  us.  The  Bank  has  been
observing markets since it opened in 1935.
3
However, until the 2007–09 financial crisis, intelligence gathering by the majority of central banks,
including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  tended  to  focus  on  operations  and  monetary  policy
formulation.  But the crisis made it clear that central banks missed some areas where risk was
building.  We  were  familiar  with  traditional  markets,  such  as  those  for  government  bonds  and
foreign  exchange,  but  much  less  knowledgeable  about  other  areas,  such  as  markets  for
structured credit and OTC derivatives. Those were some of the areas where leverage had risen
to dangerous levels.
4
In  2009,  the  G20  called  for  new  regulations  to  strengthen  the  stability  of  the  global  financial
system.  The  measures  that  have  since  been  put  in  place  range  from  structural  reforms  to
capital  enhancements.  They  include  new  solvency  and  liquidity  standards  and  new  risk
5
requirements for products such as OTC derivatives.  
These regulatory reforms have strengthened the global financial system. Today, the institutions
at the heart of  the  system—the  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries—are  safer  and  have
lower  levels  of  leverage.  However,  we  all  know  that  risk  remains.  It  may  now  reside  in  some
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
areas that are not subject to as much or any regulation and, as such, is not easily observed.
The regulations have also affected the intermediary function that banks have long performed. As
they look to optimize their use of capital, they are allocating less balance sheet to certain asset
classes, such as corporate bonds. This has affected liquidity in these products and altered the
way investors execute and trade.
In response to these evolutions in market functioning and behaviour, we have adapted how we
track  the  health  of  the  financial  system.  We’ve  increased  the  frequency  of  our  checkups,  are
making  contact  with  a  broader  set  of  players  and  have  added  new  diagnostic  tools.  We  now
devote more resources to the who, what, how and why of the vulnerabilities we identify and their
interplay with markets.  
How we gather market intelligence
To undertake these new tasks, we have expanded our team at the Bank of Canada. Because
communication  is  key—not  by  email,  or  tweets,  but  with  in-person  meetings  and  discussions
with a wide range of market participants. We augment our conversations with analysis, research
and surveys.
To facilitate our exchanges, we maintain and, in some cases, have expanded our presence in
Toronto, Montréal and New York. We make regular trips across the country as well as to London
and other key international financial centres.
Across  Canada,  and  around  the  world,  we  also  hear  from  participants  at  our  speaking
engagements. And while we are committed to communicating new information on the outlook
and policy only in public settings, the insights we garner in both public and private are invaluable
for our policy making.
Internationally, we collaborate closely with other central banks, and many of us sit on committees
of  various  global  institutions.   For  example,  I’m  a  member  of  the  Committee  on  the  Global
Financial  System  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  My  participation  allows  me  the
opportunity  to  discuss  market  functioning  from  a  Canadian  perspective,  while  hearing  about
developments in other parts of the world.
6
Another important source of intelligence, one that helps us understand developments in foreign
bond  markets,  is  our  reserve-management  operations,  which  total  roughly  US$75  billion  in
assets denominated in foreign currency.
And,  along  with  other  central  banks  and  monetary  authorities,  we  conduct  regular  surveys  of
turnover activity in the foreign exchange and OTC derivatives markets to obtain information on
their size and structure.
Domestically, our own operations are an important source of intelligence on funding and liquidity.
Our traders maintain a continuous dialogue with participants in our Receiver General auctions
and repo operations. We combine what they learn with other sources of market intelligence in a
framework  we  developed  several  years  ago  to  assess  financial  system  vulnerabilities  and
risks.  Some  of  you  will  be  familiar  with  this  framework  from  our  biannual Financial  System
Review (FSR). (The most recent issue was published earlier this month.) It helps us explicitly
identify underlying weaknesses, such as high leverage, asset price misalignments or maturity
and funding mismatches that could amplify and propagate shocks.
7
For  example,  a  few  years  ago  we  increased  our  focus  on  ETFs,  particularly  those  related  to
fixed-income instruments, given their increasing popularity among investors. While ETFs are still
relatively small in Canada, if they were to grow substantially, they could, in some circumstances,
propagate liquidity shocks, especially where the underlying assets they hold are less liquid. We
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
currently  have  no  concerns  about  the  sector  but  will  continue  to  monitor  its  functioning  and
growth.
Our  assessments  are  augmented  by  meetings  with  market  participants  that  help  deepen  our
understanding of the vulnerabilities we have identified as well as the underlying drivers of market
activity. These meetings are a two-way exchange. We learn about market behaviour from them,
and we have an opportunity to explain our policy framework.
With the expansion of our intelligence gathering, we have developed a wider network of contacts.
Still, we know the financial sector is dynamic and our work will never cover all of the playing field.
Nonetheless,  we  now  capture  a  broader  sweep  of  market  segments  and  participants.  This
allows  us  to  gather  information  when  significant  events  that  could  affect  Canadian  markets
occur, such as the commodity price collapse, Brexit or the recent US election. The expansion
helps us track more closely how markets are positioned going into such events, gauge how they
will react, and, in the aftermath, understand the short- or long-term repercussions.  
Let me get to that example that underscores why multiple sources of broader market intelligence
are so helpful for us, particularly at times when there is a great deal of uncertainty in markets.
You  may  remember  that  in  the  months  following  the  commodity  price  collapse  in  2014  the
outlook for oil prices was cloudy. The futures curve out to six months was upward sloping. This
implied that either market participants were expecting oil prices to rebound or, more negatively,
the  cost  of  storage  was  increasing,  given  the  high  level  of  inventories,  and  oil  prices  would
remain low.
To  obtain  a  better  picture  of  what  was  happening,  colleagues  from  our  domestic  economy
department, in particular, staff from the Bank’s office here in Calgary, interviewed some of their
contacts in the oil industry. Those discussions led us to conclude that market expectations were
likely too optimistic. It was clear that the path to higher oil prices was not assured in the medium
term and that the negative real effects on capital spending were going to be larger than what had
been suggested by the data. This would have a major impact on the economy. That knowledge
fed into our judgment and, ultimately, our decision to lower our policy rate in January and July
2015.  Two  years  later,  it  is  our  view  that  these  cuts  have  helped  facilitate  the  economy’s
adjustment to the oil price shock and that the economic drag from lower prices is largely behind
us.  We will be updating our outlook over the next few weeks, and it will be released on July 12 in
our Monetary Policy Report. 
8
Lastly, we have established a forum for gathering fixed-income market intelligence. We wanted
to  better  understand  the  shift  in  risk  taking  that  we  were  seeing  and  its  impact  on  market
functioning. So, some two years ago we created the Canadian Fixed-Income Forum (CFIF). Its
membership is composed of senior professionals from both buy- and sell-side firms across the
country. I co-chair the committee, which meets quarterly. Its goal is to explore developments in
the  fixed-income  market  by  tapping  into  the  collective  expertise  of  the  membership,  including
areas such as trading practices and changes in market infrastructure. The committee’s efforts
involve research and analysis to identify potential enhancements and raise awareness of these
9
issues. All of our meetings, presentations and minutes are published on the Bank’s website.
What we are learning and how we use market intelligence
As the G20 financial system reforms were being put into place there was a lot of concern among
market participants about how these reforms could affect bond market liquidity. That’s why one
of  the  first  initiatives  CFIF  undertook  was  a  survey  of  investors  active  in  the  Canadian  fixed-
income market. We wanted to hear first-hand whether there had been changes in liquidity and, if
so,  whether  that  had  altered  the  trading,  execution  and  portfolio-management  practices  of
participants, including active domestic issuers.
10  
4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
  Participants  confirmed  that  most  fixed-income
We  learned  a  great  deal  from  the  survey.
instruments have experienced a slight decline in market liquidity over the past two years. They
also told us that liquidity for certain products, such as investment-grade corporate bonds, has
deteriorated the most.
10
One  key  takeaway  was  that  many  participants  have  adapted  to  the  change  in  liquidity  by
adjusting  how  they  manage  their  portfolios.  Those  adjustments  include  taking  more  time  to
execute  by  breaking  up  their  trades  into  smaller  pieces,  holding  more  on-the-run  securities,
holding less liquid assets for longer periods of time and reducing the turnover in their portfolios.
These changes in strategy are especially evident in the corporate bond space. Some buy-side
participants also told us that they were willing to provide liquidity by acting in a countercyclical
fashion to take advantage of market distortions caused by temporary illiquidity in certain markets.
The  survey  results  are  providing  CFIF  with  a  foundation  for  further  work  in  areas  where
improvements in market functions may be made.
Discussions at CFIF meetings are also inspiring new areas of research. Last year, members
commented  on  the  increased  use  of  Canadian  bond  futures  for  hedging  by  the  dealers.  In
analyzing the data, we noted an increased level of participation by high-frequency traders in this
space. In response, we undertook a study of HFT in the Government of Canada bond futures
market. We used data provided by the Montréal Exchange to understand the impact of HFT on
market functioning.
11
 
Our analysis showed that its average effect on market pricing was slightly positive. Both effective
and bid-ask spreads, as well as price volatility, declined, while the average depth of the market
increased. HFT had a small beneficial impact on the all-in cost of the execution of smaller trades.
However, no effect was found on the cost of execution for larger trades (greater than $10 million).
It was also clear from the data that many participants now split their trades into smaller blocks,
something  we  have  been  hearing  through  CFIF  and  in  discussions  with  market  participants
across a range of asset classes.
So what’s on our horizon these days?
As we outlined in the recent FSR, changes in mortgage rules late last year have led to important
shifts in mortgage activity. Because of significant growth in house prices in some of Canada’s
largest cities, we have seen an important increase in the uninsured mortgage space. This has
highlighted  the  potential  need  for  market  participants  to  develop  additional  sources  of  funding,
particularly for the smaller lenders in this market.
12
To  diversify  funding  sources,  one  solution  would  be  the  development  of  a  private  mortgage
securitization market. This option has come up in several of our recent conversations. If poorly
 However, if appropriately
structured, securitization markets can have significant vulnerabilities.
developed, private-label securitization could benefit the economy by helping lenders fund assets
while broadening available collateral to promote market functioning. We will continue to monitor
developments in this space.
13
Another initiative we are working on is a new systemic risk survey that we will launch next year.
We  plan  to  conduct  the  survey  biannually  to  seek  views  on  key  financial  system  risks  and
developments,  as  well  as  measure  overall  confidence  in  the  Canadian  financial  system.  The
survey will support our surveillance of the financial system, inform policy decision making and
help strengthen our network. We are finalizing the details and expect to launch in early 2018. The
results will be published in the FSR.
Conclusion
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a central bank, we rely heavily on our excellent models and incoming data for our forecasts.
Yet  we  know  that  the  intelligence  we  gather  is  a  critically  important  complement  to  them,
particularly during times of transition or when sentiment is playing a bigger role. This information
gives  us  a  deeper  understanding  of  how  the  economy  is  performing  and  how  markets  are
functioning and evolving. And what we learn from all of it—our models, the data, our analysis and
intelligence from our contacts—feeds into our judgment on policy actions.
I want to emphasize that although our policy judgments are guided, in part, by our intelligence
gathering, we know that financial markets are dynamic and that we will never have a perfectly
complete, up-to-the-minute picture of all activity. We are realistic about this and are constantly
learning  and  seeking  to  know  more.  So  it  is  essential  that  we  communicate  regularly  with
participants across all dimensions, be they investors or issuers, the operators of financial market
infrastructures, regulators or other capital market facilitators.
And we share much of what we learn. While we are committed to transparency, we are mindful
of the need to respect the confidentiality of what we hear from individual firms. We publish our
findings  broadly  in  the  FSR  and  other  Bank  publications  and  in  CFIF  minutes  posted  on  our
website to educate and raise awareness both domestically and internationally.
So let’s talk. Our ultimate goal is to promote a stable and resilient financial system that serves all
market participants. We need and value your collaboration and feedback.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Bank of Canada Act.
The Governor of the Bank of Canada is a member of the Senior Advisory Committee, a non-statutory body that
discusses  macroprudential  policy.  Its  other  members  are  the  Federal  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance,  the
Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  the  Chair  of  Canada  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  the
Commissioner of the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada. 
Bank for International Settlements, “Market Intelligence Gathering at Central Banks,” December 2016.
Under the terms of Basel III, the minimum amount of capital that banks must hold was increased by about five
times. The largest, most complex firms were obliged to hold even more. The quality of capital that banks must
hold  was  also  increased  with  new  standards  established  for  bank  liquidity  and  funding.  See Bank  for
International Settlements.
Committee on the Global Financial System, “Market-Making and Proprietary Trading: Industry Trends, Drivers
and Policy Implications,” CGFS Papers No. 52 (November 2014).
Bank of Canada staff are active participants in the Financial Stability Board and its Standing Committee on
Assessment  of  Vulnerabilities,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial
System and its Markets Committee, as well as the recently formed Global Foreign Exchange Committee.
See Financial System Review, June 2014.
See Carolyn A. Wilkins, “Canadian Economic Update: Strength in Diversity” (speech to The Associates of the
Asper School of Business, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 12 June 2017) and CBC Radio interview the Governor Stephen
S. Poloz, 13 June 2017.
Canadian Fixed-Income Forum page on the Bank’s website.
See the Canadian Fixed-Income Forum Survey results.
Canadian Fixed-Income Forum, “High-Frequency Trading in the Government of Canada Bond Futures Market.”
The uninsured mortgage market is now worth more than $650 billion. See Box 2, Bank of Canada Financial
System Review, June 2017.
Market features that could mitigate those vulnerabilities include standardization of the underlying collateral and
transaction  structure,  meaningful  disclosure  requirements  and  risk  retention.  See Box  3,  Bank  of  Canada
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial System Review, June 2017.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
