Iannis  Mourmouras:  Recent  monetary  and 
John 
developments in Greece
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the
Governors’ Club, a forum comprising the Governors and Deputy Governors of the central banks
of sixteen Southeast European and Asian countries, 30 October 2016.
financial
 Thank you Madam Chair, 
Governors,
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is an honour to be here with you in the holy city of Jerusalem and I would like to thank the
Governor of the Bank of Israel, Karnit Flug, for inviting me to this high-profile meeting. In the same
Governors’ Club meeting in Shanghai in May 2015, I was given the chance to comment on the
latest  economic  developments  in  Greece.  Then  I  raised  the  alarm  against  the  government’s
delaying  the  negotiations  with  our  lenders.  Two  months  after  my  speech  in  China,  Greece
unfortunately witnessed the cost of backtracking, namely the deposit outflows which destabilised
the banking system, called into question our country’s eurozone membership and resulted in the
introduction of capital controls, a bank holiday, bank recapitalisation and, of course, the recession
in 2015 and this year. 
A. The real economy 
However,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  situation  has  stabilised  since  the  conclusion  of  the  Third
Memorandum  agreement  in  September  last  year.  Economic  activity  picked  up  in  the  last  two
quarters of this year, from a negative growth rate in 2015, to reach positive territory (+0.2% year-
on-year) in 2016 especially if receipts from tourism remain buoyant. Bank of Greece estimates
for next year show an increase in real GDP by 2.5% and 3% in 2017 and 2018 (Figure 1 and
Table 1). The key drivers of growth are expected to be private investment and exports of goods
and services. 
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both the economic sentiment indicator (Figure 2) and the industrial confidence indicator (Figure
3) have recovered in the second and third quarter of this year, while in the first half of July 2016
the number of tourist arrivals in airports in Greece increased by 7% and is expected to reach an
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
unprecedented total of about 25 million visitors in 2016, which is more than double the Greek
population. 
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The unemployment rate remains elevated (23.2% in July 2016 and 23.1% in the second quarter
of 2016), posing significant threats to social cohesion, while youth unemployment also remains
alarming  (at  38.1%  in  the  age  category  of  15–29  years  in  the  second  quarter  of  2016),
intensifying the “brain drain” that deprives the economy of high-skilled human capital. Further de-
escalation of the unemployment rate and an increase in the employment rate depend to a large
extent  on  the  stabilisation  of  economic  sentiment,  economic  growth  as  well  as  the
implementation of structural changes. Active employment policies and training programmes will
contribute  to  curbing  the  unemployment  rate  (Figure  6).  The  Greek  banking  system  has
undergone intensified liquidity pressures, following the massive deposit outflows recorded from
October 2014 and until the introduction of capital controls in late June 2015. The completion of
bank recapitalisation in December 2015, whereby private investors subscribed capital of about
€9 billion, as well as the completion of the first review in June 2016 represent important steps
towards  the  restoration  of  confidence  in  the  Greek  banking  system  which  will  facilitate  the
gradual recovery of bank deposits. In the period between the June 2015 capital controls and July
2016,  a  total  of  €6.8  billion  of  capital  placed  by  Greek  residents  (firms  and  households)  in
financial  assets  abroad,  i.e.  deposits  (worth  €4.6  billion)  and  equities  including  mutual  fund
shares (worth €2.2 billion), has been repatriated. The rise in bank deposits now amounting to
€123.9 billion stems mainly from the corporate sector, while the increase in household deposits
was  more  contained.  In  addition,  banks’  reliance  on  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA)
progressively declined in the first eight months of 2016, from €77.5 billion in December 2015 to
€47.6 billion in September 2016 (Figure 9). In this context, liquidity conditions are expected to
progressively improve as confidence is gradually restored, following the completion of the first
review and the release of the sub-tranche of €7.5 billion. In view of the above, the decision of the
European Central Bank on 22 June 2016 to reinstate the waiver of the minimum credit rating
requirements for Greek marketable debt instruments, which entered into force on 29 June 2016,
allows Greek banks to obtain funding from the ECB at a lower cost.
However,  the  brighter  outlook  is  depicted  in  the  improvement  of  both  fiscal  and  external
imbalances. In particular, 2015 marked a turning point when Greek economy registered a zero
balance in current account, and a primary surplus in the general government (GG) budget, while
the decline in the primary budget deficit in the 2009–2015 period accounted for 10 percentage
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
points of GDP! Moreover, in 2016 Greece’s fiscal balance and external position are both further
improving as the general government primary budget should exceed the target set for the year
(0.63% of GDP according to the draft budget, against a target of 0.5%), while the current account
surplus is expected to stand at 0.9% of GDP (Figure 5). The materialisation of short-term debt
relief measures, already agreed at the May 2016 Eurogroup meeting, is of great significance for
boosting investors’ confidence. This is because it signals that the debt servicing burden will be
moderate in the short term, thus releasing available resources needed for economic growth and
alleviating the consequences of a strict fiscal adjustment.
Last but not least, the Greek economy significantly benefited from improved competitiveness. In
part,  this  development  reflects  the  effect  of  structural  reforms  on  the  labour  market,  allowing
more flexibility in the process of wage bargaining. More analytically, labour cost competitiveness
has improved by 23.8% from 2009 to 2015 due to substantial labour market reforms and sizable
declines in wage costs due to the prolonged recession. As a result, the cumulative loss in labour
cost competitiveness between 2000 and 2009 has been recovered. Its improvement is estimated
by  the  Bank  of  Greece  at  3.7%  in  2015  and  at  0.5%  in  2016.  Improvements  in  price
competitiveness are also evident and faster increases in the prices of tradables relative to non-
tradables  provide  incentives  for  producers  to  move  into  tradable  sectors.  Indeed,  price
competitiveness has been gaining momentum from 2012 onwards as the inflation differential with
Greece’s  main  trading  partners  has  been  negative.  Its  cumulative  improvement  from  2009  to
2015  is  estimated  at  12.1%.  Its  improvement  for  2015  is  estimated  at  4.5%  by  the  Bank  of
Greece  or  5.1%  by  the  ECB  (Harmonised  Competitiveness  Indicators  (HCIs))  (Figure  6).
According to ECB-HCIs, the price competitiveness index in 2016: Q1 was still 7.0% above its
2000 level. In 2016 Bank of Greece estimates price competitiveness to remain virtually stable
(0.1% improvement). However Greece still ranks at the lower end of advanced economies and
progress has since stalled or even retreated. In particular, the World Bank Doing Business report
for 2015 ranked Greece 60th among 189 countries (a fall by two places) while according to the
IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2016, Greece fell by six places and is ranked 56th among
61 countries. More recently, the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report 2016–
2017 ranked Greece 86th among 138 nations, which corresponds to a fall by 5 places. But it
should  be  noted  that  Greece  has  achieved  high  rates  of  responsiveness  to  OECD
recommendations consistently since 2011 (OECD, Going for Growth 2013 & Going for Growth
2015). 
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
B. Monetary and Banking Developments
On  the  other  hand,  HICP  harmonised  inflation  was  marginally  negative  in  September  (-0.1%),
having  remained  negative  for  the  previous  fourteen  consecutive  quarters,  despite  some
marginally positive monthly spikes (in July and August) as a result of VAT increases in a wide
range of products and services (Figure 7). The convergence of HICP between Greece and the
euro area is mostly attributed to the higher indirect taxes imposed on the Greek economy. 
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Furthermore,  according  to  Greek  banks’  latest  financial  results  for  the  first  half  of  2016,  their
capital adequacy was preserved at 18%, comfortably above the EU average. 
At  the  end  of  June  2016,  non-performing  exposures  (NPEs)  remained  relatively  flat  around
45.1%, about eight times the European average which is around 5.7%, while in absolute terms
the total amount of NPEs reached €108 billion, an 9% increase compared with the end of 2014.
By  sector,  the  highest  ratios  of  non-performing  exposures  were  recorded  in  the  sectors  of
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
agriculture (59%), commercial properties (55%) and tourism (54%). Among the four main loan
segments,  the  respective  ratios  for  consumer,  large  business,  SMEs  and  mortgage  loans
reached 55.3%, 29.1%, 59.9% and 44.7%, respectively (Figure 8). Loans in delay of more than
90 days accounted for 30% of NPLs, while this evidence is an early warning signal for credit risk
developments in the banking system. Despite the size of the problem, the capital base of the
banking system – as mentioned above – remains strong, while in terms of provision coverage
Greek banks are well placed compared to peers (50.1% vs. 46.1% EU average). If one adds to
this the value of collateral pledged, total risk coverage comes to 101%, one of the highest in the
EU. 
Concluding, NPLs represent perhaps the most significant problem for the Greek banking sector
along  with  liquidity  (the  two  are  of  course  interlinked).  The  Bank  of  Greece  in  its  capacity  as
supervisor together with the SSM took a set of measures over the last two years including a code
of  conduct  for  banks  for  the  effective  and  flexible  treatment  of  borrowers  facing  difficulties  in
servicing  their  debt  obligations.  Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Greece  adopted  Executive  Committee
Acts  Nos  82/2016  and  95/2016  detailing  the  licensing  framework  for  credit  servicing  firms,
striking a balance between speed, transparency and borrower protection. It also decided to set
binding operational targets for all Greek banks with a view to ensuring a reduction of NPLs over a
horizon of three years. More specifically, according to the targets of the four systemic banks,
NPLs should be reduced by 40% or €41 billion by 2019. This reduction is expected to result from:
firstly, the economic recovery envisaged in the Adjustment Programme and the ensuing return to
profitability 
large  majority  of  businesses  and  secondly,  successful  debt
forbearance/restructuring  whereby  non-performing  loans  become  performing  again  and  a
number of NPLs are sold to funds.
C. One milestone-pending issue
for  a 
Looking  ahead,  in  terms  of  economic  policy,  the  steps  forward  are  clear  and  dictated  by  the
Memorandum  between  the  Greek  authorities  and  our  official  international  lenders  which  goes
through the completion of the second review of Greece’s Adjustment Programme by the end of
this year, the specification of debt restructuring measures agreed-upon in the Eurogroup meeting
of 24 May 2016 which are the precondition for Greece’s participation in the ECB’s public sector
asset purchase programme (PSPP), best-known as the “QE programme”. 
In  terms  of  the  mechanics,  and  applying  the  ECB’s  33%  issuer  limit  and  subtracting  the
Eurosystem  holdings  of  Greek  government  bonds,  the  maximum  allowed  purchases  are  €3.8
billion.  Some  could  argue  that  the  above  amount  is  a  mere  pittance  compared  with  the  total
Eurosystem’s purchases. Even in this respect, the signaling effect of Greece’s inclusion in the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
QE programme will be strong enough for GGB prices to recover, accompanied by a significant
fall  in  volatility,  as  the  overall  financial  environment  is  normalised  and  Greece  is  no  longer  an
outlier in the euro area. 
D. Political stability as a crucial precondition for a sustainable recovery
First of all, long-lasting political stability, strong governance and leadership are required to regain
the  confidence  of  foreign  investors  in  my  country,  both  in  terms  of  portfolio  and  Greenfield
investment.  There  should  be  no  slackening  of  efforts  on  reforms  and  privatisations,  but  less
austerity, and no complacency by the authorities. They should remain vigilant.
Greece needs a new growth paradigm based on extroversion and innovation as major drivers of
productivity and sustainable economic growth. Let me at this point draw a parallel between my
country and our host country today, Israel, another small, open economy. It is known that during
the  period  of  1973–1985,  Israel  had  a  chronic  high  inflation,  fiscal  and  external  imbalances,
indexed contracts, etc. and an exorbitant public debt of almost 300% of GDP, which has now
been reduced to a record low of 64.8%. It was the emergence of Israel’s export-based high-tech
sector in the early 1990s that really put the country’s economy on track, with annual GDP growth
accounting for at least 4%. Israel’s innovation laurels are several – the highest gross expenditure
on  R&D,  the  biggest  number  of  companies  listed  on  NASDAQ  outside  of  North America,  the
highest level of venture capital as a share of GDP. Currently, Tel Aviv has evolved into one of the
world’s leading hubs for technology and innovation and is a prime destination for entrepreneurs,
investors,  international  R&D  facilities  and  innovation  centres.  Between  1995  and  2004,  Israel
increased its spending on R&D, calculated as a percentage of GDP, from 2.7% to 4.6%, a rate
higher than any other OECD country. Despite the brain drain, Greece still has a highly qualified
human  capital  (mostly  educated  in  UK,  European  and  US  universities),  which  is  young  and
dynamic. Greece should resemble Israel, for instance, in terms of start-up high-tech companies,
a sector in which Israel has shown the way as a true champion. This may be the solution for the
Greek  youth’s  high  unemployment  problem,  the  poor  job  creation  record  and  the  subsequent
problem of a jobless recovery. 
In closing, let me look forward into the future and end my speech on a note of optimism. It is less
than five years until the milestone year of 2021, a year with lots of sentiment and symbolism for
the Greek people. It will mark the 200th anniversary of the Greek war of independence against the
400-year Ottoman rule, which led to the creation of the modern Greek state. I am confident that if
we persist with reforms in the next four years and take decisive measures, our country will come
out  of  the  woods  and  the  Greek  people  will  look  to  the  future  with  confidence,  being  able  to
celebrate this important anniversary within a truly modern European state with jobs, prosperity
and social cohesion that our great nation quite rightly deserves.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
