Nadine Baudot-Trajtenberg: Main developments and challenges in
achieving the inflation target in Israel in recent years
Remarks  by  Dr  Nadine  Baudot-Trajtenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  a
conference, organized by the Bank of Canada, Ottawa, 17 September 2017.
Accompanying slides
 "I should like to thank the organizers of the conference for inviting me to participate and share
with you Israel’s experience with inflation targeting, and particularly our recent experience which
is not unlike that of many other small open economies except perhaps in a more accentuated
form:    solid  growth,  rising  wages,  strong  currency  and  inflation  not  only  below  its  target  but
mostly in negative territory for 3 consecutive years. 
As a general background, let me recall that Israel saw a decade of hyperinflation in the 70’s and
early 80’s, followed by a decade of disinflation policy that targeted a gradually diminishing inflation
rate,  while  the  present  day  1%-3%  range  for  top  line  inflation  has  been  effective  since  2003.
Though  12  month  inflation  has  at  times  variated  out  of  this  range,  it  did  so  mostly  for  short
periods of time due to fluctuations of the exchange rate. This was the case until approximately 3
years ago, when inflation fell systematically below target for now more than 3 consecutive years.
Note that medium and long term inflation expectations have continued to be well anchored within
the target band, thus giving credence to monetary policy.
The  importance  of  price  stability,  was  reiterated  in  the  renewed  Bank  of  Israel  Law  in  2010,
where it states that the Bank’s first role is to maintain price stability, while supporting economic
growth and financial stability.  The Bank is given what appears to be ample room to attain its
target,  24  months,  allowing  it  to  “look  through”  temporary  shocks,  or  onetime  events  that  are
expected to have short-lived impact on inflation, thus pushing it out the range fleetingly. Or so we
thought. But first, let me zoom out and give you the broad outline of macro data the MPC took in
to construct its view of economic developments.
Over the past few years, while many of Israel’s trading partners were faced with a financial crisis
and  coping  with  a  protractedly  underperforming  economy,  Israel’s  economy  was  growing
steadily, and is now at close to its potential growth rate, supported by a continued rise in labor
rate participation (particularly of women), growth in employment across sectors, and rising real
and nominal wages which have emboldened private consumption expenditures.  Of course, the
data underlying this picture, does not come in smoothly, and aside from the labor market data
that  were  consistently  strong,  we  had  plenty  of  fluctuations,  including  significant  revisions  of
quarterly national account data and despite a robust current account surplus, we faced a clearly
underperforming export sector. The lull in export was in part due to the slowdown in world trade,
but we were keenly aware of the continuing strengthening of the shekel, beyond what we could
estimate would be the normal adjustment reflecting the relatively good performance of the Israeli
economy.
So  unemployment  was  at  an  all-time  low,  wages  were  rising  and  yet  inflation  remained  low,
compelling us to dig deeper into its sources in order to disentangle its underlying “core” trend,
from a series of exogenous shocks that pushed inflation down. These were many and varied,
from importing “deflation” from abroad, to decreasing energy prices, to successive reduction in
administered  prices  such  as  water,  electricity,  children  daycare,  a  cut  in  VAT,  to  welcome
structural  reforms  that  enhanced  competition  in  industries  such  as  communication.    These
came  in  addition  to  a  backdrop  of  social  protests  concerned  about  the  cost  of  living  that
increased the public’s price awareness and changed consumer habits enhancing competition in
the  retail  sector,  particularly  with  the  increased  use  of  internet  buying.    This  phenomenon  is
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
shared by other countries, but there is ample evidence that the level of prices in Israel is higher
than  its  other  advanced  countries,  thus  leaving  more  space  for  price  reductions  through
enhanced competition and consumer savvy.
Throughout  this  period,  of  now  about  3  years,  all  forecasts  and  market  expectations
systematically  underestimated  the  downward  forces  on  prices,  and  thus  overestimated
forthcoming inflation.
The discussions in the MPC reflected our challenge of on the one hand allowing for a welcome
reduction in the level of prices, and on the other maintaining the overall price stability environment
– a hard won anchor that allows for the good functioning of the economy.
We lowered the Bank of Israel’s rate as inflation was dropping, to reach 0.1% in March of 2015
when  12  month  inflation  reached  what  turned  out  to  be  its  lowest  point  at  –1%.  In  addition,
whenever  the  shekel  appeared  to  embark  on  what  we  viewed  as  excessive  momentum  not
justified by fundamentals, we intervened in the FX market, and still do so, not only because of its
impact on prices but also to avoid the unwarranted impact on export industries, particularly of
goods which tend to be more sensitive to the exchange rate.  One could look at it as the QE of
small open economies.
A year passed, and still the inflation rate was below target and still in negative territory and we
observed that the same forces were at play, and expected to continue to be due to the global
economic and monetary environment and because of our own domestic conditions. It was clear
that we needed to show our patience with the price environment. We did so by introducing non-
conditional forward guidance – there were clearly too many elements behind the low inflation to
allow us to turn some into conditions – which we reiterated more recently, and in our view was
correctly interpreted by the market.
Patience  has  its  virtue  but  must  not  be  confused  with  inaction,  the  BoI  has  been  patient  with
inflation to return, but quite active to ensure that the crucial broader environment of price stability
remains  intact.    Inflation  expectations  of  the  medium  and  longer  term  are  still  well  anchored
within the target range bestowing credibility to the monetary policy.
To conclude in the spirit of this forward looking conference, I would draw 3 points from the recent
Israeli experience.
First,  protracted  periods  of  below  target  inflation  do  not  entail  an  automatic  loss  of  monetary
policy  credibility.    For  the  latter  to  be  maintained,  we  need  to  better  understand,  and  better
explain,  how  the  transmission  mechanisms  operate  –  through  short  term  interest  rates,  long
term  rates,  exchange  rate  and  asset  prices.    This  will  lead  us  to  use  more  tools  and  more
targeted tools when available.
Second,  the  Israeli  experience  does  not  lead  to  the  need  of  changing  the  inflation  target:  an
important anchor for the economy must not be amenable to easy change unless there is strong
evidence that it is no longer at the appropriate level. Inflation in Israel is also strongly impacted by
global inflation, and while the debate on changing the inflation target is also taking place globally,
there is no reason for Israel to be a pioneer in this change, if the change takes place.
Third, monetary policy must take into account financial conditions as signaled daily, if not hourly
by the markets, but as upholder of a necessary and crucial nominal anchor it must be able to
withstand noise and remain forward looking. This in turn requires the Central Bank to engage in
discussions  and  better  explain  its  interpretation  of  sometimes  contradictory  data  on  the  one
hand, and to withstand “flavor of the day” pressures. “
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
