 March  22,  2017
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Shizuoka 
Yukitoshi Funo 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Overseas Developments 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about developments in overseas economies. An 
improvement in business sentiment of manufacturing firms has become evident on a global 
basis, mainly on the back of an increase in IT-related demand and of the progress observed 
in  emerging  economies  in  inventory  adjustments  of  materials.  In  this  situation,  overseas 
economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace. 
 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  growth  rates  of  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  increase 
moderately,  as  it  is  likely  that  advanced  economies  will  continue  growing  steadily  and  a 
recovery in emerging economies will take hold gradually. According to the World Economic 
Outlook  (WEO)  Update,  released  in  January  2017  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF), global growth projections have factored in the effects of expansionary fiscal policy 
expected to be taken in the United States and other elements compared to those made in the 
October 2016 WEO, and the global growth rate is projected to increase from 3.1 percent in 
2016 to 3.4 percent in 2017, and to 3.6 percent in 2018. 
 
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
firmly, mainly in household spending, owing to a steady improvement in the employment 
and income situation. As for the outlook, the economy is expected to continue to see firm 
growth driven by domestic private demand. 
 
The  European  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately,  mainly  in  the  household 
sector. As for the outlook, the economy is projected to follow a moderate recovery trend, 
while  uncertainty  --  associated  with  political  issues  and  the  European  debt  problem, 
including the financial sector -- is likely to be a burden on economic activity. 
 
The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, supported by policy 
effects resulting from such factors as a rise in public investment. As for the outlook, the 
economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities proactively carry out 
measures to support economic activity. 
 
 1 
 Emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies have continued 
to pick up on the whole, reflecting in particular a bottoming out of commodity prices and 
the effects of economic stimulus measures of those economies, although some economies 
have remained subdued. As for the outlook, the growth rates of emerging economies other 
than  China  and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  likely  to  increase  gradually,  due 
mainly to the effects of the economic stimulus measures and the spread of  the effects of 
steady growth in advanced economies. 
 
Risk  factors  to  the  overseas  economic  outlook  are  wide  ranging,  as  exemplified  by  (1) 
developments in the U.S. economy and the impact of its monetary policy on global financial 
markets, (2) developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, particularly 
China,  (3)  the  consequences  stemming  from  the  United  Kingdom's  vote  to  leave  the 
European Union (EU) and their effects, (4) prospects regarding the European debt problem, 
including the financial sector, and (5) geopolitical risks. Therefore, I consider it necessary to 
closely  monitor  various  risk  factors  from  a  broad  perspective  in  making  projections 
regarding overseas developments. 
 
B. Japan's Economy and Prices 
1. Economic activity 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan given the overseas developments I have 
just outlined. Japan's economy has continued its moderate recovery trend. On an annualized 
quarter-on-quarter  basis,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  October-December  quarter  of 
2016 registered 1.2 percent, representing an increase for four consecutive quarters. The rate 
continued to rise, due mainly to an increase in external demand, although domestic demand 
was somewhat sluggish. 
 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  turn  to  a  moderate  expansion. 
Domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to 
spending  being  maintained  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  on  the  back  of 
highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  fiscal  spending  through  the  government's 
large-scale  stimulus  measures.  Meanwhile,  exports  are  expected  to  follow  a  moderate 
increasing trend as the growth rates of overseas economies increase moderately. According 
to the Bank's January 2017 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook 
 2 
 Report), the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts for the economic growth rate 
are 1.4 percent for fiscal 2016, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2017, and 1.1 percent for fiscal 2018, 
and the economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential through the 
projection period of fiscal 2016-2018.1 
 
2. Prices 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  has  increased,  reflecting  a  rise  in  energy 
prices, and has been about 0 percent. The rate of increase for all items less fresh food and 
energy  had  remained  on  a  decelerating  trend,  following  the  peak  of  1.3  percent  in 
November 2015; thereafter, the rate of change has been fluctuating. Looking at annual price 
changes across all CPI items less fresh food, the share of price-increasing items minus the 
share  of  price-decreasing  items  has  continued  on  a  moderate  declining  trend,  although  it 
remains in positive territory. 
 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  as  the  positive  contribution  of  energy  prices  increases,  albeit 
with  fluctuations,  and  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  (the  output  gap) 
improves  and  inflation  expectations  rise,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all 
items less fresh food) will likely reach around 2 percent in around fiscal 2018; nevertheless, 
it  is  necessary  to  closely  monitor  downside  risks. Specifically,  the  medians of  the  Policy 
Board members' forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) presented in the January 2017 Outlook Report are minus 0.2 percent for fiscal 2016, 
1.5 percent for fiscal 2017, and 1.7 percent for fiscal 2018.2 
                                                   
1  Under a specific methodology, Japan's potential growth rate is estimated to be around 0.5 percent, 
revised upward from being in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent due to the comprehensive revision to GDP 
statistics. However, the estimate of the potential growth rate varies depending on the methodologies 
employed and could be revised as the sample period becomes longer over time. Thus, it should be 
regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error. 
2  From the January 2015 interim assessment through the October 2016 Outlook Report, each Policy 
Board member made their forecasts based on the same assumption about crude oil prices due to the 
fact  that  such prices  had  been  exerting a  considerable  impact  on consumer  prices. In  the  January 
2017  Outlook  Report,  each  member  made  an  assumption  about  crude  oil  prices  individually  in 
making their forecasts in light of the fact that the contribution of energy prices to the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) had lessened. The contribution was estimated to 
be approximately minus 0.6 percentage point for fiscal 2016 and reach around 0 percentage point in 
early 2017, becoming slightly positive thereafter. 
 3 
 II. Keys to Assessing the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
In  what  follows,  I  will  discuss  several  points  that  I  think  deserve  particular  attention  in 
terms of realizing the outlook that I mentioned earlier. 
 
A. Employment and Income Situation 
First,  I  will  talk  about  developments  in  the  employment  and  income  situation. 
Supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  improve  steadily  and 
employee income has increased moderately. According to the Labour Force Survey, the rate 
of increase in the number of employees has remained at a high level of about 1.5 percent. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  has  followed  a  steady 
uptrend,  and  a  perception  of  labor  shortage  suggested  by  the  diffusion  index  (DI)  for 
employment  conditions  (the  proportion  of  firms  responding  that  employment  was 
"excessive" minus the proportion of those responding that employment was "insufficient") 
in the December 2016 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) has 
heightened further; both indicators show a tightening at almost the same levels seen around 
1991-1992.  The  unemployment  rate  has  continued  on  a  moderate  declining  trend,  albeit 
with  some  fluctuations,  and  has  been  about  3  percent  recently.  The  supply-demand 
conditions in the labor market are expected to further tighten. 
 
On the wage side, the rise in hourly cash earnings has accelerated moderately, albeit with 
fluctuations.  Specifically,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  hourly  cash  earnings  of 
part-time employees, which are responsive to labor market conditions, has seen a relatively 
high increase, being in the range of around 1.5-2.0 percent when fluctuations are smoothed 
out. With regard to the outlook, the pace of increase in full-time employees' cash earnings is 
expected  to  accelerate,  as  corporate  profits  improve  and  a  heightening  of  inflation 
expectations  becomes  evident.  The  rate  of  increase  in  hourly  cash  earnings  of  part-time 
employees is also likely to accelerate steadily in response to the marked tightening of labor 
market conditions and an increase in minimum wages. 
 
In  light  of  these  prospects  for  employment  and  wages,  the  rate  of  increase  in  employee 
income  is  expected  to  continue  rising  at  around  the  same  rate  as  nominal  GDP  growth. 
However, there is a risk that firms will remain cautious with their decisions, particularly on 
 4 
 wage setting. In this context, how the labor-management wage negotiations in spring 2017 
will develop warrants particular attention. 
 
B. Private Consumption 
I will now discuss developments in private consumption, which has been resilient against 
the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  The 
Consumption Activity Index (CAI) had continued to be somewhat weak in part since the 
beginning of 2016, against the background of the negative wealth effects brought about by 
the  decline  in  stock  prices  and  of  irregular  weather;  however,  the  CAI  has  picked  up 
recently. As the employment and income situation has continued to improve, factors such as 
the wealth effects resulting from a rise in stock prices and the dissipation of the effects of 
irregular weather are considered to be supporting the pick-up in the CAI. 
 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  private  consumption  is  expected  to  increase  moderately, 
supported  by  a  steady  improvement  in  employee  income,  as  well  as  the  wealth  effects 
stemming  from  a  rise  in  stock  prices  and  the  effects  resulting  from  the  set  of  stimulus 
measures. 
 
C. Business Fixed Investment 
Let  me  now  explain  developments  in  business  fixed  investment,  which  has  been  on  a 
moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have improved. According to the December 
2016 Tankan, firmness has continued to be seen in business fixed investment plans for fiscal 
2016  as a  whole,  although  developments  such as delays  in  the  construction  progress  and 
postponement of opening new shops, both triggered by labor shortages, have been observed 
in some small nonmanufacturing firms.   
 
As for the outlook, business fixed investment is likely to continue to see a moderate uptrend, 
mainly on the back of (1) an improvement in corporate profits, (2) extremely stimulative 
financial conditions, such as low interest rates and accommodative lending attitudes, (3) the 
effects  of  fiscal  measures  including  projects  conducted  under  the  Fiscal  Investment  and 
Loan Program and tax reductions for capital investment, and (4) moderate improvement in 
growth expectations. 
 5 
 D. Prices 
Next, I will discuss inflation expectations and the output gap, which are the main factors 
that  determine  inflation  rates.  First,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have 
remained in a weakening phase since summer 2015 as the adaptive formation mechanism 
has played a large role, reflecting the observed inflation rate having been slightly negative. 
As  for  the  outlook,  firms'  price-setting  stance  is  expected  to  revert  to  raising  prices  as 
private consumption is expected to continue increasing moderately, and their wage-setting 
stance  is  likely  to  shift  toward  raising  wages  driven  by  the  tightening  of  labor  market 
conditions; against this backdrop, medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to 
follow a sustained increasing trend. 
 
Second, the output gap had been more or less unchanged at around 0 percent, but has shown 
some improvement recently. It is projected that it will turn slightly positive toward the end 
of  fiscal  2016,  and  from  fiscal  2017  continue  expanding  moderately  in  positive  territory 
owing to both the capital and labor factors, as domestic and foreign demand increase in a 
well-balanced manner. 
 
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  in  January  2013,  the  Bank  made  a 
commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, and in April of that year, it decided to 
introduce Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) as a necessary measure to 
underpin  this  commitment.  In  January  2016,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  QQE  with  a 
Negative Interest Rate in order to pursue monetary easing in terms of the three dimensions 
of  quantity,  quality,  and  the  interest  rate.  Furthermore,  in  September  2016,  the  Bank 
conducted  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  developments  in  Japan's economic  activity 
and prices as well as policy effects since the introduction of QQE, and decided to introduce 
QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  as  a  means  of  strengthening  the  two  previous  policy 
frameworks I just mentioned.   
 
 6 
 The framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control consists of two major components. The 
first  is  yield  curve  control  in  which  the  Bank  facilitates  the  formation  of  short-  and 
long-term interest rates that are considered most appropriate for maintaining the momentum 
toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  taking  account  of  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices as well as financial conditions. Specifically, at present, in the guideline 
for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent 
and  the  target  level  of  the  10-year  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  yields  at  around  0 
percent, conducting JGB purchases so as to achieve this target level. The second component 
is  an inflation-overshooting  commitment in  which  the  Bank  continues  with  the  monetary 
easing framework, aiming to achieve the price stability target, as long as it is necessary for 
maintaining that target in a stable manner. On this point, the Bank makes clear that it will 
continue  expanding  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a 
stable manner. 
 
As shown in the comprehensive assessment, I consider that the main factor that hampers 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent is as follows. In the course of the Bank's 
attempt to raise inflation expectations toward 2 percent, observed inflation rates declined 
due to a variety of exogenous factors such as a substantial fall in crude oil prices. Under 
these circumstances, inflation expectations declined, as the adaptive mechanism has been 
playing a relatively large role in the formation of inflation expectations in Japan. Taking this 
into  consideration,  the  Bank  decided  to  adopt  a  commitment  that  allows  inflation  to 
overshoot the price stability target so as to strengthen the forward-looking mechanism in the 
formation of inflation expectations, enhance the credibility of achieving the price stability 
target among the public, and raise inflation expectations in a more forceful manner.   
 
As for the future conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will continue with QQE with Yield 
Curve  Control,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. Currently, the momentum toward 
achieving the price stability target is being maintained, and the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI is expected to increase toward 2 percent. Nevertheless, the momentum is not yet 
sufficiently  firm,  and  we  are  only  halfway  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  Some 
 7 
 market participants, taking account of a rise in interest rates overseas, argue that the Bank 
might consider raising the target level of the long-term interest rate in the near future, but 
considering the current developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial 
conditions, I believe that it is important that the Bank continue to steadily pursue powerful 
monetary easing under QQE with Yield Curve Control. 
 
IV. Challenges for Japan's Economy 
I would now like to express my thoughts regarding the current situation of Japan's economy 
from a longer-term perspective. 
 
In order to achieve the Bank's price stability target in a stable manner, one of the necessary 
requirements is to raise the potential growth rate, which indicates the "basal metabolism" of 
an  economy.  Japan's  economy  has  achieved  growth  through  the  process  of  securing 
resources  and  making  full  use  of  them,  as  well  as  developing  high-quality  products  and 
services  and  providing  them  to  markets.  Through  this  process,  Japan  has  contributed  to 
global economic growth as well. I believe it is possible to further expand Japan's growth 
and  contribution  to  global  economic  growth  in  various  areas.  We  should  continue  with 
proactive efforts to increase Japan's growth potential, rather than being overly pessimistic 
about structural changes such as the population decline. 
 
To secure and make use of resources, measures have been taken in the public sector, for 
example, to tackle the problem of the population decline -- such as support for childcare and 
for women and the elderly to become part of the workforce. In the private sector, in addition 
to the efficient use of human resources, it is vital to enhance the training of managers and 
the efficiency of administrative operations. From a global viewpoint, expanding the network 
for securing such resources as raw materials is highly desirable. Moreover, increasing the 
number of foreign workers in many fields could be an option. 
 
With  regard  to  developing  and  providing  products  and  services,  Japan  needs  to  develop 
high-value-added products and services with good reputations and explore new sources of 
domestic  demand  through  initiatives  such  as  advancing  financial  technology.  It  also  is 
 8 
 important to expand the channels for capturing overseas demand in neighboring economies, 
mainly in Asia, where high growth is expected. This includes attracting inbound demand. 
 
In light of the current situation, I believe that Japan should secure demand necessary for its 
economic growth, both at home and abroad in a balanced manner. At a time of uncertainty 
regarding such factors as developments in overseas economies, it also is vital to enhance the 
autonomy of Japan's economy while paying due attention to overseas risk factors. One good 
example  is  the  situation  for  exports  in  2016,  when  they  remained  resilient  despite  the 
appreciation of the yen. I see this as evidence that the autonomy of Japan's economy has 
strengthened, reflecting the heightened non-price competitiveness in which the volume of 
exports is not directly affected by foreign exchange movements. Going forward, continued 
efforts are needed to establish a system for developing and providing unique products and 
services  that  are  not  susceptible  to  economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  nor  to 
foreign  exchange  movements,  and  to  further  accelerate  innovation  that  promotes 
establishment of such a system. 
 
In closing, let me underline that these initiatives toward raising Japan's potential growth rate 
require a comprehensive approach that includes structural reforms in addition to monetary 
and  fiscal  policies.  Structural  reforms  of  Japan's  economy  have  been  progressing  to  a 
certain extent, but further acceleration is required. I expect that growth strategies will bear 
fruit as smooth procurement of funds proceeds under accommodative financial conditions, 
and  as  these  are  invested  in  labor-saving  machinery  and  equipment,  research  and 
development, and mergers and acquisitions at home and abroad. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 9 
