Amando Tetangco: Advancing cooperation in an increasingly non-
cooperative world
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the EU-ASEAN Business Summit, Manila, 10 March 2017.
 For  over  250  years,  Manila  was  the  port  of  the  Galleon  Trade  that  fostered  two-way  trade
between Asia and Europe via Mexico.  And this year, the 50th anniversary of ASEAN, marks the
Philippines’    assumption  as  Chair  of  the ASEAN,  with  the  responsibility  to  promote  activities
related to our regional goals. It is fitting therefore that Manila is hosting this year’s ASEAN-EU
business summit, the objective of which is to promote trade and further strengthen our economic
relations.
A strong history of friendship
A strong history of friendship for 40 years now, binds the ASEAN and the EU.
This partnership has established many milestones in terms of economic cooperation, enabling
us to enjoy the benefits of robust and dynamic trade and investments , with the accompanying
positive effects on overall growth. 
Today, the EU is ASEAN’s second largest trading partner, while ASEAN is the EU’s third largest
trading partner outside Europe. In 2016, total trade between ASEAN and EU reached over EUR
200 billion (EUR207.89 billion), having been on a consistent uptrend for the past four years.
Opportunities beyond trade
The opportunities for stronger economic relations between the EU and ASEAN abound.  Amb.
Jessen and ECCP President Taus mentioned a number of important areas of cooperation.   I will
add the following for further cooperation: 
The first is on the development of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) as a platform
for  promoting  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth.    Both  ASEAN  and  EU  give  primacy  and
importance to MSMEs – in ASEAN, they account from 88 to 99 percent of total establishments,
with the large majority of member countries at high 90%, while in the EU they represent 99% of
establishments.  Closer cooperation can expand market access for both our MSMEs, which is
crucial  for  generating  employment  and  ensuring  a  competitive  and  dynamic  business
environment. We need to support their integration into the supply and value-chain. On the policy
level, we need to double our efforts to expand their access to finance and other support services.
The second opportunity for cooperation is the development of the digital economy, which has
been tagged as the Fourth Industrial Revolution.  We see how digital trends such as social media
and cloud computing are radically changing the business landscape.
With  an  estimated  value  of  USD19  trillion  over  the  next  decade,  digitization  has  the  power  to
enable countries to boost GDP growth, job creation, and innovation.  Through enhanced transfer
of knowledge and technology sharing, the EU and the ASEAN could potentially be transformed
into full-blown digital economies.   
The third area for stronger cooperation is human resource development.   With EU’s population
of 510 million and ASEAN’s over 625 million people, we have the potential to develop formidable
pools  of  talent  and  productivity.    We  can  harness  these  through  policies  that  support  healthy
exchange and flow of talent, as well as the development of appropriate education and skills.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen, to me these are imperatives for cooperation to make growth in ASEAN
and EU both sustainable and inclusive – the development of MSMEs, the development of a digital
economy and advancing human resource development. This is particularly relevant today when
the global environment remains confronted with certain challenges.
One major risk we face is the growing tendency towards protectionism and populism. Brexit and
the  potential  shift  in  US  economic  policies  are  manifestations  of  this  trend.  If  these  inward-
oriented  sentiments  continue  to  gain  traction,  this  will  undermine  cooperation  and  potentially
shrink  global  trade.  This  could,  in  turn,  derail  the  global  economy’s  already  protracted  path  to
recovery.
Another challenge is the re-emergence of monetary policy divergence. In particular, the US Fed
is  signaling  a  continuation  of  its  normalization  path  through  policy  rate  increases  while  other
central banks in major economies remain accommodative by keeping a lid on interest rates. This
divergence can result in volatility in financial markets and possibly dampen credit activities in the
near-term and growth in the longer-term.
Given, all these, the challenge is how to achieve economic resilience.  
In  the  Philippines,  our  thrust  over  the  years  has  been  to  focus  on  ensuring  sound
macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  building  these  as  homegrown  sources  of  resilience.  Such
focus  has  yielded  considerable  gains  for  us.  We  have  registered  72  consecutive  quarters  of
uninterrupted GDP growth, propelled by broad-based economic drivers, well-managed inflation
environment, sound external sector dynamics, and a stable banking system.
Headline inflation of 1.8 percent for 2016 reflected the prevailing manageable environment of low
and stable prices. Average inflation for the first 2 months of the year is at 3 percent, exactly at the
midpoint of the government’s target range. This is consistent with our expectation that inflation
will settle within the target range of 2 –4 percent in 2017 and 2018.
This environment gives us a sound basis to be optimistic about the Philippine economic outlook.
We believe that the economy can attain its GDP growth target of 6.5-7.5 percent for the year, and
remain a source of strength for the ASEAN region. Moving forward, our fundamentals will serve
as the spring of resilience in the economy amidst the external headwinds. In addition, our young
and dynamic work force is teeming with potential as a source of labor productivity and quality.
Both  our  fiscal  and  monetary  sectors  also  have  ample  policy  space  to  respond  to  the
materialization of exogenous shocks.  We have room to accelerate government spending to build
needed  infrastructure,  generate  jobs  and  support  economic  growth.    At  the  same  time,  the
monetary authorities have the flexibility to adjust policy, if needed, to sustain price and financial
stability  without  sacrificing  economic  activity.    In  other  words,  investors  can  expect  not  only
sources of value but also anchors of stability in investing in the Philippines.  Thus, our country will
continue to provide a conducive business environment and outstanding value to investors.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, in this time of uncertainty, better and stronger global cooperation is the
best way forward. It is up to us to calibrate, adjust and evolve the means by which we connect
our shores and advance our exchanges.
I hope therefore that through this summit, the partnership between the EU and ASEAN will work
toward achieving collective resilience and renewed growth, amidst diversity and asymmetry in
economic conditions.
I wish you all a successful and productive summit.  Thank you and Mabuhay!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
