Andreas  Dombret:  One  size  fits  all?  Applying  Basel  III  to  small
banks and savings banks in Germany
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  Handelsblatt  conference  on  "Future  strategies  for  savings  banks  and  Landesbanken",
Berlin, 2 February 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
A  demanding  2017  lies  ahead  of  banks  and  savings  banks:  While  the  sector  is  witnessing  a
structural scale-back of sorts, low interest rates and competition from digital service providers
are weighing on profit opportunities. At the same time, the risks that need to be managed have
not got any smaller - no, the challenges posed by the low-interest-rate environment are, together
with mounting interest rate risks, making them even more demanding.
Many institutions are therefore seeking new strategies and rethinking their business models. To
make matters more difficult, a raft of further regulatory reforms is just around the corner.
 
2. Basel III and the completion of regulatory reform
I'm  talking,  first  and  foremost,  about  the  finalisation  of  Basel  III  in  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision and its transposition into EU law by way of CRR II and CRD V.
The  finalisation  of  Basel  III  is  the  topic  of  much  discussion  at  the  moment,  which  centres
specifically around approaches for calculating risk-weighted assets (RWA). Although many parts
of  this  last  package  of  reforms  are  already  done  and  dusted  -  primarily  the  fundamental
revamping  of  trading-book  approaches  -  some  final  parts  are  still  being  debated  in  the  Basel
Committee. This is the case with respect to reforms concerning the treatment of credit risk and
operational risk, for instance.
Many banking industry representatives are afraid that this last package of reforms will create a
new  set  of  burdens.  I  see  it  the  other  way  around:  these  reforms  are  necessary,  as  they
complement and round out the Basel reform process. What we saw during the financial crisis
was that the approaches to calculating RWA produced capital requirements that were too low in
some cases, and a response is urgently needed.
That  is  why  the  Basel  III  package  will  not  be  complete  until  these  further  reforms  have  been
implemented, and that is why we are referring to the process as the finalisation of Basel III. What
I want, here and now, is to clearly disabuse people of the notion that a completely new standard
is being introduced.
Of course, what is being asked of institutions is significant and by no means negligible. However,
all outstanding reforms are based on the existing regulatory framework and take it a step further. I
therefore believe that they should be easier to implement than many fear.
That said, I do understand why banks and savings banks would be jittery at the prospect of a
further  increase  in  capital  requirements.  That  is  why,  in  the  Basel  III  finalisation  process,  the
Bundesbank has come out strongly against a further increase in capital requirements. Our motto
must therefore be that no agreement in Basel is better than a bad agreement. At the same time,
though, an international standard has a very high value that must not be underestimated. This is
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
all  the  more  true  in  a  time  in  which  more  and  more  countries  are  turning  inwards.  The
Bundesbank will also continue to work towards a compromise on Basel III - one that benefits
Germany.
 
3. Reforms and smaller institutions: a one-size-fits-all solution or graduated rules?
Let me turn now to a second, different topic. In talks with smaller banks and savings banks about
the post-crisis reforms, I hear one concern being echoed time and again: that smaller institutions
perceive the operational burdens of regulation as being particularly overwhelming. As they put it,
a  burden  that  is  much  more  onerous  on  small  banks  and  savings  banks  than  on  their  much
larger competitors. This is an issue I take very seriously, for the banks and savings banks are
right.
Therefore, for the next few minutes I will discuss the question as to whether banking regulation
should be offered only as a one-size-fits-all solution for all banks and savings banks - or whether
multiple different regulatory regimes should be created to fit different sizes of institutions.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  my  firm  view  that  there  is  absolutely  no  way  a  one-size-fits-all
approach  can  do  justice  to  today's  banking  landscape  -  with  its  very  large  and  complex
institutions,  its  numerous  smaller  and  regional  institutions,  and  the  wide  expanse  of  medium-
sized institutions! It will positively damage the structure of our banking system - a structure that
gave us stability during the financial crisis.
You may well all be familiar with the allegation that the purpose of the new regulatory regime is to
encourage more and more consolidation in the industry - including Germany's banking industry.
Of course, mergers among banks and savings banks must not be a taboo topic - but, by the
same token, they must not be a regulatory objective, either. I admit to being a fan and proponent
of diversity in terms of bank size and business model, as this makes our banking system more
stable.  Supervisors  are  not  supposed  to  be  making  structural  policy;  rather,  they  ought  to  be
actively working towards proportionality in regulation.
This is precisely why  banking  regulation  and  banking  supervision  are  already  designed  with  a
large degree of proportionality. However, the ambitious reforms following the financial crisis have
made the rulebook more complex, particularly because the rules were oriented to the epicentre
1
of the financial crisis: large and medium-sized institutions with risky business models.
This new regime has made compliance a much more difficult and time-consuming affair. This
overhead is high for each and every institution - regardless of its size. However, small banks and
savings  banks,  owing  to  their  smaller  staff  sizes,  are  far  less  able  to  spread  the  costs  of
compliance across their employees and have to either hire additional staff or enlist external aid.
This leads to comparatively higher burdens.
For that reason - and because smaller institutions pose less of a threat to financial stability than
medium-sized to large institutions - I think that offering relief to small banks and savings banks is
the right thing to do.
One thing that is of paramount importance to me, however, is this: any relief measures being
discussed here have to solve the actual problem - which is not, first and foremost, the minimum
capital requirements, but primarily the operational burdens imposed by the need to comply with
complex rules.
What  this  means  specifically  is  that  any  relief  for  smaller  banks  and  savings  banks  must  be
about removing operational burdens - and of this I am firmly convinced. On the other hand, there
cannot and must not be any easing of capital and liquidity requirements.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moreover,  no  relief  should  be  permitted  to  jeopardise  financial  stability.  Medium-sized,  highly
systemically interconnected institutions - those referred to as "too interconnected to fail" - and
those  institutions  with  risky  business  models  should  not  be  provided  any  relief.  The  recent
financial crisis, during which many insolvent institutions had to be bailed out, is still fresh in all of
our minds. We also need to be careful not to create any loopholes that end up being used by so
many small institutions that a situation of general distress results.
I  am  therefore  firmly  convinced  that  institutions  need  to  be  regulated  with  a  sense  of
proportionality without diluting the new regulatory regime. I am committed to ensuring that the
debate  on  greater  proportionality  is  not  used  as  a  pretext  for  reducing  capital  and  liquidity
requirements but that it instead results in an actual reduction in operational burdens on smaller
banks and savings banks.
 
4. Greater proportionality - but how?
How can the goal of regulatory proportionality be achieved in a reasonable manner without any
side effects?
There  are  two  conceivable  approaches.  The  first  is  a  details-driven  approach  that  involves
introducing special exceptions or adjustments to individual rules.
The second is the creation of separate regulatory frameworks for smaller institutions, on the one
hand, and large multinational institutions, on the other.
The  details-driven  approach  has  already  been  pursued  as  part  of  the  EU  reforms  I  explained
earlier, with the Commission emphasising a reduction in the burden on smaller institutions in all
reform areas. In its draft consultative document, it has proposed a variety of relief measures and
de  minimis  thresholds,  such  as  in  disclosure  and  reporting  requirements.  Institutions  below
these thresholds will be subject to considerably simplified rules, with some requirements even
being abolished altogether, which is something I can only welcome.
We  just  need  to  be  careful  not  to  set  the  de  minimis  thresholds  too  high,  as  otherwise  there
would be considerable risks that were inadequately regulated.
With that in mind, I would like to return to the conviction I expressed earlier on: relief measures
that  reduce  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  need  extremely  careful  consideration.  Examples
include  some  of  the  exemptions  to  the  leverage  ratio  (LR)  and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio
2
 Whereas real economic
(NSFR). Another is the considerable enlargement of the SME factor.
growth  is  unlikely  to  receive  any  boost,  the  minimum  requirements  for  institutions'  risk
provisioning could be weakened.
Let me come to the second approach: the two-tiered system. The fact that work is being done on
a details-driven approach doesn't mean at all that this fundamental approach cannot be pursued
as well.
Specifically, we are talking about a fundamental approach that envisages a dedicated rulebook
for  smaller  institutions  -  an  approach  that  would  systematically  address  the  excess  burden
placed on smaller institutions' operational capacities.
In  this  scenario,  only  banking  multinationals  would  be  subject  to  the  fully  loaded  Basel  III
requirements  in  the  EU.  This  would  be  appropriate  from  a  risk  perspective:  we  would  be
regulating  global  banking  institutions  under  a  harmonised  set  of  global  rules,  while  smaller
institutions and those operating within a certain region would be governed by graduated rules that
do  justice  to  their  different  business  models  and  risk  profiles  by  setting  less  complex
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
requirements.
The Basel Committee would also benefit from such a dedicated rulebook for banks operating
internationally.  If  the  28  member  states  knew  that  the  fully  loaded  Basel  standards  were  only
applicable  to  large,  internationally  active  banks,  we  wouldn't  have  to  worry  any  more  about
detailed  national  exemptions,  but  could  instead  devote  our  entire  energy  to  the  key  task:
standards for large, internationally active banks.
I feel very much that Brussels and Basel should examine this approach with an open mind. Such
a  systematic  approach  to  relieving  the  burden  on  smaller  institutions,  to  the  extent  that  it  is
deliverable,  is  generally  superior  to  a  patchwork  of  exemptions.  In  this  connection,  I  am  very
eager to open up a dialogue with the banking community. To this end, a joint working group was
recently  established,  comprising  delegates 
the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance,
the Bundesbank, BaFin and the central associations of the German banking industry, in order to
develop proposals along these lines.
from 
 
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the implementation of Basel III will impose further demands on banks and
savings banks - but I think that less time and effort will be required than many currently fear.
With regard to the implementation of reforms, two things are of paramount importance to me.
Under no circumstances must we water down what has been achieved since the financial crisis;
rather, we must maintain a robust regime of rules.
That said, a one-size-fits-all approach will not do justice to the banking landscape. One of the
objectives guiding the actions taken to finalise the agenda of reforms in Europe should therefore
be  to  lessen  the  operational  burdens  on  small,  low-risk  institutions  -  ie  to  make  the  final
regulatory regime more granular.
The  objective  must  not  be  to  erode  minimum  capital  requirements  and  thereby  open  a  new
gateway  for  stability  problems.  Instead,  it  is  about  reducing  operational  burdens  on  small
institutions without hollowing out capital and liquidity requirements.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is how we can secure a diverse, successful and, above all, stable
financial sector - to serve the German economy.
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
2
See  A  Dombret  (2016),  Banking  regulation  and  diversity  –  do  we  need  more  proportionality  in  banking
regulation? Speech delivered at the Banking Industry Conference of the People's Banks and Raiffeisen Banks in
Berlin, 8 June 2016.
Special treatment for exposures to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) provided for under the Capital
Requirements Regulation (CRR) – also known as the "SME supporting factor". Capital requirements  for SMEs
are multiplied by this factor, which is 0.7619; upper limit:loans with a total volume of up to €1.5 million. The
Commission wants to expand the scope of application by assigning a SME supporting factor of 0.85 to loans
above the €1.5 million limit.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
