Sharon Donnery: The macro-financial outlook for Ireland
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  (Central  Banking)  of  the  Central
Bank of Ireland, at the launch of the 2017 Macro-Financial Review, Dublin, 14 June 2017.
 Today,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  publishing  the  first  edition  of  the  2017  Macro-Financial
Review  (MFR),  which  provides  an  overview  of  the  current  state  of  the  macro-financial
environment in Ireland.
The Macro-Financial Review aims at supporting the Central Bank’s stakeholders – including the
public,  national  and  international  authorities,  and  financial  market  participants  –  in  their
assessment of financial risks. It also provides an opportunity to promote an informed dialogue on
the  macro-financial  environment  in  Ireland  and  beyond.  It  thereby  contributes  to  the  Central
Bank’s mission of safeguarding stability and protecting consumers.
The global economy is expected to grow modestly in 2017 and 2018. However, the UK leaving
the  EU  and  the  possibility  of  changes  in  international  tax  and  trade  policy  are  among  the  key
factors  generating  uncertainty  at  this  time. Although  measures  of  implied  volatility  in  financial
markets  remain  at  low  levels,  risk  and  term  premia  are  compressed  with  the  potential  for  an
abrupt change in investor sentiment arising. European banks, insurers and pension funds remain
vulnerable to such shifts in market sentiment, in addition to structural and cyclical challenges. In
this context, high stocks of NPLs arise in some Member States’ banking systems, while banks
need to diversify profit sources and address overcapacity.
Turning to the domestic environment, while the Irish economy continues to expand at a healthy
pace, the degree of uncertainty surrounding the outlook has increased since the last Review.
The short-term impact of Brexit has largely been felt through the exchange rate channel. In the
medium to long term, any new trade barriers faced by Irish exporters to the UK will likely have a
significant impact on their activity, principally in sectors such as agri-food and manufacturing. We
welcome that the European Council guidelines for Brexit negotiations outline specifically that any
future framework should safeguard financial stability in the Union.
Domestically,  infrastructural  deficits,  particularly  in  the  housing  sector,  may  prove  to  be
constraints on growth over time. Brexit is expected to have a material impact on the non-financial
corporate (NFC) sector with its effect likely to be felt through changes in UK demand, in addition
to exchange rate developments and a potentially more restrictive trading environment.
Although new lending is increasing, year-on-year growth in bank credit to both the household and
non-financial corporate sectors remains negative. Against this background, the countercyclical
capital  buffer  (CCyB)  rate  on  banks’  Irish  exposures  is  maintained  at  zero  per  cent.  The
countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is a time varying capital requirement which applies to in-
scope banks and investment firms.
It is designed to make the banking system more resilient and less pro-cyclical. Essentially the
CCyB  will  increase  the  capital  requirement  of  banks  if  we  see  credit  growth  becoming
“excessive". It can then be released, partially or fully, either in the case of a period of systemic
stress or when credit growth and associated systemic risks recede.
The Review shows that credit growth to SMEs remains negative across all sub-sectors as firms
continue to deleverage. New lending to SMEs, however, has been rising since early 2014. A large
decline in NPL rates across all categories of SME/Corporate loans has been evident in recent
years,  although  more  than  10  per  cent  of  loans  are  non-performing  and  substantial  sectoral
variation in NPL rates arises.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some categories of household credit are showing positive growth, including non-mortgage credit
and  mortgage  lending  at  fixed  rates.  The  overall  rate  of  growth  in  mortgage  loans  remains
negative as floating interest rate mortgage lending continues to fall.
While household debt has been declining, the sector remains highly indebted, at €143.8 billion in
2016Q4, leaving it vulnerable to a rise in interest rates. Those in the 30–44 age category have
high debt-to-income ratios relative to other age cohorts and by international comparison.
The  overall  number  of  mortgage  arrears  cases  has  declined  by  44  per  cent  since  2013Q2.
Almost half of mortgage arrears cases are in very long term arrears.
Turning now to the Irish commercial real estate (CRE) market, 2016 continued to see high total
returns. The commercial property vacancy rate was 13.5 per cent in 2016Q4. It is much lower for
the Dublin office sector, at 7 per cent in 2017Q1. A substantial amount of new office supply is
under construction, being planned, or at pre-planning stage. The commercial real estate market
has also seen a broadening of its investor base in recent years.
The possibility of firms seeking to relocate to Ireland as a result of Brexit could add to demand,
although Brexit could also have a negative effect, in particular on retail commercial real estate if
consumer sentiment is adversely affected. Existing commercial real estate exposures leave Irish
retail banks vulnerable to any change in market conditions.
House price growth has been rising steadily since late 2016, while survey data show further price
increases being expected over the medium term. High rental growth is also being observed. A
scarcity  of  housing  in  certain  locations  is  contributing  to  price  and  rent  developments  in  the
residential property market.
There  has  been  a  substantial  decline  in  vacancy  rates  in  recent  years,  particularly  in  high
population growth areas. The number of residential properties listed for sale or for rent is also
low. There is some uncertainty surrounding official housing completion data at present but the
number  of  new  units  being  built  and  likely  to  be  constructed  over  the  medium  term  is  below
demand.
The Central Bank introduced macroprudential mortgage-lending requirements in February 2015.
The outcome of a review of these requirements was announced in November 2016 and found
that  the  regulatory  framework  is  appropriate  and  effective  in  meeting  the  objectives  of  the
measures,  which  are  to  strengthen  households’  and  banks’  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  curb
price-credit spirals in the housing market. We have committed to review the measures on an
annual basis.
The General Government deficit ratio continues to improve and the medium-term deficit target is
projected to be achieved in 2018. The public debt burden, at around €42,000 per person resident
in  the  state,  however,  remains  high  by  historical  and  cross-country  comparison,  leaving  the
sovereign vulnerable to real economy and financial market shocks.
Looking at the financial sector, Irish retail banks’ profits, while remaining positive, fell in 2016 as a
substantial reduction in the write-back of impairment provisions occurred.
Operating income increased last year, with the domestic market accounting for almost 80 per
cent of revenue. Brexit could adversely affect those Irish retail banks with a significant presence
in the UK. New lending to the UK fell by over 18 per cent in the twelve months to 2017Q1, with a
drop  in  UK  mortgage  lending  and  exchange  rate  movements  contributing.  Irish  retail  banks’
aggregate loan book has become more concentrated in recent years in residential mortgages
and in lending to Irish counterparties. Developing a sustainable model to address declines in their
main income sources and the eventual normalisation of interest rates represents a challenge for
Irish retail banks.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The aggregate value of total assets held by Irish retail banks fell by almost 5 per cent year-on-
year  to  2017Q1,  while  outstanding  loans  fell  by  almost  8  per  cent  in  the  same  period.
Deleveraging,  write-offs,  loan  redemptions  exceeding  new  loans,  and  currency  movements
contributed  to  the  decline  in  loans.  While  credit  exposures  continue  to  fall,  credit  quality  is
improving. The value of outstanding NPLs fell by over one-quarter in the year to 2017Q1. The
resolution of NPLs is vital to the future health of the banking sector.
The Review provides more detailed macroeconomic, sectoral and system analysis, which we
are happy to discuss with you in detail.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
