Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Financial inclusion strategies in ASEAN
economies
Speech by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the ASEAN Financial Inclusion Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 25 April 2017.
 It is a great honour for Bank Negara Malaysia to host the first ASEAN Financial Inclusion Forum.
We  warmly  welcome  you  to  Kuala  Lumpur.  Let  me  also  especially  thank  the  distinguished
speakers  from  Indonesia,  Philippines,  Singapore  and  Thailand;  and  experts  from AFI,  UNCDF
and the World Bank for graciously taking the time to share your invaluable experience in pursuing
financial inclusion strategies with participants of this Forum.
ASEAN today is one of the fastest-growing and most dynamic regions in the world. We are home
to 630 million people and a burgeoning middle class, with individual economies that are diverse in
terms  of  demography,  income  level,  resource  endowment,  financial  sector  development;  and
economic  size,  structure  and  systems. A  vibrant  SME  sector  contributes  50  to  80  percent  of
ASEAN’s  workforce  and  accounts  for  96  percent  of  enterprises  in  the  region,  linked  by  more
extensive  cross-border  production  networks  and  the  intensification  of  intra-regional  trade  and
investment activities.
Growth for the region is still expected to outperform average global growth in 2017 and 2018, and
this is expected to be sustained going forward. ASEAN’s growth story has been supported by
greater  traction  in  recent  years  in  regional  financial  integration  which  will  expand  sources  of
financing  and  investments  for  economic  activities,  deepen  the  region’s  financial  markets,  and
enhance  the  competitiveness  of  ASEAN  businesses  through  efficiency  gains  (for  example
through lower costs of payments and settlements).   
Growth and development across the region however does not guarantee equal opportunities for
all to lift their social and economic circumstances. Nor can it therefore be assumed that income
and  wealth  divides  will  narrow.  History  bears  this  out,  as  despite  advances  in  financial
globalisation over several decades, income inequality has actually worsened in many parts of the
world – including both developing and developed countries.
For ASEAN,  a  key  priority  has  therefore  been  to  ensure  that  greater  economic  and  financial
integration progresses in lockstep with greater financial inclusion.  For many policymakers in this
room,  the  challenges  are  pressing  with  265  million  or  44%  of  adults  in ASEAN  who  are  still
unbanked.  This  represents  nearly  half  of  the  adult  population  in  the  region  who  do  not  have
access  to  safe  and  reliable  basic  banking  services,  with  broader  implications  for  health,
economic and social outcomes.
ASEAN Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (AFMGM) have unanimously agreed that
financial inclusion should be a policy priority for ASEAN.  The Working Committee on Financial
Inclusion, or WC-FINC established in April 2016 to carry this mandate forward, has in turn, laid
out  clear  goals  to  support  and  accelerate  regional  initiatives  to  elevate  the  level  of  financial
inclusion in ASEAN. 
WC-FINC aims to reduce the average financial exclusion level in ASEAN to 30% by 2025, and
increase  the  level  of  infrastructure  readiness  in ASEAN  to  85%  (currently  at  70%),  based  on
agreed  measures  of  financial  inclusion  outcomes  and  preconditions.  Particular  emphasis  is
given to capacity building and peer learning.  An especially interesting part of this journey has
been ASEAN’s incredible diversity which provides a rich and broad canvass for drawing lessons
from  every  country  on  specific  challenges  faced  and  measures  pursued  to  increase  financial
inclusion. For some of us, the geographic barriers to financial inclusion are the most urgent, for
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
others, cost or knowledge and trust are more significant barriers.  In different ways, we all have
something to learn from each other’s experience on strategies that worked or did not work so
well. 
This is why we are here today. This Forum on financial inclusion was organised in response to
technical  assistance  requests  and  learning  needs  of  ASEAN  countries  based  on  a  survey
conducted by WC-FINC last year. There was particular interest in Malaysia’s experience and so
we volunteered to host this first Forum, but clearly, we are also eager to learn from others. 
The Forum focuses on 5 key areas which represent core pillars of a holistic financial inclusion
system.  The  first  is  the  development  of  a  national  financial  inclusion  strategy  and  monitoring
mechanism  which  are  crucial  to  ensure  that  strategies  are  well  targeted,  coordinated  and
executed. The second is strengthening of institutions that support the implementation of financial
inclusion strategies such as development financial institutions and credit guarantee corporations.
Third is the importance of having a national focus on SME financing and development as a key
enabler for inclusive growth.  The fourth area focuses on the role of digital financial services,
including fintech and big data, in elevating financial inclusion. And lastly, the Forum will turn to the
importance of financial education and consumer protection in increasing the responsible take up
of financial services and building trust.
Beyond these practical areas, there is also much to be gained from engaging in more strategic
discussions on how financial integration itself can impact the inclusion agenda. More specifically,
if we can better understand where potential risks of exclusion may arise from the process of
integration,  then  we  will  have  a  better  chance  of  mitigating  such  risks  –  including  through
measures that may be taken as part of the integration process, rather than a consequence of it. 
Equally, if we can identify opportunities for improving financial inclusion through the process of
integration,  then  we  can  do  more  to  ensure  that  financial  integration  actually  creates  these
opportunities.     
We can think about these issues in several ways.
Could increased cross-border access further entrench the segmentation of markets given
stronger  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  focus  on  strategies  that  only  target  an
expanded market of more sophisticated, higher income customers?
Or: With expanded markets and choice available for high net worth customers, will it make it
harder for domestic financial institutions to continue supporting inclusion outcomes that are
partly cross-subsidised by high net worth business today? Correspondingly, to what extent
will this impact the cost of financial services for the poor, potentially making them even more
unaffordable than before?
Or: Are there opportunities to bring new technologies and emerging practice into domestic
markets and simultaneously create an environment for them to take root and spawn original
domestic applications that will create additional multiplier effects?
Or:  How  might  easier  cross-border  access  encourage  new  business  partnerships  that
would enable financial institutions to penetrate untapped customer segments more efficiently
and reduce associated information asymmetries?
Answers  to  such  questions  can  be  important  in  how  we  think  about  and  approach  financial
integration.    Ultimately,  behaviour  matters,  and  therefore  needs  to  be  explicitly  addressed  in
financial integration strategies. Unless we also turn our attention to the behavioural responses of
financial  actors  in  a  more  financially  integrated  region,  we  may  find  that  our  best  efforts  to
strengthen  the  pillars  for  greater  financial  inclusion  ultimately  does  not  deliver  as  expected. 
Financial inclusion and financial integration strategies therefore need to come together through
deliberate approaches that are mutually reinforcing.      
Our  international  partners,  namely AFI,  World  Bank  and  UNCDF  who  are  present  today  have
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
given their unwavering support to the various financial inclusion initiatives outlined in WC-FINC’s
Strategic Action Plan, and they have affirmed their commitment to provide technical assistance
to help ASEAN achieve its financial inclusion targets.  I encourage you to use this time to explore
new development opportunities, strengthen existing collaborations to take the financial inclusion
agenda forward, and perhaps think anew.  We also look to your constructive feedback to this
Forum which will be important for considering future engagements of a similar nature.
With that, I wish you all engaging and productive discussions over the next 4 days. Mostly, I hope
that  the  insights  gained  will  inspire  concrete  plans  for  action  in  our  respective  countries,  and
contribute towards generating a clearer vision for raising financial inclusion to a new level across
ASEAN.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
