  ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC 
 INTERACTIONS 
 by 
 Dr. Alvin Hilaire,  Governor 
 Central Bank of Trinidad  and Tobago   
Address at the Launch  of the Monetary  Policy  Report  
November 11, 2016 
1. 
Trinidad and Tobago is deeply embedded in world economic affairs. Trading 
in goods has always been significant, with exports of food crops (sugar, cocoa) giving way 
to energy and energy-based commodities (oil, natural gas, methanol, urea etc.) in exchange 
for  a  wide  range  of  imports.  Over  time,  with  advances  in  transportation,  communication 
and technology more services began to  be traded, either directly (for example tourism or 
insurance)  or  via  the  movement  of  seasoned  professionals  or  less  skilled  workers. 
Nowadays, with an open external capital account, financial flows also feature prominently. 
Foreign direct investment is attracted by comparative long term prospects, while portfolio 
flows  often  move  rapidly  in  response  to  perceived  short  term  changes  in  risk  and  profit 
opportunities.    Against  this  backdrop  it  is  evident  that  changes  in  international  energy 
prices  or  a  recession  in  the  United  States  would  directly  affect  the  local  economy.  But 
seemingly remote developments—such as migration patterns in Europe, the integration of 
  ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
 the  renminbi  as  a  reserve  asset,  or  the  loss  of  correspondent  banking  relationships  by 
Belizean  banks—can  likewise  have  deep  repercussions  for  Trinidad  and  Tobago. 
Moreover domestic economic policies and performance can have extensive consequences 
for neighboring territories, with feedback effects on Trinidad and Tobago itself.  
2. 
The  characteristics  of  the  economy  and  the  relationships  built  over  time 
necessitate  constant  attention  to  external  dynamics.  Comparatively  speaking,  Trinidad 
and Tobago is tiny, with land space of just  5,131square kilometers and population of 1.3 
million,  a  small  fraction  of  the  number  of  persons  in  many  Latin  American  cities. 
Nonetheless,  per  capita  GDP  of  over  US$16,000  puts  the  country  in  the  World  Bank’s 
high income category, while its energy base has attracted major multinational companies. 
It is widely considered as the financial capital of the Caribbean, with Trinidad and Tobago 
companies  setting  up  shop  or  investing  directly  in  other  territories.  A  relatively  low 
unemployment rate has served to attract other Caribbean nationals, and depending on the 
fiscal  position,  the  state  has  been  able  to  provide  project  or  grant  funds  to  neighboring 
nations.  In  terms  of  economic  influence  in  the  international  arena,  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
has generally punched above its weight, being a founding member and the only Caribbean 
country in the G-241 and often taking leadership roles in issues raised at the Boards of the 
International Monetary Fund and World Bank. In light of this perspective, I’d like to take 
the opportunity to  highlight five  aspects  of  the country’s interactions  with the rest  of the 
world and the associated implications for public policy and private sector behavior. These 
are:  (i)  dependence  on  commodity  cycles;  (ii)  financial  interconnections;  (iii)  interest 
parity  and  capital  movements;  (iv)  the  current  global  economic  outlook,  particularly  for 
emerging markets; and (v) labor mobility and remittances.   
3. 
The  clearest  expression  of  our  external  dependence  is  in  exposure  to 
commodity  cycles.  As  a  small  producer,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  does  not  have  the  clout  to 
directly influence global energy prices. With the bulk of exports derived from energy, or 
energy-based products, the balance of payments and fiscal operations move largely to the 
rhythm  of  externally  determined  prices.  Between  2000  and  2015,  energy  exports 
accounted for 83 per cent  of export values, while taxes on the energy sector made up  39 
                                                           
1 The Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-Four on International Monetary Affairs and Development (G-24) 
coordinates the position of developing countries in the deliberations and decisions of the International Monetary 
Fund and World Bank. 
 
2 
   ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
 per  cent  of  fiscal  income.  Oscillations  in  oil/natural  gas  prices  have  largely  shaped  the 
boom-bust  cycles  over  the  last  half  century,  despite  attempts  to  smooth  consumption  by 
saving  during  years  of  windfall.  The  latest  episode  of  depressed  energy  prices  is 
significant—oil prices dropped from US$100 per barrel in 2008 to a low of around US$48 
in 2015—and this was exacerbated by declines in domestic  energy production. However, 
significant buffers in the form of fiscal space due to relatively low public sector debt, high 
international  reserves  (close  to  a  year  of  import  cover)  and  savings  in  the  form  of  a 
Heritage  and  Stabilization  Fund  (just  over  half  of  the  level  of  official  international 
reserves)  have  provided  some  breathing  room  from  the  need  for  immediate  full  scale 
economic adjustment.  
4. 
But there is a very real possibility that recent energy price movements could 
reflect  secular,  as  opposed to  cyclical,  trends.2 Swings in  energy prices have often been 
characterized as components of a broader pattern of cyclical commodity price fluctuations. 
This  analysis  relates  the  combination  of  periodic  changes  in  demand  (associated  with 
regional  or  global  macroeconomic  conditions)  and  alterations  in  supply  (due  to  weather 
patterns,  decisions  of  suppliers  or  technical  factors)  with  alternating  up  and  down  price 
patterns.  The  present  situation  in  the  energy  markets  may  be  different.  Most  analysts 
expect oil prices to remain low for a long time for several reasons: on the supply side, the 
advent  and  relative  resilience  of  shale  oil  production  and  increased  oil  production  by 
OPEC  members  play  an  important  role.  As  regards  demand,  lower  GDP  growth  in 
emerging  markets  has  tended  to  reduce  oil  demand  growth,  especially  in  light  of  the 
secular increase in global oil efficiency.  Natural gas price declines also appear to be long 
lived in light of the North American shale gas boom, recent discoveries of vast gas fields 
in  developing  countries  and  the  resumption  of  nuclear-powered  electricity  generation  in 
Japan. If this assessment holds true, a permanent shift in energy prices would require not 
only  short  term  stabilization  efforts  to  deal  with  initial  balance  of  payments  and  fiscal 
difficulties, but a more fundamental reengineering of the Trinidad and Tobago economy to 
deal with lower energy export and fiscal earnings.   
                                                           
2 In its latest World Oil Outlook, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) assumes its OPEC 
Reference Basket will average US$45 in 2017 and gradually increase by US$5 per year through 2021. That 
implies it will not be until 2020 that crude reaches US$60 per barrel, substantially lower than the US$80 
forecast in its 2015 Outlook. 
3 
   ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
 5. 
Second, our financial system is closely linked to world markets and this will 
continue.  Many  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  indigenous  and  foreign-based  banks  have 
branches,  headquarters  or  subsidiaries  throughout  the  Caribbean,  North  America,  Latin 
America, India and more recently Africa. Ownership and investment patterns of insurance 
companies  are  also  diverse  and  there  is  an  increasing  incidence  of  conglomerates 
combining  a  wide  range  of  financial  service  offerings,  sometimes  alongside  other 
products.  This  increasing  global  interconnectedness  of  diverse  financial  entities  sets  the 
stage for a rise in cross-border mergers and acquisitions, necessitating closer collaboration 
among regulators in different territories. In this regard, and to treat with the possibility of 
regulatory arbitrage (where financial companies gravitate to the jurisdiction with the least 
amount  of  supervision)  the  Caribbean  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  and  related 
associations in  the fields  of insurance and securities have already started to  beef up their 
cooperation  and  information  sharing.  Moreover,  it  must  be  recognized  that  the  risk  of 
contagion—the  transmission  of  problems  from  other  jurisdictions  to  domestic  financial 
companies—is becoming more apparent due to the intensity of financial linkages. 
6. 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  must  achieve  global  compliance  standards  if  it  is  to 
avoid being ‘de-risked’. A major issue that has emerged in recent years is the threat of the 
loss  of  correspondent  banking  relationships,  particularly  for  small  developing  countries. 
Basically, it involves the growing tendency of some large banks in developed countries to 
end their ‘correspondent’ relationships with banks in smaller territories; such relationships 
allow financial transactions to be processed in the developed countries (mainly the United 
States, United Kingdom  and Europe). The consequences of such loss could be severe for 
the  smaller  territory,  negatively  affecting  the  flow  of  remittances  and  all  payments  for 
cross  border  goods  and  services  and  pushing  transactions  outside  of  the  formal  financial 
system.  Much discussion is currently underway on the problem and solutions.3 In the case 
of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  incidence  of  withdrawal  of  correspondent  banking  services 
has so far been limited. However, there is an urgency for the country to fully adhere to tax 
compliance  accords  and  international  anti-money  laundering/anti-terrorism  financing 
                                                           
3 Most recently in October/November 2016 at a Conference at the IMF/World Bank Annual Meetings in 
Washington, D. C., a Stakeholders Conference in Antigua and Barbuda and a High Level IMF Conference in 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
 
 4 
  ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
 standards4  to  forestall  the  possibility  that  the  jurisdiction  (and  by  extension  domestic 
financial institutions) is characterized as lax in compliance, thereby hindering international 
financial relationships. 
7.  A third aspect of global interaction involves recognition of the importance of 
interest  parity  conditions  in  the  determination  of  inward  and  outward  capital  flows. 
Technically  speaking,  “interest  rate  parity”  involves  a  relationship  in  which  interest  rate 
differential  between  two  countries  is  equal  to  the  differential  between  the  forward 
exchange  rate  and  the  spot  exchange  rate.  In  plain  English,  this  means  that  for  Trinidad 
and Tobago the difference between local interest rates and foreign rates matters in terms of 
attracting  capital  or  investment,  and  this  has  a  bearing  on  exchange  rates  in  the  future. 
Underlying  this  notion  is  the  understanding  that  where  there  are  no  restrictions  on  the 
movement  of  capital  across  borders,  then  investors  would  place  their  funds  where  the 
returns are highest, taking into account their expectations of exchange rate movements and 
their perception of the riskiness of the investment climate. This sounds complicated but let 
me explain what this implies in practical terms. 
8.  Monetary policy must be sensitive to external interest rates while consistent 
and credible macroeconomic policies help to guide expectations and risk perception. As 
is well known, interest rates across the globe are at all-time lows and the United States has 
been  on  an  extremely  gradual  path  of  raising  rates  as  its  economy  has  improved.  In 
tandem,  interest  rates  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  have  slipped  over  the  years—3-month 
Treasury  bill  rates  averaged  0.97  per  cent  in  2015  compared  to  10.78  per  cent  in  2000! 
Taking into account, among other things, the path of US rates, the Central Bank raised the 
domestic repo rate from  3.25 to 4.75 per cent over the course of 2015 with a subsequent 
pause  in  2016  to  date.  Moving  forward,  we  can  anticipate  that  the  trajectory  of  external 
rates  would  have  a  bearing  on  domestic  monetary  policy  actions.  Concerning  the  wider 
subjects of exchange rate expectations and risk perception, a crucial factor will not only be 
how monetary policy is conducted but also the comprehensiveness and consistency of the 
overall macroeconomic  adjustment  program. As  noted earlier the terms of trade shock is 
large; moreover, an announced fiscal adjustment program is in train within the context of a 
recently unveiled Central Government budget. Success in coordinating adjustments on the 
                                                           
4 Most immediately implementation of the United States Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) 
conditions and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) requirements in the sphere of money laundering and 
countering the financing of terrorism. 
5 
   ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
  fiscal, structural and monetary fronts would be vital in smoothing the way to an economy 
less reliant on energy exports.  
9. 
The  fourth  issue  relates  to  how  Trinidad  and  Tobago  fits  into  the  current 
global economic outlook, particularly for emerging market economies. The latest IMF’s 
World Economic Outlook published in October 2016 is sobering. The organization’s Chief 
Economist summarized it neatly (if not  cheerfully) by saying that “the world economy is 
moving sideways”. A number of key factors that are relevant to Trinidad and Tobago were 
cited as  coloring the  prognosis, including the response to  Brexit and the  implications for 
trade  and  institutional  relations  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Europe;  China’s  short 
term  economic  prospects;  some  firming  of  non-energy  commodity  prices;  the  risk  of 
subdued growth leading to anti-integration policies gaining more traction in the advanced 
economies; and the daunting policy challenges faced by emerging market and developing 
economies  in  adjusting  to  weaker  commodity  prices.  The  Fund  estimated  that  the 
probability of a recession in the short run in Latin America was around one in three and in 
the  rest  of  the  world  (excluding  the  US,  Europe,  Japan  and  emerging  Asia)  was  about 
50:50.  A  fair  summary  of  the  policy  message  for  developing  countries  and  emerging 
markets  is  that  they  should  build  resilience  to  deal  with  a  complicated  external 
environment. 
10.  But it is a two-way street, and domestic policies will impact other countries, 
especially  our  neighbors  in  the  Caribbean  Sea.  It  is  revealing  how  closely  Caribbean 
nationals follow economic and other developments in Trinidad and Tobago, via traditional 
or  social  media.  To  a  large  extent  this  reflects  not  simply  curiosity  but  an  underlying 
recognition of how much Trinidad and Tobago affects  them. In the economic sphere, the 
interdependence  is  easiest  to  see  in  episodes  when  energy  prices  have  surged,  positively 
impacting Trinidad and  Tobago but  negatively  affecting the oil-importing territories.  But 
even  currently  as  energy  prices  have  dropped,  many  Caribbean  countries  confront 
conditions of low growth, high debt and minimal fiscal space.  In terms of direct support, 
Trinidad and Tobago has been able to provide financing to Caribbean countries via, among 
other  things,  a  Petroleum  Fund,  a  CARICOM  Multilateral  Clearing  Facility  and 
contributions  to  the  CARICOM  Development  Fund.  Fiscal  constraints  could  affect  the 
magnitude and timing of such financing. More generally, other policies have had a direct 
bearing  on  the  competitiveness  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  companies.  Energy  costs  of 
6 
  ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
  manufacturers  are  a  small  fraction  of  costs  in  other  territories;  consequently,  policies  to 
reduce  energy  subsidies  would  lower  the  comparative  advantage  of  locating  plants  in 
Trinidad and Tobago. The main lesson is that the linkages with other Caribbean countries 
are  so  tight  that  domestic  economic  measures  can  have  regional  impacts  and  eventually 
feedback on Trinidad and Tobago itself.  
11.  Finally,  economic  factors  will  remain  a  dominant  consideration  in 
migration  decisions.  A  concrete  repercussion  of  uneven  economic  opportunities  across 
countries  is  the  incentive  to  relocate.  Recent  data  on  migration  are  limited  but  2011 
statistics show that immigrants to Trinidad and Tobago numbered just under 50,000, with 
most  originating  from  the  Caribbean.  For  the  most  part  emigration  from  Trinidad  and 
Tobago has been to North America and the United Kingdom. Over  the last decade or so, 
local  businesses  have  complained  about  gaps  in  the  labor  forces  for  some  highly 
specialized jobs but more generally for occupations requiring very low specific skills and 
education, for example basic security services, cleaning assistants and shop workers. The 
low level skill worker deficiency has tended to encourage nationals from other countries to 
fill the vacancies; in addition several major construction projects have employed Chinese 
workers  and  difficulties  in  Venezuela  led  to  some  migrants  from  that  country.  A  telling 
result of the migration dynamics is in the data on remittances by workers to their families 
abroad.  Outward  remittances  surpassed  remittances  from  abroad  in  2014;  by  2015  there 
was  a  net  outflow  of  remittances  from  Trinidad  and  Tobago  on  the  order  of  US$43 
million.  
12.  The  migration  issue  generates  latent  and  potentially  substantial  medium 
term  implications  for  public  policy.  In  principle,  the  movement  of  workers  across 
territories  would  simply  help  to  bring  demand  and  supply  of  labor  into  balance  and 
improve  efficiency  and  production.  The  ongoing  struggle  with  migration  in  Europe 
however  shows  that,  on  a  large  scale,  the  repercussions  could  be  much  more  complex, 
spilling  into  humanitarian,  cultural,  ethnic,  security  and  other  spheres.  In  the  case  of 
Trinidad and Tobago, the most apparent economic consequences of migration relate to: (i) 
wage rates in the relevant sector; (ii) employment conditions of migrants relative to locals; 
(iii) the provision of social and other services to  migrants; (iv) the portability of national 
security,  pension  and  other  benefits;  and  (v)  taxation  of  migrants.    In  essence,  therefore, 
these  consequences  must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
7 
  ASPECTS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTERACTIONS 
 policies that impinge on the attractiveness of Trinidad and Tobago for migrants, including 
public  sector  employment  programs  that  draw  workers  out  of  other  low  skilled  jobs. 
Having brought into the discussion the topic of migration, alongside the earlier subjects of 
commodity prices, financial interconnections, interest parity and the global outlook, what 
are the lessons for analysts and decision makers?  
13.  Data and intelligence on Trinidad and Tobago’s economic interaction with 
the rest of the world must be comprehensive, timely and meaningful. In order for private 
and  public  sector  decision  makers  to  effectively  deal  with  the  issues  related  to  the 
country’s  global economic  activities, data is  crucial.   Detailed and as far  as possible real 
time statistics on energy markets, financial indicators, market sentiment, developments and 
prospects  in  other  economies,  and  on  migration  must  be  constantly  on  hand.  There  are 
undoubtedly some existing deficiencies that must be immediately addressed. For example, 
comprehensive trade data is critical in assessing the external accounts but this is now only 
available  with  a  lag  of  about  a  year.  A  longer  term  collaborative  endeavor  to  improve 
collection,  the  technical  basis  of  the  statistics  and  dissemination  of  relevant  data  and 
market intelligence must be a priority.  
14.  Moreover,  domestic  policies  must  formally  integrate  feedback  effects  from 
external  reactions.  The  analysis  above  has  shown  that  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  external 
interface is quite layered, with a number of complicated and interwoven dimensions. As a 
result, concerted effort  should  be put  into  investigation and  explanations of world  events 
and the potential short and long term impact on the domestic economy. Having done this, 
it would be important to ensure that as policies are developed there is regular and formal 
assessment  of  the  second  or  third  round  feedback  effects  arising  from  external  factors. 
Finally,  a  strengthening  of  coordination  among  technicians,  public  policy  makers  and 
private  sector  agents  would  help  to  accelerate  the  extension  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s 
influence in economic matters at the regional and world levels. 
 
 
 
 
November 11, 2016 
 
 
 
 
E-mail  Address:  info@central-bank or g.tt 
Website:  www.central-bank. org.tt 
 8 
