  20.06.2017 
 Testimony by the Governor of the Banco de España before the 
Parliamentary Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness   
 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee on the occasion of the presentation of the Banco de España 
Annual Report for 2016.  
I would like to begin by reviewing the most notable features of the current Spanish economic 
upswing,  which  began  almost  four  years  ago.  I  will  then  go  on  to  describe  the  more 
immediate  prospects  for  the  Spanish  economy,  with  reference  to  the  Macroeconomic 
Projections  Report  published  by  the  Bank  on  13  June,  and  I  will  mention  the  main  risks 
surrounding  this  outlook.  Finally,  I  intend  to  address  the  main  challenges  for  Spanish 
economic policy over a longer time horizon and to conclude with a brief reference to the 
challenges for the European project. 
The factors underlying the firming of the Spanish economic recovery 
According to the estimates available, Spanish GDP should have regained its pre-crisis level 
during the current quarter, after growing in 2015 and 2016 at a rate of 3.2%,  which was 
notably higher than the rates recorded in the other main euro area economies and, in both 
years, higher than initially forecast. 
As regards the labour market situation, one of the main causes for concern for our economy 
and society, positive employment growth data are being recorded, which are also exceeding 
expectations.  However,  we  are  still  far  from  achieving  the  employment  levels  prevailing 
before the crisis, given the enormous impact that it had on our labour market. 
Unlike  in  previous  upturns,  the  growth  of  activity  and  employment  is  proving  to  be 
compatible with the ongoing correction of the economy’s imbalances. The more balanced 
and  sustainable  nature of  the  current  recovery  is  closely  related  to the  factors  that  have 
made it possible, some of which should be considered temporary while others may have a 
more persistent impact. 
I  would  like  to  refer  to  two  central  issues  to  explain  this  more  balanced  growth:  the 
improvement in competitiveness and the normalisation of financial conditions. 
Competitiveness improvements 
One of the most important changes in the functioning of the Spanish economy since the 
crisis has been the recovery in external competitiveness.  
Cost and price adjustments have stimulated exports and have also enabled our productive 
sectors to compete better in their domestic markets with imports. This has led to an increase 
in the demand for resources, driving business investment decisions and encouraging job 
creation.  The increase  in employment,  favoured  by  moderate  wage  growth,  has  led  to  a 
significant recovery in household consumption.  
Unlike in previous upswings, the moderate growth of prices and costs is helping to ensure 
that the increase in economic activity is not achieved at the expense of a deterioration in 
the  external  balance.  In  fact,  in  2016  the  Spanish  economy  recorded  a  current  account 
surplus of close to 2% of GDP and the external balance is expected to perform positively 
over the medium term, although probably less so than during the last two years. 
 3/8 
 The normalisation of financial conditions  
The  recovery  in  economic  activity  and  competitiveness  is  also  related  to  the  decline  in 
financing costs.  
Since the most acute phases of financial stress in the second half of 2011 and in the first 
half  of  2012,  there  has  been  a  gradual  normalisation  of  the  financing  costs  of  firms  and 
households, with less divergence from the interest rates paid by economic agents in other 
Eurosystem countries. 
The  decline  in  the  cost  of  financing  has  stimulated  business  investment  and  helped  to 
enhance household spending possibilities, with a positive impact on economic activity. The 
normalisation  of  financial  conditions  has  also  extended  to  the  level  of  household  and 
business debt, which has fallen significantly in recent years, in relative terms.  
In keeping with this reduction in private sector debt, aggregate bank lending continues to 
decline, although at increasingly slower rates. This is the case, in particular, of lending to 
households  and  non-financial  corporations  that  do  not  belong  to  the  construction  and 
property development sector. 
The outlook for the Spanish economy over the next few years  
According  to  the  latest  economic  projections  published  by  the  Banco  de  España,  the 
upswing is expected to continue until 2019, although activity will tend to slow on account 
of,  among  other  factors,  the  less  expansionary  fiscal  policy  stance  and  steady  or  rising 
prices for oil and other commodities, which are expected, in any event, to be higher than 
over the last two years. 
With regard to the composition of spending, the less expansionary fiscal policy stance and 
the squeeze on the income of resident agents, resulting from the rise in inflation associated 
with the increase in  energy  prices  since  early 2016,  will  somewhat  reduce the growth of 
private  domestic  demand.  Net  external  demand  will  continue  to  make  a  small  positive 
contribution, against a background in which exports are expected to remain dynamic while 
imports remain relatively weak. 
The risks surrounding the central scenario 
The favourable outlook for economic activity I have described is subject to risks originating 
essentially in the external environment.  
First, although there has been an improvement in the outlook for world activity and trade, it 
has  been  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  global  uncertainty  stemming  from  the  greater 
strength  of  restrictive  positions  on  trade,  migratory  movements  and  international  policy 
coordination, in the area of financial regulation, for example.  
Second, we should not forget that, despite the significant progress made in deleveraging in 
recent years, our level of debt is still high. Moreover, the progress made in reducing the level 
of debt has not been uniform. While general government debt is still close to its recent high 
levels (on which I will have more to say later), private sector deleveraging has been very 
significant.  
4/8 
  In any event, the net external debt of the economy as a whole remains very high. Reducing 
this  debt  will  require  running  persistent  external  surpluses,  which  would  be  difficult  in  a 
setting of contracting international trade or rising interest rates.  
Insofar  as  maintaining  balanced  economic  growth  is  concerned,  the  low  profitability  of 
Spanish deposit institutions is certainly a problem. This phenomenon, also observed in other 
European banking systems, is related to the pressure that the low interest rate environment 
exerts  on  the  net  interest  margin,  but  also  to  the  still-high  level  of  unproductive  assets, 
limited turnover and the competitive environment, in which a growing number of institutions 
from  outside  the  financial  sector  are  increasingly  active  in  offering  services  traditionally 
provided by banks. 
Challenges for sustained economic growth in Spain in the long term 
Taking  into  account  these  short  and  medium-term  prospects,  I  will  now  refer  to  the 
challenges  facing  the  Spanish  economy  in  the  longer  term.  Our  report  refers  to  four 
priorities:  combating  the effects  of  population  ageing,  tackling  long-term  unemployment, 
increasing productivity growth and reducing public debt. 
The consequences of population ageing 
As in other European countries, we are witnessing a process of strong population ageing, a 
phenomenon  with  profound  implications  in  various  areas.  This  development,  which  has 
been under way for several decades already, has accelerated as a result of the impact of 
the crisis on births and migratory flows. People over the age of 65, who in 1970 made up 
less  than  10%  of  the  population,  currently  account  for  21%  and,  according  to  INE 
projections, will represent more than a quarter of the Spanish population within 15 years. 
Currently, two types of adverse effects of this phenomenon on economic growth can be 
identified.  
First, population ageing is leading to a reduction in the number of persons prepared to work 
or seek employment.  
Second,  indirect  negative  effects  of  population  ageing  on  productivity,  saving  and 
investment decisions and innovation can be identified. 
As a result, ageing poses enormous challenges for fiscal policy, since a smaller labour force, 
that is possibly on average less productive, will have to support the vital needs of a growing 
number of dependent persons. 
In fact, the scope and consequences of population ageing form the backdrop to the other 
long-term challenges facing the Spanish economy.  
Towards a greater use of the labour factor 
The formulas to combat the effects of demographic developments involve the search for 
means to achieve a greater use of the labour factor and higher productivity growth.  
Despite the recovery, employment still stands below its pre-crisis level. The unemployment 
rate in the first quarter of 2017 was 18.8%, far higher than in the other euro area countries, 
 5/8 
 with  the  exception  of  Greece.  This  high  unemployment  is  concentrated  in  groups  that 
include those with the lowest skills and the young (with ages ranging from 16 to 29), those 
whom the economic recovery has reached with least intensity, since they continue to have 
unemployment rates in excess of 30%.  
Remaining unemployed over a very long period of time reduces the skills that individuals 
had acquired from their previous work experience, which in turn compounds the difficulties 
of  obtaining  a  new  job.  Getting  these  people  back  to  work  must  be  one  of  our  main 
economic  policy  priorities;  it  is  also  worth  noting  that  changes  in  the  degree  of  income 
inequality in our country are very closely related to the unemployment level.  
Productivity growth  
Another key way to counter the adverse effects of population ageing on economic growth 
is to promote productivity. I should like to highlight three significant areas for improvement. 
Firstly,  increasing  productivity  requires  continuous  efforts  to  improve  the  educational 
system and to promote the accumulation of technological capital. The shortcomings in our 
educational  system  are  illustrated,  for  example,  by  the  fact  that  the  percentage  of  the 
population aged 25-34 with a level of educational attainment below that of full secondary 
education stands in Spain at 35%, more than twice the average of the EU countries. When 
designing any educational reform, promoting skills linked to the new technologies should 
be a priority objective.  
Secondly, promoting competition in certain markets for goods and services used as inputs 
in other productive processes would contribute to reducing the gap between Spanish firms’ 
average productivity growth and that observed in other developed countries. Specifically, it 
would  be  worth  reviewing  some  of  the  regulatory  elements  in  place  in  certain  network 
industries, such as telecommunications, transport and energy, and professional services.  
Finally,  there  are  aspects  of  labour  market  regulation  that  have  a  bearing  on  weak 
productivity growth. The tying of firm-level wage increases to productivity is still very limited. 
For instance, the figures available indicate that fewer than 6% of workers are covered by 
firm-level agreements.  
In addition, the fact that employees with temporary contracts continue to bear the brunt of 
adjustments  to  negative  shocks  raises  the  volatility  of  employment  and  discourages  the 
formation  of  human  capital.  Lessening  the  differences  between  the  different  types  of 
contract, which would be negative if it were a disincentive to the demand for labour as a 
whole, would contribute to promoting productivity gains and reducing inequality.  
The challenge of reducing public debt  
I shall now address the high level of public debt, one of the most notorious legacies of the 
crisis.  
After increasing by more than 60 percentage points relative to its pre-crisis level, the public 
debt/GDP ratio has stabilised at around 100% of GDP, against a background in which our 
budget deficit level remains high when compared with other euro area countries.  
6/8 
  We  need  to  consider  the  risks  this  situation  poses.  It  is  necessary  to  reduce  general 
government  debt  both  to  lessen  the  vulnerability  of  public  finances  to  any  potential 
tightening in financing conditions and to restore scope for a fiscal policy response to any 
future adverse shocks. However, even in the current favourable environment of economic 
growth and low interest rates, the probability of the level of Spanish general government 
debt standing below the euro area reference level of 60% of GDP in the next decade is low.  
Factors conducive to public sector deleveraging are higher economic growth in real terms, 
the  prospect  of  higher  inflation,  limited  interest  rate  movements  and  a  reduction  in  the 
deficit. I shall focus on the last two factors: the interest burden and budgetary consolidation.  
Evidently, a high level of public debt involves a likewise-high interest burden. While general 
government interest expenditure has eased owing to the effects of monetary policy, its level, 
at  close  to  3%  of  GDP,  is  above  the  average  recorded  since  the  launch  of  the  single 
currency, in 1999. Moreover, the opportunity cost of this expenditure is very high: we might 
recall,  for  instance,  that  the  volume  of  resources  assigned  at  present  by  overall  general 
government to nursery, primary and secondary education is similar to the cost of covering 
debt service.  
Further,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  public  debt  financing  conditions  may  become  less 
favourable than at present. In this respect, given the high level of debt, an increase in interest 
rates may have a significant impact on interest expenditure, although this effect would take 
some time to become manifest, since the lengthy average term of maturity means that the 
pass-through  of  changes  in  interest  rates  to  the  cost  of  refinancing  debt  comes  about 
gradually.  
This  situation  means  we  must  continue  to  rationalise  public  spending  and  make  it  more 
efficient, prioritising those items that have a greater potential for improving productivity and 
long-term growth.  During  the  crisis,  spending on public  investment  has  halved,  standing 
significantly below the average level for the euro area, and most likely even below –  though 
this is not an easy calculation to make – the level needed to cover the depreciation of the 
existing stock of public capital.  
Turning to revenues, consideration should be given to reviewing the composition of taxes 
which, once the desired level of public spending has been set, may enable the necessary 
takings  to  be  raised  in  the  most  stable  and  efficient  way  possible.  Compared  with  the 
European Union average, it is a fact that Spain stands out for the relatively low weight of its 
tax revenue as a proportion of GDP, this being attributable, in the comparison within the 
euro  area,  to  the  low  relative  weight  of  indirect  taxation,  particularly  in  the  areas  of 
environmental taxes and excise duties.  
Finally,  it  may  also  be  said  that,  from  a  medium  and  long-term  perspective,  population 
ageing  exerts  upward  pressure  on  items  such  as  healthcare,  care  for  the  elderly  and,  in 
particular, pensions.  
In this latter case, the reforms introduced in recent years, such as raising the retirement age, 
the  definition  of  a  factor  of  sustainability  linking  the  initial  pension  to  the  increase  in  life 
expectancy, and the new mechanism that makes the annual revision of pensions conditional 
upon balance between the system’s revenue and expenses, with ceilings and floors, have 
 7/8 
 contributed  to  containing  the  increase  in  expenditure  and  to  shoring  up  the  long-term 
sustainability of the pensions system. 
That  said,  in  the  absence  of  increased  revenues,  the  adjustment  mechanism  would  rest 
mainly on a reduction in the average pension relative to the average wage, which is known 
as  the  “replacement  rate”.  With  a  view  to  the  future,  it  would  be  advisable  to  set  an 
“objective replacement rate”, on the basis of which system revenues should be adjusted to 
ensure their sustainability. It would moreover be desirable if the reform strategy chosen were 
to lead to an increase in the system’s transparency and a stronger relationship between 
contributions  and  benefits,  maintaining  automatic  adjustment  mechanisms  that  ensure 
financial equilibrium. 
Challenges for the European Union governance framework  
I should like to conclude with a very brief reference to the risks arising in Europe and globally 
too from political positions and currents of opinion contrary to globalisation and free trade.  
I  need  not  stress  that  these  movements  are  negative  for  our  recovery  prospects  and,  in 
general,  for  an  economy  such  as  Spain  that  is  increasingly  integrated  into  the  global 
framework and which in recent years has notably improved its competitive capacity abroad. 
The  United  Kingdom’s  departure  from  the  European  Union  is,  in  my  view,  a  negative 
phenomenon, although the results in recent European elections appear to indicate a brake 
on or at least a re-drawing of the lines marking these trends.  
In any event, in the euro area – where our economy operates – it will be very important to 
maintain  the  goals  of  integration  into  the  financial  and  banking  area  and  to  address  the 
capital markets union project.  
But it is important, too, that the achievement of a true economic union may go beyond the 
financial realm. Along these lines, our Annual Report refers to the discussion of possible 
ways forward towards a fiscal policy that includes common stabilisation elements within the 
euro area, in a setting, such as the present, in which the high levels of public debt restrict 
the budgetary room for manoeuvre in a good number of countries. Progress here would 
contribute to equipping fiscal policies within the area with greater strength and, therefore, 
to minimising the potential adverse repercussions – economic and social alike – of future 
crises. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
8/8 
 