Muhammad bin Ibrahim: “State of the Industry Address”
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  the Asian  Strategy  &amp;  Leadership  Institute’s  (ASLI)  21st  Malaysian  Banking
Summit, Kula Lumpur, 25 May 2017.
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak again at the ASLI Malaysian Banking Summit.
Around this time last year, I recall delivering the keynote address at this Summit after assuming
the office of the Governor.
A year has passed, and it was indeed an eventful year. In the past year, we witnessed major
forces  that  shaped  the  world.  Some  improbable,  others  familiar.  Some  transformative,  others
polarising. Some deep-seated, others fleeting.
In short, it has been a year of contrasts. In more ways than one, our perception of reality is also
changing dramatically. The human brain can now communicate directly with computers, from
powering prosthetic limbs to flying drones. Months ago, both Uber and Airbus unveiled separate
plans for flying cars. Additionally, just earlier this week, artificial intelligence surpassed the world’s
best player in Go, believed to be the most complex strategy game, with more possibilities than
atoms in the visible universe.
On  many  levels,  these  developments  contrast  starkly  with  conventional  wisdom  and  the
traditional state of play in respective industries. Yet, they are also driving thought leadership and
genuine innovation. This theme of contrasts will underpin my observations today on the economy
and the banking industry.
A World of Contrasts: Synchronous Recovery Amid Uneven Risk Profiles
Since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  almost  nine  years  ago,  the  pursuit  of  a  sustained  global
economic expansion has eluded policymakers. Global growth has been slow, fraught with risks
and  shrouded  by  uncertainties.  There  have  been  several  false  starts,  with  uneven  and
sometimes divergent growth momentum among regions. In fact, 2016 marked the slowest global
GDP growth recorded since the crisis.
Positive  developments  have,  however,  recently  emerged.  A  pick-up  in  industrial  activity  and
trade, along with the increase in commodity prices, points to a quickening in growth momentum.
Significantly,  this  growth  upturn  is  characterised  by  a  synchronised  expansion  in  both  the
advanced and emerging countries. This has given policy makers some cautious optimism for a
sustained recovery of global growth and international trade.
In particular, the improvement in advanced economies is encouraging as it is led by recovery in
investment  activity.  Emerging  economies  are  benefiting  from  external  demand,  aided  by  the
improvements in commodity prices.
Our  assessment  is  that  the  global  economy  will  continue  to  gradually  improve.  Nevertheless,
many developments around globe warrant a very close surveillance. It is still too early to declare
a definitive revival in the global economy. In fact, at this point, despite the emergence of a few
positive developments, the overall risks remain tilted to the downside.
Major events that could shape global growth in the near term include uncertainties in policy and
political  spheres,  especially  in  major  economies;  the  potential  retreat  arising  from  backlash
against  globalisation;  the  rise  in  trade  protectionism;  and  the  volatilities  of  global  commodity
prices. Financial markets have in recent months remained eerily calm. However volatility may
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
reignite if risks re-emerge, whether real or perceived.
Beyond these short-term risks, structural changes are also afoot. The ageing population, income
inequality and youth unemployment are slow-churning yet potent structural changes that require
policy prescriptions. Changes in policy today are needed to secure future prospects for growth.
In Malaysia, the economy has been boosted by the expansion in global demand. The strongest
export  growth  in  28  quarters  has  provided  additional  impetus  to  our  domestic  demand.
Consequently,  the  Malaysian  economy  started  2017  with  a  robust  growth  of  5.6%  in  the  first
quarter. We are on track for a better economic growth compared to last year. Nevertheless as an
open economy with sizable and globally connected financial markets, Malaysia cannot neglect
the risks dominating the global environment. We are certainly not immune from events unfolding
around us.
Some say central bankers are paid to worry. In good times and even more so, the bad. However I
am  comforted  that  earlier  reforms  have  accorded  the  country  with  strong  macroeconomic
fundamentals and resilience to weather these still-challenging times. However, we cannot afford
to  rest  on  our  laurels.  New  risks  and  challenges  continue  to  emerge  and  confront  us.  An
important  lesson  is  to  continue  to  strengthen  our  resilience  and  buffers,  especially  during  the
good times.
A World of Contrasts: Bankers as Active Stakeholders, Not Passive Bystanders
The banking sector has been a central pillar of strength for the Malaysian economy. The industry
can play a more positive role by engaging positively in conversations on economic and financial
issues  confronting  the  country.  As  I  have  experienced  in  the  last  one  year,  the  chamber  of
conversation on the economy  could  be  further  expanded.  Narratives  on  the  economy  and  the
industry continue to be shaped by external parties, drowning out the occasional whispers from
the banking industry.
Given the central role of banks in the economy, bankers have the equivalent of a box seat to
provide an informed view on developments in the economy and financial system. Rather than
being onlookers, the banking industry should weigh in on domestic economic discourse. From
sectoral issues to macro trends, bankers’ perspectives would provide additional viewpoints and
enrich  assessments  by  the  public  and  financial  community,  and  help  address  gaps  between
reality and perception that have too often dominated the public conversation.
It is therefore timely for our bankers to participate more actively in the economic discourse to
shape a more balanced narrative. Bankers should be proactively offering solutions to some of the
pressing economic and financial issues facing the country. A positive voice for socioeconomic
change can help instill greater public trust in the role of the banking sector in nation building.
A  current  issue  that  has  disproportionately  drawn  attention  to  banks  is  the  affordable  housing
issue.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  recently  featured  a  box  article  on  this  subject  in  2016  Annual
Report.  The  public  debate  largely  continues  to  misdiagnose  or  ignore  the  root  cause  of  the
problem, that is, affordability and accessibility, rooted by low incomes and compounded by the
huge mismatch between demand and supply of affordable houses.
The popular myth, is that it is all about access to financing. I am perplexed. Actual data is self-
evident.  It  shows  the  continued  strength  in  bank  financing  to  households  for  the  purchase  of
affordable  homes,  with  four  in  five  new  housing  loans  extended  for  houses  priced  below
RM500,000. Yet banks have done little to educate and inform the public on this financing trend.
The  industry  ought  to  be  at  the  forefront  in  explaining  the  real  situation  and  where  possible,
offering suggestions to help address this issue.
Affordable housing is not a problem that is unique to Malaysia. Policymakers around the world,
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
including  in  developed  countries,  continue  to  look  for  creative  solutions  to  this  delicate  socio-
economic  challenge.  A  common  thread  across  these  solutions 
their  multi-faceted
dimensions. 
is 
The solution for Malaysia has to involve rebalancing the supply of housing towards the affordable
segments. We require a bold and pragmatic solution. We estimate a shortage of 960,000 units of
affordable housing. This is projected to reach 1 million units by 2020.  A central authority and a
national repository can significantly improve the ability to better distribute, monitor and manage
the  supply-demand  imbalances.  Developing  a  thriving  rental  market  should  also  be  on  the
agenda to temper the nation’s fixation on home ownership.
Another  issue  that  banks  should  be  concerned  with  is  the  sizable  surplus  in  commercial
property. In contrast to affordable housing, the office and retail markets are in oversupply.
In 2016, the vacancy rate for prime office space in the Klang Valley stood at 21.8%, outstripping
the regional average of 6.2% . Monthly rentals of prime office space in Kuala Lumpur are the
lowest among regional cities. Over the next few years, the significant incoming supply of large
projects is likely to aggravate supply conditions in this segment.
1
Signs of oversupply are also emerging in the retail segment in major urban centres in Malaysia.
This can be traced to the abundance of shopping malls. You may be surprised to learn that there
are  as  many  as twenty  shopping  malls  just  along  the  40km  stretch  of  the  LDP  highway.  It  is
equally astonishing that the prime retail space per capita in cities like Johor, Penang and Kuala
Lumpur  is  actually higher  than  regional  megacities  such  as  Shanghai  and  Beijing,  and  also
higher income cities such as Singapore and Hong Kong.
A significant increase in vacancy rates, and the ensuing price corrections, are risks that the Bank
has  highlighted  as  far  back  as  2013.  The  concerns  are  not  limited  to  effects  within  the
commercial property sector, but have broader spillovers to other economic sectors. During the
Global  Financial  Crisis,  commercial  property  was  a  major  driver  of  loan  losses  in  Australia,
France,  Ireland  and  New  Zealand,  despite  generally  accounting  for  a  much  smaller  share  of
banks’ loan books, compared to residential property. This was attributable to a sharper pace of
contraction in commercial property prices, compared to house prices.
Banks are key stakeholders in this conversation. Data available within banks can be a harbinger
of turns in the property cycle, and used more effectively in combination with other sources of
market data, to smooth out adjustments between demand and supply.
Furthermore,  in  the  same  way  that  reporting  standards  are  starting  to  move  away  from
provisioning  practices  that  were  “too  little  too  late”,  there  is  merit  in  in  taking  a  closer  look  at
current valuation practices that contribute to property boom-bust cycles. It may well be time to
consider how we might correct practices that are encouraging banks to lend “too much too early”
in specific property segments, before demand drivers are firmly entrenched.
At a more fundamental level, we should explore ways to moderate the lending bias towards real
estate. Instead, banks should be providing more financing to new productive investments that are
essential to support the transformation of our economy. As we progress, the industry has to be
more innovative in product offerings to meet the demands of the new economy.   
These examples illustrate the significant scope for the banking industry to organise itself more
effectively to weigh, expand, and ultimately galvanise action in response to emerging issues that
concern  our  economy  and  society.  There  are  other  matters  as  well.  Education  in  long-term
financial planning among Malaysians, the impact of financial technology, expanded inclusion to
financial services, income and productivity gaps, and labour market developments, are just some
of the issues where banks ought to be much more active participants in the policy dialogue and
debate.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Financial Markets Committee stands out as a forum that serves as a focal point for industry
and external stakeholders on recent measures taken in the domestic financial markets. Likewise,
similar initiatives can be mobilised to provide a more organised stage for the banking industry to
lend its voice on a range of issues and contribute to more informed public opinion.
It is time for the industry to be active stakeholders, rather than just passive participants.
A World of Contrasts: Long-Term Interests Versus Myopic Gains
Extending the theme of contrasts further, regulatory measures introduced in the past year have
been the subject of much scrutiny. In many quarters, regulation is still widely perceived as an
unnecessary constraint on markets. In reality, it is a means to safeguard longer-term public well-
being against parochial interests. The intention behind regulatory measures may at times appear
contrary to popular wisdom. Nonetheless, viewed through a broader lens, this is motivated by
policymakers’  duty  to  preserve  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  In  discharging  this
responsibility,  policymakers  must  consider  macro  perspectives,  be  able  to  look  further  afield,
evaluate risks, and take timely actions to manage these risks.
The Global Financial Crisis provides a stark reminder that markets cannot be exclusively relied
on to rein in excesses. Left to the market, there is always a tendency to overshoot. Market forces
can at times deviate significantly from public interest.
This is where policymakers step in to moderate these effects and steer markets back onto a
sustainable path. This is infamously described as, central banks ‘taking away the punch bowl,
2
just as the party gets going ’.
One  ‘party’  we  saw  developing  was  the  imbalance  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  more
specifically in the ringgit non-deliverable forward (NDF) market.
Measures taken by the Bank in December last year were aimed at further developing the onshore
financial  markets  and  limiting  the  influence  of  speculative  pricing  of  the  ringgit  in  the  offshore
market which had undermined the stability of the domestic foreign exchange market. Since the
implementation  of  these  measures,  the  exchange  rate  stabilised,  with  the  1-month  implied
volatility recording a lower average of 4.5%, against 9.9% before the measures were put in place.
The average intraday movement recorded a daily average of 76 points while the bid-ask spread
recorded an average of 25.0 basis points since end-February 2017. Of importance, the onshore
foreign exchange market continues to record a healthy daily average volume of USD10 billion.
Prior to the measures, the daily volume was around USD8 billion.
The  Malaysian  bond  market  remains  resilient.  The  last  two  primary  auctions  of  government
bonds  recorded  a  healthy  bid-to-cover  ratio  of  more  than  two  times.  Following  higher  market
demand, MGS benchmark yields have eased lower between 8 – 32 bps across the yield curve.
Non-resident holdings of government papers have also been pared down from a peak of 34.7%
to 25.3% as at end April 2017.
More  importantly,  our  surveillance  indicates  that  the  composition  of  stable  and  long-term
investors  is  now  much  higher,  with  previous  outflows  mainly  due  to  short-term  speculative
positions exiting the market. This is definitely a positive development.
Malaysia remains a highly open economy and will continue to welcome the participation of long-
term  investors.  Indeed,  we  remain  a  highly  attractive  destination  for  foreign  direct  investment.
Returns  on  Malaysia’s  FDI  assets  have  averaged  12.9%  per  annum  between  2010  to  2016,
higher than nominal GDP growth of 7.7% over the same period . Payoffs from investing in the
real economy are one of the highest in the region, making Malaysia an important profit centre for
investors.
3
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the next seven months, the Bank will introduce further regulatory measures to strengthen the
foundations for a strong and resilient banking system.
First,  we  will  implement  a  mandatory  employment  reference  check  for  financial  industry
employees  which  is  aimed  at  removing  employee  information  asymmetries  during  job
transitions.
Second,  we  will  share  with  the  industry  proposed  revisions  to  the  outsourcing  policy  to
improve the governance and supervision of financial institutions, especially involving cross-
border arrangements. The revisions also aim to better support the development of domestic
expertise and capacity in core functions of the banking industry.
Third,  a  shared  security  operations  centre  for  the  financial  industry  (FINSOC)  will  be
established  in  coordination  with  the  industry  to  support  the  continuous  and  proactive
monitoring of cyber threats.
Finally, by 2018, we hope to operationalise an industry-wide implementation of e-KYC for the
on-boarding of customers. 
Further progress has also been made on the development of the policy framework for domestic
systemically  important  banks  (D-SIBs).  Survey  results  collected  from  banking  institutions  and
financial holding companies earlier this year are currently being analysed and will facilitate further
refinements to the assessment methodology to identify D-SIBs. This will form part of the D-SIB
policy framework which will be released later this year for industry consultation.
Beyond  the  immediate  term,  the  Bank  is  also  looking  at  introducing  enhanced  standards  on
measuring capital requirements and outline expectations on recovery planning, in line with global
reforms.  In  doing  so,  we  will  engage  the  industry  on  the  potential  domestic  implications,  and
make adjustments where necessary to ensure that these standards are phased-in seamlessly.
A World of Contrasts: Shifting From Macro Masterplans to Micro-Cellular Transformation
Malaysia’s  transition  to  a  high-income  economy  will  require  careful  attention  to  the  context  in
which  policies  are  developed  and  pursued.  In  particular,  behavioral  changes  shape  the  way
people live and work.
Thanks to globalisation and digitalisation, individuals are much freer to dictate their living, working
and  financing  arrangements.  Traditional  institutions  and  conventional  policy-making  have  less
influence than before. This calls for a new approach to governing and policy making, one that
combines  high-level  strategic  clarity  with  experimentation  and  dynamic  implementation  at  a
micro level.
Since 2000, the Government has produced 39 blueprints, roadmaps and master plans, including
the Financial Sector Blueprint. This is more than double the number of master plans introduced
between 1970 to 1999.
From a different perspective, over the last 17 years, the country introduced two blueprints a year,
compared to only one plan in every two years during the period 1970 to 1990.
There is no denying that the plans have laid a great foundation for the nation to move forward.
Indeed,  the  Economic  Transformation  Plan  played  a  catalytic  role  in  spurring,  what  we  at  the
Bank like to refer to, as the Investment Renaissance period between 2011 and 2014.
Going forward, there is a critical need to overlay these existing master plans and blueprints with
micro-cellular  transformations.  We  have  been  advocating  this  approach  at  every  opportunity
available.  It  is  just  as  relevant  for  industry,  including  the  banking  sector.  Very  often,
implementation pitfalls caused the failure of the strategic vision of leaders. I believe this gap can
be bridged if each component, layer, and cell, within the ecosystem, whether at an institution or
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
industry level, is empowered to support and even lead transformation.
This micro transformation involves three elements: first, solving locally-nominated and defined
problems; second, employing nudges or smart incentives to induce desired behavior; and third,
experimenting on specific markets, groups or products before a broad roll-out. I must admit that
these  are  hardly  unfamiliar  concepts  in  business.  Yet  few  businesses  have  gone  further  to
integrate these elements within broader transformation strategies.
This has increasingly been the approach taken by the Bank, in facilitating initiatives such as the
FinTech innovations in the financial sector. The Regulatory Sandbox introduced last year allows
for  the  experimentation  of  potentially  beneficial  FinTech  innovations  that  may  seem  inherently
risky  at  inception,  but  properly  harnessed  could  be  a  game  changer.  By  providing  a  “safe”  or
“contained”  space  for  testing,  the  risk  effects  can  be  comfortably  observed,  controlled  and
calibrated. Wider applications of this approach by institutions will go a long way to cultivate a
balanced banking culture of innovation and resilience.
Such applications are also not confined to the area of technology. It can span across a bank’s
decision to enter a new market, reform incentive structures, disrupt outdated internal processes
and provoke changes in management paradigms. The possibilities are limited only by our attitude
to change, our ability to adapt, and our willingness to pursue creative solutions within acceptable
risk limits. 
Banks  that  will  remain  relevant  in  the  future  are  those  that  have  a  deep  understanding  of  the
shifts in the economy and the consumer. This requires banks to have a finger on the pulse of the
economy, to closely observe the micro transformations that are taking place, and to keep abreast
of future financing opportunities, particularly in new areas of growth. To this end, banks will need
to think ahead and begin to invest in developing the organisational capacity to study, distill and
generate innovative solutions to effectively and efficiently meet new financing needs.
With the development of alternative financing such as crowd funding, P2P, private equity, venture
capital,  factoring  and  leasing,  it  will  be  imperative  for  banks  to  consider  how  they  can
complement and support these arrangements more effectively.
We are living in interesting times, shaped by forces that bring to the fore contrasts in economic
and  financial  developments.  These  developments  have  important  implications  on  how  we
govern, do business and engage externally. It has never been more important for the banking
industry to be more engaged, agile and responsive.
I do believe that our banks are well-placed to adapt to changes going forward. It is incumbent on
the banking industry to continue to strengthen its foundations and address gaps that may appear
through  business  and  economic  cycles.  Banks  cannot  be  oblivious  to  the  changing  tide.  Our
economic  prosperity  is  very  much  influenced  by  the  ability  of  the  industry  to  play  its
intermediating role effectively.
Bank Negara Malaysia
25 May 2017
 1
2
3
Regional average prime office vacancy rate is based on 2015 data
Attributed to William McChesney Martin Jr., the ninth Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve Bank
Return on investment: measured as FDI profit over FDI stock
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
