Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Some  perspectives  on  globalisation  and
its aftermath
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  2017  IMF-BNM  Summer  Conference  "Some  Perspectives  on
Globalisation and its Aftermath", Kuala Lumpur, 25 July 2017.
 Welcome to the 2017 IMF-BNM Summer Conference. I would like to thank the IMF for partnering
with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  co-host  this  event  for  the  first  time  in  Southeast  Asia.  Our
exchange of knowledge and experiences will be valuable for us to better understand the dynamic
issues brought about by globalisation that is confronting our economies, financial systems and
societies. I want to record my appreciation to all of you for being here today.
Kofi Annan once said that arguing against globalisation is like arguing against the law of gravity.
Globalisation has brought about unprecedented periods of peace, prosperity and progress for the
world. We have made significant strides. In the last decade, we have lifted half a billion people
out of abject poverty – it previously took us 25 years to do it, from 1980 to 2005. Businesses,
investors  and  workers  have  benefited  from  expanded  opportunities.  Countries  have  rapidly
transformed agricultural labourers into manufacturing workers, spurring growth and productivity.
Consequently,  economies  worldwide  have  become  more  interdependent,  integrated  and
intertwined.
th
One  of  the  biggest  beneficiaries  from  globalisation  is  ASEAN,  which  celebrates  its  50
anniversary this year. ASEAN is now the sixth-largest economy in the world in terms of combined
GDP; and is the fourth-largest exporting region after China, the U.S. and Germany. The ASEAN
Economic  Community  is  governed  by  the  principles  of  mutual  respect  for  countries’
independence, national identities, and levels of development. These principles have become a
foundation for deeper economic and financial integration, creating a region that is more inclusive
and sustainable.
However,  globalisation  has  presented  us  with  significant  challenges.  Where  it  has  created
winners, many have been dislocated. Fruits of globalisation that were not equitably shared led to
a sense of injustice  within  the  global  community  and  economy.  Now,  domestic  inequality  has
increased,  while  existing  wedges  in  wealth  distribution,  employment  opportunities  and  social
mobility have been amplified by globalisation. 
Public discourse on both the positives and negatives of globalisation is not new. What is new is
the rising public backlash against globalisation, which has been used by some to promote their
narrow  economic  and  political  agenda.  Ironically,  some  of  these  originated  from  the  very
economies that advocated globalisation as a means to generate greater wealth. Some of these
concerns  are  legitimate  and  deserve  due  attention  by  policymakers  and  researchers.  The
advocacy  that  globalisation  should  be  made  fairer  warrants  strong  consideration.  Maximising
benefits and evenly distributing it is a worthwhile goal. Let’s challenge the conventional wisdom
and  consider  unorthodox  solutions. As  these  solutions  will  invariably  have  global  dimensions,
cooperation  amongst  countries  is  critical.  This  is  where  the  IMF,  as  a  global  institution,  can
facilitate and play a meaningful role.
Globalisation in the Aftermath of the Crisis
In  more  recent  periods,  major  trends  have  influenced  how  we  perceive  and  pursue  the
globalisation  process. The first trend is growing anti-globalisation sentiments and rising
populism. We  can  trace  this  back  to  rising  inequality  and  deteriorating  standards  of  living  in
many communities across the globe.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Between 1988 and 2011, the incomes of the poorest 10% increased by just USD65, while the
incomes of the richest 1% increased nearly 200-fold, or USD12,000. In the advanced economies,
workers railed against the intense competition from lower cost producers of manufactured goods
such  as  Bangladesh,  China  and  Vietnam.  Coupled  with  higher  living  costs,  many  became
marginalised. The angst of these communities have fused into anti-establishment movements
and pushback against trade agreements. Unfortunately, these circumstances happen at a time
when we need to galvanise all our resources to pull away from the setback of what was termed
the “New Mediocre”.
Second  is  the  growing  perception  that  globalisation  erodes  national  sovereignty.
Participation  in  multilateral  institutions  and  international  trade  agreements  is  portrayed  as  a
devolution of national policies. The extensive involvement of multilateral institutions in domestic
economic affairs and the onerous obligations in trade agreements have incited strong reactions
from domestic constituents.
This reality, for some, underscores the imbalances associated with globalisation. Its economic
ramifications are immense, with the consequences of Brexit and the retreat of the U.S. from the
Trans-Pacific  Partnership  Agreement  still  unfolding  as  we  speak.  The  full  impact  of  these
developments are only likely to be clear some years from now. This is indeed a most unfortunate
situation. When factions exacerbate fractions, it damages even the most established forms of
international cooperation.
Third, the exponential speed of technological change has altered the global economic
landscape and requires us to adapt fast.  The  proliferation  of  providers  offer  services  that
challenge  the  status  quo.  The  dynamism  of  digital  financial  services  redefines  the  nature  of
product  delivery.  It  adds  to  the  complexity  of  regulations  and  presents  new  challenges  for
economies, with broad consequences. Unattended, these challenges create risks that can stunt
innovation,  cause  dislocation  of  labour  and  destabilise  financial  systems.  Look  at  how
ransomware  attacks  such  as  WannaCry  and  NotPetya  have  rattled  internet  users  around  the
world. These virtual intruders infiltrated our synthetic selves, blocked access to our personal and
professional files, and held us ransom by demanding payments to unlock them.
These malwares infested computers operating on outdated and susceptible systems. For the
financial sector, these recent attacks reinforce the lesson that, if we take a neutral stance to the
IT  revolution,  we  open  ourselves  up  to  weaknesses  that  can  be  extremely  costly.  For
policymakers, these costs can have significant externalities that we must be concerned about. 
During World War II, Alan Turing and a team of experts took  six months to crack the Enigma
code.  In  contrast,  today,  Google  can  detect  a  virus  in mere  minutes  through  its  algorithms.
Artificial intelligence is already being deployed to replicate human logic and judgment in specific
applications.  According  to  the  OECD,  9%  of  jobs  are  at  high  risk  of  being  replaced  by
automation, and a quarter of the workforce requires major re-skilling. Currently, only 42% of the
workforce has the necessary skills to thrive in tech-rich landscapes. In Malaysia and like many
other  countries,  technological  advancements  have  reinvented  many  processes  and  displaced
many functions in bank branches, forcing closure and rationalisation of operations. Automation
will replace conventional labour as we know it, and this trend will go unabated.
Tweaking our approach to globalisation
The IMF has warned that global living standards will continue to fall, unless governments and
businesses  take  measured  efforts  to  put  in  place  long-term  solutions.  The  trends  that  I  have
mentioned,  while  highlighting  the  larger  challenges  that  confront  us,  should  not  reverse  our
current path of progressing towards expanded but measured globalisation. We must emphasise
the  benefits  of  globalisation  to  counter  populist  sentiment,  while  actively  assisting  those
negatively  impacted  to  make  the  necessary  adjustments.  It  is  from  this  perspective  that  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
solution is not to turn our backs on globalisation, closing borders and cut ties, or to withdraw from
international trade or financial agreements and commitments.
It is from this perspective that research has the potential to advance the current conversation on
global solutions. As we re-evaluate our path of policymaking, there must be heightened focus on
evidence-based research and greater room for experience-based policymaking. In line with the
spirit  of Sasana,  our  meeting  point  today  for  the  learned  and  the  wise,  I  look  forward  to  the
exchange of ideas at this Conference.
In this regard, I would like to humbly offer some thoughts on three areas where the gains from
globalisation  can  be  safely  acquired,  more  equitably  dispersed,  and  impose  the  least  cost  to
society.
Firstly,  we  must  make financial  globalisation  safer  and  its  benefits  distributed  more
equitably. The Global Financial Crisis, and the Asian Financial Crisis, clearly demonstrated the
risks and the damage that could be wrought by financial globalisation. It amplified the costs of
policy and regulatory lapses and failures in crisis prevention and management. It is interesting to
observe that despite consequences primarily associated with financial globalisation, trade has
received the brunt of the blame. Let me illustrate – in the wake of the GFC, between November
2008 to December 2009, 390 trade protectionist measures were announced or implemented by
19  of  the  G20  members.  Ironically,  financial  globalisation  channels  were  not  addressed  as
quickly. It is surprising how policymakers, particularly in the advanced economies, have yet to
arrive  at  a  consensus    in  recognising  the  harmful  effects  of  free  capital  mobility  that  is
disconnected with the real economic activity. This is an issue that many remain divided on until
today.  While  we  have  instituted  policy  reforms  to  better  manage  our  financial  systems  and
institutions, more can be done.
We need effective frameworks to ensure financial globalisation contributes to risk diversification,
consumption  smoothing  and  efficient  intermediation  of  productive  capital  across  international
borders.
The global community should decisively address the risks posed by large and volatile short-term
capital flows. Not enough is being done at the global level to manage the negative spill-overs to
recipient countries. Here, the IMF can play its role as the trusted policy advisor. The Fund can do
more  to  ensure  that  global  financial  aspirations  consider  diverse  circumstances  and  national
objectives. Efforts to encourage a more inclusive process in setting global financial standards
and initiatives are positive steps in the right direction. Perhaps the most important development
of late is the unravelling of a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach to managing international financial flows.
Again and again, previous experiences in crisis management strongly suggest that each crisis at
any  given  time  requires  a tailor-made solution, given the specificity of each economy’s social,
economic and political landscape.
The  world  is  changing  so  rapidly  that  many  countries  are  forced  to  retool  their  nations  to
embrace new opportunities and unlock this growth potential. Previous successful solutions and
policies do not guarantee success and relevance.
Throughout  episodes  of  crises,  a  key  lesson  policymakers  learnt  was  to  have  flexibility  and
courage  to  explore  and  implement  all  available  policy  tools  in  preserving  macroeconomic  and
financial stability. At one time, unorthodox and unprecedented policies were considered heresy.
Now, they are considered necessary.  
I thus welcome the recognition within the IMF for a more progressive view on macroprudential
and  capital  flows  measures.  I  also  welcome  the  IMF’s  continuous  engagement  and
responsiveness to the experiences of countries in this region, that have been using these policy
tools for many decades. And I hope the IMF will continue to fine-tune the Institutional View on
Capital Flows and its interaction with macroprudential policy. To my mind, this will provide the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
impetus to a deeper partnership between members and the IMF as a trusted policy advisor.
The second area relates to our policy approaches. They must be clear, coherent and
complementary to ensure a more human-centered approach.
Experience shows that for globalisation to make sense to the man on the street, they must ‘feel’
and be ‘touched’ by its benefits, and be satisfied that their lives are better than before. Public
engagement  is  important  to  address  specific  concerns.  Domestic  policy  programs  and
implementation  must  be coherent,  comprehensively explained  and  easily  understood,  and
complemented  by  policy  measures  consistent  with  the  intended  outcomes  of  international
arrangements. Robust communication and transparent assessments can contribute to deeper
levels of public understanding and acceptance. With information now easily accessible to all and
sundry,  authorities  are  no  longer  the  sole  arbiter  of  knowledge. Authorities,  therefore,  cannot
maintain a one-dimensional communication strategy to explain the multi-dimensional policies and
the consequent impact of those policies that we implemented.
Finally, we must fully embrace the explosion of technology to keep pace with the altered
global economic landscape. Come 2020, more than 24 billion internet-connected devices will
be installed. As technology continues to reshape our world, we must balance improvements in
efficiency and customer experience with the concomitant risks. Today, the trade-offs are still not
well understood because while some use technology maliciously, many more use it for a good
cause. Only by embracing this advancement, and by working together with tech-players, can we
synergise and fully reap the benefits for the economy.
In response to these technological shifts, ‘RegTech’ developments ought to be a high priority for
global  financial  regulators.  An  end  goal  is  to  balance  the  risks  and  opportunities  within  the
technological sphere. Equally important here are the complementary roles of governments and
industries in sharing information, so that we can holistically mitigate various aspects of security
threats.  The catalytic role of behavioural analytics and big data further provides us with tools to
address  threats  channelled  through  the  financial  system.  In  order  to  adapt  to  the  borderless
nature of globalisation, international cooperation is vitally important.
Beyond  the  financial  sector,  we  must  prepare  our  human  capital  for  the  future.  Close
collaboration between public and private sectors is critical to ensure that displaced workers are
adequately retrained and equipped with new skills.  Those dislocated should not feel sidelined.
We can address labour displacement by investing in education, skills re-training and increasing
women’s participation in the workforce. We need to take a hard look at the current landscape of
social safety nets, and draw best practices – both those tried and tested, and practices that can
best respond to new challenges and needs of society.
Conclusion
Looking ahead, globalisation will likely work if we widen the horizon that touches positively on all
segments of society. Negative spill-overs are likely unavoidable. But it is incumbent upon us to
formulate policies and give greater attention to those most adversely impacted by this process.
Kofi  Annan  compared  globalisation  to  gravity.  With  weightlessness,  astronauts  experience
intense  dizziness  and  lose  their  sense  of  orientation.  Without  gravitational  pull,  their  bones
weaken, ligaments deteriorate and muscles atrophy. The same can be said about the force of
globalisation  –  without  it,  economies  weaken,  relationships  deteriorate  and  growth  atrophies.
Globalisation is slowly but surely solidifying our shared future as one global nation of states. It is
our collective responsibility to strengthen and sustain the  state  of this nation for the benefit of
future generations.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me end here by thanking the eminent speakers and participants for being here, and I look
forward to hearing your views. I hope that you will also take some time during your stay here to
enjoy the diversity of our country. 
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
