Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 12 July 2017.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your
questions about today’s interest rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
Today, we raised our key policy rate by 25 basis points, in the context of an economy that is
approaching full capacity and with inflation expected to reach the 2 per cent target within the next
year.
Before we turn to your questions, let me offer some insights into the deliberations of Governing
Council.
Economic  data  have  been  encouraging  over  the  past  few  months,  globally  and  especially  for
Canada. We acknowledged this positive trend in our April MPR and in our May 24 press release,
while noting concern about the sustainability of growth because of its composition, as well as
US-based  policy  uncertainties.  While  uncertainties  remain,  delays  in  decision  making  in  the
United  States  seem  to  have  moved  some  of  those  concerns  more  into  the  background.  The
Bank’s  latest Business  Outlook  Survey,  for  example,  finds  very  strong  business  sentiment,
particularly for investment and hiring intentions, despite a lack of clarity about future US policies.
Since April, we have also seen further evidence of a broadening of growth in Canada. Along with
stronger-than-expected growth, this has bolstered Governing Council’s confidence in the outlook
for the economy and inflation. The economy is absorbing excess capacity more rapidly than we
projected in April, and it now appears that the output gap will close around the end of this year.
That  will  nevertheless  leave  some  slack  in  the  labour  market. As  output  growth  continues  to
exceed potential, we expect companies to invest in additional capacity and draw from this slack
in  the  labour  market,  thereby  expanding  potential  output  further.  This  process  is  difficult  to
forecast  but  is  likely  to  become  increasingly  evident  as  we  approach  full  potential.  This  is  an
important reason why monetary policy is not on a predetermined path. It will remain highly data-
dependent as we move forward. One key indicator of progress will continue to be wage inflation,
which  has  shown  signs  of  a  pickup  in  recent  months  but  remains  restrained  by  the  lingering
effects of the adjustment to low oil prices.
Meanwhile, inflation has continued to fluctuate in the bottom half of our target range. This has
prompted a lively debate, not just in Canada but in many other countries, about the appropriate
interest  rate  setting  when  economic  growth  is  rapid  but  inflation  is  low.  Governing  Council
examined this issue closely from two perspectives.
The first asks whether there are special factors that are temporarily pushing inflation lower, and
we discuss this issue in a technical box in the MPR. Generally speaking, central banks prefer to
look through temporary factors. Of course, our new core measures of inflation were developed to
help  us  see  through  the  noise  in  inflation  data,  but  even  these  are  not  immune  to  temporary
fluctuations.
After careful assessment of the evidence, Governing Council agreed that a significant portion of
the  recent  softness  in  our  measures  of  inflation  should  prove  to  be  temporary.  Nevertheless,
even a one-time price change affects inflation for a year, simply because we gauge inflation on a
year-over-year basis. Some temporary factors are themselves gradual rather than one-off, such
as increased competition in retail food stores. This all serves to underscore the data-dependent
nature of monetary policy.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
All  things  considered,  Governing  Council  judges  that  in  the  absence  of  temporary  factors,
inflation would be running at around 1.8 per cent, as excess capacity in Canada is estimated to
account  for  an  inflation  shortfall  of  about  0.2  per  cent. Accordingly,  as  the  gap  closes  in  the
months  ahead,  we  expect  inflation  to  head  toward  2  per  cent,  with  the  rate  of  convergence
determined by how quickly these various temporary factors unwind.
Our projection shows a modest overshoot of the 2 per cent inflation target in 2019. This is a
product of the dynamics of our model, but it is an important reminder that, while our target is 2
per cent, our control range is a symmetric 
1  to  3  per  cent.  Having  a  target  range  acknowledges  the  uncertainty  inherent  in  economic
forecasting and inflation control. The chances of an overshoot will depend on how investment
and potential output respond to tighter capacity constraints, a process that the Bank will monitor
closely.
The second perspective on the low-inflation issue concerns the lags between monetary policy
actions and their ultimate effects on inflation. It is worth remembering that it can take 18 to 24
months for a monetary policy action to have its full effect on inflation. This means that central
banks  must  target  future  inflation  by  anticipating  future  deviations  from  target.  And  because
inflation is measured with a lag, reacting only to the latest inflation data would be akin to driving
while looking in the rear view mirror. In contrast, imagine a world where the Bank was able to
anticipate all future movements in inflation, and adjust interest rates in advance to offset them
and keep inflation exactly at 2 per cent. In such a case, it might appear to the casual observer
that interest rates were being adjusted up or down for no reason.
Taking together the approaching closing of the output gap and our understanding of recent soft
inflation readings, today’s increase in interest rates is clearly warranted. That being said, we will
of  course  monitor  the  details  of  inflation  carefully  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  it  remains
appropriate to look through fluctuations in inflation.
Interest rates were lowered in 2015 in order to help the economy adjust to lower oil prices, and
much of that adjustment is now behind us. While lower rates contributed to greater household
financial  vulnerabilities,  enhanced  macroprudential  policies  helped  to  mitigate  these  and  will
continue to do so. As the economy approaches full capacity, a higher policy rate in pursuit of our
inflation target also serves to reinforce efforts to mitigate financial system vulnerabilities.
Governing  Council  acknowledges  that  the  economy  may  be  more  sensitive  to  higher  interest
rates than in the past, given the accumulation of household debt. We will need to gauge carefully
the effects of higher interest rates on the economy.
Future adjustments to the target for the overnight rate will be guided by incoming data as they
inform the Bank’s inflation outlook, keeping in mind continued uncertainty and financial system
vulnerabilities.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I will be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
