Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Tallinn, 8 June 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Hansson  for  his  kind  hospitality  and  express  our
special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of today’s meeting of the Governing
Council. We will now report on the outcome of our meeting.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We expect them to remain at their present levels for an extended
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. Regarding non-standard
monetary policy measures, we confirm that our net asset purchases, at the current monthly
pace of €60 billion, are intended to run until the end of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary,
and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with its inflation aim. The net purchases will be made alongside reinvestments of the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  continued  to  preserve  the  very  favourable  financing
conditions that are necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation rates towards levels
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The information that has become available since
our last monetary policy meeting in late April confirms a stronger momentum in the euro area
economy, which is projected to expand at a somewhat faster pace than previously expected. We
consider that the risks to the growth outlook are now broadly balanced.
At the same time, the economic expansion has yet to translate into stronger inflation dynamics.
So  far,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  continue  to  remain  subdued.  Therefore,  a  very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation is still needed for underlying inflation pressures
to  build  up  and  support  headline  inflation  in  the  medium  term.  If  the  outlook  becomes  less
favourable,  or  if  financial  conditions  become  inconsistent  with  further  progress  towards  a
sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  we  stand  ready  to  increase  our  asset  purchase
programme in terms of size and/or duration.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.6%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2017, after 0.5% in
the last quarter of 2016. Incoming data, notably survey results, continue to point to solid, broad-
based  growth  in  the  period  ahead.  The  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  has
facilitated  the  deleveraging  process  and  should  continue  to  support  domestic  demand.  In
particular,  the  recovery  in  investment  continues  to  benefit  from  very  favourable  financing
conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability.  Employment  gains,  which  are  also
benefiting from past labour market reforms, are supporting real disposable income and private
consumption.  Moreover,  the  global  recovery  is  increasingly  supporting  trade  and  euro  area
exports. However, economic growth prospects continue to be dampened by a sluggish pace of
implementation of structural reforms, in particular in product markets, and by remaining balance
sheet adjustment needs in a number of sectors, notwithstanding ongoing improvements.
This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  June  2017  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections  for  the  euro  area,  finalised  in  late  May,  which  are  conditional  on  the  full
implementation of all our monetary policy measures. These projections foresee annual real GDP
increasing by 1.9% in 2017, by 1.8% in 2018 and by 1.7% in 2019. Compared with the March
2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised
upwards over the projection horizon.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are considered to be broadly balanced. On
the one hand, the current positive cyclical momentum increases the chances of a stronger than
expected economic upswing. On the other hand, downside risks relating to predominantly global
factors continue to exist.
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  1.4%  in  May,
following 1.9% in April and 1.5% in March. As expected, the recent volatility in inflation rates was
mainly due to energy prices and temporary increases in services prices over the Easter period.
Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to remain
around current levels in the coming months. At the same time, measures of underlying inflation
remain low and have yet to show convincing signs of a pick-up, as unutilised resources are still
weighing  on  domestic  price  and  wage  formation.  Underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  rise  only
gradually  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing
economic expansion and the corresponding gradual absorption of economic slack.
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the June 2017 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.5% in 2017, 1.3% in 2018
and 1.6% in 2019. By comparison with the March 2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections,
the outlook for headline HICP inflation has been revised downwards, mainly reflecting lower oil
prices.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an  annual  rate  of  growth  of  4.9%  in April  2017,  after  5.3%  in  March. As  in  previous  months,
annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the  narrow
monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 9.2% in April 2017, after 9.1% in March.
The  recovery  in  loan  growth  to  the  private  sector  observed  since  the  beginning  of  2014  is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 2.4% in
April 2017, from 2.3% in the previous month, while the annual growth rate of loans to households
remained stable at 2.4% in April. The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place
since  June  2014  continues  to  significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and
households, access to financing, notably for small and medium-sized enterprises, and, hence,
credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2%.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  much  more  decisively  to  strengthening  economic  growth.  The  implementation  of
structural  reforms  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce
structural  unemployment  and  boost  productivity  and  potential  output  growth.  Regarding fiscal
policies, all countries would benefit from intensifying efforts towards achieving a more growth-
friendly composition of public finances. A full, transparent and consistent implementation of the
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  procedure  over  time  and
across countries remains essential to bolster the resilience of the euro area economy.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
