Italian Banking Association
Annual Meeting
Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 12 July 2017
   The current economic scenario and the outlook 
The  Italian  economy  has  gained  strength.  The  latest  economic  indicators  confirm  that 
production  is  picking  up.  All  in  all,  the  most  recent  surveys  of  households  and  firms  signal 
persistently high levels of confidence and a resumption of investment; the outlook for exports and 
employment remains favourable. The upturn in growth has had a positive impact on lending, even 
though firms’ demand for financing is still weak, reflecting the ready availability of own funds and 
the problems facing certain sectors. 
If  the  economy  is  to  continue  to  strengthen,  the  global  cycle  must  keep  improving,  there 
must be no increase in the volatility of international financial markets, and monetary and credit 
conditions in the euro area must remain highly expansionary. In early June the Governing Council 
of  the  ECB  confirmed  its  commitment  to  maintaining  a  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation.  To  ensure  a  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  towards  the  price  stability 
objective, it expects that official interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period 
of time, and well past the horizon of the net asset purchases, which will run until at least the end 
of this year. 
But  to  erase  the  legacy  of  the  most  severe  economic  crisis  in  our  nation’s  history,  the 
consequences of which can be seen in the record levels of unemployment, the public debt-to-GDP 
ratio  and  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  to  total  outstanding  loans,  we  need  more  than  just  a 
cyclical  recovery.  In  Italy  economic  development  is  still  hampered  by  the  rigidities  and 
inefficiencies  of  the  environment  in  which  firms  operate  and  by  weak  productivity  growth.  The 
process of reform must continue, requiring a collective commitment, far-sightedness and measures 
to mitigate the costs of the transition. 
Banks, too, must change, seeking to become more resilient and to regain an adequate level of 
profitability. The success of this transformation depends on the entire economy returning to a path 
of sustained and enduring growth to which banks must contribute; at the same time banks must be 
prepared  for  the  possibility  that  it  may  take  a  long  time  to  achieve  a  more  satisfactory  rate  of 
expansion in production. In 2016 and in the first few months of this year both new NPL flows and 
their ratio to total loans fell. This is a trend that should be encouraged through active management 
of these exposures. To recover profitability, additional decisive steps must be taken to cut costs, 
reorganize  business  models,  adopt  effective  corporate  governance  arrangements,  and  engage  in 
mergers. More investment is required to enable banks to meet, including by updating their business 
models,  the  challenges  posed  by  the  sweeping  changes  taking  place  in  technology,  regulation, 
market structures, and client demands. 
The resolution of episodes of bank crisis  
A number of banks experienced particularly severe difficulties, which could not be blamed on 
the decline in productive activity alone. When the crisis began, these banks were already in a weak 
position  owing  to  deficiencies  in  their  governance  structures  and  imprudent  lending  practices, 
compounded, in some instances, by malfeasance. 
Over the last few weeks important steps have been taken to resolve some of the most serious 
cases.  The  precautionary  recapitalization  of  Banca  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena  was  approved,  an 
orderly liquidation of Veneto Banca and Banca Popolare di Vicenza was undertaken involving the use 
of State funds, and the sale of Nuova Carife, the last of the four banks put in resolution at the end of 
2015 to be placed on the market,  has been  concluded.  As  for  other troubled, but small banks,  the 
public authorities, the banks’ own directors and fellow institutions are committed to finding solutions. 
The measures chosen eliminate the tail risk that in recent months has weighed on conditions at 
individual banks and on the sector as a whole, especially as perceived by financial operators. This is 
borne out by the positive response of the markets to the announcement of the most recent decisions.  
The  decisions  complied  fully  with  European  legislation  and  procedures.  To  the  extent  that 
these permitted, efforts were made to find the solution that best protected the interests involved. The 
use of state funds, which have a good chance of being recovered, should be viewed in this instance 
as  a  necessary  response  to  specific  market  failures,  but  as  exceptional,  also  in  view  of  the 
underlying principles of the new European rules.  
The  measures  adopted  arose  from  a  process  that  was  made  particularly  complex  –  and 
exceedingly long – by changes in the institutional and legislative framework. The management of 
banking crises today is entrusted to a multiplicity of independent authorities and institutions. There 
is a lack of effective coordination for setting priorities and establishing guidelines on the margins of 
discretion afforded by law. This is also demonstrated by the problems that have arisen in finding a 
solution  to  the  crises  at  the  Veneto  banks.  There  must  also  be  specific  procedures  in  place  to 
account for the decisions taken. 
To  build  on  the  progress  made  to  date,  the  plans  that  have  been  drawn  up  must  be 
implemented with dedication and determination. Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena must begin the 
corporate  reorganization  and  turnaround  contemplated  in  its  multi-year  business  plan,  which  has 
been scrutinized by the European institutions and which is capable of returning it to an adequate, 
and enduring, level of profitability. The precautionary recapitalization approved by the European 
Commission on 4 July avoided the very serious consequences of a resolution procedure; it permits 
an €8.1 billion recapitalization, of which €3.9 billion injected by the State and €4.2 billion resulting 
from the conversion into shares of capital instruments subject to burden sharing. To prevent or end 
disputes  over  the  placement  of  these  instruments  with  non-qualified  customers,  the  State  can 
acquire up to €1.5 billion worth of the shares resulting from the conversion in exchange for senior 
bonds issued by MPS.  
Overall, in exchange for public funding of no more than €5.4 billion, the State will acquire a 
share in the bank’s capital equal to about 70 per cent. The recapitalization will be completed by 
early August with the issue of the ministerial implementing decrees. The operation will enable the 
bank to raise its capital ratios to levels comparable to those of its main competitors; to free itself of 
its entire portfolio of bad loans and increase the coverage ratios on the remaining non-performing 
loans, also thanks to the Atlante fund; to significantly raise efficiency, productivity and profitability 
by  offering  early-retirement  incentives  to  a  large  portion  of  its  staff;  to again  contribute  fully  to 
financing the economy. Once adequate profitability levels have been restored, the State will sell its 
holding on the market, maximizing its investment. 
For Veneto Banca and Banca Popolare di Vicenza, precautionary recapitalization was not an 
option due to the lack of sufficient private resources to cover the losses they were likely to incur in 
the  near  future.  The  losses  estimated  by  the  European  authorities  involved  in  the  procedure 
increased  progressively  during  their  assessment  of  the  restructuring  plan;  that  same  assessment 
included a negative opinion on the banks’ ability to return to an adequate level of profitability. It 
therefore became necessary to examine the alternatives to precautionary recapitalization.  
On 23 June 2017, the ECB declared that the two banks were ‘failing or likely to fail’. The 
Single Resolution Board (SRB), the European authority  responsible for  the management of bank 
crises, agreed with the ECB’s assessment and concluded that there were no alternative market or 
supervisory measures that could prevent the failure of the banks. The SRB further concluded that 
resolution action – as a substitute for liquidation – was not warranted in the public interest.  
The  Italian  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Italy,  in  close  cooperation  and  in  constant 
communication  with  the  European  authorities,  therefore  resolved  the  crises  of  the  two  banks  by 
means  of  compulsory  administrative  liquidation  in  accordance  with  the  European  rules  and  the 
principles of the Consolidated Law on Banking. The Decree Law issued by the Government on 25 
June  2017  offered  a  suitable  framework  for  dealing  with  the  two  banks,  including  by  making 
provision for the public sector support necessary to guarantee their orderly exit from the market. 
The  liquidation  was  carried  out  in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  existing  business 
relationships  and  to  limit  the  effects  of  the  crisis  on  the  productive  economy.  Shareholders  and 
junior bondholders participated in the losses, but no bail-in was used, which would have included 
senior  bondholders  as  well  as  customers  with  deposits  above  €100,000;  provision  has  also  been 
made for compensating some retail junior bondholders. 
The  European  Commission  found  these  measures  to  be  fully  compatible  with  the  rules  on 
State aid as defined in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union; it also found that the 
public  intervention  satisfied  the  conditions  set  out  in  the  2013  Communication  on  State  aid  to 
support  banks  in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis.  This  Communication  established  that 
shareholders and junior creditors participate in the costs and, if the liquidation calls for the en bloc 
sale  of  the  struggling  bank’s  assets  and  liabilities,  that  the  acquirer  be  chosen  through  an  open, 
competitive  and  non-discriminatory  process  so  as  to  select  the  most  advantageous  offer  and 
minimize  the  effects  on  the  public  finances.  That  is  what  occurred,  in  full  compliance  with  the 
agreed rules and conditions.  
  The  selection  process  involved  six  potential  acquirers:  four  were  Italian  (the  two  leading 
banking groups, a mid-size bank and a major insurance group) and two were large European banks. 
At the close of the process, two binding offers had been submitted; Intesa Sanpaolo’s was the only 
one that could ensure the continuity of the two banks’ critical functions. The acquirer must now 
proceed to integrate and restructure the assets and liabilities sold as part of the operation.  
  The banks in liquidation continue to hold, on the asset side, shares and other stakes totalling 
€1.7 billion and all their non-performing loans (€9.9 billion net of write-downs); on the liability 
side,  they  hold  capital,  junior  bonds  and  risk  provisions  totalling  €6.2  billion.  The  €5.4  billion 
difference constitutes a debt to Intesa Sanpaolo, which simultaneously acquires all the other assets 
and liabilities of the banks in liquidation. This debt (which may be revised upwards to €6.4 billion 
following  the  due  diligence  on  the  performing  loans)  is  guaranteed  by  the  State,  which  has  also 
granted the acquirer other guarantees, with an estimated fair value of €400 million, to cover various 
risks. The immediate burden on the State consists of a cash injection of €4.8 billion, of which €3.5 
billion to Intesa Sanpaolo to cover its capital needs following the acquisition, and €1.3 billion to 
cover the cost of the restructuring measures that Intesa Sanpaolo must implement. 
  As  a  counterpart  of  these  undertakings,  the  State  is  a  creditor  vis-à-vis  the  banks  in 
liquidation and will be reimbursed through the sale of their assets. The non-performing loans will be 
assigned to Società di Gestione delle Attività (SGA), which will have to work towards eventually 
obtaining recovery rates consistent with those implied by the loans’ book values, which are net of 
write-downs.  The  costs  of  a  standard  liquidation  procedure  (‘atomistic  liquidation’),  the  only 
available alternative once precautionary recapitalization has been excluded, would have been much 
higher for customers, the banking system, and even the State.  
The situation of Italy’s banks and the problems currently being addressed 
Credit quality continues to improve, sustained by the economic recovery. The ratio of new 
non-performing loans to total outstanding loans has fallen to the levels prevailing before the crisis, 
dropping to 2.4 per cent in the first quarter of this year. The stock of NPLs has also fallen: at the 
end of March, the ratio of NPLs to total outstanding loans fell for the significant banking groups as 
a whole to 9.2 per cent, net of write-downs, from a peak of 11.4 per cent recorded in the second half 
of 2015. The coverage ratio had reached 53 per cent, compared with an average of 45 per cent for 
the  leading  European  banks.  Sales  and  securitizations  currently  under  way  will  lead  to  a  further 
significant drop in the volume of net non-performing exposures: in the next twelve months their 
share of the total could fall below 8 per cent.  
This process must continue. The reforms of the credit recovery procedures launched in Italy in 
recent years are a step in the right direction; they must be strengthened to ensure a sharp reduction in 
recovery  times.  As  I  recalled  in  May,  it  would  be  especially  useful  to  increase  the  level  of 
specialization  in  the  handling  of  insolvency  cases,  providing  for  the  centralization  of  the  more 
complex  proceedings,  including  by  reviewing  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  Italy’s  courts.  For  their 
part, banks must make the best possible use of the instruments already available in the form of out-of-
court agreements with firms on debt restructuring and the transfer of real estate pledged as collateral. 
All financial intermediaries must increase the availability of sufficient and timely information 
on non-performing exposures, essential for making the management of these assets more efficient 
and less costly, thereby facilitating their sale. The new reporting on bad loans that the Bank of Italy 
introduced last year, motivated by the scant availability of computerized data at banks, is providing 
a  significant  contribution  to  improving  the  management  criteria  for  non-performing  loans.  The 
Commission has asked the European Banking Authority to consider launching a similar initiative 
for banks in all member states. 
The first results of the new NPL reporting confirm that the survey has prompted the banks to 
speed up actions to improve data organization and digitalization. The quality of the responses was 
initially poor but has become better, partly thanks to monitoring by the Bank. There is still room for 
improvement: in many cases the data on the status of recovery procedures and on the type of assets 
pledged as collateral are incomplete, particularly as regards valuations. Approaches to the recovery 
procedures differ considerably: some banks are not taking sufficiently prompt action. Efforts should 
be stepped up to eliminate the backlog and take full advantage of the possibilities offered by the 
new database. 
By  exploiting  the  information  to  the  full  it  will  also  be  possible  to  conduct  a  more  active 
management of non-performing exposures other than bad loans, raising the rate of reclassification 
to performing and adjusting coverage levels where necessary. Unlikely-to-pay  exposures account 
for  half  of  total  NPLs;  swift  action  is  required  to  maximize  their  value,  especially  by  means  of 
restructuring agreements to set firms back on the path to sustainability. The 2015 reform introduced 
tools  that  give  financial  creditors  far  greater  room  for  manoeuvre  under  these  agreements;  they 
should be exploited fully.  
The debate at European level is focusing again on the practicality of setting up a specialized 
company for managing the non-performing assets with public support to reduce the weight of these 
exposures in banks’ balance sheets and to develop the NPL market. As I have already pointed out, 
we believe that introducing this type of measure could be useful, provided it is finalized as soon as 
possible. To be truly successful, the disposal price of the assets should not diverge too much from 
their real economic value. Banks’ participation in the scheme should be voluntary and the various 
elements of their restructuring plans should be decided beforehand. 
Europe  is  also  considering  the  introduction  of  mechanisms  that  set  compulsory  minimum 
write-downs, increasing over time, on new loans to be classified among non-performing exposures 
(known  as  calendar  provisioning)  –  so  as  to  reach  high  levels  of  coverage  fast.  Should  such 
mechanisms be introduced, even with the necessary graduality, the significant differences in civil 
justice processes and loan recovery times across Europe would acquire even greater weight.  
The creation of cooperative banking groups is proceeding along the lines set out in the reform 
law. At the end of this process, two of the three new groups (Iccrea and Cassa Centrale Banca) will 
be ‘significant’ for supervisory purposes and will therefore be subject to direct supervision by the 
ECB. Before this happens, the two groups must undergo a comprehensive assessment, based, as in 
2014, on an asset quality review and a stress test. This is currently scheduled for the first half of 
next year and will be tailored to take account of the fact that the institutions will not only be new to 
Italy’s banking sector but will also still be taking shape.  
Certain  key  elements  are  essential  for  the  reform  to  be  successful.  The  parent  banks  must 
complete a difficult transformation over the next few months to enable them to head very large and 
complex  groups.  Extensive  discussions  are  already  under  way  with  the  supervisory  authorities, 
which  will  need  to  approve  the  main  contractual  clauses:  by-laws,  cohesion  contracts  and  cross-
guarantee  schemes.  The  process  must  now  continue  apace:  organizational  and  decision-making 
mechanisms must be strengthened, senior management must possess high levels of competency and 
professionalism,  and  the  steps  needed  to  integrate  IT  systems  must  be  rigorously  planned.  The 
comprehensive assessment should be prepared well in advance; in terms of capital adequacy, the 
parent companies will have to draw up plans enabling them – with equanimity and right from the 
word go – to establish the new groups.  
The participating banks must begin to operate in harmony, under the guidance of the parent 
company, well before the groups have been formally established. The asset quality review will need 
to  be  thoroughly  updated  to  take  account  of  the  necessary  value  adjustments  and  write-downs 
already entered in this year’s balance sheets. 
The Bank of Italy is committed to strengthening the other banks under its direct supervision 
in order to increase their efficiency and productivity, promote the supply of innovative services 
for households and firms, and diversify their sources of income. For their part, banks are being 
called on to undertake wide-ranging action, including mergers to facilitate investment, economies 
of scale and, where necessary, access to capital markets. A first step towards greater integration 
could be recourse to consortiums to provide services and the pooling of data for internal models 
to compute capital requirements. In line with other countries, a more decisive step would be to 
introduce  Institutional  Protection  Schemes  (IPS),  which  do  not  remove  the  autonomy  of 
individual banks but give rise to mutual support agreements that can be activated in the event of 
capital or liquidity needs.  
Expenses, income and structural changes in the banking industry 
The  significant  progress  made  in  overcoming  the  grave  difficulties  of  some  banks  and  the 
gradual improvement in balance sheet conditions throughout the banking industry are undoubtedly 
positive developments. Several factors, however, are altering the context in which banks operate: 
changes in demand for financial services, technological progress and the digital revolution, and the 
regulatory reforms introduced in the wake of the financial crisis. 
The profitability of European banks has diminished considerably over the last ten years. The 
global  financial  crisis  first  hit  the  large  merchant  banks,  who  earn  much  of  their  income  on  the 
capital market. The recession and sovereign debt crises then took their toll on the balance sheets of 
banks  whose  core  business  is  lending.  Italy’s  banking  sector  suffered  a  particularly  sharp  fall  in 
profits; the return on capital, which was about 10 per cent in the middle of the previous decade, has 
been virtually nil for the last five years, exceptional factors aside. 
At the same time, the profits of Italian banks have been eroded by heavier losses on loans and 
a drop in income. Because of corporate crises in particular, from 2008 to 2016 write-downs on loans 
absorbed 80 per cent of operating profit. Interest income is now one third lower in relation to total 
assets than in the middle of the last decade; other income has also diminished. 
As the economic recovery gains strength, the outlook for the banking industry is improving, 
though only gradually. A return of new NPL flows to normal values will reduce the cost of credit 
risk.  More  intensive  economic  activity  will  spur  households’  and  firms’  demand  for  loans  and 
financial services; eventually, profits could be boosted by higher interest rates. However, it is still 
unclear how much of the drop in banks’ net income is due to the economic cycle and how much to 
long-term factors.  
The growth in lending to firms may continue to be hampered by the ample supply of internal 
funds.  The  non-financial  corporations  sector  has  been  a  net  creditor  of  the  other  sectors  of  the 
economy  since  2012;  this  is  an  anomaly  with  respect  to  the  past,  but  one  that  is  also  present 
worldwide. 
The modest expansion in lending to firms can also be put down to a gradual strengthening of 
their  financial  structure.  Since  2011,  leverage  (i.e.  the  ratio  of  financial  debt  to  its  sum  with  net 
equity) has diminished by 7 percentage points. The share of bonds in total financial debt has risen by 
5 percentage points, to 11 per cent; the proportion of bank loans has similarly diminished. Initially, 
the switch between the two types of financing concerned only a small number of firms, typically the 
big industrial groups already active on the bond market; it has now spread to small firms as well.  
The greater financial soundness of firms and their more diversified sources of finance are a 
positive,  long-sought-after,  development.  If  the  trend  takes  root,  it  will  make  Italy’s  financial 
system more resilient by splitting macroeconomic risk among a much larger number of investors. 
For many banks, however, it will potentially reduce credit and income growth. The challenge is to 
exploit the large pool of information on firms and on the economic system to offer new services. 
This  process  requires  qualified  human  resources  and  an  ability  to  interact  with  investors  and 
markets without entering into any conflict of interest. 
The  sweeping  reform  of  the  rules  on  bank  capital  launched  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis 
significantly  increased  the  quantity  and  quality  of  own  funds  and  inevitably  put  pressure  on 
profitability. Going forward, the completion of Basel III, the introduction in Europe of requirements 
regarding loss-absorbing liabilities in situations of crisis, and the adoption of new accounting rules 
for  write-downs  on  loans  will  bring  further  pressure  to  bear,  notably  on  the  cost  of  wholesale 
funding.  For  the  banks  that  are  unable  to  withstand  this  pressure  it  is  important  to  prepare  in 
advance measures that will make it as easy as possible for them to leave the market by means of 
mergers or sales, and at no cost to ordinary customers. 
To help the banking industry adapt more rapidly to the new environment, all the problems not 
yet  solved  by  the  regulations  must  be  addressed  without  delay.  An  interval  in  the  process  of 
changing the rules would be welcome, not only to allow the banks to fully adapt to the new system, 
but also to prevent the incessant production of rules from itself becoming a source of uncertainty, 
and thus a hindrance to banking activity.  
Over  a  broader  time  frame,  the  growth  of  digital  technologies  is  bound  to  increase  the 
pressure  of  competition  and  squeeze  banks’  profit  margins.  The  availability  of  information  on 
households’ and firms’ economic behaviour has increased enormously in the last ten years, as has 
the ability to process it. A new group of companies, called Fintech, are  using this data to create 
innovative products, processes and business models. Already today they are in a position to offer 
financing and investment services, financial consultancy, and retail and wholesale payment services 
in competition with traditional banks. 
In the light of these developments and of the uncertainty surrounding the potential growth in 
business  volumes  and  income,  the  banks  are  being  called  on  to  make  an  exceptional  effort  to 
reduce  operating  expenses,  improve  efficiency,  and  redirect  spending  towards  investment  in 
innovation. Greater use of digital technologies in the production and distribution of services will 
have a significant impact on the organization of labour, on its quantity and quality, and on how it 
is used. The number of payroll employees in the banking industry has fallen by 12 per cent since 
2008,  a  trend  that  is  bound  to  continue,  including  through  the  adoption  of  well-designed  early 
retirement incentive schemes. During this period of transition, cost-cutting measures should apply 
to  overall  compensation  as  well,  at  all  levels,  and  should  reduce  the  many  organizational 
duplications. 
A  by  no  means  small  number  of  banks  are  still  struggling  to  keep  pace  with  the  rapid 
reorganization of distribution channels. To date, the increase in the role of digital channels and the 
reduction in traditional ones have mainly concerned the largest banks. Since 2008, the number of 
branches has decreased by 5,000, or 15 per cent, a trend that will inevitably continue, both here and 
in  the  other  main  European  countries.  At  the  end  of  2016,  just  over  half  of  bank  customers  had 
access to online banking facilities.  
Investment aimed at exploiting the opportunities offered by the new frontiers of the digital 
economy is growing, but it is still restricted to a small number of large banking groups. Barely a 
third  of  banks  have  started  projects  to  exploit  internal  big  data  and  organize  information  on 
customers’ habits and potential requirements. The main obstacle is the lack of technology and of 
human  and  financial  resources;  it  must  be  overcome  if  Italy’s  financial  industry  is  to  remain 
competitive and continue to create value for the economy. 
   The crisis that hit our economy has disrupted banks’ activity. The equilibrium that ensured 
almost a decade of growth and stability for Italian banks between the last millennium and this has 
been broken. However, as the problems of failing banks are solved and the economy recovers, the 
risk that the system may not hold up is receding. The market’s assessment of the outlook for Italy’s 
banks  has  improved  in  recent  months,  leading  to  a  robust  recovery  of  their  share  prices.  Much 
remains  to  be  done  before  the  sector  reaches  a  state  in  which  the  banks  are  able  to  generate 
sufficient profits to support the levels of capital adequacy imposed by the rules safeguarding the 
stability of individual banks and of the system as a whole. 
  The supervisory authorities cannot stand in for the banks’ senior management in corporate 
decision-making. Their task is to prompt those responsible for strategic decisions to evaluate the 
opportunities  and  risks  of  the  new  environment  and  make  a  realistic  assessment  of  their  bank’s 
strengths and weaknesses. Reinforcing corporate structures, improving efficiency and productivity, 
seeking  alliances  or  mergers  to  overcome  the  limitations  imposed  by  size,  and  investing  in  new 
technologies, are key elements in the effort to reinvigorate the Italian banking system. 
    by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and Printed  
