R  Gandhi:  Improving  investor  interest  -  recent  legislative  and
regulatory measures
Keynote address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the "Asia-
Pacific Regional Meeting 2017", jointly organised by Link Legal India Law Services and Globalaw,
Mumbai, 2 March 2017.
 It  is  a  well  recognized  fact  that  clear  and  efficient  laws  provide  confidence  to  the  investing
community.  Such  investments  can  be  by  domestic  entities  or  foreign  entities  or  investment
overseas  by  domestic  entities.  In  the  recent  past,  India  has  embarked  upon  a  number  of
legislative and regulatory measures that are certain to create a positive impact on the investment
climate prevailing in the country and capable of boosting the confidence of investors. A few such
measures are also on the anvil. I would like to invite the attention of the audience to a few of
them.
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
The recent enactment of a comprehensive legislation relating to insolvency of corporates, firms
and  individuals  has  been  a  much  awaited  move.  The  Insolvency  and  Bankruptcy  Code,  2016
(IBC)  lays  down  a  resolution  process  that  is  time  bound  and  undertaken  by  professionals.  It
creates an institutional mechanism for insolvency resolution process for businesses operated by
companies,  individuals  or  any  other  entities,  either  by  coming  up  with  a  viable  survival
mechanism or by ensuring their prompt liquidation. The preamble to the Code makes clear the
objective of the new law as one to consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and
insolvency  resolution  of  corporate  persons,  partnership  firms  and  individuals  in  a  time  bound
manner,  for  maximisation  of  value  of  assets  of  such  persons  to  promote  entrepreneurship,
availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders.
Through  this  enactment,  the  Parliament  has  codified  the  laws  governing  insolvency  and
bankruptcy of both corporates and individuals, which were spread over a number of legislations.
A key innovation of the new Code is its four pillars of institutional infrastructure comprising of
Insolvency  professionals,  Information  Utilities,  Adjudicating  Authorities  (NCLT  &  DRT)  and
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India.
The Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Bill, 2016 (Draft)
The  IBC  2016  about  which  I  spoke  so  far  does  not  provide  for  resolution  of  the  corporates
providing  financial  services.  The  need  for  jurisdictions  having  a  specialized  resolution  regime
applicable  to  financial  service  providers  has  also  been  recognized  internationally.  Recently,  a
draft Bill for this purpose has been recommended by a working group constituted by the Central
Government.  This  Bill  aims  to  establish  a  framework  to  carry  out  the  resolution  of  certain
categories of financial service providers in distress, to provide deposit insurance to consumers
of certain categories of financial services and for designation of Systemically Important Financial
Institutions by the Central Government for resolution. The draft Bill on Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance not only consolidates the resolution provisions presently scattered in different
statutes, but also introduces new requirements like classification of financial service providers
into various categories of risk to viability, submission of resolution / restoration plans, etc. and
new  methods  for  resolution,  on  the  lines  of  prevalent  international  practices.  It  also  proposes
creation of a new specialized authority called the Resolution Corporation, which will be tasked
with the responsibility of carrying out speedy and efficient resolution of financial service providers.
The  authority  will  also  take  over  the  deposit  insurance  activity  presently  undertaken  by  the
DICGC. The overall mechanism contemplated under the Bill would certainly bring in more clarity
as to the rights of investors in the event of resolution of the investee financial service provider and
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
is expected to improve investor confidence in the Indian financial market.
Amendments to the SARFAESI Act and DRT Act
Slow pace of recovery of financial debts has been imposing considerable strain on the financial
position of the lenders, thus raising concerns for any investor, existing or prospective, of such
lenders.  Specialized  laws  establishing  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  (DRTs)  and  empowering
secured  creditors  to  enforce  security  interest  without  the  intervention  of  court,  have  been  in
vogue for several years now. While, such mechanisms have definitely facilitated faster recovery,
there can be no doubt that much more needs to be done. In this context, some of the changes
made  to  those  laws  recently  are  worth  mentioning.  For  instance,  certain  procedural
improvements have been made with respect to the functioning of DRTs like (i) stricter time lines
for filing of written statement, conclusion of hearings, etc. to expedite adjudication; (ii) filing of
recovery  application,  documents  and  written  statements  in  electronic  form;  and  (iii)  uniform
procedure for conduct of proceedings. Further, specific provisions have been enacted in those
laws to clarify regarding the priority of secured creditors over state dues.
Another important change brought about is enabling ‘Debenture trustees’ to approach DRTs to
recover  unpaid  debts  due  under  listed  debt  securities  as  well  as  to  invoke  the  provisions  of
SARFAESI  Act  to  enforce  the  security  interest  without  the  intervention  of  courts.  These
measures confer additional recovery avenues for the benefit of debenture holders.
Other Legislative Changes
Legislative  changes  have  also  attempted  to  improve  the  investment  horizon  in  asset
reconstruction  companies  (ARCs).  The  restriction  which  existed  on  a  holding  company
sponsoring an ARC has since been removed. The sponsors of ARCs are now required to be
only fit and proper as per RBI guidelines. Further, apart from qualified buyers, non- institutional
investors specified by RBI could also invest in security receipts issued by ARCs.
Apart from the above, there were a number of legislative measures of substantial significance to
the investor community. For instance, a Constitutional amendment was brought in the previous
year  for  enabling  a  single  Goods  and  Service  Tax  throughout  the  country.  In  the  year  2015,
Parliament  passed  the  Arbitration  and  Conciliation  (Amendment)  Act  providing  for  various
changes to the arbitration laws, with a view to making arbitration quicker, reducing interference
by courts and to make India a more attractive destination for foreign investors. In order to take
forward  and  accelerate  the  agenda  of  the  “Ease  of  Doing  Business”  and  “Make  in  India”,  the
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of the High Courts
Act, 2015 was promulgated, which provides for the constitution of Commercial Courts and the
establishment of Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions in the High Courts
to adjudicate Commercial Disputes for achieving the motive of swift and speedy enforcement of
contracts,  recovery  of  monetary  claims  and  compensation  for  damages  suffered  to  increase
investment  and  economic  activity  in  our  country.  Other  two  notable  legislative  measures
important from an investment perspective are Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Amendment Act,
2016  and  Real  Estate  (Regulation  and  Development)  Act,  2016.  The  Benami  Transaction
(Prohibition)  Amendment  Act,  2016  aims  to  control  the  menace  of  black  money  and  its  by-
product Benami transactions, with the new stringent law and its effective implementation. The
Real  Estate  (Regulation  and  Development) Act,  2016  (RERA)  is  designed  to  provide  uniform
regulation,  protect  consumer 
improve
accountability of developers and boost transparency. It should help to make the Indian real estate
sector more attractive for foreign and domestic investment.
Foreign Investment
interests,  help  speedy  adjudication  of  disputes, 
Now, let me discuss some of the recent regulatory measures relating to foreign investment. In
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
today’s world, no country can be an island oblivious of the developments in the world around it.
With globalization and trade reforms, countries are globally integrated and have trade linkages
with  each  other.  Free  trade  enables  lower  prices  for  consumers,  increased  exports,  benefits
from economies of scale and a greater choice of goods. In developing nations, including India,
free  trade  has  increased  the  gap  of  Current Account  Deficits  as  imports  exceed  exports.  To
bridge this deficit and also to bridge the gap between domestic savings and investments, India
requires  forex  flows  from  overseas.  These  flows  help  India  reach  its  economic  potential  by
providing  capital  to  finance  new  industries  and  enhance  existing 
industries,  boosting
infrastructure, productivity, and employment opportunities in the process. In other words they aid
development and fuel domestic growth. Inward flows can be in the form of debt, equity, deposits
or personal remittances.
India  continues  to  be  among  the  top  ten  countries  in  terms  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)
inflows globally and the fourth in developing Asia, as per the World Investment Report 2016 by
the  United  Nations  Conference  for  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD).  India  also  jumped  16
notches  again  to  39  among  144  countries  in  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  Global
Competitiveness Index 2016 that ranks countries on the basis of parameters such as institutions,
macroeconomic environment, education, market size and infrastructure among others.
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB)
Considering  the  macroeconomic  developments  and  the  experience  gained  in  administering
ECBs over the years, a liberalized regime for debt capital was introduced through a four track
approach  for  ECBs.  The  overarching  principles  of  the  revised  framework  are:  (a)  fewer
restrictions on end-uses and higher all in cost ceilings; (b) expand the list of eligible lenders to
include long term lenders like sovereign wealth funds, insurance companies and pension funds;
(c) small negative list of end use restrictions; (d) nudge borrowers towards rupee denominated
debt and (e) permit higher interest for long term foreign currency borrowings. Recognizing the
needs  of  the  infrastructure  sector,  long  term  borrowing  in  foreign  currency  denominated  ECB
with a minimum average maturity of ten years has been permitted (subsequently reduced to five
years in alignment with OECD requirements). Access to alternative sources of credit to eligible
borrowers without its concomitant forex risks was made feasible with the introduction of masala
bonds.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
Foreign investment is one area which economies around the world look at with at most precision.
Which sectors to open up to foreign funds, how much control to cede to foreign investors and
what all clearances to mandate are some questions that pose challenges to most Governments.
In  India  the  policy  on  foreign  investment  is  framed  by  the  Central  Government.  On  an  annual
basis, it issues a consolidated circular detailing the policy stance. The sectoral limits, approval
routes and investment linked conditionalities are laid down in the policy stance. It also issues
Press Notes as and when changes in the policy are proposed. Regulations are issued under the
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) to give a legal backing to these policies.
Investment  can  be  received  in  the  form  of  equity  shares,  compulsorily  convertible  preference
shares  (CCPS)  and  compulsorily  convertible  debentures  (CCDs).  These  instruments  can
contain an optionality clause subject to a minimum lock-in period of one year but without any
option or right to exit at an assured price.
The inflows on account of foreign investment was US$ 36.485 billion in the financial year 2015–
16.  In  the  recent  past  regulations  on  investments  have  been  liberalized  to  ensure  increased
flows.  Following  the  revisions  in  the  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  policy  announced  by  the
Government,  the  regulations  have  been  amended  so  that  wherever  sectoral  limits  /  caps  on
foreign  investment  are  in  place,  such  limits  /  caps  are  required  to  be  reckoned  within  a
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
composite  manner  aggregating  both  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  and  Foreign  Portfolio
Investment  (FPI).  In  addition  “control”  and  “ownership”  have  been  defined  for  the  purpose  of
arriving at the indirect foreign investment in an Indian company and guidelines have been issued
for calculating the ‘total foreign investment’ to be taken as the sum total of direct and indirect
foreign investments. Regulations have also been amended to simplify FDI linked conditionalities,
increase sectoral caps and include certain sectors under automatic route. This liberalization had
a  positive  impact  on  sectors  viz.,  manufacturing,  insurance,  railway  construction,  defence,
plantation,  real  estate  business,  e-commerce  in  single  brand  retail,  etc.  In  addition,  foreign
investment in limited liability partnership (LLP) has been permitted under the automatic route for
sectors  where  100  per  cent  FDI  is  allowed  without  attendant  FDI-linked  performance
conditionality.
Ease of Doing Business
Several steps have been initiated for facilitating the ease of doing business and contributing to an
ecosystem that is conducive to the growth of start-ups. Accordingly, a dedicated mailbox was set
up to provide assistance and guidance to the start-up sector. Further, online submission of Form
A2 for outward remittances has been enabled. Certain transactions related to start-ups which
were clarified / notified are as under: (i) issue of shares without cash payment through sweat
equity was permitted provided that the scheme has been drawn either in terms of regulations
issued by SEBI or the Government; (ii) issue of shares against legitimate payment owed by the
investee company, remittance of which does not require permission of the Government or the
Reserve  Bank  was  permitted,  (iii)  start-up  enterprises  were  permitted  to  collect  payments  on
behalf  of  their  subsidiaries  abroad;  (iv)  companies  have  been  permitted  to  have  an  escrow
arrangement or paying the consideration on a deferred basis for an amount up to 25 per cent of
the  total  consideration  for  a  period  not  exceeding  18  months  in  respect  of  transfer  of  shares
between a resident and non-resident; (v) startup companies were allowed to issue innovative FDI
instruments like convertible notes and (vi) start-ups were permitted to access rupee loans under
ECB framework with relaxations in respect of eligible lender, end-use and cost of borrowing, etc.
The  move  towards  automation  and  use  of  technology  for  reporting  and  monitoring  has  been
extended to Foreign Inward Investment and all FDI related returns have been replaced with online
filing on the Government’s e-Biz portal.
Non-Resident Indians Deposits (NRI Deposits)
India has always been a favored investment destination for its diaspora. The flows in the form of
deposits  (FCNRB  and  NRE)  has  been  steady  in  the  recent  years.  As  on  Dec  2016,  the
outstanding FCNR (B), NRE and NRO deposits were US$ 20.859, US$ 77.418 and US$ 11.458
billion, respectively. Flows in respect of personal remittances were US$ 44.083 billion and US$
37.656 billion in the last two financial years.
To further facilitate the account holders, policies were changed to permit transfer across non-
resident ordinary rupee (NRO) accounts. Further, NRIs and persons of Indian origin (PIOs) have
been  permitted  to  open  NRO  accounts  jointly  with  other  NRIs  /  PIOs.  While  permitting
remittances outside the country from the balances held in NRO accounts maintained by NRIs
and  PIOs,  ADs  are  now  required  to  obtain  a  declaration  that  the  remittances  represent  the
account  holder’s  legitimate  receivables  in  India  and  do  not  represent  any  borrowing  from  any
other person or transfer from any other NRO account. Non-residents having a business interest
in  India  can  open  a  repatriable  special  non-resident  rupee  (SNRR)  account  with  balances
commensurate with business operations. An Indian company receiving foreign investment under
the FDI route has been permitted to open and maintain a foreign currency account with an AD in
India provided it has impending foreign currency expenditure. The account needs to be closed
immediately after the requirements are completed or within six months from the date of opening
of such account, whichever is earlier.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overseas Investment
India’s external sector management has gained strength over the last few years with a prudent
and pragmatic approach to policy aimed at supporting India’s inherently strong macroeconomic
fundamentals,  which  has  made  India  as  one  of  the  most  attractive  destination  for  foreign
investors. At the same time, the growth in magnitude and spread (in terms of geography, nature
and  types  of  business  activities)  of  overseas  direct  investment  (ODI)  from  India  reflect  the
increasing appetite and capacity of Indian business sector in availing the opportunities thrown up
by the rapid globalization. The robustness of direct investment flows – both inward as well as
outward,  serve  as  an  indicator  of  the  maturity  and  degree  of  integration  of  India  in  the  global
economy.
While the average of total Financial Commitments (FC) under ODI for 2014–15 and 2015–16 at
around US$ 30 billion was lower than the average of preceding two years (US$ 40 billion), the
outlook  and  potential  for  growth  in  outward  FDI  from  India  remain  positive  as  seen  by
encouraging  trend  in  proposals.  Actual  outflows,  which  are  asynchronous  with  the  Financial
Commitment have also varied over the period.
Overseas investment provides an important gateway for domestic businesses to enter the global
marketplace and in recent times, India has taken some significant steps to make its presence felt
in  the  global  arena.  The  increased  ODI  have  also  resulted  into  greater  macro-economic  co-
operation between India and other countries, transfer of technology and skill, sharing of R&D and
promotion of brand India.
At the same time, the increasing degree of uncertainty in a continuously changing, and in recent
times- often a disruptively changing global business environment, also poses some challenges
for Indian businesses with respect to their ODI.
The policy and regulatory approach has been to balance the need to pave the way for growth of
Indian  businesses  to  keep  pace  with  the  changing  demands  of  businesses  and  improve  the
“ease  of  doing  business”  for  Indian  companies  –  with  the  need  for  managing  the  potential
systemic risks- within the confines of the broad policy based on a calibrated approach to the
management of capital account.
While  the  FEMA  notification  on  outward  FDI  regulates  all  acquisition  of  overseas  securities
denominated in foreign currency, the focus is primarily to regulate acquisition / incorporation of
overseas entities by the Indian corporates.
The  broad  approach  has  been  to  facilitate  outward  foreign  direct  investment  by  domestic
companies through joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries up to 400% of their net worth;
restrictions apply only in respect of investments abroad in real estate and banking. Investment
which  is  also  termed  as  financial  commitment  can  be  in  form  of  equity,  loan,  guarantee  and
raising  funds  through  pledge  of  shares,  domestic  and  overseas  assets.  Further,  resident
individuals are enabled to undertake outward FDI within LRS limit of US$ 250,000.
Current issues
During  last  one  decade  or  so,  cross-border  businesses  involving  multi-layered  structure  of
entities have been a common phenomenon. Such layered structure of entities may be a plain
vanilla  two-tier  structure  or  a  complex  multi-layered  structure.  Further,  some  of  the  business
models resulting in inward FDI through the overseas entities established under ODI are posing
major policy challenges including those pertaining to possible tax evasion, money laundering and
round tripping.
The  World  Investment  Report  of  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development
(UNCTAD) has observed that tax avoidance practices by Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) are a
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
global issue, relevant to all countries. Such structures are created, typically, based on either for
transfer pricing reasons or for financing their subsidiaries. While these could be established for
tax avoidance purposes, such structures often involve investments in offshore investment hubs
as holding entities, through which further investments are made in the step down subsidiaries.
Needless to say that even though the motivations range from genuine business / commercial
considerations  to  taxation  benefits  which  are  available  to  any  global  investors,  at  times  the
underlying  motive  could  be  to  create  opacity  through  a  labyrinth  of  structures  for  reasons
unjustified which evokes concerns.
Treaty shopping and parking of capital and passive incomes in tax havens leads to erosion of the
tax base of the countries. Concerns have been raised about the minimization of tax burden by
MNEs using legal arbitrage opportunities that arise out of gaps and frictions in the interactions of
various domestic laws and / or tax treaties.
The international community has taken note of abusive tax practices employed by tax payers to
create double non-taxation or taxation at low rates. Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) have
often  been  used  as  a  tax  avoidance  strategy  used  by  MNEs  for  shifting  profits  from  high  tax
jurisdiction to low tax jurisdiction.
While efforts are on to further rationalize and simplify the extant regulations for undertaking ODI,
it would achieve a meaningful impact after the aforementioned issues are resolved effectively.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  India,  with  its  strong  and  modern  legislative  structure,  effective  legal  systems,
sound macroeconomic policies, adherence to responsible fiscal management, low and declining
Current Account  Deficit,  stable  monetary  and  financial  sector  management,  robust  economic
growth prospects, remains an attractive proposition for FDI. India has also found its own niche in
ODI. The policy environment is alive to the potential growth in investments, whether domestic,
foreign or overseas and remains ready to make adjustments.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
