    A Little More Conversation 
A Little Less Action 
  Speech given by 
Andrew G Haldane, Chief Economist, Bank of England 
   Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Conference 
31 March 2017 
          The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy 
Committee.  I would like to thank Shiv Chowla, Jeremy Franklin, Jonathan Fullwood, Chloe Gilbert, 
Leanne Leahy, Michael McLeay, Michael McMahon, Sam McPhilemy, Chris Peacock and  
Paul Robinson for their help in preparing this text.  I would like to thank Mike Anson, Tom Belsham, 
James Benford, Rachel Botsman, Nida Broughton, Kristin Forbes, Keir Haldane, John Lewis,  
Clare Macallan, Mike Peacock and Eryk Walczak for comments and contributions. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
  It is a great pleasure to be here at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco conference on 
“Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy”.  I am grateful to my old friend John Williams, President of the  
San Francisco Fed, for the invitation.  And for one night only, John, where better to channel my inner-Elvis.1
Back in 2004, Benoit Mandelbrot observed:  “So limited is our knowledge that we resort, not to science, but 
to shamans.  We place control of the world’s largest economy in the hands of a few elderly men, the central 
bankers”.2  You could quibble with the detail here – a few central bankers these days are women and a few
are not old.  But the general sentiment is not one which would be entirely out of place today.  
It is not difficult to see why.  The profile of central banks may never have been higher than today.   
The responsibilities of central banks may never have been greater than today.  And the actions taken by 
central banks may never have been larger or as far-reaching as today.  It is no coincidence that they have 
recently been described, variously and colourfully, as “masters of the universe” and “the only game in town”. 3
At the same time, central banks have faced mounting criticism, and some mistrust, of their actions, 
responsibilities and influence, at least in some quarters.  Some have suggested tweaking, perhaps even 
reversing, central banks’ degree of operational independence over monetary policy.4  Others have suggested
constraining, perhaps even removing, central banks’ degree of discretion over monetary policy.5
This story has all the hallmarks of a Charles Dickens novel.  Depending on who you follow on Twitter, for 
central banks it is the best of times and the worst of times; it is an age of wisdom and an age of foolishness;  
it is an epoch of belief and an epoch of incredulity.  A happy ending to this story is by no means assured. 
These views may be polarised, perhaps even caricatured.  But they matter.  Trust is the lifeblood of all things 
monetary and financial, including central banks.  And incredulity is Kryptonite for central banking Supermen 
(and the odd Superwoman), rendering ineffective their policies and unaccountable their actions.  Building 
trust and legitimacy is among the most pressing issues facing central banks today. 
Tonight, I want to explore one avenue for doing so – rethinking how and with whom central banks engage.   
There has been a revolution in central bank communications over recent years, with much wider and deeper 
engagement with society.6  That has been essential in building central bank trust and credibility during good
times and protecting central bank legitimacy and independence during bad. 
But two recent developments mean that central banks’ engagement strategies may need to be widened and 
deepened.  First, the global financial crisis has dealt a trust-busting blow to many institutions, including 
1  The title of the Elvis song is, of course, A Little Less Conversation, A Little More Action (Please).  Elvis was not a central banker.  
2  Mandelbrot and Hudson (2004). 
3  For example, Sentance (2015) and El-Erian (2015).  See also Carney (2016). 
4  In a recent CFM-CEPR survey of Europe-based macroeconomists, only 45% disagreed with the statement that “central bank 
independence in the Eurozone and the UK will decline over the next 48 months” (den Haan et al, 2017). 
5  See House Bill 3189 (2015). 
6  See Warsh (2014) and Blinder et al (2017).
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
2 
 central banks.  Second, the way trust is built has been fundamentally reconfigured.  Where once trust was 
anonymised, institutionalised and centralised, today it is increasingly personalised, socialised and distributed. 
 Facing these new constraints, the challenge for central banks is to rebuild trust among a wider set of societal 
stakeholders, more distrustful and diffuse than ever previously, using a set of trust-building technologies, less 
well-understood than those used previously.  As they have through their history, central banks will need to 
adapt their customs and practices to these new social norms and technological possibilities.7 
 This is a big agenda.  It is not one remotely unique to central banks.  And it is not one I could remotely do 
justice to tonight.  Nonetheless, given the policy weight these days being placed on central banks’ shoulders, 
and the changing social and technological landscape facing them, it is probably as good a time as any to 
begin exploring these new frontiers of central bank engagement. 
 Those new frontiers include communicating in simpler, narrative language that engages a wider audience 
using localised, personalised messaging;  finding new ways to engage with cohorts of society currently out of 
reach, listening as often as talking;  and using new technologies – nudging and polling, naming and gaming 
– to better understand the views and behaviours of wider society.  For central banks, this is a brave new 
world.   
 The Rising Tide of Central Banking 
 
Let me start by looking backwards.  The 20th century may yet be seen by monetary historians as the one 
when central banking came of age.  At its start, there were fewer than 20 recognisably “central banks” 
operating globally (Chart 1).  Their responsibilities were typically heavily circumscribed by custom and 
practice, by law or by the state.  In the Bank of England’s case, it was all three. 
 In these early days, the role of central banks was often to act as an operational arm of government:  buying 
and selling foreign exchange to preserve a currency peg;  distributing central bank liquidity to financial 
institutions, in normal and crisis times;  serving as banker to the government and to commercial banks; and 
issuing banknotes to the public to serve as the ultimate medium of exchange.8 
     
As the 20th century unfolded, central bank numbers swelled.  By its mid-point, they had risen more than 
twofold, to around 60.  By its end, they had risen a further threefold to not far off 200.  Today, there are 
roughly as many central banks as there are countries in the world. 
Some of this ascent was simply the arithmetic consequence of a rising number of independent nation states.  
But that is not the whole story.  The fraction of nation states with a central bank rose from around  
                                                      
7  My friend and former colleague Minouche Shafik recently made many of these points in her final speech as Deputy Governor (Shafik, 
2017). 
8  Capie et al (1994).  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  one-quarter at the start of the 20th century to close to one by its end.  In other words, during the course of the 
20th century central banks came to be seen as an essential building block of the nation state.9 
  
Accompanying this rise in the number of central banks through the 20th century was a rise, albeit not a 
straight line rise, in their stock of responsibilities.  Prominent among these was responsibility for setting 
monetary policy.  Latterly, this has gone by the name central bank operational “independence”. 
 Even the word “independence” needs careful interpretation.  As international practice has shown, there are 
various shades of independence, depending on who sets the objectives and instruments of monetary policy 
and how policy decision-makers are appointed and held to account.  Indeed, there is now a small cottage 
industry measuring these various dimensions of central bank independence.10 
 Nevertheless, on most metrics central bank independence in the setting of monetary policy has risen 
secularly and sharply over the past few decades.  Until the 1980s, the number of recognisably “independent” 
central banks was relatively modest.  On one often-used measure, as recently as 1981 there were still fewer 
than 50 independent central banks globally.11 
 In the period since, the fraction of central banks with operational independence in the setting of monetary 
policy has sky-rocketed, rising from around a half in the 1980s to around 85% today (Chart 2).  In a 
generation, operational independence has gone from nice-to-have to have-to-have.  It has become an 
international norm, a statement of best institutional practice.   
 This rising tide of responsibilities is not confined to monetary policy.  Around 80% of central banks have 
some role in setting new macro-prudential tools.12  The Bank of England is among the over 50% of central 
banks fully in charge of doing so.  In the US, responsibility is shared across agencies, including the Fed.  In 
the European Union, responsibility is also spread across agencies, including a number of central banks.   
 In the run-up to the financial crisis, micro-prudential policy was increasingly located outside central banks.  
Since the crisis, however, that trend has reversed (Chart 3).  The ECB has assumed responsibility for 
supervising the euro area’s largest banks.  The Federal Reserve’s supervisory responsibilities have been 
expanded and enhanced.  And in the UK, micro-prudential supervision has returned to the Bank.13 
The most recent chapter in central banks’ evolutionary history has been increased openness and 
transparency about their actions, monetary, macro- and micro-prudential.  This shift was a natural 
                                                      
9  Consistent with that, the historical evidence suggests that institutions, such as central banks, are essential elements of statecraft 
(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012).   
10  See for example, Cukierman et al (1992), Grilli et al (1991), Crowe and Meade (2007), Arnone et al (2006), Dincer and Eichengreen 
(2014), Bodea and Hicks (2015) and Garriga (2016). 
11  The Cukierman et al (1992) index, updated and expanded by Garriga (2016). 
12  Claessens et al (2016), discussed in Blinder et al (2017). 
13  While monetary and financial stability policies are often seen as the fulcrum of central banks, they do not fully define their 
responsibilities.  A survey by the Bank of International Settlements identified a further 16 responsibilities undertaken by at least some 
central banks (BIS, 2009). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  accompaniment to increased central bank responsibilities and autonomy.  With increased delegated powers 
came increased societal responsibilities to explain how those powers were being discharged. 
 This shift in transparency practices took time.  In 1981, Karl Brunner was still speaking about the “mystique” 
of central banking.14  In the early 1990s, “mystique” was still the one-word advice offered by one prominent 
central bank governor (Paul Volcker) to another (Mervyn King).15  For most of their history, opacity has been 
deeply ingrained in central banks’ psyche.  And for much the greater part of its history, the Bank of England 
was at the forefront of that opacity agenda. 
 For its first three centuries, the Bank appears to have kept its public utterances to a minimum.  It was 
effectively mute.  The prevailing ethos was well-captured by the job description provided to the official who 
became, in effect, the Bank’s first press officer:  “keep the Bank out of the press and the press out of the 
Bank”.16  The Bank was good to its word.   
 During the period 1920 to 1945, the Bank’s communications strategy was far from expansive.  The Governor 
gave precisely one speech a year - the annual Mansion House lecture (Chart 4).  This tended not to be rich 
in content.  Nor was it not ideally suited to enhancing wider public understanding, being delivered to an 
audience of around 300 City bankers and merchants, several glasses of wine into the evening. 
 Body language can sometimes substitute for the spoken word.  So it was at the Bank of England.  In the 
1920s, the Governor’s “eyebrows” famously became one of the Bank’s means of communicating. The 
eyebrows were, in a way, a primitive form of emoji:  sterling crisis – sad face.  Nonetheless, for even the 
most malleable-faced Governor, the “eyebrows” were an imperfect communications medium. 
 Beginning in the 1960s, there was a sea-change in central bank communication practices.  Speeches by the 
Governor and his deputies increased, by the 1960s averaging around five per year.  They were matched by 
other communication innovations.  December 1960 saw the first edition of the Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin.  There was roughly a doubling in the number of speeches in each subsequent decade. 
 In 1992, a formal target for inflation was announced in the UK, together with a regular schedule of monthly 
monetary policy meetings.  In 1993, the Bank began publishing a quarterly Inflation Report, setting out its 
views on the economic outlook.  In 1996, the Inflation Report gained a sister publication, the six-monthly 
Financial Stability Review.  With the arrival of the nine-person Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in 1997, 
the number of published speeches increased further from around 13 per year in the nineties to around 34 in 
the noughties.  Accompanying these speeches were published minutes of MPC meetings.   
                                                       
14 See Brunner (1981) and Goodfriend (1986). 
15 As described by King (2000). 
16 Capie (2010). 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  In 2013, the Bank began issuing so-called “forward guidance” on its policy actions.17  In 2014, following a 
review by David Stockton, the Bank began publishing forecasts for a wider set of variables.18  And from 
2015, following a review by Kevin Warsh, the Bank agreed to publish full transcripts of MPC policy meetings 
(Table 1).19   
 These publications do not capture the entirety of the Bank’s engagement strategy.  In 2016 alone, the Bank 
appeared before Parliament on 22 separate occasions.  Senior Bank officials made around 60 visits to the 
Bank’s regional agencies across the UK.  Bank officials visited nearly 5,000 companies and charities. The 
Bank ran a schools competition, involving over 250 schools.  And it hosted a Future Forum, at which it 
engaged openly with a broad cross-section of the public on a wide range of issues. 
 These step changes in transparency have been broadly mirrored across a range of other central banks.  
Notable milestones among the world’s major central banks have included:  in 1994, the Fed’s decision to 
announce immediately its target interest rate after each meeting; the announcement of different forms of 
forward guidance, starting in Japan in 1999;  publishing minutes of policy meetings, most recently introduced 
by the ECB in 2015;  and forecasts for interest rates, which the Fed has done since 2012 (Table 1). 
 The major central banks’ engagement strategies have been equally as impressive.  For example, the  
Federal Reserve has a long-standing and extensive commitment to promote community development at the 
national, regional and local levels.  That includes working with communities whose residents are low- and 
moderate-income.  The various initiatives of the Community Development team at the San Francisco Fed are 
excellent examples of this work.20 
 The Federal Reserve has also sought to learn from listening to the views of those same communities.  In 
2015, the Federal Reserve Board formed a new Community Advisory Council, which contains a diverse 
group of 15 citizen representatives.  It meets with the Fed Board twice a year to provide information and 
recommendations on policy matters, with a focus on issues relevant to low- and moderate-income residents. 
 Bringing this together, it is possible to construct weighted-average aggregate transparency indices.  These 
show a steady ratchet-up in openness across a range of central banks over time (Chart 5).  And if we look at 
mentions of the world’s major central banks in the main newspapers, these have also been on a  
steadily-rising trend over time (Charts 6A and 6B).   
 What a difference a century makes.  A century ago, the Bank issued one speech a year.  In 2016 alone, it 
issued 80 speeches, 62 working papers, close to 200 consultation documents, just under 100 blogs and over 
100 statistical releases - in total, over 600 publications.  That is around 9,000 pages or around four and a 
                                                      
17  Monetary Policy Committee (2013). 
18  Stockton (2012), McKeown and Paterson (2014). 
19  Warsh (2014), Bank of England (2014). 
20  See Williams (2016a) for a discussion of one of these initiatives. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  half million words.  It would not be over-egging this pudding to call this a genuine revolution in central bank 
transparency.  And this revolution has taken place, in central bank terms, at warp speed. 
 The Benefits of Central Bank Communication 
 In lockstep with this evolution-cum-revolution in central bank transparency practices has emerged an 
academic literature seeking to understand, explain and assess the implications of this shift.  This literature 
has been growing fast.  Chart 7 plots the percentage of mentions of the words “central bank” followed by 
“communication” in English-language publications over the past 70 years.21  It shows an exponential 
increase.    
 This literature provides a useful starting point for assessing the progress made so far by central banks in 
boosting their openness, the advantages this may have conferred and where future transparency efforts 
might best be directed.  In theory, transparent communications confer two high-level benefits.22   
 First, improved central bank communications can help stabilise the economy.  They do so by improving 
outside agents’ information on the likely course of the economy (now and in the future) and/or on the likely 
course of policy (now and in the future).  This reduces the degree of uncertainty felt by households and firms, 
better enabling them to make decisions about spending, saving, working and the like. 
 Improved information about the economy or economic policy may also have an effect on expectations.   
For example, information on the target or instrument paths for monetary policy might help shape inflation 
expectations.  In this way, transparency initiatives can also help improve the effectiveness of economic 
policy.23  These are the ex-ante benefits of communications arising from improved understanding. 
 Second, transparent communications improve the ability of outside agents to assess the performance of the 
central bank and hold them to account.  They fulfil a democratic demand for accountability.24  They also 
increase incentives for the delegated party to make wise decisions in the first place, knowing they will be 
held to account.25  These are the ex-post benefits of central bank communications arising from improved 
trust. 
 These conceptual benefits, improved understanding and trust, are fairly well-understood, if not 
uncontentious.26  Over the course of the past couple of decades, a body of empirical evidence has built up to 
                                                      
21  Drawing on the methodology from Hansen and McMahon (2016).  
22  For example, Blinder et al (2008), Reis (2013). 
23  For example, Crowe (2010), Eusepi and Preston (2010) and Hubert (2015). 
24  Briault et al (1997), among others, make this point. 
25  See the survey by Geraats (2002). 
26  Morris and Shin (2002) argue that noisy central bank communication can worsen the understanding of monetary policy, if they cause 
expectations to coordinate away from fundamentals.  Kool et al (2011) show how even precise communication could worsen outcomes, 
if it leads the private sector to reduce investment in information. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  assess some – but only some – of these benefits.  Let me set out some of the key lessons from that 
literature, before identifying places where the existing evidence base is sparse. 
 The richest seam of research has focussed on whether and how central bank communications have affected 
financial markets, often using event-studies around the time of key announcements.  This has concluded, 
perhaps unsurprisingly, that central bank announcements cause significant movements in asset prices. 27  
For example, they cause adjustments along the yield curve, in equity and corporate bond prices, in the 
exchange rate and in the volatility of these asset prices. 
 This suggests central bank announcements are a significant source of information to financial markets, either 
about the course of the economy or the course of policy or both.  That is despite often sharp differences in 
communication strategies across central banks.28  It is difficult to say, definitively, whether these strategies 
have improved the efficiency with which asset markets function, given that fundamentals are unobservable.  
But that is not an unreasonable conjecture. 
 A second strand has assessed how central bank communications affect professional forecasters.  The 
evidence suggests they have a good understanding of how monetary policy behaves.29  Central bank 
communications have been crucial to that understanding.  For example, this improved after the Fed began 
giving press conferences in 2011.30  And central bank communications have been found to contain 
information that can help predict future policy decisions.31  
 A related literature has looked at the impact of monetary frameworks and communications strategies in 
shaping inflation expectations and in influencing inflation dynamics.  Generally speaking, this points towards 
the announcement of formal inflation targets having helped anchor the inflation expectations of financial 
market participants, companies and consumers around these targets.32   
 A third strand has looked at the role of the media in intermediating central bank messages.  Studies have 
examined the factors that influence how the media intermediate central bank messages.33  There is mixed 
evidence on how well the media performs this task.  There is evidence the media leads to a better 
understanding of the ECB’s monetary policy.34  But in the US and Germany, there is evidence the media may 
sometimes impair communication and bias opinion.35 
                                                       
27  For example, Gürkaynak et al (2005), Hendry and Madeley (2010), Ranaldo and Rossi (2010) and Hayo et al (2010). 
28  Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007). 
29  Carvalho and Nechio (2014). 
30  Dräger et al (2016). 
31  Sturm and de Haan (2009). 
32  For example, Joyce et al (2010) and Gürkaynak et al (2010). 
33  Berger et al (2011) find that press reports of ECB decisions are more critical when the decision is a surprise, or when made under a 
backdrop of high inflation.  The reception is more positive when press conferences are informative or if the ECB president has recently 
been active in giving statements. 
34  For example, van der Cruijsen et al (2015). 
35  See Dräger et al (2016) for the US and Lamla and Lein (2014) for Germany. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
  As the number of central bank publications has expanded, a new strand of research has begun analysing the 
words and phrases used by central banks, using semantic-modelling and other text-mining techniques.36  For 
example, these methods can be used to extract from written central bank material the key themes and issues 
that have been the focus of central bank deliberations and communications. 
 Academics Stephen Hansen and Michael McMahon have used semantic techniques to identify particular 
monetary policy topics.  These can be used to quantify how much emphasis an issue has had in committee 
deliberations.  For example, Charts 8A and 8B focus on the topic of the “labour market” in the MPC’s 
minutes.  They suggest the fraction of time spent discussing this topic picked up in 2013, the year that the 
MPC issued forward guidance linked to the unemployment rate.37 
 Charts 9A and 9B do the same for the FOMC’s deliberations, focussing on groups of words from FOMC 
transcripts related to “recession”.  With individual FOMC transcripts, we can also track how much time each 
individual FOMC member devoted to this topic, shown in the range.  The median FOMC member started 
talking more about recessions at the point the US downturn took hold, although there was a significant 
variation in the time different FOMC members devoted to this topic. 
 Taking this literature together, it suggests the great strides forward in central bank transparency over recent 
years have delivered some significant stabilisation benefits, most notably for financial markets, inflation 
expectations, macro-economic forecasts and, to some degree, media reporting.  So what the missing links 
when assessing the potential benefits of central bank communications?  Three stand out.   
 First, the vast majority of studies have focussed on the ex-ante informational benefits of central bank 
transparency.  There is far less evidence assessing whether openness initiatives have affected central bank 
legitimacy – the ex-post accountability benefits.  In other words, empirical evidence has focussed on the role 
of central bank transparency in fostering understanding rather than trust. 
 Second, studies have focussed on the impact of central bank communications on the key information 
intermediaries – Markets (M), Economists (E) and News (N) – rather than the general public.  Empirical 
studies of central banks have been dominated by MEN.  This is a notable gap.  It is the general public who, 
ultimately, make decisions about spending and saving in the economy.  And it is the public who decide, 
ultimately, whether central banks are serving society well or poorly.38    
 Third, when it comes to assessing the impact of central bank actions on the trust and understanding of the 
public, little if any attention has been paid to some of the richer informational channels through which news 
                                                      
36  See Bholat et al (2015) for a summary of these methods. 
37  Ongoing work by Hansen, McMahon and Tong uses these techniques to analyse the Bank’s Inflation Report and finds that its text 
moves financial markets, even after controlling for the Report’s quantitative aspects.  This suggests that the narrative explaining what 
drove the forecasts and how the committee interprets the data matters, not just the numerical forecasts. 
38  For example, Blinder et al (2008) suggest that “Virtually all the research to date has focused on central bank communication with the 
financial markets.  It may be time to pay some attention to communication with the general public…In the end, it is the general public 
that gives central banks their democratic legitimacy, and hence their independence.”  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
  might spread between people.  For example, the recent work of George Akerlof and Robert Shiller has 
emphasised the role of “popular narratives” in shaping the public’s expectations and decisions.39   
 Story-telling is the ultimate communications device.  History is no more than a sequence of stories.  These 
stories spread word by word, mail by mail, Tweet by Tweet.  They obey the same laws of motion as 
epidemics, with viral spread beyond a tipping point.  And in a world of modern media, these popular narrative 
epidemics are probably spreading further and faster than ever previously. This matters for individuals’ 
feelings and decisions and, potentially, for macro-economic behaviour.   
 Pessimistic popular narratives have been used to explain the sharp contraction of spending at the time of the 
Great Depression and the Great Recession.40  With popular narratives more virulent than in the past, 
tracking their source and spread may be increasingly important for understanding the economy.  This poses 
risks to policymakers.  But it also presents opportunities if they are able to shape and shepherd these 
narratives through adroit communications.   
 Understanding and Trusting Central Banks 
 Even if the empirical literature is sparse, the great leaps forward in central bank openness over recent years 
would be expected to have earned them a transparency dividend among the harder-to-reach general public.  
That dividend might take the form of improved trust in central banks by the public and an improved 
understanding of their functioning.  There is disappointingly little evidence of either. 
 Trust in institutions generally has taken a body-blow over the past few years.  The Edelman global survey 
suggests that public trust in businesses, government, NGOs and the media has fallen sharply.  In 2016, only 
around half of the general public trusted these bodies.  In the UK, fewer than 30% of the population trusted 
these institutions in the latest survey, down from over 40% a few years ago (Chart 10). 
 The source of dwindling trust is itself revealing.  It reflects a widening gap between trust in institutions among 
the elites (which has held firm) and among the general public (where it has fallen).  This trust gap between 
elites and the general public averages 15 percentage points globally, having been around 9 percentage 
points as recently as 2012.  In the UK and US, this gap is around 20 percentage points.41 
 What is true of institutions appears to be true too of the economics profession.  A recent poll by YouGov in 
the UK asked the general public how much they trusted various professions.42  Economists were towards the 
bottom of this list, well below scientists, historians, weather forecasters and even sports commentators 
                                                      
39  Akerlof and Shiller (2009), Shiller (2017). 
40  Shiller (2017). 
41  Elsewhere, I have called this widening trust gap the Great Divide (Haldane, 2016). 
42  YouGov (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 10 
 
10 
 (Chart 11).  There is always someone worse off than you – in this case it was politicians – but the overall 
picture is discouraging. 
 If trust in institutions is low, and if trust in economists is low, the backdrop is not propitious for institutions 
containing (lots of) economists.  So it is with central banks.  Chart 12 shows some measures of trust or 
confidence in the four major central banks over the past decade.  In the UK, the US and the euro area, trust 
has fallen over that period, often coincident with the global financial crisis.  The Bank of Japan has been an 
exception, although its financial crisis came rather earlier. 
 If we turn from trust to understanding, the picture is similar.  In 1997, Robert Shiller conducted a survey of 
public attitudes towards inflation.  He concluded then:  “there will probably always be a communications gap 
between economists and the public.  But there appears to be rather more of a gap than most of us would 
have expected”.43  In the period since, there is little evidence this gap has closed.   
 A survey by the BBC in 2011 asked the public about the meaning of the words “inflation” and “GDP”, the two 
central concepts in modern-day macroeconomics.  Only 16% of the general public could clearly define what 
was meant by inflation, while only 10% could do so for GDP.44  For central banks, whose stock-in-trade is 
inflation and GDP control, these fractions are disappointingly low. 
 In 2013, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales conducted a survey of economic experts and the general public 
on a set of economic policy questions.45  Not only were there large differences between experts and the 
public in their answers.  Tellingly, these differences were largest in those areas where experts were most in 
agreement.  Expert economic opinion increased the general public’s sense of scepticism.  That gap between 
elites and the general public is, if anything, even larger when it comes to economic issues. 
 Turning to central banks, it is a good news/bad news story.  In surveys, around 60% of the general public 
believe the Bank of England has a good understanding of the economy.  This is the good news.  The bad 
news is that only around a quarter believe it explains its actions and decisions in terms they can 
understand.46  On monetary policy, around half of the general public do not know who sets interest rates.  
Almost a half have either never heard of the MPC or think it is part of government.   
 Let me give a specific policy example to illustrate this (lack of) understanding.  In the summer of 2013, the 
MPC provided guidance about the future path of monetary policy.  This guidance was aimed explicitly at 
reducing uncertainty among households and companies, with simple and clear language about the future 
path of policy.  It was accompanied by a communications plan focussed on the general public, including TV 
interviews and a published document.  
                                                      
43  Shiller (1997). 
44  Quoted in Thompson (2016). 
45  Sapienza and Zingales (2013). 
46  See Haldane (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
   The Bank conducted a survey after the guidance had been issued, with the aim of assessing its impact on 
the general public.  This painted a mixed picture.  The Bank’s message got through to around 75% of 
companies, but only around one-fifth of households.  Moreover, even among those households who heard 
the guidance, as many felt less confident as more confident about the economy (Table 2). 
 In the US and the euro area, surveys have found a similar lack of understanding of central bank actions.  
They have also identified where these understanding problems are most acute.  In the US, survey 
respondents with lower incomes or without a college degree are less likely to understand monetary policy.47  
In the euro area, a Dutch survey found respondents with higher education or income were more likely to 
answer questions about the ECB’s monetary policy correctly.48    
 This is a puzzle.  Despite a huge increase in the volume of central bank reporting, neither understanding of, 
nor trust in, central banks has improved.  These trust and understanding problems are not unique to central 
banks – they are common across banks, business, government, the media.  Nonetheless, what explains 
these trends?  The financial crisis and the slow recovery from it are likely to have been one factor, but not the 
whole story.  Let me highlight three other factors to have played a role, for central banks and more broadly.  
 (a)  The changing nature of trust   
 
Trust has been studied extensively by philosophers, sociologists and anthropologists over many years.49  
These studies have shown that trust can take a variety of forms and can change shape quite fundamentally 
over time.  Such a mini-metamorphosis appears to have taken place over recent years, in particular among 
trust in institutions.50 
 The traditional model of trust was a fairly simple one.  To a significant degree, it was anonymous, centralised 
and institutional.  The actions of institutions, like the Fed and the Bank, were trusted by the general public, 
even when few of them understood what it is these institutions did and why.  And having a trusted third-party, 
able to exercise a degree of control over monetary and financial affairs, was a source of comfort.   
 This institutional structure, in the main, served society well.  Not least, it lasted for several hundreds of years.  
Some have argued that a good chunk of society’s success over this period can be attributed to these 
institutional foundations.51  Latterly, however, there are signs these foundations have started to subside.  
And institutions are being challenged, at least in part, because a different model is emerging in which trust is 
distributed rather than centralised, social rather than institutional, personal rather than anonymous.   
                                                       
47  Carvalho and Nechio (2014), using the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers.   
48  van der Cruijsen et al (2015).   
49  For example, Govier (1997), Barber (1983) and Liisberg et al (2015). 
50  For example, the work of Rachel Botsman. 
51  Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 12 
 
12 
 One example of that trend concerns a commodity many thousands of years old and one close to central 
banks’ hearts – money.  Money, certainly fiat money, relies for its existence on trust.  In many countries over 
many centuries, this trust was delivered in a centralised, institutionalised and, to a large degree, anonymised 
way, namely through central banks.   
 Latterly, there are just the faintest signs that could be changing.  The Blockchain or Distributed Ledger 
Technology (DLT) first came to prominence through Bitcoin, the crypto-currency.  Since then, the range of 
applications of DLT has expanded massively, well beyond crypto-currencies.  What differentiates DLT from 
earlier technologies is the ability to confer trust on a commodity or transaction without the need for a central 
institution for verification.  Trust is distributed, personalised, socialised. 
 It is too soon to tell whether DLT will revolutionise financial services in general and money in particular.  But 
its potential has not escaped the notice of central banks or the financial services industry.  Both are exploring 
DLT as a means of reconfiguring financial infrastructures.  And some believe this new technology of 
distributed trust could bring about a genuine transformation of money and finance. 
 One reason to think this possible is because a similar model of distributed trust has already fundamentally 
reshaped a number of other products, services and businesses.  We have seen the rapid emergence of 
businesses built on peer-to-peer interactions and transactions.  These business models are underpinned by 
trust between buyer and seller, producer and consumer, trust which is distributed and personalised.   
 Take the market for accommodation.  This has been transformed by the emergence of AirBnB.  This  
peer-to-peer or distributed model of accommodation among strangers is underpinned by feedback ratings 
which endow participants with personalised trust.  AirBnB is only 9 years old but already has over three 
million listings.  Its estimated valuation is well above the market capitalisation of established, centralised, 
hotel chains such as the Hilton and Hyatt. 
 Or consider travel.  Everyone has heard of Uber – itself a distributed trust model.  Fewer people have heard 
of BlaBlaCar.  This is a distributed model of riding-sharing among strangers, also underpinned by feedback 
ratings and personalised trust.  BlaBlaCar is only 11 years old but already transports more than four million 
people per month, well above Eurostar or JetBlue airlines.52 
 (b)  The changing nature of media   
 Accompanying, and contributing, to these shifts in the structure of trust have been important changes in the 
methods by which information is intermediated.  The traditional model of information intermediation gave the 
mainstream media – TV, newspapers, radio – a central role in filtering, assimilating and propagating 
                                                      
52  Botsman (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
  information to the public.  As recently as 2000, circulation of paid-for daily and Sunday newspapers was 
equivalent to around 60% of US and UK households.53   
 The past few years have seen dramatic shifts in the way news is reaching the public.  Some of this may 
reflect a decline in trust in mainstream media.  A recent Gallup poll reported trust in the mass media had 
fallen to less than a third of the US population.54  This compares with more than half at the start of the 
century.  This decline in trust has been particularly pronounced among younger age groups.   
 This loss of trust in mainstream media can also be seen in surveys of how people receive their news.  Only 
20% of Americans get news regularly from a print newspaper.55  For those aged over 50, the traditional 
media continue to dominate as a news source (Chart 13).  But for those under-50, around half get their news 
online and fewer than 10% from newspapers.   
 Within online, social media has been rising rapidly as a news source.  A recent Reuters Institute study in the 
UK found that more than half of all 18-24 year olds used social media as a news source and more than a 
quarter used this as their main news source, for the first time more than TV.56  These fractions are similar in 
the US.  Among young adults, social has usurped mainstream media.   
 In some respects, this shift in media methods is the mirror-image of changes in the nature of trust-building.  
As trust-building has become distributed, personalised and socialised, so too have media methods for 
conveying information and news.  This is likely to have been a two-way process, with technology shaping 
trust and trust technology.  Meanwhile, centralised sources of news have seen trust wane and with it usage. 
 Online and social media often, of course, get their information from mainstream media.  This, it could be 
argued, makes these shifts in media channels less important than might first appear.  But looks can be 
deceiving.  As Canadian philosopher and writer Marshall McLuhan first told us over 50 years ago, the 
medium often is the message.   
 For online and social media, information from mainstream sources is often being filtered and purified, 
sometimes using search algorithms.  These tailor the content to an individual’s tastes and preferences.  
Quite literally, this is news and information personified.  It makes for news and narratives which tend to be 
self-reinforcing and self-referential.  The echoes in this chamber are louder, reach further, last longer. 
 These new media channels make, then, for a different process of news transmission.  Social networks mean 
it is likely to propagate faster and further.  They mean popular narratives are likely to emerge and spread 
                                                      
53  Communic@tions Management Inc (2013). 
54  Gallup (2016). 
55  Pew Research Center (2016). 
56  Reuters Institute for Journalism (2016).  See also Shafik (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
  faster and further in a self-reinforcing fashion.  They make for larger, louder, hermetically-sealed echo 
chambers.  And that is true whether this is old news, new news or fake news. 
  (c)  The changing nature of language   
Operating alongside these seismic shifts in the nature of media and trust have been equally-large shifts in 
the public language.  As Mark Thompson discusses in his recent book, public language has become shorter, 
sharper and shriller, with higher impact and wider reach, aided and abetted by new media.57  Twitter, as a 
media medium, ticks every one of these boxes:  personalised, socialised, distributed, short, sharp and shrill. 
 ‘Twas not ever thus. Once upon a time, when trust in institutions was high, complex language posed no trust 
problem.  Little was published, even less read.  Public discourse was infrequent and attentive audiences 
were narrow.  Complex language added to the “mystique” of institutions, including central banks, and as a 
sign of technical competence.  As Stella Artois was reassuringly expensive, central banks were reassuringly 
inexpansive. 
 Today, the situation is different.  Trust in institutions has been eroded despite a great deal more being 
published, including by central banks.  Complex language is these days more likely to breed mistrust than 
mystique.  Expert opinion has become a source of scepticism rather than reassurance.  The well-directed 
Tweet has displaced the well-argued speech, the Facebook “like” the approving newspaper review, the 
smiley-faced emoji the hand-written thank-you note.58   
 That change in the nature of public language – shorter, simpler, shriller - puts an even greater premium on 
institutions making themselves understood, despite (indeed, because) of the technocratic task with which 
they are charged.  That means speaking in words and sentences that land rather than levitate with the 
public, that connect rather than divide public opinion, that illuminate rather than darken public debate.   
 So how well do central banks fare on that front?  Earlier this year, the Campaign for Plain English, a militant 
band of grammarians, turned its attention to the Bank of England MPC’s Monetary Policy Statement.  This 
statement is intended to be a simplified and sanitised account of the MPC’s judgements.  The Campaign for 
Plain English described it as “worthless, impenetrable waffle” and “gobbledygook”.  Reading between the 
lines, I am not sure they liked it. 
 These views are instructive, but subjective.  More objective measures have been developed, however, that 
enable us to measure the linguistic complexity of written and spoken material.  For example, some of the 
more widely-used of these metrics are based on word and sentence length, the use of different word types 
etc.59  These metrics can be applied to central bank publications.  The picture they paint is a sobering one. 
                                                      
57  Thompson (2016). 
58  The irony of making these points in a long speech is not lost on me. 
59  DuBay (2004). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 15 
 
15 
  For example, Chart 14 takes a set of regular Bank of England publications (MPC minutes, MPC statements, 
excerpts from the quarterly Inflation Report, Governors’ speeches) and assesses their linguistic complexity 
over time.  It uses one well-known measure of linguistic complexity, the Flesch-Kincaid reading grade 
score.60  These central bank publications are compared with a set of external publications (broadsheet and 
tabloid newspapers, the Economist magazine and political speeches). 
 Bank of England publications have an average reading grade score of around 14 – that is to say, they would 
be expected to be understood, on average, by someone aged around 20.  They have been steady around 
this level for a number of years.  In linguistic complexity terms, that puts them around 2 years ahead of 
broadsheet newspapers, 4 years ahead of tabloid newspapers and around 6 years ahead of the average 
political speech.  They are around 5 years ahead of the average Dickens novel. 
 We can do the same exercise for a selection of Federal Reserve publications (FOMC minutes, speeches by 
the Chair, Beige Book summaries) and compare those with some external publications (the New York Times, 
Washington Post and Financial Times and US political speeches).  Chart 15 suggests Fed publications tend 
to have a higher reading grade score than Bank of England ones.  For example, FOMC minutes have a 
reading grade score of around 17, compared to around 14-15 for MPC minutes.   
 Nonetheless, in common with the Bank, there is a material reading grade gap between central bank and 
external publications, of around 5 years with mainstream newspapers, 8 years for political speeches 
generally and 13 years for election campaign speeches by President Trump.  They are 11 years ahead of the 
average Elvis song.  If we look at a selection of other central banks’ English language publications, we see 
the same pattern.  Reading scores are around 14, well above the levels of external publications (Chart 16). 
 Taken at face value these scores are interesting, if perhaps not altogether surprising.  After all, central banks 
occupy a technocratic space with its own technical language.  Nonetheless, it is worth reflecting on the costs 
at which this complexity comes.  For example, what fraction of the general public are central bank 
publications excluding because of their language?  Given data on the distribution of literacy rates across the 
population, linguistic complexity metrics allow an estimate of that fraction. 
 Using data from the US national adult literacy survey, we can estimate the penetration rate of various 
publications, central bank and external (Chart 17).61  This suggests that a campaign speech by President 
Trump is accessible to around 70% of the US adult population, an Elvis song around 60%, political speeches 
a little less than half and the mainstream US press when discussing monetary policy around 20%.   
Beige Book summaries reach fewer than 10% of the US adult population.  FOMC minutes are accessible to 
only around 2%.   
                                                      
60  Kincaid et al (1975).  The precise algorithm used will have some bearing on the final Flesch-Kincaid score that is computed for a 
given text.  Other metrics of linguistic complexity yield broadly similar results. 
61  Kirsch et al (1993). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
16 
 
16 
   
According to OECD studies, levels of literacy in the UK and US are not greatly dissimilar.62  Assuming the 
same literacy rate in the UK and US implies that political speeches are accessible to slightly less than half 
the population, Dickens novels to around 40% and newspapers to around 30%.  Bank of England 
publications are accessible to less than 10% of the adult population.   
 These fractions are low.  Around 95% of the general public are likely to find central bank publications 
inaccessible.  Perhaps unsurprisingly, these tend to be the same segments of society with least trust and 
understanding of central banks – for example, the young and less well-off.  Mainstream media can help 
mediate, but they have an increasingly constrained reach among those same cohorts.  
 Herein lies central banks’ challenge:  a rising tide of central bank communications on the one hand, a 
retreating tide of public trust and understanding on the other.  Conventional means of communicating are 
unlikely to be able to reach those parts of society for whom mistrust and misunderstanding are most acute.  
To reach that wider audience, to close those trust and understanding deficits, central banks will need new 
tools and techniques.  
 A New Frontier for Central Bank Engagement 
 Which tools and techniques?  Were this simply a case of producing more, trust and understanding problems 
would have been long since solved.  It is not.  As philosopher Onora O’Neill has argued, simply adding to 
reporting does little for accountability and trust-building.63  If reports are mostly unread or unreadable, 
smothering people in more words and numbers could even detract from trust and accountability. 
 In one sense, this is not a new point.  Claude Shannon, the grandfather of information theory, did not define 
information by words or digits.  Instead he defined it by whether uncertainty was reduced on the part of the 
receiver.64  If receivers are overwhelmed by the depth, discouraged by the density and bamboozled by the 
complexity, reporting can be disinformation on Shannon’s criterion.  For a chunk of society, the very volume 
of reporting may be increasing uncertainty and impairing information, understanding and trust. 
 Even the term “central bank communication” – a mainstay of central banking and a centrepiece of academic 
studies of central banks – may fail as a description of what is these days required to build trust and improve 
understanding.  The quest to improve communications makes sense.  But it has more than a hint of better 
sermons to the assembled congregation, enhanced education of an inattentive audience, a smoothly-
swinging one-way door.  Communication means mouths. 
                                                       
62  See Binkley (1997). 
63  O’Neill (2002, 2014). 
64  Shannon (1948). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
  These days, building trust and improving understanding may require a different approach.  It may be less 
about communication than conversation, less about edicts than engagement, ideally on as personalised and 
localised a basis as possible.  It may involve listening as much as speaking, understanding of the public as 
much as public understanding, a two-way door.  Conversation means ears as much as mouths.   
 What new tools and techniques might help achieve this wider engagement?   Let me offer a few ideas, 
ranging from the workaday to the speculative.  Even more than usual, the speculative ideas are not the views 
of the Bank of England or its policy committees. 
 (a)  Different Strokes for Different Folks 
 Many macro-economists are brought up learning the representative agent model, as a simplified way of 
making sense of aggregate behaviour.  When it comes to central bank engagement, thinking in these terms 
is unhelpful.  The public are anything but monolithic in their abilities and appetites.  They are different folks. 
 This suggests that, as a first step in any programme of improved central bank engagement, an improved 
understanding of these different folks is needed:  their concerns, their constraints, their degrees of 
understanding and distrust, their appetite for information and their preferred means of receiving it.  Knowing 
your audience is public relations 101.  Yet it is one lesson central bank publications may, historically, have 
failed fully to heed.  If so, it is relatively easily rectified. 
 Having identified the different folks, it is then a question of applying different strokes to communicating and 
engaging with them.  One size will not fit all.  That probably means the need for engagement policies that are 
targeted and layered to meet the different needs of different cohorts.   
 This does not mean we should stop communicating with our current audience.  Their needs may be  
well-served by some of the analysis we already produce.  But it may call for a particular focus on those 
cohorts currently out of reach of central banks, such as the young and the less well-off. 
 Both the message and the medium matter here.  For the wider public, especially the younger and the less 
well-off cohorts, Mark Thompson’s synopsis of the changing form of public language – shorter and simpler – 
may be a good starting point.  Over the past year or so, the Bank of England has diversified its stable of 
publications, with a view to reaching that some of that wider audience. 
 In 2015 the Bank began a staff blog, “Bank Underground”.  This was intended to be shorter, simpler and 
somewhat more opinionated than anything the Bank had previously published.  So far, the blogs have 
received over 700,000 hits.  The most popular are amongst the best-read of any Bank publication.  That is 
probably helped by their shorter length (under 1500 words) and greater reach (reading grade scores of 9 
mean that they are accessible to up to 30% of the population).   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 18 
 
18 
  The Bank introduced last year “Knowledge Bank”.  This is largely intended as an educational device, 
covering how the economy works and how central bank policies may be affecting it.  It contains cartoons and 
videos as well as prose.  It is targeted, explicitly, at younger age cohorts.  Its reading score of 8 means it is 
capable of reaching almost half of the UK adult population.   
 The Bank, in common with many other central banks, is making greater use of social media.  As a two-way 
personalised, socialised, distributed communications medium, with high penetration among the young, it has 
real attractions.  The Bank has a Twitter account with over 200,000 followers.  Individuals do not have Twitter 
accounts and nor does the Bank have a cohort of Bloggers and Vloggers providing daily diaries of time spent 
at the central bank coalface.  But it is early days. 
 These are examples of layered and targeted content, the like of which a number of other central banks, 
including the Federal Reserve System, are investing.  The Bank’s existing publications are now more flexible 
and layered in their length and content, potentially making them accessible to a wider audience (Chart 18).  
But this is clearly just the start.  I shall resist the temptation to say it is going to be great. 
 (b)  Minding your Language 
 The changing nature of public language means central banks will need to adapt their own language to 
increase its penetration and reach with the general public.  There are two elements to this – the technical 
and the behavioural.  The first is easier to fix. 
 By technical I mean the complexity of the language used – the length and complexity of words, sentences 
and paragraphs.  Currently, central banks score poorly technically, in part because they are themselves 
technicians.  This comes at a cost in terms of accessibility.  Fortunately, there is a large literature, and a 
sizable cohort of grammarians, who have considered how to shape language to improve its reach. 
 For example, like many others I suffer from an acute case of hippopotomonstrosesquipeadaliophobia – that 
is to say, the fear of long words.  And if you choked on that last sentence, so now might you.  Simple words 
can make a dramatic difference to readability.  “Inflation and employment” leaves the majority of the public 
cold.  “Prices and jobs” warms them up.  “Annuity” deep freezes the public, whereas “investment” thaws.65 
 In general, the readability of text is improved the larger the number of nouns and verbs and the fewer the 
adverbs and adjectives.66  This old mantra remains true in the Facebook age:  Facebook posts are more 
likely to be shared the more frequent nouns and verbs and the less frequent adverbs and adjectives.  The 
ratio of nouns and verbs to adverbs and adjectives in an Elvis song is 3.3.  In my speeches it is 2.7.  
                                                      
65  Smart (2016). 
66  In their classic Elements of Style (1979), William Strunk and E B White write:  “Write with nouns and verbs, not with adjectives and 
adverbs.  The adjective hasn’t been built that can pull a weak or inaccurate noun out of a tight place.”  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
19 
 
19 
   The behavioural dimension to public language involves speaking in ways which best connect the receiver 
with the sender.  Behavioural science has given us plenty of insights into how to do that.67  Messages 
wrapped in real-world narratives are more likely to stick than those wrapped in numbers.  Messages which 
are personalised are more likely to stick than those that are anonymous.  And messages that are local are 
more likely to stick than those that are national. 
 These maxims have been borne out in real-world experiments.  Personalising and localising messages has 
been found to increase their reach, and their chances of being acted on, in a wide variety of public policy 
settings:  in everything from encouraging tax payments to discouraging carbon emissions;  from encouraging 
school attendance to discouraging crime;  from encouraging charitable giving to discouraging sugar 
consumption.  Linguistic “nudges” appear to work.68    
 Yet localised and personalised messages often flow less easily from the mouths of central banks.  For 
understandable reasons, they have tended to have a national rather than local focus, to weigh the objective 
over the emotional, to be fact rather than anecdote-based.  That is all well and good.  But it does carry a 
cost.  It is hard to engage with a building.  The view from 30,000 feet can feel a little distant.  Excel 
spreadsheets do not emote.  This can inhibit building trust and improving understanding. 
 Localising the message can certainly help.  Here, the work of the regional Feds in the US and the Bank’s 
regional agents in the UK is crucial.  More generally, analysis of the regional and distributional split is 
important for understanding the economy and localising messages about how it is performing.69  Even 
though monetary policy acts nationally, and central bank tools may be ill-equipped to redress regional or 
distributional differences, that is no excuse for central banks not monitoring and understanding, continuously 
and in depth, the fortunes of different regions, sectors and cohorts of society.   
 Localising also makes it easier to convey information as connected stories rather than as disconnected data.  
During 2016, I wrote a number of speeches on the economy, probably totalling over 50,000 words.  From 
that mass of words, the best-remembered single sentence, by far, did not concern my views on GDP or 
Brexit or QE.  It was not a number, a theory or even a chart.  It was anecdote drawn from a visit I made to a 
set of charities in Nottingham at which they told me there had, for them, been no recovery.  That stuck.  
Personal stories stick.  No amount of data is ever as adhesive. 
 Personalising events also helps stickiness.  In 2015, the UK’s Meteorological Office began naming its 
storms.  Just before Christmas, “Storm Barbara” hit the UK, causing widespread devastation to as many as a 
dozen umbrellas and blowing off several people’s hats.  Yet advance warnings of Storm Barbara inspired 
                                                      
67  See Kahneman (2011) and Shiller (2017) for examples. 
68  See Thaler and Sunstein (2008), Adams and Hunt (2013) and Halpern (2015). 
69  For example, Haldane (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 20 
 
20 
 81,000 tweets and 4,000 retweets.  Polling by YouGov suggests that, since storms began being named, 
more than half of people have begun taking steps to prepare themselves. 
 Storm-naming in the UK follows long-standing US practice of naming (very much more) extreme weather 
events.  This began back in 1953.  The evidence is that naming these events has increased significantly 
public awareness.  Even the names matter.  The death toll from female-named hurricanes in the US is higher 
than for male-named ones, even once storm-severity is taken into account.70  Had “Storm Barbara” been 
“Storm Brian”, several items of apparel may have been alive today.   
 I am not suggesting central banks should start following this meteorological precedent to the letter.  I am not 
sure naming the next sharp downturn in activity “Recession Andy” (much less “Depression Andrea” given the 
meteorologists experience with female names) would necessarily raise public awareness greatly.  
Nonetheless, making the impact of economic events on people’s lives as specific and personal as possible 
can help raise public awareness, understanding and preparation. 
 Earlier this year, one of the major UK supermarkets withdrew from its shelves Marmite, a popular  
yeast-based spread that has the appearance, viscosity (and, for some, taste) of the bitumen spread on 
British roads.  The situation arose because the supplier had increased significantly the product’s price in the 
light of sterling’s depreciation last year.  Remarkably, “Marmitegate” led the news for much of the day it 
broke. 
 In the event, tragedy was averted when the supermarket and supplier reached agreement and the great 
British public were allowed to continue tarring their toast.  This high-profile event did, however, quite helpfully 
put on the general public’s radar the likelihood of prices in the shops beginning to rise in the period ahead.   
It was information with narrative content and personal touch.  Arguably, “Marmitegate” raised public 
awareness of rising inflation much more effectively than any amount of central bank jawboning.  Stories, like 
Marmite itself, stick. 
 (c)  Public Understanding, Understanding the Public 
 Many central banks have made big strides towards improving public understanding of the economy and their 
policies over recent years.  Many have an active schools programme, websites with educational resources, 
issue leaflets, posters, podcasts and videos.  Some have a Museum.  These are all great. 
 But central banks, like many institutions, have sometimes been better at talking than listening.  Or, put 
differently, they have done better at public understanding than understanding the public.  As a personal  
trust-building device, it may be a good time to rebalance these scales, to start abiding by a “one mouth, 
two ears” policy - a time, if you like, for a little more conversation and a little less action. 
                                                      
70  Jung et al (2014). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
21 
 
21 
   Some of this is likely to involve central banks engaging on an on-going basis with a different, and more 
eclectic, set of partners than in the past.  For example, this year the Bank is looking to increase its 
engagement with state schools outside of London and the South East, who might otherwise not have had 
any contact with the Bank or anyone else in the public policy domain.  I personally have been increasing my 
engagement with these schools for the past four years.   
 Recently, the Bank’s regional Agents have begun increasing their engagement with charities, social 
enterprises, faith groups and trades unions, among others, listening to their often very different perspectives 
on how the economy is faring.  This is something the Governor and I have prioritised over a number of years.  
These events are similar in spirit to the Community Advisory Council run by the Federal Reserve.  
Personally, I find they provide an incredibly useful window on the world, one which has shaped my view on 
policy.   
 In a world of popular narratives, where emotions shape decisions and where stories can snowball, 
aggregates measures of activity may do a less good job of capturing the forces shaping people’s decisions.  
The qualitative, the conversational, the narrative, the emotional are the new data in this new world – 
optimism and anxieties about tomorrow, as much as income and jobs today.  Harvesting these new data 
calls for a different set of approaches and reaching new communities in new ways.71    
 One example of that is making greater use of surveys of sentiment.  The Bank of England recently set up a 
new survey of companies to assess their degree of uncertainty around Brexit and what impact this was 
having on their decision-making.  It is as much a survey of sentiment and perceptions as investment 
intentions.  This follows previous analysis undertaken by Nick Bloom and Steven Davis in collaboration with 
the Atlanta Fed.72   
 Working with psychologists, the Bank has undertaken research to capture sentiment in financial markets, 
applying semantic-analytic techniques to the words used by market participants.73  More generally, the same 
semantic techniques used to study central bankers’ words could be applied to the words used by the general 
public to capture their topics of conversation, their sentiment and their popular narratives on the economy. 
 Clearly, there is further to go.  As a baby step, later this year I am starting a series of “Townhall” meetings 
around the UK, partnering with organisations such as the Muslim Council of Britain, Age UK, Citizens UK and 
the Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB).  Their purpose is to listen and learn, as much as talk and 
teach, to local communities about the issues that matter for them.  These public events, like public language 
itself, need to be localised and personalised if they are to land. 
                                                      
71   An excellent recent example of this is contained in Carol Graham’s new book on the well-being of different cohorts of American 
society (Graham, 2017). 
72  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Decision Maker Survey (2017). 
73  Nyman et al (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
22 
 
22 
   (d) Nudging and Gaming  
 There are new techniques and technologies becoming available that may help central banks to improve the 
potency and reach of their messages and the quality and quantity of the feedback they receive on them.  
These techniques allow a much wider reach at a much lower cost.  They also enable a dynamic process of 
two-way learning between central banks and the general public to take place.  
 Semantic analysis has been a blossoming area of research over recent years, including on central bank text.  
But, at least insofar as research on central banks is concerned, this analysis has largely been positive and 
descriptive – what have central banks been communicating?  An alternative would be to apply these same 
techniques on a normative and prescriptive basis – how should central banks be communicating to best 
engage with a wider audience?   
 For some time, this has been as area of active study and policy design by behavioural economists.  For 
example, in the UK the Behavioural Insights Unit (BIU), initially set up by the UK government, has worked on 
a range of public policy questions, including taxation, regulation and consumer choice.  In particular, their 
work has focussed on how sometimes subtle changes in language can be used to improve understanding by 
the public and to “nudge” them towards a particular course of action.74 
 Understanding the response of the public is often not easy and often calls for the use of randomised control 
trials familiar from development economics.  For example, the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK has 
recently used these techniques to explore how changes in the language used to describe financial products 
affects the likelihood of them being understood and purchased by retail investors.  In choosing retirement 
income products, use of the word “annuity” shrunk take-up by 25%.75 
 This approach of trialling, eliciting feedback and then adapting is not common in macro-economic public 
policy.  That is, at least in part, for the understandable reason that doing experiments with the general public 
on a macro scale is a rather daunting task.  For reasons of credibility, central banks often feel they need to 
convey a strong sense of certainty about the impact of their words and actions.    
 My own sense is that this needs to change.  Experimentation and trialling, adaptation and learning are likely 
to be crucial when dealing with central banks’ new, wider audience:  more diffuse than ever in their actions 
and reactions, increasingly silo-ed and self-reinforcing in their behaviours, shaped by social norms and 
popular narratives that propagate faster than ever.  The response of this complex, adaptive social system to 
central bank interventions is likely, often, to be unknown. 
                                                       
74  For example, Halpern (2016). 
75  Consumers in the trial were presented with hypothetical choices.  See Smart (2016) for details. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 23 
 
23 
 Experimental trials, which solicit and respond to feedback, are one way of reducing somewhat that 
uncertainty through learning and adaptation. These are used extensively by companies when trialling new 
games, new films and new apps, among other things.  Although the bar is higher, and the trial would need 
careful stage-management, there is no reason these experimental methods could not be used to trial new 
communications and policies by central banks.    
 A more sophisticated, and dynamic, approach to eliciting feedback is by “gamifying” the policy problem.  A 
number of central banks and government departments have already made steps in this direction.   
The San Francisco Fed has a game called “Chair the Fed”.  This is not a campaign rally by John.  It is a 
game that gives people the chance to set monetary policy to steer the US economy.  In the UK, “MyUK” 
allows people to put themselves in the Prime Minister’s hot-seat and invoke Article 50 on any day of the 
week. 
 These are effectively single-person games, designed largely for educational purposes.  But there is no 
reason a similar game could not be designed which was multi-person.  This would allow interactions among 
the public, in their communications and choices, to take place.  This is crucial for understanding the 
propagation of stories, and the contagion in choices, across the economy.  Once those are captured, the 
game could offer important insights into public actions and reactions to central bank interventions, in an 
experimental setting. 
 There are many existing games that are multi-player and interactive, many of them hugely successful.  A 
small sample would include Second Life, Minecraft, EVE Online and World of Warcraft.  A number of these 
games contain elements of the economy or financial system, albeit in a simplified form.  Creating a game 
with a realistic economy, realistic psychology and realistic policy would not be a venture into the unknown. 
 Robert Shiller has spoken of the role played by “narrative entrepreneurs” in catalysing and shaping the 
popular narratives that propagate across society.  Central banks are narrative entrepreneurs, shaping views 
on the economy and on policy through their words, providing a hopefully benevolent “nudge” to expectations.  
In a world of new media, that narrative entrepreneurial role has probably never been more important.   
 But judging, ex-ante, the likely success of these central bank narratives is very difficult.  And the premium on 
getting this right is much greater when the fortunes of the whole economy are at stake.  Will a message be 
understood?  By whom?  How will it propagate through new media?  How will it shape emotions - optimism, 
anxiety, exuberance, depression?  And how, ultimately, will it affect choices – savings, spending, working?   
 Answering these questions in an increasingly complex, adaptive, connected system like the economy is one 
of the greatest challenges in public policy.  Our existing modelling infrastructure – simplified, objective, static 
– is probably ill-equipped for the task.  An interactive, multi-person game may sometimes be a better test-
bed for new communications and policies, without first inflicting them on the real-world.   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
24 
 
24 
   The use of gaming technology may also help central banks reach cohorts of society which they have 
traditionally found difficult – the Facebook generation.  Globally, around half of young adults aged 18-24 play 
games online.  It might be time for central banks to start playing them at their own game. 
  Is this fanciful?  114 years ago, almost to the day, Elizabeth Magie entered a Patent Office in Washington 
DC to file a patent for a game called “The Landlord’s Game”.  On the same day, the Wright Brothers filed a 
patent for the first aircraft.  “The Landlord’s Game” was a brilliant property-based board game which, like 
other games at the time, had a higher public policy purpose:  to educate adults and children on the perils of 
rising income inequality and wealth concentration.  The game was a modest success. 
 In 1935, Charles Darrow sold an adapted version of the game to Parker Brothers under the name 
“Monopoly”.  This was a huge success.  It has gone on to sell hundreds of millions of copies worldwide, 
earning Darrow and Parker Brothers millions of dollars in royalties.  Magie earned $500 for selling her patent.  
While the Wright Brothers’ patent will forever be etched in the history books, Magie’s has largely been lost.   
 If nothing else, this episode shows that games can play an important role in public understanding and 
perhaps even in public policy.  Monopoly remains as popular today as it was in the latter half of the 20th 
century.  Were it virtual rather than physical, its multi-players measured in millions rather than fingers, its 
money from an interactive central banker rather than an inanimate piggy-banker, if people swapped stories 
as well as properties, perhaps this game could help address the 21st century’s problems too. 
 (e)  Rules and Referenda 
 
It has been suggested by some that rules should play a more central role in the setting of monetary policy.76  
There are a number of possible motivations for doing so.  One is that it makes the policy process simpler and 
more transparent.  Machine would, in effect, replace man (and the odd woman).  Other things equal, this 
greater transparency would tend to increase the degree of accountability of, and trust in, the central bank 
among the general public.   
  But other things are rarely equal.  The downsides of slavish adherence to a fixed rule are also well-
understood.77  They include the fact that rules can sometimes be fragile and fallible, particularly at times of 
structural change.  If blind adherence to an algorithm sent policy and the economy into a tailspin, that is 
unlikely to enhance trust in central banks among the wider public.  That does not mean, of course, that rules 
cannot play a useful informational role in setting policy, as is the case in a number of central banks.78 
                                                       
76  Meltzer (2009), Taylor (2011, 2012). 
77  Williams (2015, 2016b), Haldane and Radia (2016), Yellen (2017). 
78  Williams (2014), Yellen (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 25 
 
25 
 An alternative way of making monetary policy more accountable would be to canvass the views of the 
general public directly.79  Digital technology means this option is feasible.  But would it be desirable?  Public 
referenda are hardly infallible.  You may have heard there was an important referendum in the UK last year.  
The result came as a surprise to many.  For some, it was a shameful example of the perils of populism.  
Contrary to some claims, the outcome was a travesty for democracy and at odds with the will of the people. 
 The referendum in question was initiated by the National Environmental Research Council (NERC) and 
involved a public ballot to choose a name for the new polar Royal Research Ship.  Various options were 
mooted as suitable candidates, including “Sir David Attenborough” (the famous British naturalist),  
“Henry Worsley” (the famous British explorer) and “Pingu” (the famous cartoon penguin). 
 The winner of the public ballot was none of these.  With almost 80% of the popular vote, “Boaty McBoatface” 
romped home courtesy of a social media campaign.  At that point, NERC jettisoned the will of the people.  
The ship was named instead “Sir David Attenborough” - though, in a small concession to democracy, its 
remotely operated sub-sea vehicle was named Boaty McBoatface.  This is an object lesson in the perils of 
public polling for policy purposes.  Sometimes, there is madness in crowds.80   
 That is not to say, however, that public opinion is always and everywhere mad.  In his book 
Superforecasting, Philip Tetlock uses evidence drawn from a variety of experimental studies to determine the 
ingredients of a good forecast.81  He finds that the key lies in diverse perspectives, drawn from amateurs as 
well as experts.  Often, he finds, there is wisdom in crowds.  If harnessed, the wisdom of crowds and of 
amateurs can improve the forecasting performance of experts.   
 Regularly canvassing the views of the public, on the economy and on the setting of monetary policy, would 
be one way of harnessing that wisdom.  This would allow central banks to listen to a potentially much wider 
and richer array of views on the setting of policy, in particular from those who might otherwise be distant, 
disenfranchised or distrustful of central banks and their actions.  It would open central banks’ ears  
(and eyebrows) to a wider range of societal stakeholders when setting policy.   
 The information provided from the public could serve as another input to the policy-setting process, much as 
monetary policy rules (and other data) do today.  What are the public telling us about the right setting of 
policy and why?  Clearly, neither rules nor polls should be followed slavishly - the scope for misinformation 
and mishap is simply too great.  And the whole purpose of delegating policy to an independent third-party is 
to avoid the short-termism that may sometimes affect the general public. 
 Nonetheless, if crowds, like rules, sometimes contain wisdom – different perspectives, different views, 
different narratives – then harvesting this information could be an important additional input into the policy 
                                                      
79  Earle et al (2016). 
80  Mackay (1841).   
81  Tetlock and Gardner (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
26 
 
26 
  process.  It would help reach, and solicit direct feedback from, those parts of society otherwise out of central 
banks’ reach.  And it may, as a by-product, also improve public understanding of policy and the economy. 
 Embracing the views and expertise of citizens is increasingly common in other disciplines.  “Citizen Science” 
draws on the time and expertise of the general public to solve problems as diverse as spotting star and 
galaxy formations and forecasting the weather.82  As well as helping solve these problems, Citizen Science 
increases public interest and understanding of science.  What better time for central banks to begin enlisting 
the help of some Citizen Economists. 
 Conclusion 
 Central bank communications have come a long way.  When pressed by a Parliamentary Committee in 1930 
to explain the Bank’s actions, Montagu Norman replied:  “Reasons, Mr Chairman?  I don’t have reasons, I 
have instincts”.  The Bank’s Chief Economist of the day was given similarly short shrift by Norman:  “You are 
not here to tell us what to do” he scolded “but to explain why we have done it.”  How things change. 
 Central banks are public institutions, put on earth to serve the public.  As the public’s norms, preferences and 
demands shift, so too must central bank practices.  That is exactly what has happened over many years.  
The evolution-cum-revolution in central bank communications practices over recent years came in response 
to new circumstances and new responsibilities.  It has delivered significant benefits. 
But the past few years have seen further societal and technological shifts, at a time when central banks 
having been bearing a heavier policy load than ever previously.  As trust and technology has changed, so 
too must central banks.  Their latest metamorphosis needs to ensure they reach the parts of society they 
previously have not reached, using media they have not previously used, conversing as much as convincing, 
listening as often as talking. 
 It is an irony, and not one lost on me, that this speech is a classic example of one-way central bank 
communications.  Worse still, it comes in at around 11,500 words, contains 2,000 adverbs and adjectives 
and has a reading grade score of around 11.  Perhaps central bankers, like this one, have always been 
better at preaching than practicing.  If so, that needs to change.  And when better to change than now.   
  This would be a brave new world for central banks.  They do not need to be as magical as Mandelbrot’s 
shaman, as good a storyteller as Charles Dickens, as great a showman as Elvis.  But to make a success of 
this new world, central banks will need to be brave.  
                                                         
82  Roy et al (2012). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
27 
 
27 
  Annex 
 Chart 1: Number of central banks 
Number of central banks 
ECB 
Sveriges 
Riksbank 
Bank of 
England 
Banque 
de France 
Bank 
of Japan 
US Federal 
Reserve 
8
6
6
1
0
8
6
1
2
9
6
1
4
0
7
1
6
1
7
1
8
2
7
1
0
4
7
1
2
5
7
1
4
6
7
1
6
7
7
1
8
8
7
1
0
0
8
1
2
1
8
1
4
2
8
1
6
3
8
1
8
4
8
1
0
6
8
1
2
7
8
1
4
8
8
1
6
9
8
1
8
0
9
1
0
2
9
1
2
3
9
1
4
4
9
1
6
5
9
1
8
6
9
1
0
8
9
1
2
9
9
1
4
0
0
2
6
1
0
2
200
150
100
50
0
Source:  Central Banking Directory 
Chart 2: Percentage of independent central banks 
Monetary policy objectives
All aspects
Percentages of central banks 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
7
9
1
2
7
9
1
4
7
9
1
6
7
9
1
8
7
9
1
0
8
9
1
2
8
9
1
4
8
9
1
6
8
9
1
8
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
2
9
9
1
4
9
9
1
6
9
9
1
8
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
Source:  Garriga (2016) using index of Cukierman et al (1992). 
Notes:  Central banks with values greater or equal to 0.4 on the index are defined as independent.  ‘Monetary policy objectives’ 
measures whether the central bank’s objective is focused on price stability.  ‘All aspects’ also includes variables related to the 
appointment of the CEO/Governor;  policy formulation;  and limitations on lending to the government. 
Chart 3: Percentage of central banks with 
Chart 4: Governors’ and other policymakers’ 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
28 
 
28 
  responsibility for bank supervision 
speeches 
Banking supervision inside the central bank
Banking supervision outside the central bank
Percentages of 
central banks 
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Speeches per year 
2003
2007
2011
 0
2
9
1
0
3
9
1
0
4
9
1
0
5
9
1
0
6
9
1
0
7
9
1
0
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
Sources:  Bank Regulation and Supervision Surveys: World 
Source:  Bank of England. 
Bank (2003, 2007, 2011). 
Chart 5: Central bank transparency indices 
Overall transparency 
score 
8
9
9
1
9
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
t
s
e
t
a
l
Sveriges Riksbank
Swiss National Bank
Reserve Bank of Australia
Bank of Canada
Norges Bank
Reserve National Bank of
New Zealand
Bank of Japan
European Central Bank
Federal Reserve
Bank of England
15
12
9
6
3
0
Sources:  Dincer and Eichengreen (2015) for data up to 2014, Bank of England calculations based on the index of Eijffinger and 
Geraats (2006) for latest datapoint. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
  29 
 
29 
 Chart 6A: Mentions of central banks in The Times newspaper 
Bank of England 
Number of 
mentions 
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
Federal Reserve 
Number of  
mentions 
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
 1800s
1850s
1900s
1950s
2000s
Bank of Japan 
Number of 
mentions 
1900s 1920s 1940s 1960s 1980s 2000s
  600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1900s 1920s 1940s 1960s 1980s 2000s
 Source:  Factiva. 
Notes:  Charts show number of mentions per decade. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
30 
 
30 
  Chart 6B: Mentions of central banks in The Financial Times newspaper 
Bank of England 
Number of 
mentions 
10,000
Federal Reserve 
Number of 
mentions 
 10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
1900s 1920s 1940s 1960s 1980s 2000s
Bank of Japan 
Number of 
mentions 
3,000
1900s 1920s 1940s 1960s 1980s 2000s
   2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1900s 1920s 1940s 1960s 1980s 2000s
 Source:  Factiva. 
Notes:  Charts show number of mentions per decade 
Chart 7: Publications containing ‘central bank communication’ as a percentage of publications 
containing ‘central bank’ 
Google Books (LHS)
Google Scholar (RHS)
Per cent 
Per cent 
 
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
5
4
9
1
2
5
9
1
9
5
9
1
6
6
9
1
3
7
9
1
0
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
4
9
9
1
1
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
5
1
0
2
Source:  Google Books Corpus, search of http://scholar.google.com on 23/03/2017. 
Notes:  Based on the methodology of Hansen and McMahon (2016). 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
 31 
 
31 
 Chart 8A: Word cloud for “labour market” topic 
Chart 8B: Fraction of MPC minutes devoted to 
in MPC minutes  
“labour market” topic 
 Proportion of minutes 
 0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
8
9
9
1
9
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
Source:  Bank of England calculations based on methodology of 
Source:  Bank of England calculations based on methodology of 
Hansen, McMahon and Prat (2014). 
Hansen, McMahon and Prat (2014). 
Notes:  Each word cloud represents the probability distribution of 
Notes:  The procedure estimates the allocation of each month’s 
words within a given topic;  the size of the word indicates its 
MPC minutes to a topic which we label “labour market”.  The 
probability of occurring within that topic. 
chart shows a three-month moving average. 
Chart 9A: Word cloud for “recession” topic in 
Chart 9B: Fraction of speaking time devoted to 
FOMC transcripts 
“recession” topic in FOMC meeting, by speaker 
Recessions
Median
Minimum
Maximum
Proportion of 
speaker's time 
0.3
 8
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
2
9
9
1
4
9
9
1
6
9
9
1
8
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
 Source:  Hansen, McMahon and Prat (2014). 
Source:  Hansen, McMahon and Prat (2014). 
Notes:  Each word cloud represents the probability distribution of 
Notes:  The procedure estimates the allocation of each 
words within a given topic;  the size of the word indicates its 
speaker’s time in the FOMC transcripts to a topic which we label 
probability of occurring within that topic. 
“recession”.  The chart shows a three-month moving average of 
the results for the first day of each FOMC meeting.  The three 
lines show the proportion for the median FOMC member and the 
range around it.  Shaded areas are NBER-dated recessions. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
32 
 
32 
  Chart 10: Trust in institutions in the UK 
Chart 11: Trust in professions in the UK 
 NGOs
Business
Government
Media
Per cent 
Net percentage balances 
-100
-50
0
50
100
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Nurses
Doctors
Your own GP
Historians
Scientists
Sports commentators
Weather forecasters
Nutritionists
Civil servants
Economists
Your local MP
Politicians
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Q1
Source:  2017 Q1 Edelman Trust Barometer. 
Source:  YouGov, February 2017. 
Notes: Years refer to the date on which survey fieldwork 
commenced. 
   Chart 12: Trust/confidence/satisfaction with central banks 
 
 US Federal Reserve
Bank of England
ECB
Bank of Japan
Net percentage balances 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Sources:  Bank of England, Eurobarometer, Gallup, Bank of Japan 
Notes:  The US Federal Reserve line shows a Gallup poll of confidence in the economic leadership of the US, the ECB line shows a 
Eurobarometer measure of trust in the ECB, the BoJ line shows an opinion survey of confidence in the Bank of Japan and the BoE 
line shows TNS Survey results on satisfaction with the Bank’s performance. 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
33 
 
33 
  Chart 13: How Americans of different ages got their news in 2016 
 18-29 
Newspaper
5 
Radio
14 
Online
50 
TV
27 
Age Group 
30-49 
10 
27 
49 
45 
50-64 
23 
29 
29 
65+ 
28 
24 
20 
72 
85 
Per cent 
Per cent 
Per cent 
Per cent 
Source:  Pew Research Centre (Barthel et al, 2016). 
Chart 14: Flesch-Kincaid reading grade level of 
Chart 15: Flesch-Kincaid reading grade level of 
BoE publications 
US Fed publications 
Reading 
grade level 
Governor 
Speech 
16
14
12
10
8
6
MPC 
Minutes 
MPC 
Statement 
Inflation 
Report 
Broadsheet 
The 
Economist 
Tabloid 
UK Political 
Speeches 
2
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
2
9
9
1
7
9
9
1
2
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
2
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
Reading 
grade level 
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
FOMC 
Minutes 
Chair Speech 
Beige Book 
Summary 
Financial 
Times 
New York 
Times 
Washington 
Post 
US Political 
Speeches 
2
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
2
9
9
1
7
9
9
1
2
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
2
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
  Sources:  Nexis, Bank of England calculations 
Sources:  Nexis, Bank of England calculations 
Notes:  Newspaper and journal content matches a search for 
Notes:  Newspaper and journal content matches a search for 
‘monetary policy’. 
‘monetary policy’. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
34 
 
34 
  Chart 16: Flesch-Kincaid reading grade level of 
Chart 17: Percentage of adult population for 
other Central Banks 
whom Elvis lyrics and 2016 communications are 
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
Reading 
grade level 
accessible 
FOMC minutes
Beige Book summary
The Economist on
monetary policy
Mainstream press on
monetary policy
US political speeches
Elvis lyrics
Trump campaign speech
BoC MPR 
RBI Misc 
RBA MPS 
RBNZ MPS 
Broadsheet 
The 
Economist 
Tabloid 
UK Political 
Speeches 
2
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
2
9
9
1
7
9
9
1
2
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
2
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
0% 20% 40% 60% 80%
Percentage of adult population 
Sources:  Nexis, Bank of England calculations. 
Source:  Bank of England calculations. 
  Notes:  Newspaper and journal content matches a search for 
‘monetary policy’. 
Chart 18: Dispersion of Flesch-Kincaid reading grade for 2016 Bank of England publications 
(minimum, first quartile, median, third quartile and maximum) 
Reading grade level 
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
 Knowledge Bank
Bank
Speeches
Inflation Report MPC Statement MPC Minutes Working Papers
Underground
Source:  Bank of England calculations. 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
35 
 
35 
  Table 1: Timeline of selected communication and transparency innovations for major 
central banks 
 Sources:  Danker and Luecke (2005), Eijffinger and Geraats (2006), Plosser (2011), Warsh (2014), Cordemans (2015), Blinder et al 
(2017), Praet (2017), Bank of Japan. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
   36 
 
36 
 Table 2: 2013 forward guidance survey results 
Sources:  Bank/GfK NOP survey and Markit. See February 2014 Inflation Report for more detail on the survey questions. 
                      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
37 
 
37 
  References 
 Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J (2012), Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty, 
Random House Inc. 
 
Adams, P and Hunt, S (2013), ‘Encouraging consumers to claim redress: evidence from a field trial’, 
Financial Conduct Authority, Occasional Paper, No.2. 
 
Akerlof, G and Shiller, R (2009), Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Economy and Why this 
Matters for Global Capitalism, Princeton University Press. 
 
Arnone, M, Laurens, B and Segalotto, J-F (2006), ‘The Measurement of Central Bank Autonomy: Survey 
of Models, Indicators, and Empirical Evidence’, IMF Working Paper, No. 06/227. 
 
Barthel, M, Gottfried, J, Mitchell, A and Shearer, E (2016), ‘The Modern News Consumer, News attitudes 
and practices in the digital era’, Pew Research Center. 
 
Bank of England (2014), ‘Transparency and accountability at the Bank of England’, available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/warshresponse.pdf 
 
Barber, B (1983), The Logic and Limits of Trust, Rutgers University Press. 
 
Berger, H, Ehrmann, M and Fratzscher M (2011), ‘Monetary Policy in the Media’, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, Vol. 43, No. 4, p. 689-709. 
 
Bholat, D, Hansen, S, Santos, P and Schonhardt-Bailey, C (2015), ‘Text mining for central banks’, CCBS 
Handbook, No. 33. 
 
BIS (2009), ‘Roles and objectives of modern central banks, Chapter 2 in Issues in the Governance of Central 
Banks, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/othp04_2.pdf 
 
Binkley, M (1997), ‘Adult Literacy: An International Perspective’, U. S. Department of Education, Office of 
Educational Research and Improvement Working paper, No. 97-33. 
 
Blinder, A, Ehrmann, M, Fratzscher, M, de Haan, J and Jansen, D (2008), ‘Central Bank Communication 
and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence,’ Journal of Economic Literature, American 
Economic Association, Vol. 46(4), p. 910-945. 
 
Blinder, A, Ehrmann, M, de Haan, J and Jansen, D (2017), ‘Necessity as the mother of invention: 
Monetary policy after the crisis’, Economic Policy, forthcoming. 
 
Bodea, C and Hicks, R (2015), ‘Price Stability and Central Bank Independence: Discipline, Credibility, and 
Democratic Institutions’, International Organization, Vol. 59, No. 1, p. 35-61. 
 
Botsman, R (2016), ‘We’ve stopped trusting institutions and started trusting strangers’, available at ted.com 
 
Briault, C, Haldane, A and King, M (1997), ‘Independence and Accountability’, Towards More Effective 
Monetary Policy, Palgrave Macmillan UK, p. 299-340. 
 
Brunner, K (1981), ‘The Art of Central Banking’, Centre for Research in Government Policy and Business 
Working Paper, No. 81-6. 
 
Capie, F, Goodhard, C, Fischer, S and Schnadt, N (1994), The Future of Central Banking – The 
Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Capie, F (2010), The Bank of England 1950s to 1979, Cambridge University Press. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
38 
 
38 
  Carney (2016), ‘The Spectre of Monetarism’, speech available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech946.pdf 
 
Carvalho, C and Nechio, F (2014), ‘Do people understand monetary policy?’, Journal of Monetary 
Economics, Vol. 66(C), p. 108-123. 
 
Claessens, S, Laeven, L and Cerutti, E (2016), ‘The use and effectiveness of macroprudential policies, 
Journey of Financial Stability, forthcoming. 
 
Communic@tions Management Inc. (2013), ‘Can daily newspaper “brands” survive the decline (and likely 
disappearance) of the printed product?’, Discussion Paper. 
 
Cordemans, N (2015), ‘Monetary policy communication in the wake of the great recession’, National Bank of 
Belgium Economic Review, December 83-101. 
 
Crowe, C and Meade, E (2007), ‘The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World’, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 4, p. 69-90. 
 
Crowe, C (2010), ‘Testing the transparency benefits of inflation targeting: Evidence from private sector 
forecasts’, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 57, No. 2, p. 226-232. 
 
Cukierman, A, Webb, S and Neyapti, B (1992), ‘Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its 
Effect on Policy Outcomes’, The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 6, No. 3, p. 353-398. 
 
Danker, D and Luecke, M (2005), ‘Background on FOMC Meeting Minutes’, Federal Reserve Bulletin, 
Spring, p. 175-179. 
 
den Haan, W, Ellison, M, Ilzetzki, E, McMahon, M and Reis, R (2017), ‘The future of central bank 
independence: Results of the CFM–CEPR Survey’, article on VoxEU. 
 
Dincer, N and Eichengreen, B (2014), ‘Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New 
Measures’, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 10, No. 1, p. 189-259. 
 
Dincer, N and Eichengreen, B (2015), ‘Central Bank Transparency Data for 1998-2014’, available at 
http://eml.berkeley.edu/~eichengr/data.shtml 
 
Dräger, L, Lamla, M and Pfajfar, D (2016), ‘Are survey expectations theory-consistent?  The role of central 
bank communication and news’, European Economic Review, Vol. 85(C), p. 84-111. 
 
DuBay, W (2004), The Principles of Readability, Costa Mesa, CA: Impact Information. 
 
Earle, J, Moran, C and Ward-Perkins, Z (2016), The Econocracy: The perils of leaving economics to the 
experts, Manchester University Press. 
 
Ehrmann, M and Fratzscher, M (2007), ‘Communication by Central Bank Committee Members: Different 
Strategies, Same Effectiveness?’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, No. 2/3, p.509-541. 
 
Eijffinger, S and Geraats, P (2006), ‘How transparent are central banks?’, European Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 22, No. 1, p. 1-21. 
 
El-Erian, M (2016), The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability and Avoiding the Next Collapse, 
Random House, USA. 
 
Eusepi, S and Preston, B (2010), ‘Central Bank Communication and Expectations Stabilization’, American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, No. 3, p. 235-271. 
 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Decision Maker Survey (2017), available at 
www.frbatlanta.org/research/surveys/decision-maker/ 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
39 
 
39 
  Garriga, A (2016), ‘Central Bank Independence in the World: A New Data Set’, International Interactions, 
Vol. 42, No. 5, p. 849-868. 
 
Geraats, P (2002), ‘Central Bank Transparency’, Economic Journal, Vol. 112, p. 532–565. 
 
Goodfriend M (1986), ‘Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 
Vol. 17, p. 63-97. 
 
Govier, T (1997), Social Trust and Human Communities, Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 
 
Graham, C (2017), Happiness for All? Unequal Hopes and Lives in Pursuit of the American Dream, 
Princeton University Press. 
 
Grilli, V, Masciandaro, D and Tabellini, G (1991), ‘Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Financial 
Policies in the Industrial Countries’, Economic Policy, Vol. 6, No. 13, p. 341-392. 
 
Gürkaynak, R, Sack, B and Swanson, E (2005), ‘Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words?  The Response 
of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements’, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 1, 
No.1, p. 55-93. 
 
Gürkaynak, R, Levin, A and Swanson, E (2010), ‘Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation 
Expectations?  Evidence from the U.S., UK and Sweden’, Journal of the European Economic Association, 
Vol. 8, No. 6, p. 1208-1242. 
 
Haldane, A (2016), ‘The Great Divide’, speech at New City Agenda Annual Dinner, available at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech908.pdf  
 
Haldane, A and Radia, A (2016), ‘The need for discretion and rules: a commentary on John Taylor’s 
lecture’, Policy Stability and Economic Growth: Lessons from the Great Recession, Readings in Political 
Economy, Vol. 5. 
 
Halpern, D (2015), Inside the Nudge Unit: How small changes can make a big difference, WH Allen. 
 
Halpern, D (2016), ‘It’s time to bring more realistic models of human behaviour into economic policy and 
regulation’, Bank Underground, available at https://bankunderground.co.uk/2016/08/23/its-time-to-bring-
more-realistic-models-of-human-behaviour-into-economic-policy-and-regulation/  
 
Hansen, S and McMahon, M (2016), ‘The nature and effectiveness of central-bank communication’, article 
on VoxEU.  
 
Hansen S, McMahon, M and Prat, A (2014), ‘Transparency and deliberation within the FOMC: a 
computational linguistics approach’, CEPR, Discussion Paper 9994. 
 
Hayo, B, Kutan, A and Neuenkirch, M (2010), ‘The impact of U.S. central bank communication on 
European and pacific equity markets, Economic Letters, Vol. 108, No. 2, p. 172-174 
 
Hendry, S and Madeley, A (2010), ‘Text Mining and the Information Content of Bank of Canada 
Communications’, Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper, No. 2010-31. 
 
Hubert, P (2015), ‘Do Central Bank Forecasts Influence Private Agents?  Forecasting Performance versus 
Signals’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 47, No. 4, p. 771–789. 
 
Joyce, M, Lildholdt, P and Sorensen, S (2010), ‘Extracting inflation expectations and inflation risk premia 
from the term structure: A joint model of UK nominal and real yield curves’, Journal of Banking & Finance, 
Vol. 34, No. 2, p. 281-294. 
 
Jung K, Shavitt S, Viswanathan, M and Hilbe, J (2014), ‘Female hurricanes are deadlier than male 
hurricanes’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 111.24, p. 8782-8787. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
40 
 
40 
  Kahneman, D (2011), Thinking Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus & Giroux. 
 
Kincaid, J, Fishburne, R, Rogers, R and Chissom, B (1975), ‘Derivation of New Readability Formulas 
(Automated Readability Index, Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease Formula for Navy Enlisted Personnel’, 
Research Branch Report, No. 8-75. 
 
King, M (2000), ‘Monetary Policy: Theory in Practice’, speech. 
 
Kirsch I, Jungeblut, A, Jenkins, L and Kolstad, A (1993), ‘Adult Literacy in America: A First Look At The 
Findings of the National Adult Literacy Survey’, U.S. Department of Education, NCES 1993–275. 
 
Kool, C, Middeldorp, M and Rosenkranz, S (2011), ‘Central Bank Transparency and the Crowding Out of 
Private Information in Financial Markets’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 43, No. 4, p. 765-774. 
 
Lamla, M and Lein, S (2014), ‘The role of media for consumers’ inflation expectation formation’, Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 106(C), p. 62-77. 
 
Liisberg, S, Pedersen, E and Dalsgård, A (eds.) (2015), Anthropology & Philosophy, Dialogues on Trust  
and Hope, Berghahn Books. 
 
Mackay, C (1841), Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions, London: Richard Bentley. 
 
Mandelbrot, B and Hudson, R (2004), The (Mis)Behavior of Markets: A Fractal View of Financial 
Turbulence, Basic Books. 
 
Meltzer A (2009), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2, University of Chicago Press. 
 
McKeown, J and Paterson, L (2014), ‘Enhancing the transparency of the Bank of England’s Inflation 
Report’, article on VoxEU. 
 
Monetary Policy Committee (2013), ‘Monetary policy trade-offs and forward guidance’, available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2013/ir13augforwardguidance.pdf 
 
Morris, H and Shin, S (2002), ‘Social value of public information’, American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 
5, p. 1521-1534. 
 
Nyman, R, Gregory, D, Kapadia, S, Ormerod, P, Tuckett, D and Smith, R (2016), ‘News and narratives in 
financial systems: exploiting big data for systemic risk assessment’, mimeo. 
 
O'Neill, O (2002), ‘A Question of Trust’, BBC Reith Lectures. 
 
O’Neill, O (2014), ‘Trust, Trustworthiness, and Accountability’, in Morris, N and Vines, D (ed.): Capital 
Failure: Rebuilding Trust in Financial Services. 
 
Praet, P (2017), ‘Have unconventional policies overstretched central bank independence?  Challenges for 
accountability and transparency in the wake of the crisis’, speech. 
 
Plosser, C (2011), ‘Toward Clarity in Monetary Policy’, available at 
www.philadelphiafed.org/publications/annual-report/2011/toward-clarity-in-monetary-policy 
 
Ranaldo, A and Rossi, E (2010), ‘The reaction of asset markets to Swiss National Bank communication, 
Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 29, No. 3, p. 489-503. 
 
Reis, R (2013), ‘Central Bank Design’, Journal of Economic Perspectives,  Vol. 27, No. 4, p. 17-44. 
 
Roy, H, Pocock, M, Preston, C, Roy, D, Savage, J, Tweddle, J, Robinson, L (2012), ‘Understanding 
Citizen Science & Environmental Monitoring.  Final Report on behalf of UK Environmental Observation 
Framework’.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
41 
 
41 
  Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (2016), Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2016. 
 
Sapienza, P and Zingales, L (2013), ‘Economic Experts versus Average Americans’, American Economic 
Review, Vol. 103, No. 3, p. 636-642. 
 
Sentance (2015), ‘We expect too much of the new masters of the universe’, article in the Financial Times. 
 
Shafik, M (2017), ‘In experts we trust?’, speech available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2017/speech964.pdf 
 
Shannon, C (1948), ‘A Mathematical Theory of Communication’, Bell System Technical Journal, 27 (3) 
 
Shiller, R (1997), ‘Why Do People Dislike Inflation?’, Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, NBER, p. 
13-70. 
 
Shiller, R (2017), ‘Narrative Economics’, NBER Working Paper, No. 23075. 
 
Smart, L (2016), ‘Full disclosure:  a round-up of FCA experimental research into giving information’, 
Financial Conduct Authority, Occasional Paper 23. 
 
Stockton, D (2012), ‘Review of the Monetary Policy Committee’s Forecasting Capability’, available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr3stockton.pdf 
 
Strunk, W and White, E (1979), The Elements of Style, Idg Books (3rd edition). 
 
Sturm, J and de Haan, J (2009), ‘Does Central Bank Communication really Lead to better Forecasts of 
Policy Decisions? New Evidence Based on a Taylor Rule Model for the ECB’, CESifo Working Paper Series, 
No. 2760. 
 
Taylor, J (2011), ‘Legislating a Rule for Monetary Policy’, Cato Journal, vol. 31(3), p. 407-415. 
 
Taylor, J (2012), ‘Monetary Policy Rules Work and Discretion Doesn’t: A Tale of Two Eras’, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, 44: 1017–1032. 
 
Tetlock, P and Gardner, D (2016), Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction, Broadway Books. 
 
Thaler, R and Sunstein, C (2008), Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness, Yale 
University Press. 
 
Thompson (2016), Enough Said: What’s gone wrong with the language of politics?, Bodley Head. 
 
US Congress (2015), ‘Fed Oversight Reform and Modernization Act of 2015’, H.R. 3189, 114 Cong. (2015).   
 
van der Cruijsen, C, Jansen, D-J and de Haan, J (2015) ‘How much does the public know about the ECB’s 
monetary policy?  Evidence from a survey of Dutch households’, International Journal of Central Banking, 
Vol. 11, No. 5, p. 169-218. 
 
Warsh, K (2014), ‘Transparency and the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee’, available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/warsh.pdf 
 
Williams, J (2014), ‘Policy rules in practice’, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 49(C), p. 151-
153. 
 
Williams, J (2015), ‘Monetary policy and the independence dilemma’, FRBSF Economic Letter, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
 
Williams (2016a), ‘The Heath of Nations’, presentation to the National Interagency Community 
Reinvestment Conference 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
42 
 
42 
  Williams, J (2016b), ‘Rules of engagement’, FRBSF Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco. 
 
World Bank (2003, 2007, 2011), Bank Regulation and Supervision Survey. 
 
Yellen, J (2017), ‘The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy’, speech available at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170119a.htm 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
43 
 
43 
 