Karnit Flug: Infrastructure development plan for Israel
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Cabinet meeting on the multi-
year infrastructure development plan, Tel Aviv, 3 September 2017.
         
I  attribute  tremendous  importance  to  the  establishment  of  an  interministerial  team  to
advance, coordinate and monitor infrastructure investment projects,   set standards and criteria
for  using  PPP  in  infrastructure  projects,  and  evaluate  the  adequateness  of  projects  to  be
executed by PPP .
The  level  of  infrastructure  in  Israel  is  insufficient,  particularly  in  the  area  of  public
        
transportation, and mainly in the major cities, but also in the electricity delivery system and in
communication  infrastructure.   The  volume  of  annual  investment  is  low  by  international
comparison, and we are therefore not closing the gap in the level of infrastructure compared to
other  advanced  economies,  which  weighs  down  productivity  and  the  growth  potential  of  the
economy.
         We  need  to  define  needs  with  a  forward-looking  view,  in  close  cooperation  with  the
ministries, and to plan years, or, in fact, decades, in advance.   One of the main barriers is the
long project planning duration.
        In view of the many needs, it is important to set priorities and to plan and execute according
to them.
         
It is important that an informed estimation of the costs be made, and that the budgetary
sources be defined, in order to avoid stopping projects and sharp cutbacks in projects as has
happened in the past at times of budgetary stress.
         The use of PPP enables the costs of the project to be spread out over time.  It is important
to monitor the budgetary ramifications of all projects over time.
          PPP can be an important tool, if the projects executed through this method are chosen
wisely.   The selection must be made according to criteria that rely on Israeli and international
experience, as we showed in the Bank of Israel Annual Report for 2016.  The large advantage of
the PPP method is that the developer does not only build the project, but also plans, maintains
and operates the asset over time, so that the project can benefit from the operator’s expertise
and experience, and the developer has an incentive to make the investment in a way that will
minimize the operating and maintenance costs over time.   The main disadvantage is that the
private developer’s capital cost is higher than that of the government.
         It is important that a government unit be established that will specialize in the management
and monitoring of PPP tenders and contracts.  It will require specific know-how and expertise in
tenders and contracts.
         Even in PPP projects, it is best if the government is the one that acts to complete the
statutory processes such as obtaining building permits, municipal permits, environmental quality,
etc.  The government has an advantage here.​
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
