Is  more  always  better?  Transparency,
Erkki  Liikanen: 
accountability, and the clarity of message
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Panel
Discussion "Is More Always Better? Transparency, Accountability, and the Clarity of Message",
ECB Central Bank Communications Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2017.
Why do we need transparency? Is more always better?
 There  are  two  basic  reasons  for  transparency  in  monetary  policy:  The  first  is  public
accountability of central banks. The second reason is better policy effectiveness.
Anders Chydenius, the 18  century Finnish clergyman and economist drafted the world’s first
freedom of information act (enacted in the Kingdom of Sweden in 1766). This was 98 years after
the Riksbank was founded. Chydenius summarized the connection between transparency and
political liberty in the following way:
th
"The liberty of a nation is preserved not only by the laws, but by public information and knowledge
1
as to how they are being administered."
Chydenius’ statement presents the accountability argument for transparency in its simplest and
the most forceful way. The rule of law alone is not sufficient for freedom, but the transparency of
the use of executive power is also necessary.
Until a generation ago, central banks were rather secretive organizations, shrouded in a kind of
monetary  mystique.  This  started  to  change  in  the  1990’s,  when  the  independence  of  central
banks rose to the top of the reform agenda, in order to improve the credibility of monetary policy. 
 As central banks became more independent, it was natural that accountability and transparency
had to develop as well. Citizens and their political representatives needed to be able to monitor
how central banks used their independence.
Considering the ECB, an important forum for its accountability are the regular hearings of the
President of the ECB at the European Parliament. These hearings are both a forum of scrutiny
and a venue for communication of policy goals and strategies. 
The  accountability  framework  was  strengthened  further  after  the  ECB  was  entrusted  with  the
powers of banking supervision in the euro area. Since then, also the Chair of the Supervisory
Board appears regularly in the European Parliament.
Beyond  the  formal  accountability  requirements,  the  ECB  was  the  first  major  central  bank  to
organize  regular  press  conferences  after  each  monetary  policy  meeting  of  the  Governing
Council. They are not just one-directional communication but enable useful interaction between
the press and the President and the Vice-President of the ECB.
A  more  recent,  but  a  very  important  step  was  when  the  accounts  of  the  Governing  Council’s
monetary policy meetings were published starting from the January 2015 meeting. They enable
the  analysts  to  get  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  discussion  that  has  taken  place  among
Governing Council members, and of the main arguments presented. The accounts also include
the presentations by the Executive Board members on market developments and the economic
situation. So, the monetary policy deliberations are public three weeks later.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Is there an area, where more is not always better? This is one question for the panel.
Bengt Holmström, last year’s Nobel Laureate in economics, has pointed out that in some cases
transparency  can  be  counterproductive.  His  point  is  that,  in  asset  markets,  too  much
transparency can lead to a loss of liquidity compared to situation where all market participants
2
would view some asset class as homogeneous because of their opacity.
Are  there  limits  to  transparency  in  central  banking?  Are  there  trade-offs  between  the
transparency and quality of decision-making?  Is there an area where a space should be left for
confidential reflection?
Keynes is quoted as having said: “When my information changes, I alter my conclusions. What
3
do you do, sir?”  
How could we take into account this wise advice in monetary policy making? 
When  policy-makers  review  the  most  recent  information  and  fact-based  analysis  of  the
economy, an opportunity should be given to make candid questions on the basis of the available
information. It is justified to keep this exchange of views confidential when it is separated from the
discussion of the future monetary policy stance.
In this way, members have the space to compare the analysis they were prepared beforehand to
the analysis which is given to all members at the same time at the central bank.  In my view, this
is not in contradiction with the transparency and accountability of the decision-making itself.
In this session, we will discuss the different varieties of transparency and their relation to the
effectiveness of monetary policy, and the accountability of the central banks. 
Is  our  transparency  already  optimal  from  the  accountability  point  of  view?  There  will  certainly
always be room for improvement. One area where further development may be warranted is the
transparency of central banks regarding their management of the financial risks in their balance
sheets.
Of  course,  central  banks  must  give  priority  at  all  times  to  their  monetary  policy  and  financial
stability  responsibilities  over  their  financial  result.  At  the  same  time,  our  stakeholders  in
parliaments, governments, and the general public deserve to know how the assets accumulated
in the central banks are managed, and how the central banks assess the financial risks involved.
This knowledge strengthens the support of the policies of central banks.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  have  made  a  lot  of
progress  in  the  transparency  of  the  balance  sheets.  In  particular,  the  content  of  the  on-going
asset  purchase  programme  is  made  public,  on  a  country-by-country  and  security-by-security
basis. At the same time, we must always put financial risks in central banking in the broader
policy context and take into account the objectives and results of such policy.
In  general,  disclosure  is  necessary,  but  not  enough.  Central  banks  need  to  ensure  that  the
political decision-makers and the general public understand what the central banks are doing and
why. Deep and coherent participation by the central banks in the public economic debate at the
national and euro area level is needed. 
 Transparency is useful also for other reasons besides retroactive accountability. It is important
for policy effectiveness.
Monetary policy is largely about managing expectations. In order for monetary policy to do its job
smoothly,  it  is  important  that  the  market  participants  understand  the  intentions  of  the  central
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank.  This,  in  fact,  makes  communications  the  first,  although  not  the  ultimate  instrument  of
monetary policy.
In  monetary  policy,  communication  is  an  active  form  of  transparency:  transparency  about  the
current interpretation of the economic situation, and about the goals and intentions of the central
b a n k .  Charles  Evans  spoke  about  the  distinction  between  “Delphic”  (or  predictive)
communication  and  “Odyssean”  (committing)  communication,  where  promises  are  involved.
These  terms  were  recently  discussed  by Ben  Bernanke  in  his  speech  and  paper  about
4
monetary policy in a new era.
At present, the role of communications is especially large, because of the increased reliance of
central banks on forward guidance.  When forward guidance is credible, it adds an important
instrument  to  the  central  bank’s  toolbox.  It  has  proven  useful,  especially  when  the  room  of
movement for the principal instrument of monetary policy – the interest rate – is restricted by the
Zero Lower Bound.
Using the Chicago terminology, the ECB took an Odyssean step in 2013 when it started to use
forward  guidance  regarding  its  future  interest  rate  policy.  Later,  the  degree  of  precision  and
commitment in the ECB’s forward guidance went further when the large-scale asset purchase
programme was launched in 2015.
Forward guidance in an environment of very low interest rates has been a success, but it was
not the first instance of using transparency as a commitment device.
The most important thing to be transparent about are the policy objectives. The ECB was an
early advocate of goal transparency. The commitment to the famous definition of price stability in
1999 and its clarification in 2003, “below, but close to 2 per cent in the medium term” are the
most important cases in point. The latter step was taken to underline the symmetry of our price
stability objective, meaning that downward deviations from the definition are just as undesirable
as upward deviations.
I now invite the distinguished members of our panel to address the question of transparency in
monetary policy each from their own point of view.
1
2
3
4
Chydenius, A.: Memorial on the freedom of printing. In Jonasson, M. and Hyttinen, P. (eds.): Anticipating the
Wealth of nations. The selected works of Anders Chydenius (1729 – 1803). Routledge 2012.
e.g. Holmstrom, B.: Discussion of The Panic of 2007 by Gary Gorton. In: Mantaining Stability in a Changing
Financial System, Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference. Federal Reserve of Kansas City 2008.
This  widely  used  quote  is  according  to  ”The  Keynes  Centenary”  by  Paul  Samuelson,  published  in  The
Economist, Vol. 287 (1983), p. 19. There has been some debate about whether Keynes actually ever said this.
Bernanke,  B.:  Monetary  Policy  in  a  New  Era.  Conference  on  Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Peterson
Institute, Washington DC, October 12–13, 2017. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
