Yves Mersch: Securitisation revisited
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2017.
 Today I would like to come back on an issue that has found some of our attention in the recent
past: securitisation.
What has happened: Is it part of CMU agenda? It is not helping banks to sanitize their balance
sheets more rapidly when there is such a great need?
Simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisations
Let  me  start  with  some  good  news.  The  European  framework  for  simple,  transparent  and
standardised or ‘STS’ securitisations was formally adopted by the European Parliament on 26
October.  The  adoption  by  the  Council  is  expected  soon  and  will  lead  to  the  conclusion  of  a
process that has taken many years of hard work. The STS Regulation is one of the cornerstones
of the Capital Markets Union (CMU) project to build a single market for capital in the EU.
Some basic beliefs: At the outset I still consider the Great Financial Crisis heaving at its origin
excess  built-up  of  leverage  especially  short  term  debt.  We  should  however  not  condemn
wholesale all debt carrying instruments. While we must tackle the stock of legacy debt, the flow
of  new  credit  to  the  economy  should  not  be  hampered  as  it  fuels  the  economic  recovery.
Therefore, a differentiated assessment of financial instruments is required.
Let me elaborate on the reasons why the ECB is interested in this particular market segment:
First,  the  ABS  market  acts  as  one  of  the  transmission  channels  of  our  monetary  policy,
facilitating  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  euro  area  real  economy  and,  thereby,  helping  us  to
achieve our monetary policy objective.
Second, ABS are an important component of the collateral framework of the Eurosystem.
Third, securitisation, when used well, can transfer risk away from the banking sector, which may
support monetary policy as it can help banks free up bank capital, allowing them to extend new
credit to the real economy.
The reputation of securitisation or asset-backed securities (ABS) has been severely tarnished by
the  financial  crisis,  reflecting  both  the  prominent  role  of  ABS  involving  complex,  opaque
structures with poorly underwritten loans and the misuse of derivatives.
Moreover, the market was over-reliant on a highly leveraged investor base depending on short-
term wholesale funding. Although these practices were more prevalent in the US, the European
securitisation market was also impaired. By consequence, all ABS were demonized.
The  ECB  together  with  the  Bank  of  England  were  early  supporters  of  a  better  functioning
securitisation market for transactions that comply with the concept of simple, transparent and
standardised ABS and duly take into account the lessons learnt of the crisis.
An early intuition was that lack of transparency acted as an obstacle to the revitalisation of the
securitisation  market.  The  ECB  has  made  a  significant  effort  to  ensure  a  high  degree  of
transparency in securitisation by promoting the loan-level data initiative.
STS Regulation also requires a system of registration and supervision for ABS data repositories
established in the EU. ‘Securitisation repositories’, as they are called, will be subject to the same
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ongoing  governance,  technical  and  operational  requirements  as  trade  repositories  under  the
EMIR  framework.  They  will  be  expected  to  store  not  just  loan-level  data,  but  also  all  other
information which the Regulation requires, such as transaction documentation. The repositories
will  be  registered,  authorised  and  supervised  by  ESMA.  The  ECB  will  wholeheartedly  support
ESMA in completing its tasks. So far so good. What about results?
It is duly noted, however, that the revival of the European securitisation market is still anaemic.
Market-placed  issuance  is  at  historic  lows.  The  investor  base  has  not  recovered.  The  EU
securitisation markets are impacted by bank deleveraging, unfavourable regulatory treatment and
lower relative costs of funding of alternative instruments. Admittedly, the sizeable Eurosystem
covered bond purchase programme and long term loan operations have also represented viable
funding alternatives for banks.
In this respect, some more patience is warranted. The STS regulation will only come into force in
2019  as  various  important  technical  standards  still  need  to  be  finalised  to  provide  further
regulatory certainty which is important for securitisation market development. EBA is for example
mandated to develop guidelines to ensure a common and consistent understanding of the STS
criteria throughout the Union. As the ECB has argued in its opinion, this is important to ensure
legal certainty and efficiency for those interpreting and applying the STS criteria.
While these initiatives are helpful in principle, they do not exist in legislative isolation. We have to
be mindful of potential negative spill-over effects by other pieces of legislation. Let me highlight
some areas of concern:
First,  on  a  more  technical  note,  under  the  current  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation
(EMIR)  securitisation  special  purpose  entities  (SSPEs)  are  classified  as  non-financial
counterparties and accordingly, subject to certain conditions, are not required to comply with the
clearing and margining obligation. However, according to the May proposal of the Commission to
amend  the  EMIR  framework,  securitisation  entities  are  reclassified  as  financial  counterparties
instead  of  non-financial  counterparties.  Therefore,  these  entities  would  potentially  become
subject  to  mandatory  clearing  and  margining.  This  would  mean  that  they  have  to  provide
collateral, with regards to their derivatives. This is surprising because securitisation derivatives
already  contain  features  to  mitigate  counterparty  credit  risk.  Moreover,  the  nature  of  the
securitisation  derivatives  makes  it  difficult  to  comply  with  the  margining  or  clearing  obligation.
How  can  an  SPV  put  down  margining  as  it  only  has  by  definition  control  over  its  underlying
portfolio? How can it post collateral? The STS Regulation exempts STS SSPEs from the clearing
obligation, provided that counterparty credit risk is adequately mitigated. Further clarity on this is
needed  as  many  European  securitisation  transactions  use  derivatives  for  genuine  hedging
purposes.
Second, the revision of capital charges for STS securitisations in Solvency II is essential for the
recovery of the investor base. An updated calibration should consider the difference in the risk
profile  and  tolerance  between  insurance  companies  and  banks  and  the  capacity  of  the  STS
criteria  to  capture  a  lower  risk  profile  in  securitisations.  The  calibration  should  not  incentivise
insurance  companies  to  seek  investments  in  the  underlying  assets  in  question  in  an  un-
securitised, rather than a more liquid securitised, format.
Third,  the  potential  benefits  of  securitisation  are  twofold:  it  can  be  used  as  a  way  to  fund  an
asset and as a means of transferring risk. It can free up bank capital, allowing banks to extend
new credit to the real economy. Likewise, the pricing of risks is more effective when securities
are assessed by the market rather than being dormant on banks’ balance sheets.
All this may support the transmission of monetary policy, where the bank lending channel may
otherwise be impaired.
Finally, it may lower borrowing firms’ exposure to re-financing or liquidity risk, thereby increasing
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks’ resilience and helping to contain systemic risk.
For  this  potential  benefit  of  securitisation  to  come  to  fruition  it  is  of  course  key  that  the  risk
transfers are genuine; in other words, it is necessary that the risk is really transferred to third
parties. The experience of the crisis showed that this condition was not always met in the past. In
this respect, I would like to highlight the important work done by EBA in the assessment of the
current  supervisory  practices  and  the  proposals  made  to  further  enhance  the  criteria  of
significant risk transfer for securitisation in its discussion paper.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The ECB places great importance on the health of the European securitisation market. The ABS
loan-level initiative has made an important contribution in ensuring a high degree of transparency
to enable investors to assess the embedded risks of securitisations.
Obviously,  ABS  had  to  become  safer  after  the  experience  of  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  in
particular  with  securitized  US-subprime  mortgages.  Regulators  and  legislators  have  acted
accordingly, and the work has not yet been completed. But we should not throw the baby out with
the bath water. Instead, the potential of healthy securitizations should be exploited.
In line with the Commission goal to revive the securitisation market in Europe, in order to broaden
investment  opportunities  for  investors  and  boost  lending  to  households  and  businesses  a
number  of  barriers  need  yet  to  be  overcome.  The  STS  Regulation  could  make  an  important
contribution.  Much  work  has  already  been  conducted,  nevertheless  many  important  technical
standards still need to be finalised and some other uncertainties still remain. In this context, we
have to be mindful amid the interdependencies of different pieces of legislation.
Calibration  of  Solvency  II  is  essential  for  insurance  companies  as  investors  in  securitisation.
Further clarity of securitisation special purpose entities under the EMIR framework is needed.
Finalisation  of  Basel  III  may  impact  securitisation  as  a  means  of  transferring  risk.  These  are
challenges that lie ahead of us.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
