Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 26 October 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  today  we  conducted  a  thorough
assessment of the outlook for inflation, the risks surrounding this outlook and our monetary policy
stance. As  a  result,  the  Governing  Council  took  the  following  decisions  in  pursuit  of  its  price
stability objective.
First,  the key  ECB  interest  rates were  kept  unchanged  and  we  continue  to  expect  them  to
remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net
asset purchases.
Second,  as  regards non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  will  continue  to  make
purchases  under  the  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  at  the  current  monthly  pace  of  €60
billion until the end of December 2017. From January 2018 our net asset purchases are intended
to  continue  at  a  monthly  pace  of  €30  billion  until  the  end  of  September  2018,  or  beyond,  if
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. If the outlook becomes less favourable, or if financial
conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation, we stand ready to increase the APP in terms of size and/or duration.
Third, the Eurosystem will reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased
under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of its net asset purchases, and in any
case for as long as necessary. This will contribute both to favourable liquidity conditions and to
an appropriate monetary policy stance.
And fourth, we also decided to continue to conduct the main refinancing operations and three-
month longer-term refinancing operations as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for
as long as necessary, and at least until the end of the last reserve maintenance period of 2019.
Today’s  monetary  policy  decisions  were  taken  to  preserve  the  very  favourable  financing
conditions that are still needed for a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2%. The recalibration of our asset purchases reflects growing confidence in
the  gradual  convergence  of  inflation  rates  towards  our  inflation  aim,  on  account  of  the
increasingly robust and broad-based economic expansion, an uptick in measures of underlying
inflation  and  the  continued  effective  pass-through  of  our  policy  measures  to  the  financing
conditions  of  the  real  economy. At  the  same  time,  domestic  price  pressures  are  still  muted
overall  and  the  economic  outlook  and  the  path  of  inflation  remain  conditional  on  continued
support  from  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains
necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and support headline inflation
developments  over  the  medium  term.  This  continued  monetary  support  is  provided  by  the
additional net asset purchases, by the sizeable stock of acquired assets and the forthcoming
reinvestments, and by our forward guidance on interest rates.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. The
economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  be  solid  and  broad-based.  Real  GDP
increased  by  0.7%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  second  quarter  of  2017,  after  0.6%  in  the  first
quarter. The latest data and survey results point to unabated growth momentum in the second
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
half of this year. Our monetary policy measures have facilitated the deleveraging process and
continue  to  support  domestic  demand.  Private  consumption  is  underpinned  by  rising
employment,  which  is  also  benefiting  from  past  labour  market  reforms,  and  by  increasing
household wealth. The upswing in business investment continues to benefit from very favourable
financing  conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability.  Construction  investment  has
also strengthened. In addition, the broad-based global recovery is supporting euro area exports.
Risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain broadly balanced. On the one hand, the
strong cyclical momentum, as evidenced in recent developments in sentiment indicators, could
lead to further positive growth surprises. On the other hand, downside risks continue to relate
primarily to global factors and developments in foreign exchange markets.
Euro area annual HICP inflation remained unchanged at 1.5% in September. Looking ahead, on
the basis of current futures prices for oil, annual rates of headline inflation are likely to temporarily
decline towards the turn of the year, mainly reflecting base effects in energy prices. At the same
time, measures of underlying inflation have ticked up moderately since early 2017, but have yet to
show  more  convincing  signs  of  a  sustained  upward  trend.  Wage  growth  has  increased
somewhat, but domestic cost pressures still remain subdued overall. Underlying inflation in the
euro  area  is  expected  to  continue  to  rise  gradually  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our
monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing  economic  expansion,  the  corresponding  gradual
absorption of economic slack and rising wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an  annual  rate  of  growth  of  5.1%  in  September  2017,  after  5.0%  in  August.  As  in  previous
months,  annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the
narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 9.7% in September 2017, up from
9.5% in August.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 2.5% in
September  2017,  after  2.4%  in August,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households
remained  stable  at  2.7%.  The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  third  quarter  of  2017
indicates  that  net  loan  demand  has  continued  to  increase  for  all  loan  categories.  Credit
standards have further eased for loans to households, while they remained broadly unchanged
for loans to enterprises. Banks’ overall terms and conditions on new loans have continued to
ease for all categories of loans.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  ‒
notably for small and medium-sized enterprises ‒ and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed the need to recalibrate the policy instruments to ensure
the degree of monetary accommodation necessary to secure a sustained return of inflation rates
towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%.
the 
to  strengthening 
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  decisively 
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing
vulnerabilities. The implementation of structural reforms in all euro area countries needs to be
substantially stepped up to increase resilience, reduce structural unemployment and boost euro
area productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, all countries would benefit from
intensifying efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances. A
full,  transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the
macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to
increase the resilience of the euro area economy. Strengthening Economic and Monetary Union
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
remains  a  priority.  The  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  ongoing  discussions  on  further
enhancing the institutional architecture of our Economic and Monetary Union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
