Joachim Wuermeling: Prospects for European monetary union
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  as  part  of  the  "Finanzwelt  Europa";  series  of  talks  hosted  by  the  Landesbank
Hessen-Thüringen  and  the  Representation  of  the  State  of  Hessen  to  the  EU,  Brussels,  11
October 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
This is the second time I have had the pleasure of visiting the Representation of the State of
Hessen in Brussels this year. In June, I spoke about current developments in the euro area at a
lunchtime event dedicated to financial market policy. Since then, a number of occurrences have
affected  all  of  us  as  European  citizens,  in  our  economic  and  political  roles,  and  also  at  the
Bundesbank.
The fact that the Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen and the Representation of the State of Hessen
to the EU are coming together to discuss Europe as a financial community in its “Finanzwelt
Europa”  series  of  lectures  highlights  the  important  role  that  Hesse  plays  in  Europe’s  financial
framework. I would therefore like to thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity to talk to
you.
The  Bundesbank  operates  in  a  policy  field  that  is  already  communitised  in  the  euro  area:
monetary  policy.  Our  Bundesbank  logo  consists  of  yellow  stars  on  a  blue  background,  which
shows how strongly the Bundesbank considers itself part of the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem
can only pursue sound monetary policy in a stable currency union. This is why the Bundesbank
is taking part in the current reform debate.
The title of my speech contains a key term: “prospects". I believe it is almost more important now
than ever to talk about the prospects of the EU and the Economic and Monetary Union. The word
“prospects”  has  several  layers  of  meaning.  First,  it  can  imply  guidance  –  a  compass  or  a
roadmap.  What  should  the  EU  look  like  in  one,  five  or  ten  years’  time?  Second,  it  generates
clarity, hope – and ideally even enthusiasm. If the debate surrounding European policy is outlook-
based instead of being limited to questions that are certainly important, but rather technical; if the
citizens of Europe can see which direction we are heading, then it becomes clear what Europe
stands for and why it is worth standing up for Europe. And third, prospects always point to the
future. Those who are forward-looking must be innovative and implement reform.
Direction, enthusiasm and reform: these are the kind of prospects that can drive the EU and the
euro area forward. That is why it is important for us to meet here to discuss them.
And  not  a  moment  too  soon. After  all,  we  have  been  through  some  turbulent  times.  Think  of
Brexit  –  a  “wake-up  call”  to  European  policymakers;  a  shock  to  all  of  us  who  believe  that
supranational cooperation creates added value for policy, the economy and society. Euro-sceptic
feeling  prevailed  here.  Afterwards,  something  like  a  countermovement  took  place,  with  pro-
European  forces  retaining  the  upper  hand  –  for  instance  in  the  elections  in  France,  the
Netherlands and most recently in Germany.
There is currently momentum to undertake reforms, particularly since the French elections. We
should harness this momentum, and we are all involved in doing so in our various roles. The
Bundesbank is playing its part in this debate by putting forward technical proposals for the euro
area.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would very much like to see this window of opportunity used to make reforms to the euro area
that  directly  address  the  core  problems  brought  to  light  by  the  crises.  This  is  in  monetary
policymakers’ interests, too.
Let  me  now  take  a  closer  look  at  three  issues.  First,  the  monetary  policy  challenges  we  are
facing. How did the ECB Governing Council act during the financial and sovereign debt crisis and
what  decisions  still  need  to  be  made?  Second,  the  reform  proposals  for  the  Economic  and
Monetary Union. How can we do our utmost to prevent future crises from happening? And third,
the position of the EU following Brexit – involving a kind of “European digital financial centre".
2. Monetary policy challenges
For the EU, and particularly for the euro area, crises have almost become par for the course over
the  last  few  years.  The  crises  have  also  posed  new  challenges  to  the  Eurosystem’s  core
business  area  –  monetary  policy. As  a  Bundesbanker,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about
monetary policy during the crises and the decisions that are about to be made.
The  ECB  Governing  Council  took  a  number  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  as  a
targeted response to the global financial crisis and the euro area sovereign debt crisis. Later on,
monetary policy was loosened further because the majority of the ECB Governing Council saw a
risk of deflation – a dangerous downward spiral of sinking prices and wages.
The non-standard monetary policy measures include a zero – and even a negative – interest rate
policy, a fixed-rate full allotment procedure to cover banks’ liquidity needs (provided they have
sufficient eligible collateral), targeted longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of up to
four  years,  various  asset  purchase  programmes  and  forward  guidance,  through  which
the ECB Governing Council indicates the likely future path of monetary policy given the current
situation.
Some of the crisis symptoms have now subsided and the threat of deflation has evaporated. The
euro area economy is experiencing a sustained and broad-based recovery – but with regional
variation.
The ECB’s staff projection puts real economic growth at 2.2% in 2017 and at almost 2% in 2018.
However,  inflationary  pressure  is  increasing  only  gradually.  Although  an  accommodative
monetary policy stance is therefore basically still justified to bolster the economic recovery and
thus inflationary pressures in the euro area, at the same time, the current circumstances are
opening up the possibility of a return to normal monetary policy.
Even  if  the  net  purchases  under  the  asset  purchase  programme  are  ultimately  discontinued,
euro-area monetary policy would remain accommodative. After all, the deciding factor is not so
much the amount of monthly purchases but, above all, the total volume of bonds purchased by
the Eurosystem. The reinvestment policy means that maturing bonds are replaced by purchases
of  new  securities.  So  the  monetary  policy  stimulus  created  by  the  asset  purchases  remains
strong – it is just not being made stronger still.
We call the gradual scaling back of the asset purchases “tapering". For the Bundesbank, it is
important  that  government  bond  purchases  be  phased  out  quickly  due  to  their  serious  side
effects. The problem with government bond purchases is that they have turned central banks into
their countries’ largest creditors. The line between monetary policy and fiscal policy is becoming
increasingly  blurred.  Governments’  financing  conditions  depend  much  more  heavily  on  the
actions of central banks than in the past. This creates a proximity between governments and
central banks that may threaten the central banks’ independence.
In the autumn, the ECB Governing Council will make decisions about the future monetary policy
stance. It goes without saying that you will keep a close eye on these decisions and their effects.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. Reforms of the Economic and Monetary Union
The ECB Governing Council has responded to the crises of the past few years by adopting non-
standard measures. The objective of these measures must be to restructure the monetary union
in  a  way  that  prevents  such  crisis  situations  from  reoccurring  in  future,  thereby  making  it
unnecessary to again resort to non-standard monetary policy measures.
To achieve this, we need reforms. A clear analysis needs to be carried out before these reforms
can begin: What triggered these crises? What reforms are necessary to prevent such crises
from reoccurring? What form should these reforms take?
A deepening of European integration is a project that is decided on at the political level. We are
currently holding a broad debate on this issue. Recently, French President Emmanuel Macron
presented his reform plans in which he called for the euro area to be given its own budget and its
own  finance  minister.  He  also  put  forward  a  number  of  other  proposals,  which  included  the
creation of a parliament for the euro area, an EU unemployment insurance scheme, a European
Monetary Fund and a common European deposit insurance scheme.
But what reforms would resolve the actual problems in the Economic and Monetary Union? We
have to beware of falling into the trap of taking action for action’s sake, but focus on solving the
actual core problems.
The sovereign debt crisis has taught us that in a monetary union, state sovereignty in fiscal and
economic policy decisions becomes problematic if the member countries do not abide by the
commonly agreed rules of the game. Two weaknesses became particularly apparent during the
crises: first, the excessive debt levels of countries in the euro area; second, the heterogeneous
economic developments in the individual member states of the monetary union.
3.1 Sound public finances
We must therefore begin by ensuring sound public finances. “Those who act must also bear the
consequences  of  their  actions”  –  this  has  to  be  the  basic  principle  behind  the  reforms  of  the
European Economic and Monetary Union. In some cases, the relationship between actions and
liability was knocked-off balance during the crises when a number of elements of mutual liability
were introduced, whilst, at the same time, keeping the sovereign powers of the member states
largely unchanged. Responsible decisions can, however, only be made if decision-makers are
also held liable for the consequences of their actions.
The Bundesbank has made technical proposals in this regard which follow the basic principle of
making  those  who  take  risks  also  responsible  for  the  consequences.  The  first  proposal
envisages  the  possibility  of  extending  the  maturities  of  government  bonds  whenever  member
states need European rescue funds. This would ensure that bondholders do not receive funds
from  European  taxpayers  whilst  a  rescue  programme  is  still  ongoing,  thereby  making  them
responsible for their own actions. If a country is still cut off from the capital markets following a
rescue programme, then a bail-in may be carried out, meaning a haircut at the expense of the
original creditors. Second, the Bundesbank’s proposals seek to end the across-the-board zero
weighting of government bonds, giving them an equity capital advantage, in order to reflect the
different risk potential of the bonds of various countries on banks’ balance sheets. Third, we need
an independent fiscal surveillance mechanism, as the Stability and Growth Pact has not had the
impact that was originally intended. These proposals by the Bundesbank should lead to sounder
public finances and thus to a more stable monetary union on the whole.
3.2 Greater economic growth
Next, it makes sense to strive towards a higher degree of economic growth in a monetary union,
and this also strengthens social cohesion.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a monetary union, the individual member states are no longer able to use the exchange rate as
a competitive tool like in the past. On the contrary, reforms of the real economy are necessary in
order  to  enable  economic  success  in  every  member  state.  This  applies  to  many  areas:  the
supply  of  highly-skilled  workers,  labour  costs,  an  economy’s  ability  to  innovate,  taxation  and
much more. It is the responsibility of the individual member states to ensure sufficiently flexible
goods  and  factor  markets.  Flexible  economic  structures  make  it  easier  to  cushion  economic
shocks.  They  are  also  the  foundation  for  dynamic  economic  growth.  This  also  lightens  the
burden  on  monetary  policy,  which  is  why  the  ECBGoverning  Council  repeatedly  calls  for  the
member states to implement structural reforms.
In  recent  years,  the  willingness  to  embrace  reforms  was  greater  in  some  countries  than  in
others. Here, it is not just a question of helping the formerly crisis-ridden countries to get back on
their feet. Those countries that were not so severely affected by the crisis, such as Germany and
France, must also implement reforms to enable them to meet the challenges of the future.
4. Digital financial centre of Europe
Ladies and gentlemen,
Although the reform efforts in the European Union and in the euro area are not a direct result of
Brexit, Brexit has nevertheless acted as a catalyst in many areas. This is particularly true in the
case  of  the  financial  markets.  In  a  speech  held  in  Florence,  UKPrime  Minister  Theresa  May
presented  her  vision  of  how  the  British  government  envisages  the  negotiations  and  its  future
partnership with the EU.
An  important  part  of  this  partnership  will  be  redefined  following  the  negotiations:  the  role  of
London as the most important financial centre in Europe. This role will not, however, dissolve into
thin air once the UK leaves the single market, but its role will change. This marks a major turning
point with regard to the importance of the financial centres in the European Union.
The  question  arises  as  to  where  key  finance-related  decisions  for  countries,  enterprises  and
households in the EU will be made. The assumption that market activity will simply shift towards
the euro area or the EU after Brexit is by no means a foregone conclusion.
Competition among financial centres went global long ago. Wall Street or other financial centres
could  therefore  also  be  among  the  winners  –  and  Asia,  too,  for  example,  which  is  already
undergoing a dynamic catching-up process.
Market positions are not generally set in stone. The market players are continuously reassessing
the  underlying  conditions  for  new  financial  centres,  yet  those  which  can  offer  the  following
features stand a good chance of being successful:
Openness and economic strength
A look back at economic history shows that there is a strong correlation between fewer trade
barriers and greater prosperity. And  the  generated  wealth  has  to  be  managed  and  increased.
Many  successful  merchants  realised  as  early  as  back  in  the  Middle  Ages  that  financial
transactions  can  be  riskier,  but  also  more  profitable  than  the  pure  trade  in  goods.  They
consequently  began  adapting  their  line  of  business  accordingly. As  a  result,  financial  centres
sprang up in locations where wealthy businessmen were living. Although things have continued
to  develop  in  many  ways  since  then,  the  fact  that  strong  financial  centres  tend  to  emerge  in
strong economic areas still holds true today.
Political and legal stability
Ultimately, investors not only have an interest in earning a return on their investments, but first
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and foremost in protecting their assets. More specifically, this means protecting their assets not
only against expropriation by the state, but also against losses brought about by inflation, dubious
business practices or economically unsound financial institutions. These protective functions are
primarily dependent on the institutional framework in place in the respective financial centre. The
key  ingredients  are  a  stable  political  system,  a  reliable  legal  system,  independent  courts,
independent central banks that are primarily geared towards price stability as well as a regulatory
system which focuses on the soundness and credit quality of financial institutions, but which also
provides creative potential to expand.
Human capital or, in other words, highly skilled experts
Since  time  immemorial,  highly-qualified  workers  with  specialist  skills  have  been  creating  new
business opportunities using financial products and innovations. Examples of this are in no short
supply: in the Early Middle Ages, for instance, business with trade bills in Italy, and then later
government bonds underwriting as a specialty in the financial centre of Frankfurt. Around the turn
of the millennium, it was financial engineering using securitisation techniques in the Anglo-Saxon
world. At the same time, a financial centre has to be attractive enough to lure highly qualified
staff. Quality of life is not always clearly measureable, yet it does play an important role when
choosing a place to work.
Infrastructure
In the Middle Ages, it was a favourable location along the trade routes that determined where the
financial centres would blossom. This was later facilitated by having a good road, rail and air
traffic network. Nowadays, the digital infrastructure is playing an increasingly decisive role. Speed
in  information  processing  has  become  a  success  factor.  For  financial  enterprises  which  are
increasingly focusing on automated trading systems, fast data connections to stock exchanges
are essential.
The  European  Union  and  the  euro  area  are  doing  well  in  embodying  many  of  these  features,
namely  openness  and  economic  strength,  political  and  legal  stability  and  human  capital  and
infrastructure.
We  live  in  strong,  diversified  economic  areas  with  high  living  standards  and  a  broad  cultural
landscape.
We  have  the  euro,  whose  stability  is  guarded  by  the  Bundesbank  and  the  other  Eurosystem
central banks, and which enjoys the confidence of investors around the world.
We  do  business  in  a  single  market  with  a  largely  harmonised  regulatory  framework.  People,
goods, services and capital can move freely and quickly in the second strongest economic area
of the world.
The banking union with its single supervisory mechanism and harmonised regulation has further
strengthened trust in the European financial system. And the emerging capital markets union is
moving European financial integration further forward.
Competition among financial centres remains lively, however. This prompts me to take a look at
one of the features I mentioned earlier and which, in my opinion, merits special attention from
politicians and financial market participants alike: digital infrastructure.
Economic  history  has  demonstrated  that  changes  to  infrastructure  can  have  a  considerable
impact. The decline of Venice as a trading and financial centre was sealed when the sea route to
India was discovered at the turn of the 15th/16th centuries. The new sea route was much more
advantageous than the journey by land, which resulted in oriental spices costing only half the
price  in  northern  Europe  as  in Aleppo,  for  example.  The  Syrian  commercial  city  used  the  old
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
trading routes over land to Asia. And so the port town of Antwerp became the Venice of the 16th
century.
The significance of infrastructure becomes clear at this point. Changes have a transformative
effect.  Alongside  the  many  parallels,  there  is  one  difference  between  the  route  to  India  and
digitalisation:  the  sea  route  was  a  discovery;  digital  infrastructure  calls  for  a  more  targeted
implementation  and  expansion  of  networks.  There  is  already  a  highly  developed  political
awareness of this, with France’s President Macron recently defining digital innovation as one of
Europe’s  core  issues.  At  the  Tallinn  Digital  Summit,  the  European  Union  heads  of  state  or
government discussed how Europe can make better use of the opportunities available.
Early  action  is  essential  for  the  financial  sector:  in  a  first  step,  cooperation  possibilities  for  a
powerful digital networking of EUfinancial centres need to be explored. The mission statement
could be that the various locations increasingly function as a kind of “digital financial centre of
Europe” or “digital city of Europe".
"Digital  financial  centre”  does  not  mean  that  personal  contacts  and  established  trust  among
financial  market  participants  would  no  longer  be  necessary.  A  powerful  digital  infrastructure
would  actually  make  these  relationships  easier  to  develop  and  strengthen,  and  financial
transactions  would  be  facilitated.  In  this  way,  development  potential  which  is  geographically
dispersed over an entire continent would be tapped more efficiently.
Such a project should be market-driven. Policymakers could assume the role of a catalyst, sitting
the  main  players  down  at  one  table.  Together  with  market  participants,  these  include  market
infrastructure operators, who recognised long ago the disruptive potential of blockchain, smart
contracts or the like in the issuance, trading, settlement and administration of securities.
IT providers, who can ensure fast and powerful data connections and systems, or legal advisers
are also among the key players. As time progresses, they can support policymakers in adapting
the legal framework to the new environment in terms of harmonised contractual standards for
securities issues across the EU, for example. Start-up centres like Frankfurt TechQuartier are
also  offering 
for  cooperation  between
many FinTechs.
resources,  already  providing  platforms 
their 
The central banks, that is the Eurosystem with national central banks like the Bundesbank, are
certainly  not  the  most  important  in  all  this,  but  they  do  play  a  role  as  market  infrastructure
operators, for example.
There are numerous challenges to be overcome in this context, one of which being the individual
interests of the respective providers. In terms of the individual financial centres, Luxembourg will
keep an eye on its position in the funds industry, for example, Amsterdam on its importance for
insurers or high frequency traders, and Dublin on its leading role in securitisation. At the end of
the day, it is important where jobs and tax revenue are created. But an examination of individual
market participants also reveals a varying degree of motivation and different target coordinates.
The  merging  of  existing  IT  architectures  with  the  least  possible  friction  represents  another
challenge.  A  high  level  of  standardisation  is  required  in  this  instance.  Ideally,  technical  or
administrative issues within the EU should not play any role in EUinvestment decisions.
The hurdles for a European digital financial centre are therefore high but not insurmountable. The
diversity of the individual financial centres can also represent a strength for a European digital
financial centre, especially if the digital networking ensures that the financial market participants
can capitalise on the strengths of the decentralised and specialised financial centres.
In general, if we don’t just keep an eye on our own piece of the pie, but join forces, the whole pie
can grow in size. In more specific terms, it is worth working together to establish a counterweight
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  the  other  major  financial  centres.  A  powerful  and  secure  digital  network  where  financial
centres  offer  specialised  services  and  with  easy  access  for  global  providers  and  seekers  of
capital can make a valuable contribution.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, let us use the “window of opportunity” that I outlined at the beginning of
my speech. In the coming years, each and every one of you will be confronted with the reforms
of European Economic and Monetary Union and with the development of the European financial
centre following Brexit. We will all have a role to play. The Bundesbank will be involved in the
debate in some areas.
One  point  that  is  of  particular  importance  to  me  is  this.  Let  our  action  plan  be  based  on  an
objective analysis. The necessary reforms will certainly involve some unpopular decisions. We
must make sure that the debate about the future of the Economic and Monetary Union, the future
of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole,  is  not  driven  by  populist  movements.  Let  us  highlight  the
positive aspects and give the EU what it needs: a compass providing direction, enthusiasm and
reform or, in a nutshell, prospects.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
