     
Remarks by Sylvain Leduc 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
Sherbrooke Chamber of Commerce 
Sherbrooke, Quebec 
October 3, 2017 
 
 
Seeking Gazelles in Polar Bear Country 
 
Introduction 
You are probably all familiar with the inventor of the snowmobile, 
Joseph-Armand Bombardier. He was from the Eastern Townships of Quebec and 
he merits a place in our history books just as much as Maurice Richard and 
Félix Leclerc. 
You may be less familiar with Montréaler Arthur Sicard, who also had an idea 
that had a profound impact on the Quebec and Canadian economies. Born in 
1876, Sicard spent his childhood working on the family farm. He was often 
prevented from delivering milk in the winter because of the snow blocking the 
roads. Observing combine harvesters at work in the fields in summer gave him 
an idea for a snowblower. Sicard’s invention was launched in 1925, and the City 
of Outremont bought the first model two years later. The snowblower not only 
improved the lives of city dwellers by making car travel easier in winter, it also 
had a major and unexpected impact on Canadian economic activity, facilitating 
winter road transport between Montréal, New York and Toronto. 
When we think of innovation, we think of people like Sicard and Bombardier, who 
start from scratch, invent new products or processes, and create companies that 
soon become drivers of the economy. These innovators help increase our 
productivity. 
In recent decades, advanced economies have experienced a sharp decline in 
productivity growth. This trend is worrisome because, in the long run, productivity 
growth determines the evolution of our standard of living. To give you an idea of 
how much it matters, last year Canadians would have earned an additional 
 I would like to thank Pierre St-Amant and Ben Tomlin 
for their help in preparing this speech. 
Not for publication before October 3, 2017 
12:30 Eastern Time 
   - 2 - 
$13,000 if our productivity had increased at the same pace as seen in the late 
1990s.1 
And since productivity determines the level at which the economy can operate 
without creating inflationary pressures, understanding its evolution in an inflation-
targeting regime like ours is vital to us at the Bank of Canada. 
Economists who are studying this trend are naturally asking whether there are 
fewer innovators like Bombardier and Sicard today than in the past. They are 
also trying to explain why productivity is weak in all advanced economies. 
To answer this question, we have to look beyond the usual macroeconomic 
indicators and examine the innovation process at the firm level. 
Today, I would like to highlight some of the major trends in firm behaviour that 
have given rise to vigorous debate among economists. First, I will describe how 
the data point to declining dynamism in the Canadian economy. I will then offer 
some possible explanations for this trend and will review how dynamism and 
other factors affect economic growth. I will conclude by briefly discussing the 
implications for monetary policy and achieving our inflation target. 
Declining Dynamism 
Let’s start with a simple intuition: in a dynamic economy, innovative companies 
are expected to emerge and replace companies with older business models. 
Think of Sicard, whose invention clearly brought huge long-term benefits but also 
led to job losses, especially the jobs of workers who cleared roads using horse-
drawn snowplows. 
As such, a strong and dynamic economy should be driven, in part, by the entry of 
new firms and the exit of less-viable firms.2 This renewal involves a needed 
reallocation of labour toward growing industries.3 This dynamic process of 
innovation was called “creative destruction” by the economist 
Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s. 
Data collected by Statistics Canada show that there has been a surprising and 
sustained decline in the entry rate of new firms since the early 1980s. Relative to 
total active firms, the entry rate of new firms was 24 per cent in 1984. It has 
decreased by half since then, which is a considerable drop (Chart 1). The firm 
exit rate has also declined—but by less—from almost 17 per cent in 1984 to 
about 11 per cent, according to the most recent data. 
The decline in entry and exit rates is also reflected in the weaker rate of labour 
reallocation.4 For the past 10 years, new firms have created fewer jobs than 
                                            
1 C. A. Wilkins, “Blame It on the Machines?” (speech to the Toronto Board of Trade, Toronto, 
April 18, 2017). 
2 S. S. Poloz, “Reconstruction: Rebuilding Business Confidence in Canada” (speech to the 
Oakville Chamber of Commerce, Burlington, Ontario, June 19, 2013). 
3 Of course, this constant reorganization of economic activity can be facilitated by assistance 
programs such as employment insurance. 
4 D. Leung and S. Cao, “The Changing Pace of Labour Reallocation in Canada: Causes and 
Consequences,” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2009): 31–41. 
 
 - 3 - 
before. Simply put, the data seem to point to a loss of dynamism in the Canadian 
economy.  
This decline in dynamism is especially striking because it is broad-based. It can 
be seen in almost all industries and across the country, showing up, for example, 
in rates of entrepreneurship (Chart 2). This trend has also appeared in most 
OECD countries. 
Chart 1: Aggregate entry and exit rates of new firms have been declining 
Aggregate entry and exit rates, annual data
%
25
20
15
10
2016
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
Entry rate
Exit rate
Sources: Bank of Canada calculations using data from Statistics Canada's Longitudinal Employment 
Analysis Program. For the year 2016, quarterly firm creation data were used.
Last observation: 2016
Chart 2: Chart 2: Rates of entrepreneurship have declined in all regions 
 Rates of entrepreneurship by region, annual data
%
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Canada
Quebec
Ontario
Atlantic region Prairie region British Columbia
1981
1990
2000
2014
Source: Bank of Canada calculations using data from Statistics Canada's Labour Force Survey 
Last observation: 2014
The main concern about a loss of dynamism is that it will lead to less innovation 
and diminishing long-term growth. The estimated potential growth rate of the 
economy is about 1.5 per cent, adjusted for inflation. Compared with previous 
  - 4 - 
decades, when potential output sometimes rose to more than 3 per cent per 
year, this is a significant drop.5 And this is the context in which the loss of 
dynamism must be considered. 
Back to the Source 
To better understand the possible effects of a loss of dynamism, we need to 
understand its causes—a more difficult task than it sounds. Some leads are more 
promising than others. The fact that we see this loss of dynamism not only in 
Canada but also in most OECD countries suggests that its causes are not unique 
to Canada and that there may be common factors.6  
A first factor to consider is population aging. The younger you are, the more likely 
you are to become an entrepreneur and start your own company.7 The appetite 
for risk is perhaps more intense when you have less to lose and the expected 
benefits are spread out over a greater number of years. However, our data show 
that the rate of entrepreneurship has dropped for all age groups. Indeed, we 
even see that the decrease in entrepreneurship is greater among people aged 
25 to 44.8 So population aging can explain only part of the decline in 
entrepreneurial activity. 
On the other hand, this decline may be because emerging entrepreneurs face 
greater opportunity costs than before; that is, the shortfall in income they would 
suffer if they quit their job to launch their company is now higher. In fact, since 
the 1980s, the most significant decrease in entrepreneurship rates that we’ve 
seen has been among those whose wages have increased the most; namely, 
university graduates.9 New technologies, which often benefit those with more 
technical skills, have likely contributed to this trend. 
In many cases, these new technologies also generate significant economies of 
scale and network effects that lead to greater industrial concentration, in turn 
leading to a loss of economic dynamism. On the one hand, the expectation of 
positive benefits is what encourages business innovation. On the other hand, if 
the largest companies constantly increase their share of the market, it is 
increasingly difficult to compete with them.10  
In fact, industrial concentration figures are quite astonishing. In the United States, 
industrial concentration since the early 1970s has increased in 75 per cent of its 
industry sectors. There are now fewer US firms listed on the stock exchange than 
                                            
5 A. Agopsowicz, B. Gueye, N. Kyui, Y. Park, M. Salameh and B. Tomlin, “Annual Reassessment 
of Potential Output Growth in Canada,”Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note 2017-5 (April 2017). 
6 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “The Future of Productivity,” 2015. 
7 S. Cao, M. Salameh, M. Seki, P. St-Amant, “Trends in Firm Entry and New Entrepreneurship in 
Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015-11 (October 2015). 
8 Ibid. 
9 Ibid. 
10 D. Andrews, C. Criscuolo and P. N. Gal, “The Best versus the Rest: The Global Productivity 
Slowdown, Divergence across Firms and the Role of Public Policy,” OECD Productivity Working 
Papers 5, OECD Publishing, 2016. 
 - 5 - 
there were 40 years ago, while US GDP is three times higher.11 In line with this 
trend, markups in several industries have been steadily increasing over the past 
three decades.12 Here in Canada, the rate of industrial concentration is 
historically high. Estimates from economists at Innovation, Science and 
Economic Development Canada tell us that the median concentration of 
Canadian industries in the early 2000s was about 75 per cent higher than in the 
United States.13  
The economies of scale and network effects in several sectors put new firms that 
produce at higher costs at a disadvantage. You must be very optimistic and have 
a great deal of confidence in your business model to launch a retail business 
these days, when giants like Walmart and Amazon are making life difficult for 
established companies. For example, with its diverse network of producers, 
Walmart can change its source of supply to minimize operating costs a lot more 
easily than a newly launched company can.14  
However, the effects of concentration and declining entry rates on innovation and 
productivity are not unequivocal. Many large companies use leading-edge 
technology and are pushing boundaries as never before—such as the firms 
developing self-driving cars. Today, large companies know that they must 
continually invent new products or services to stay one step ahead of their 
competitors. A good example of this is Apple, with the introduction of its iPhone 
in 2007 and the different versions the company has introduced since then. 
Dynamism and Potential Growth 
Competition is therefore essential to innovation and can certainly come from 
established companies. But the possibility of new companies revolutionizing an 
industry encourages established firms to innovate. Viewed in this light, the loss of 
dynamism could be symptomatic of a decline in innovation and long-term 
productivity, paradoxically during a period when technological advances seem to 
be increasing exponentially. Indeed, this question may warrant further 
investigation so that we better understand which new firms are most likely to 
contribute to growth. 
Statistics show that the shelf-life of new companies ranges between two 
extremes. About half of firms close their doors within five years of their creation. 
But younger companies that do make a name for themselves tend to grow very 
rapidly. It is this propensity to grow by leaps and bounds that inspired the term 
“gazelle.”  
                                            
11 G. Grullon, Y. Larkin and R. Michaely, “ Are U.S. Industries Becoming More Concentrated?” 
2016. 
12 J. De Loecker and J. Eeckhout, “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic 
Implications,” National Bureau Of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23687, 2017. 
13 M. Duhamel  and S. Crépeau, “Competition Intensity in Canada: A Critique of Recent OECD 
Findings,” Industry Canada Working Paper No. 2008-09. 
14 Research has shown, for example, that large importing firms have a higher elasticity of 
substitution across products in Canada. See M. B. Devereux, W. Dong and B. Tomlin, “Importers 
and Exporters in Exchange Rate Pass-through and Currency Invoicing,” Journal of International 
Economics 105: 187–204, March 2017. 
 - 6 - 
These young, transformative companies that are growing at dizzying speeds 
have a good chance of developing new technologies that increase productivity. 
However, the impact of innovation on productivity is difficult to assess. 
Breakthroughs in robotics, artificial intelligence or financial technologies are 
phenomenal, but are still not reflected in our productivity measures at the 
national level (Chart 3). And the impact of an innovation is very uncertain, which 
is why many new companies go bankrupt after only a few years. Predicting 
whether an innovative company will revolutionize markets is just as risky as 
guessing if a first-round choice in the hockey draft will become a new superstar 
goalie like Carey Price. Most of the time, you get another very ordinary player.  
Chart 3: Labour productivity has slowed in Canada and the United States  
Labour productivity growth, annual data
%
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Canada
United States
1984–1994
1995–2004
2005–2015
 Source: Statistics Canada
Last observation: 2015
Nevertheless, among OECD countries, firm productivity is operating at two 
speeds. Firms at the cutting-edge of technology—big guns such as Google and 
Tesla—are three to four times more productive than other companies.15 Given 
the declining dynamism we are seeing, this gap is not being reversed by the exit 
of less-productive firms, which probably feel less need to adopt cutting-edge  
technology. These firms therefore contribute to reducing national productivity. In 
this context, encouraging the adoption of new technologies is essential.  
Given that about a quarter of productivity growth is driven by innovations from 
new firms, gazelles play an essential role, particularly in the high-tech sector.16 
                                            
15 D. Andrews, C. Criscuolo and P.N. Gal, “The Best versus the Rest: The Global Productivity 
Slowdown, Divergence across Firms and the Role of Public Policy,” OECD Productivity Working 
Papers 5, OECD Publishing, 2016. 
16 See, for example,  D. Garcia-Macia, C. Hsieh and P. Klenow, “How Destructive Is Innovation?” 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 22953, 2016; U. Akcigit and W. R. 
Kerr, “Growth Through Heterogeneous Innovations,” National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper No.16443, 2010; and L. Foster, J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson, “The Slow 
 
 - 7 - 
So it’s worrying that the share of gazelles in the Canadian economy has declined 
markedly since 1997 (Chart 4). Surprisingly, we see this decline in the 
information and technology sector. 
Chart 4: The rates of entry of both new firms and gazelles have declined 
Index: 100 = 1997, annual data
Index
110
90
70
50
30
 Entry rate of new firms
Gazelle rate
Note: The entry rate of new firms is obtained by dividing the number of entries by the average total number of firms in the previous and current year. Gazelle rate is 
defined as the number of gazelles divided by total number of firms.
Source: Custom tabulation from Statistics Canada’s Longitudinal Employment Analysis Program
Last observation: 2012
That said, the entry and exit rates of new firms also follow the business cycle, 
and the Canadian economy has performed a lot better than expected over the 
past five quarters. For example, productivity has increased significantly since 
mid-2016, especially in the goods sector. It is also encouraging to note that the 
most recent data show that the rate of entry for new firms appears to have 
stabilized over the past few quarters (Chart 5). 
The economy's growth rate is expected to decline over the next few quarters, but 
it should still exceed that of potential output. We therefore expect an increase in 
entry rates and a decline in business exits over the coming quarters.17 Moreover, 
the contribution of new firms to increasing the productive capacity of the 
economy could give rise to a virtuous circle of growth. 
For the Bank, understanding how the productive capacity of the economy 
evolves is crucial. Indeed, our monetary policy is based on the fact that the rate 
of inflation tends to stabilize near our target of 2 per cent when the economy is 
running at capacity. When the economy operates at a level higher than potential 
output, inflation tends to accelerate and, conversely, decelerates when the 
economy operates below its potential output. An increase in productive capacity 
resulting from new firm creation would therefore allow the economy to grow 
faster without creating inflationary pressures. In concrete terms, higher potential 
                                                                                                                                  
Growth of New Plants: Learning About Demand?” National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper No. 17853, 2012. 
17 S. S. Poloz, “Reconstruction: Rebuilding Business Confidence in Canada” (speech to the 
Oakville Chamber of Commerce, Burlington, Ontario, June 19, 2013) and “Returning to Natural 
Economic Growth” (speech to the Vancouver Board of Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
September 18, 2013). 
 - 8 - 
output would lead to a long-term improvement in the standard of living of 
Canadians. 
Chart 5: The rate of entry for new firms may have finally stabilized 
Four-quarter moving average, quarterly data
%
4.0
3.5
3.0
2007Q1 2008Q1 2009Q1 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 2014Q1 2015Q1 2016Q1 2017Q1
2.5
Source: Bank of Canada calculations using Statistics Canada's quarterly firm creation data
Last observation: 2017Q1
 Conclusion 
In recent quarters, Canada’s economic growth has been strong, exceeding that 
of all the other G7 economies. The sharp depreciation of the Canadian dollar 
following the drop in oil prices may have contributed to the growth of gazelles by 
facilitating access to external markets and increasing the benefits of greater 
economies of scale. What I find encouraging is that, despite the decline in 
dynamism, the sectoral adjustment required as a result of the fall in oil prices 
happened within the anticipated time frame. This episode shows that the 
Canadian economy is still flexible enough to absorb a major shock. 
That said, significant challenges remain, as our productivity is still well below that 
observed south of the border.18 Productivity growth could certainly be increased 
by reducing the barriers that future gazelles may face, which would further 
stimulate the Canadian economy. A report from the World Bank notes that 
Canada is one of the easiest countries in which to start a business.19 On the 
other hand, it is nevertheless more difficult for businesses to grow beyond a 
certain point, possibly because of the size of our markets. The free trade 
agreement with Europe is an encouraging example, because it can help our 
gazelles grow. Here in Canada, the agreement signed earlier this year on 
reducing barriers to interprovincial trade is also a good sign, although several 
areas are still excluded. In addition, new gazelles are likely to have more difficulty 
                                            
18 Centre for the Study of Living Standards, “Aggregate Income and Productivity Trends: Canada 
vs United States, 1961–2015.” 
19 World Bank, “Doing Business: Measuring Business Regulations,” 2017. 
 - 9 - 
financing intangible investments, which they increasingly need, than tangible 
investments, which, unlike the former, may be offered as collateral. 
I would be remiss if I did not mention a Sherbrooke initiative that is addressing 
these challenges. I'm talking about Sherbrooke Innopole, an organization 
dedicated to accelerating business development in five new areas. In 
collaboration with the city, Innopole three years ago founded Espace-inc, a 
business incubator whose results have exceeded initial expectations. So far, it 
has helped launch 24 companies.20 Similar initiatives are under way elsewhere in 
Canada. We hope they will be successful and that they will help entrepreneurs of 
the calibre of Sicard and Bombardier to emerge. 
In the meantime, the best contribution the Bank of Canada can make in this 
regard is to promote economic stability by keeping inflation at 2 per cent, thereby 
facilitating investment decisions.  
                                            
20 Espace-inc, “Bilan d’impact 2015-2016.” 
