Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Build, build, building our FIN-frastructure
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at The Asset’s 12th Philippine Forum, Pasay City, 24 October 2017.
 I am pleased to be your keynote speaker this morning in The Asset’s 12th Philippine Forum. 
In the forum briefer, the national Government’s focus on building infrastructure is described as a
step towards “defining new dimensions in development”...  What a positive theme to build on!
Infrastructure development is vital to economic growth.  When one looks at the key facilities for
the efficient functioning of a nation: transportation, communication, water, energy... it is evident
that infrastructure development is all about building networks of viable, productive and meaningful
connections.  Indeed, the goal of having sound and reliable infrastructure is to include more and
more people into development. 
At the Bangko Sentral, we too are eager to pursue development in inclusive ways.  In our role as
central  monetary  authority,  as  supervisor  of  financial  institutions,  and  as  guardian  of  the
payments  and  settlements  system,  our  thrust  is  to  ensure  that  the  business  and  operating
environment  is  sound  and  stable...  and  that  our  policies  and  regulations  encourage  the  build,
build,  build  of  a  progressive  and  inclusive  financial  infrastructure...  I  will  now  coin  a  word....
“FINfrastructure.”  (I googled this and the search did not turn up any results.  As far as I know, it’s
original).  FINfrastructure. :)
Strong Foundation for FINfrastructure Building
To  initiate  building  any  infrastructure  project,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  solid  and  reliable
foundation.   Key statistics show that we enjoy a strong economic base.
The  Philippines  experienced  sustained  uninterrupted  expansion  for  the  past  74  consecutive
quarters, spanning 18 years.  The economy is expected to grow within Government’s real GDP
growth  targets  of  6.5-7.5  percent  for  2017,  and  7.0-8.0  percent  for  2018.    Strong  domestic
demand  and  an  expansive  government  budget  for  infrastructure  development  underpin  this
growth.  Overseas Filipino remittances and BPO sector revenues continue to drive our economy.
Inflation remains low and stable, and expectations continue to be well-anchored.  For the first
nine months of 2017, inflation rate averaged 3.1 percent.  We remain on track to stay within the
target range of 2 to 4 percent for 2017, and inflation is projected to settle near the midpoint in
2017–2019. 
Despite global shifts, the balance of payments (BOP) is under control. The country’s BOP in
September  in  fact  posted  a  surplus  of  US$24  million,  a  reversal  from  the  previous  months’
deficit.  While we project an overall BOP deficit for 2017, we expect this to remain at less than 1
percent of GDP.  This is something that can readily funded given the large level of international
reserves, our other external liquidity buffers, and our market access.
The  emergence  of  a  current  account  (CA)  deficit  can  be  attributed  to  the  strong  demand  for
imports associated with the sustained and broad-based expansion of the domestic economy’s
capital formation, production and consumption.
The increased demand for dollars also reflects residents’ investments abroad and prepayments
of  foreign  debt.  However,  continued  strong  inflows  from  overseas  Filipinos’  remittances,
business process outsourcing receipts, and revenues from the tourism sector, help support the
balance of payments.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The financial sector also demonstrates strength and sustained growth.  Our banks continue to
enjoy  strong  balance  sheets  and  satisfactory  asset  quality.  The  banking  system’s  resources
expanded by 15.4 percent as of end-August 2017.  Asset growth is supported by a stable deposit
funding base. In line with the country’s domestic growth, banks’ total loan portfolio grew by 17.3
percent and is diverse across industry sectors.
Notwithstanding sustained expansion in credit, banks demonstrate prudence in lending.  Banks’
NPL ratios improved to 2.0 percent as of end-August 2017.  Banks also maintained adequate
buffer for loan losses, registering a higher NPL coverage ratio of 114.1 percent.
Meanwhile,  banks  continue  to  build  up  their  capital  position. As  of  end-June  2017,  the  capital
adequacy ratio (CAR) of universal and commercial banks (U/KBs) registered at 16.0 percent.
This solid performance did not happen overnight.  Rather, it is the result of deep and meaningful
financial  sector  reforms  boldly  implemented  over  the  years.    Today,  we  continue  to  promote
sound corporate governance standards, a stronger capital base, and improved risk management
practices.  For  instance,  just  this  month,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  revision  of  the
guidelines on liquidity risk management, signifying enhancements to our guidelines which were
first issued in 2006.  This is part of a broader set of BSP reforms on liquidity standards. This
initiative was preceded by the issuance of the liquidity coverage ratio (or “LCR”) framework in
March 2016. It will be followed by issuances on the implementation of the net stable funding ratio
(or  “NSFR”),  which  is  part  of  the  Basel  III  Liquidity  Standards;  and  intraday  liquidity  reporting
requirements.
Vigilance as We Build
The economic landscape looks good, with conditions ripe for building.  However, as we build, we
must be mindful and vigilant of challenges.
For example, there could be some transitory upside risks to inflation owing to the possible impact
of  the  proposed  tax  reform  program  along  with  pending  petitions  to  raise  power  rates.    This
notwithstanding, inflation expectations continue to be within target over the policy horizon.
The BSP also continues to watch against financial market volatility emanating from uncertainty in
the pace of normalization of U.S. monetary policy as well as geopolitical issues that may have
impact  on  the  stability  of  financial  markets,  on  movement  of  capital  flows,  and  on  continued
economic activity.
INFRA supports the Superstructure
At the BSP, our mandate is to provide policy direction in the areas of money, banking and credit. 
We do not ourselves build the FINfrastructure.  Rather, our task is to promote an environment for
those  that  do  (this  includes  many  in  this  prominent  audience)....  We  do  this  through
implementation of rules and regulations, through the launching of initiatives, and through sound,
prudent and progressive banking reforms. 
As I say this, the fact that what we do in the BSP is slightly invisible becomes apparent.  But
insight is that the very word itself, “infrastructure” is preceded by the Latin prefix, INFRA... which
means “below”... which while underneath and invisible, provides support to the superstructure
flourishing above it.  In this sense, I am heartened.  What an honor for the BSP to serve in this
way!
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The FINfrastructure Agenda
At the BSP, our agenda on FINfrastructure focuses on financial sector and market infrastructure
reforms that aim to enhance access to credit and other financial services, deepen local currency
debt and foreign exchange markets, and digitalize our financial system.  These are strategic and
complementary  reforms  that  reinforce  sustainable  economic  growth  and  push  further  our
financial inclusion agenda. 
Over the years, our regulatory issuances allowed a wider range, as well as expanded physical
and virtual reach, of financial services.  For example, we now allow third party retail outlets to
function as cash agents as well as the implementation of reduced Know-Your-Customer (KYC)
rules for certain low-risk accounts and the use of technology to comply with KYC requirements. 
Likewise,  the  BSP  supports  efforts  to  build  financial  infrastructure  and  viable  ecosystems  to
facilitate a more equitable allocation of credit.
Earlier, we talked about the Government’s thrust for infrastructure. Part of BSP FINfrastructure
agenda is collaborating with other government agencies and industry stakeholders to deepen the
local currency debt market, given its vital role in complementing bank lending to support long-
term financing requirements of corporates and the Government, particularly for its “Build, Build,
Build” program. 
As  early  as  June  last  year,  the  BSP  has  started  the  groundwork  for  project  financing  under
Circular  No.  914.    Last  month,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  amendments  to  streamline
requirements of issuance of bonds and commercial papers by banks and quasi-banks (QBs),
thereby providing them more flexibility in tapping capital markets as alternative funding source. 
These amendments, as embodied in Circular No. 975, include the removal of required eligible
collaterals.    At  the  same  time,  just  this  month,  we  issued  Circular  No.  976,  which  provide
enhancements  to  the  prudential  reporting  requirements  over  project  finance  exposures.    It  is
important  to  sharpen  BSP’s  assessment  of  banks’  exposure  to  project  finance,  given  that
demand is expected to pick up and gain traction as the country moves towards its infrastructure
goals. 
Complementing capital market development initiatives, we are also pursuing foreign exchange
(FX) market reforms to deepen and increase efficiency of the FX market, and reduce cost of
doing business.
Building FINfrastucture with FINtech
Technological  development  has  significantly  changed  the  business  of  banking  and  finance.
Financial transactions can conveniently be made on the move, in the comfort of one’s home,
using a smart phone. There is a shorter turnaround time for financial transactions.
Nowadays,  retail  financial  services  are  further  being  digitized  via  mobile  wallets,  payment
applications, robo-advisors, equity crowd-funding platforms for access to private and alternative
investment opportunities, and online lending platforms.
These  breakthroughs  are  revolutionalizing  the  financial  landscape.  Sound  FINfrastructure  is
needed to support it. 
The BSP is actively leading industry-wide initiatives to operationalize the National Retail Payment
System (NRPS) to enable customers to make payments and transfer funds between and among
accounts using any digital device.  The goal is for us to transition into a cash-lite economy.  We
are  seeing  progress  in  this  area.    First,  with  the  establishment  of  the  payment  system
management  body,  incorporated  as  Philippine  Payments  Management,  Inc.,  there  is  now  an
organized governance structure of retail payment systems in the country.  We are also currently
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
working with the industry on the formation of two priority Automated Clearing Houses (ACHs), the
Batch Credit Push EFT (called PesoNet), and the Real-time EFT Credit (called InstaPay).  The
PesoNet is set to launch on November 8, 2017.
The BSP is also mindful that fintech also poses technology-related risks.  With this in mind, the
BSP  follows  a  test-and-learn  approach  that  allows  an  enabling  environment  for  new
collaborations to prosper. We encourage bank and non-bank partnerships with fintech startups to
maximize the benefits of innovative digital platforms, efficiency of gains, and cost savings.
We are also aware that new entrants may cause disruptions in the financial ecosystem since
traditional players may be unable to immediately respond to increasing competition. Hence, we
monitor fintech activities to better understand their business models, processes and systems.  
Moreover,  the  BSP  has  enhanced  existing  regulations  to  ensure  that  non-banks  such  as
pawnshops  and  money  service  businesses  are  properly  supervised  as  they  compete  in
delivering  bank-like  services.    Relatedly,  we  regulate  entities  that  use  virtual  currency  as
underlying instruments for remittance.
The  BSP  has  also  provided  guidelines  on  BSP-supervised  financial  institutions  to  ensure  that
risks resulting from usage of social media are adequately assessed and managed. Lastly, the
BSP is enhancing its information security framework to consider cybersecurity controls.
While the term, “Financial Infrastructure” refers broadly to a system that allows for the effective
operation of financial intermediaries, encompassing even the legal and regulatory framework... I
would like to think of FINfrastructure as one that addresses the very heart of why infrastructure
exists:  to connect people, to enable inclusion and to provide a network for more Filipinos to enjoy
the benefits of economic progress and development.
Leveraging on Fintech fosters Inclusion
The BSP is committed to promoting financial inclusion. (Incidentally, financial inclusion is one of
the foundations of the Philippine Development Plan 2017 to 2022, Ambisyon Natin 2040.). The
ultimate goal is to reach the unbanked and underserved populace.  Fintech can be leveraged to
achieve this.  Jack Ma, founder and executive chairman of Alibaba  expressed this by saying,
“Fintech or Techfin is to rebuild the system with technology…to solve the problem of a lack of
inclusiveness.”
We believe in leveraging on digitization so that it is responsive to a broader economy.  This is
why we are also closely working with the National Government for the adoption of a biometric-
based foundational ID system.
Build, Build, Building Together
Ladies and gentlemen, this Forum is an opportune time to encourage each one here — pillars of
society, movers and shakers in the banking and financial industries, to all work together.
The  Philippines  is  increasingly  populated  by  young,  tech-savvy  ‘millenials.’  This  growing
customer-base prefers streamlined processes and products and services that can be accessed
via  electronic  services.  This  market  is  on  the  lookout  for  new  offerings.  We  can  therefore
capitalize on this opportunity by allowing fintech to come into play.  The BSP is supportive of
fintech innovations and see much potential in this area.  Indeed we are, as the forum’s briefer
says, in an “energized backdrop.”
I have said in several speeches before that Fintech is borderless with varied and plenty players. 
This,  constant  engagement  with  Fintech  innovators,  other  regulators  and  industry  players  is
important.  This is to foster a deeper understanding of risks, gauge market conduct expectations
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and inculcate appreciation for financial inclusion goals.  I reiterate this today.
On behalf of the BSP and the Monetary Board, I thank the organizers for the opportunity to share
our initiatives with you today as we work toward a better Philippines.
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas.  Mabuhay tayong lahat.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
