Andreas Dombret: Why business needs values – what we can learn
from the banking sector
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Academie Kloster Eberbach, Eltville am Rhein, 17 November 2017.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It is said that the Viennese writer and journalist Karl Kraus once asked a budding academic what
he was planning to study, upon which the young man said, “Business ethics.” To which Kraus
replied, “One or the other, you can’t have both.”
This brief exchange rather neatly reflects a view held across much of our society – that business
and ethics are irreconcilable rivals at opposite ends of the spectrum. It is widely thought that the
banking  sector,  more  than  anywhere  else,  bears  testament  to  this  idea  of  business  being  an
ethics-free zone.
And who could blame them for thinking that way? After all, financial crises and scandals – like the
one  in  which  banks  colluded  for  years  to  rig  benchmark  rates  –  don’t  exactly  put  the  picture
straight. In some instances, these scandals were rooted in unethical behaviour. Court rulings,
fines and an exodus of customers are a stiff price to pay for this conduct, not least for the banks
themselves.
Every single scandal, every single crisis, adds to the chorus of voices calling for more regulation,
more supervision. Could supervisors, they say, not make sure that ethics are anchored once and
for all in the business world?
And it's true that, in some instances, banking supervisors are increasingly encroaching on this
ethics debate with some of the steps they take. There are two new ways in which we do this
which I would like to discuss in greater detail during the course of my speech.
To make sure we’re not talking at cross purposes, I’d like to take a minute to share with you my
understanding of ethics, or values, and ethical behaviour.
For the purposes of this speech, values, for me, are behavioural anchors, or characteristics and
qualities that are considered worthwhile and morally sound. Honesty, solidarity and responsibility
are just some of the values I could mention that most would regard as worthwhile. My definition of
ethical behaviour, meanwhile, is behaviour that embraces those very values.
I  would  like  to  spend  the  next  few  minutes  answering  the  following  questions:  Why  should
banking supervisors be interested in values? Where are banking supervisors promoting ethical
behaviour? Can values even be a matter for banking supervisors in the first place, and should
they be? At what point do rules and supervision reach their limits? And do we need a code of
ethics in the business world?
2 What we can learn from the banking sector
Why exactly does business need values? After all, it’s perfectly adequate for the market to be
guided by the invisible hand of competition – at least that was the predominant view before the
financial crisis struck. There is no lack of controversial views claiming that business and ethics
are locked in eternal conflict. US investor George Soros, for instance, once said that the profit-
maximising  behaviour  characteristic  “ignores  the  demands  of  morality”,  thereby  rendering
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial markets amoral rather than immoral. Following Mr Soros’ line of thinking, then, perhaps
we don’t actually need any values at all in business? Isn’t “competition”, in and of itself, enough of
a value for business?
But scour the banking sector and you will find instances where ethics sometimes only played
second fiddle, paving the way for what was, at times, glaring misconduct.
The financial crisis, which originated in the US real estate markets in 2007, is a lesson that the
consequences  of  pushing  for  short-term  profits  can  be  catastrophic.  Bankers  who  were
convinced  that  their  securitisation  vehicles  had  shifted  credit  risk  off  their  books  let  their
conservative lending standards slip, which meant, in a nutshell, that they ended up issuing and
securitising  far  too  many  risky  loans.  In  a  second  step,  those  bankers  underestimated  the
possibility that those loans might default because of a lack of due care and also the opacity of
those securitised products. Compensation models rewarding short-term behaviour did the rest.
This all set a cycle of events in motion in which loans were systematically granted to customers
who  were  unable  to  service  them.  Not  just  that:  in  some  cases,  customers  were  deliberately
mis-sold loans, all in the interest of pocketing quick gains. It's hardly surprising, then, that the
crash in the US real estate market proved to have very far-reaching implications, not least in the
shape  of  enormous  costs  for  banks  and  a  loss  of  confidence.  The  court  rulings,  fines  and
customer exodus I mentioned earlier thus continued to take their toll on banks long after the US
real estate market went into free-fall.
Bearing all this in mind, one could be forgiven for thinking that it was unethical behaviour which
made the financial crisis possible in the first place. Financial mis-selling and a focus on short-
term profitability were rewarded, securitisation encouraged opaque and dishonest conduct, and
there was no such thing as a realistic assessment of credit risk.
There’s another example I could mention to show that the market is incapable of regulating itself
and  that  values,  it  would  appear,  still  haven’t  made  an  appearance  in  some  quarters  of  the
banking  industry.  I’m  talking  about  the  Libor  scandal  –  that  is,  the  rigging  of  the  benchmark
London interbank offered rate. Bankers colluded to submit fictitious interest rates so as to falsely
inflate or deflate Libor. This rigged rate then fed into financial transactions all around the world;
many credit or savings products are geared to the Libor benchmark rate.
So  if  you  ask  me  whether  business  needs  ethical  values,  the  answer  is  an  unequivocal  and
resounding yes. And as for the other question I asked just now, my answer would be a definite
no.  Competition,  in  and  of  itself,  isn’t  enough;  we  need  rules  to  stake  out  a  clear  operational
framework. Leaving the market to its own devices isn't an option. But the question is whether we
can achieve this simply with rules and supervision?
Many a new approach in the world of banking supervision is designed to do just that, but if there’s
one thing I can tell you already, it is that they will never go far enough. Because when it comes
down  to  it,  values  are  beliefs  which  each  and  every  one  of  us  needs  to  anchor  in  our  own
behaviour. And that is precisely the problem which I intend to delve into later in my speech to you
today.
3 New approaches to banking supervision
Traditional banking supervision aims to maintain checks, create trust, and, ultimately, ensure a
stable  banking  system  with  solvent  institutions.  However,  some  new  approaches  to  banking
supervision are going one step further, even if only as a side effect. I would like to introduce two
of these measures to you now: first, what is known as salary regulation and, second, the Task
Force on Behaviour and Culture.
Salary  regulation  governs  the  minimum  standards  for  the  remuneration  systems  of  German
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  institutions.  During  the  course  of  the  reforms  following  the  financial  crisis,  particular
attention in this regard was paid to avoiding distorted incentives.
On  the  one  hand,  there  are  “clawbacks”,  which  allow  variable  remuneration  that  has  already
been paid to be reclaimed in cases of severe personal misconduct. On the other hand, payment
of  variable  remuneration  may  be  postponed;  in  addition,  payment  is  made  partially  in  stock
options.  This  aims  to  encourage  sustainable  decision-making  and  limit  short-term  thinking
geared only towards profits.
The Task Force on Behaviour and Culture is a project that is still in its test phase. However, the
results are of such great interest for our discussion today that I would like to briefly present them
to  you  now.  The  Task  Force  is  working  towards  developing  a  methodology  for  evaluating
behaviour and culture in banks. No need to worry – although it may sound vague, I can assure
you that this is certainly not the case.
In  specific  terms,  it  intends  to  assess  the  work  and  cooperation  of  supervisory  bodies  and
management  boards.  For  instance,  are  banks  implementing  planned  strategic  changes
effectively?  Are  there  any  risk-relevant  behavioural  patterns  in  management  boards  or
supervisory bodies? These behavioural patterns can be seen as early warning indicators or even
as problem drivers in terms of an institution’s financial return and risk profile.
The results of the first studies in banks show, on the one hand, that risk-relevant behavioural
patterns,  such  as  ineffective  leadership  and  group  dynamics,  are  indeed  present  and,  on  the
other hand, that strategic changes are, to a certain extent, only being implemented ineffectively.
There is undoubtedly a lot of catching-up to do.
Both the Task Force on Behaviour and Culture as well as salary regulation therefore seem to
promote ethical behaviour, or, more specifically, to punish illegal behaviour – which is often also
unethical. Although they do not actively impose values of their own, they punish a lack of values.
These measures highlight one thing very clearly: we, as banking supervisors, firmly believe that
business needs values.
Please  allow  me  to  now  expand  upon  something  that  I  mentioned  earlier:  rules  alone  cannot
entrench values in business. There are two reasons for this. First, rules have natural limitations,
and,  second,  values  are  subjective  and  must  be  recognised  by  each  person  individually.  For
now, I would like to delve deeper into the first point – the limits of regulation.
4 The limits of regulation
There is one thing that we can all agree on: we need an operational framework and ground rules
for  business.  An  operational  framework  creates  trust  and  thereby  attracts  investors  and
customers.  For  this  reason,  the  banks  themselves  also  have  an  interest  in  a  functional
operational framework.
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  explain  in  greater  detail  two  phenomena  that  impose  limits  on
regulation: first, the challenges of globalisation and, second, the concept of what is known as
homo oeconomicus.
Globalisation presents us with immense challenges that cannot be overcome at the national or
European  levels  in  isolation.  Global  problems  such  as  environmental  protection,  security,  and
financial  stability  require  collective  solutions  and  in  no  way  affect  just  one  country  or  just
economic agents alone.
Furthermore,  it  is  not  only  economic  agents  who  now  face  global  competition,  but  also  the
ground rules applicable in each jurisdiction. A regulatory race to the bottom is often the response
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
to this competition between locations. We are indeed trying to contain this through our work in
international committees but, as long as there is no global operational framework in place, an
ethical  vacuum  is  created  here.  Just  because  something  is  legal  or  not  yet  subject  to  global
sanctions, it does not ultimately mean that we should also behave that way. Legality does not
automatically mean legitimacy.
The  second  phenomenon  that  imposes  limits  on  regulation  is  the  concept  of  homo
oeconomicus,  which  forms  the  foundation  of  most  modern  economic  models.  In  short,  it
describes  an  ideal  person  who  acts  purely  rationally  and  therefore  makes  the  most  optimal
decisions possible.
However, business consists of an intricate web of agents who are guided by human decisions.
Unlike homo oeconomicus, humans are not purely rational beings, so it goes without saying that
decisions are often shaped by emotions – and humans are prone to human error. In cases of
doubt, ethical vacuums can arise here, too.
Let  me  summarise  so  far.  First,  business  needs  values.  Second,  some  of  the  latest  tools  in
banking supervision are moving increasingly in this direction. Third, every operational framework
has  limitations  through  which  ethical  vacuums  can  arise.  Fourth,  we  cannot  comprehensively
entrench  values  in  business  through  regulations,  even  if  this  may  be  possible  theoretically.
Values must instead be recognised and adopted by each person individually. It is this fourth point
that I would like to discuss in more detail.
5 Does the answer lie in more supervision?
One way of responding to the fact that there are limits to what a rulebook can achieve might be to
introduce ever more intricate supervision, so as to cover as many scenarios as possible. Ethical
vacuums  could  be  plugged  with  a  maximum  of  rules,  each  of  them  as  detailed  as  possible,
eliminating the need for the individual to think about what is right or wrong.
And indeed we can do this up to a certain point – salary regulation and the task force which I
mentioned earlier are two examples. These new initiatives are increasingly making inroads into
the realm of values and morals, serving at least to penalise unethical behaviour.
It  is  tempting  to  think  that,  if  new  rules  make  people  conform  to  certain  ethical  patterns  of
behaviour, supervision can take care of values. Simple! But it doesn’t work like that – and here’s
why.
Supervision cannot anchor values in the business world. Granted, it does so sometimes “by the
by”, as a side effect of penalising conduct which is both illegal and unethical, as with the two
examples  I’ve  just  mentioned.  But  we  do  not  prescribe  values  that  market  participants  must
abide by.
Rather,  our  efforts  to  prevent  certain  unethical  strands  of  behaviour  are  based  on  economic
factors. We have neither the ability nor the desire to vet whether somebody alters their behaviour
because they either accept and prize values such as honesty and responsibility or fear negative
repercussions.
Your instinct may be to think that whether bankers behave in an ethical manner because they
believe that it is the right thing to do or just because they feel forced to do so is neither here nor
there. The end result is, after all, the same.
But that is far too simplistic; the end result is not the same. On the one hand, we have bankers
who believe in values such as honesty and solidarity. They will always behave in an ethical way,
even if given the chance to behave unethically without being caught out.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the other hand, the sole reason that some bankers are not behaving unethically is because
they are being held back by the operational framework. They will always seek – and probably
often find – a way to behave unethically.
Please don't get me wrong, the majority of people, and the majority of bankers, are honest and
their behaviour is value-led. But we are only human, and it is simply human nature to want the
best  for  ourselves  and  those  close  to  us. Any  debate  around  values  will  always  hit  upon  this
snag.
So, for a variety of reasons, values cannot be embedded in business by regulation alone. First,
because globalisation and irrational behaviour limit what rules can achieve. And second, because
even if rules were not naturally limited in this way, every individual has to acknowledge and live by
values – they are not something that can be forced.
So, if we accept that rules alone are not enough to anchor values in business or the banking
sector, how can we embed these standards? I would argue in favour of a code of values.
6 Conclusion
It makes sense for values to have a place in business. Values can prevent unethical behaviour,
averting future scandals and crises. In other words, it is not pure idealism which speaks in their
favour; values can in fact cut costs.
Banking supervision does what it can within its remit. Salary regulation shows that by imposing
rules  we  can  at  least  give  the  business  world  a  push  in  the  right  direction,  helping  to  embed
these  values. And  the  Task  Force  on  Behavior  and  Culture  is  another  useful  addition  to  the
banking supervision toolkit.
But  we  should  be  under  no  illusions.  It  cannot  be  the  primary  task  of  banking  supervision  to
establish  or  monitor  values  in  business  or,  more  specifically,  the  individual.  So,  how  can  we
establish values in business if an operational framework does not suffice?
I am convinced that the solution is to be found, as is so often the case, somewhere in the middle.
We need rules to provide us with a sound operational framework and we also need a code of
values to guide us when we encounter an ethical vacuum.
A  code  of  values  can  help  us  to  make  decisions  in  situations  where  rules  leave  open  some
leeway and where the decision maker is not the homo oeconomicus but a person like you or me.
A code of values will hopefully make ethical decisions easier for us.
Values can only be generated through a combination of reflection, dialogue and information. A
code of values that we all voluntarily stick to will only endure if we can clearly see that it makes
sense.
This, in turn, throws up a whole series of questions.
Who should the code of values apply too? Do we need a general code of values, or ones which
are branch-specific? Which values should be written into our code? Do we want enterprises to
be accountable? Should we follow the example set by hospitals and expect all major decisions to
be brought before an ethics committee?
These are not questions which I can (or wish to) answer alone. Every individual must choose for
themselves to be guided by the same code of values. In the same way, the decision as to what
that code of values should look like, or whether we want one at all, is one that must be taken
collectively.
If we wish to do more than simply pay lip service to the notion of a credible code of values, then
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
we must make a genuine effort to engage with the issue. Information and transparency, sharing
knowledge and discussing ideas – this is how we can bring a code of values into focus. Not least
at events such as this.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
