Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Journal du Dimanche
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Le Journal du Dimanche, conducted by Ms Bruna Basini on 27 October, and published on 29
October 2017.
 The  reduction  in  liquidity  decided  by  the  ECB  is  so  accommodative  that  one  might
wonder if it has become impossible to wean the markets off this source…
We’ve decided to halve our asset purchases. From January to September 2018 we will buy €30
billion worth of bonds per month instead of €60 billion, as at present. And our interest rates will
remain unchanged. The ECB’s monetary policy will remain very accommodative: in particular,
our  asset  purchases  will  continue  until  inflation  clearly  moves  towards  2%.  This  recalibration
takes account of the solidity of the recovery and allows it to gain strength. I am hopeful that this
will be the last extension.
Don’t we have to fear negative effects?
We are aware that this policy could create risks on the financial markets. But its first effect is to
further stimulate consumption and investment, and to support the fall in unemployment. There’s
no financial bubble at euro area level. There are price tensions on real estate markets in some
countries. In France, corporate debt is also rising very quickly, perhaps too quickly. But nothing at
this stage demands action from the ECB.
How will this policy affect interest rates?
The  ECB’s  policy  will  enable  households  and  firms  to  continue  borrowing  at  historically  low
levels. The short-term rates set by the ECB are going to remain very low for quite some time,
well past September 2018. As for long-term rates, they are set by the financial markets. These
rates  can  be  expected  to  rise  as  the  global  economic  recovery  proceeds.  Businesses  and
governments must prepare for that.
Prices are not rising very much, wages even less so, whatever happened to inflation,
which is levelling off at around 1.5%?
In Europe wages have tended to stand still because we’ve endured one blow after another, the
financial crisis, then the euro area crisis. One young person in five is unemployed in the euro
area. It’s no surprise that this affects wages. The nature of the jobs created has also changed.
There  are  many  fixed-term  and  part-time  jobs  which  keep  employees  in  a  position  of
dependence. As the recovery takes hold, the quality of jobs will improve and allow wages to rise,
but this will take time.
Are the reforms undertaken by the euro area countries going in the right direction?
It’s not the ECB’s job to give lectures. Our mandate is to protect the purchasing power of the
people of Europe. Growth has returned in all the euro area countries and consumer confidence
across Europe is at its highest for 16 years. The priority now is to achieve greater convergence
between  the  countries  and  thus  create  a  more  resilient  economic  bloc.  Every  country  must
continue with its reforms: in particular France, but also Germany.
Does  the  economic  transformation  of  France  promised  by  Emmanuel  Macron  go  far
enough?
It will enable France to make up for lost time. The return of growth in Europe is offering France a
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
unique  opportunity  to  pursue  a  coherent  set  of  reforms  in  order  to  rectify  its  weaknesses:
persistent unemployment, inadequate training, deficits in public finance and external trade. But
this is happening at a time when globalisation and technological change are creating uncertainty.
More flexibility is needed, it’s true, but we shouldn’t forget those who get left behind by this model.
And the level of France’s public debt?
On the budgetary front, France still faces a predicament. Its deficit is falling, but mainly because
the  economy  is  growing  again.  If  the  economic  climate  changes,  where  will  the  room  for
manoeuvre be? It’s now high time that France, the second-largest economy in the euro area, let
go of the ECB’s monetary policy.
What institutional reforms will be needed to consolidate the euro area?
That’s  a  matter  for  the  heads  of  state  and  government.  For  a  long  time  I  have  favoured  the
establishment of a euro area finance ministry. Provided it was given the right financial tools, this
would  facilitate  the  handling  of  the  next  crisis  without  having  to  rely  excessively  on  the  ECB,
which  was  mainly  the  case  these  past  few  years.  But  for  the  ministry  to  come  into  being,  a
degree of trust has to be recreated between the countries. In this discussion, the reforms and the
serious nature of France’s budget are a test case. Let’s also prevent the common budget from
absolving governments of their budgetary responsibilities.
Would a European Monetary Fund make sense?
I am not one of those who think that Europe should get rid of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). The IMF was there when Ireland, Portugal, Greece and Cyprus were under attack. In an
unstable world, the IMF is more necessary than ever. Our crisis management tool, the European
Stability  Mechanism,  deserves  to  be  strengthened.  It  could  become  a  true  European  stability
fund, with greater resources and an independent advisory capacity. European crises would also
have to be managed in a more transparent way, involving the European Parliament more closely.
Protectionist and populist movements are gaining support among voters in Europe. How
should we respond to this frustration?
Europe  was  a  great  success  when  it  came  to  building  the  single  market  and  the  euro,  and
welcoming  the  former  Communist  countries.  But  it  was  unable  to  help  workers  facing
globalisation and technological change. We need to take advantage of the return of growth to
create a space for European rules which foster the mobility of employees, protect their rights and
enable them to be educated and trained across Europe.
Why  are  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  ignoring  bitcoin  and  other  crypto-
currencies, which are being increasingly used for trade?
We aren’t ignoring them. At the moment crypto-currencies don’t pose any monetary risk because
the amounts involved are marginal. They are speculative financial instruments which create risks
of  a  financial  or  even  criminal  nature.  The  central  banks  are  following  their  development  very
closely because they can  spread  very  rapidly,  especially  in  countries  which  are  moving  away
from banknotes and coins.
And if tomorrow the future President of the ECB was a German national, would that be a
serious matter?
The nationality of the ECB’s President is irrelevant. What matters is that the person can do the
job.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
