Gent  Sejko:  Convergence  process  challenges  facing  south-east
Europe and Albania
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  7th  ECB  conference  on
central,  eastern  and  south-eastern  Europen  (CESEE)  countries  on  "Institutional  quality  and
sustainable economic convergence", Frankfurt am Main, 5 October 2017.
Accompanying slides
Honourable Participants,
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  Conference,  and  discuss  about  the  role  of  our
Institutions in the EU economic convergence process, such a relevant topic nowadays. I believe
sharing our knowledge and experience in this area is extremely beneficial to all of us.
My thoughts will be organized along three main dimensions. To begin with, I will highlight some of
the challenges that the SEE convergence process is facing, from Bank of Albania’ point of view.
Next, I will briefly describe how Albania is positioned across these dimensions. Lastly, I will try to
emphasise how the convergence process itself can be enhanced to anchor our policymaking.
1. SEE convergence process challenges
The long-term political future and economic prosperity of the SEE region is firmly linked to EU
convergence and integration processes. While individual countries have differences, a common
specific they all share is the economic and political benefits from the process.
The convergence process is difficult and full of challenges, most importantly, the risk of falling
into a ‘middle income trap’, a feature that is especially relevant given the slowdown in the speed
of convergence that the region experienced in the aftermath of the crisis. The main reasons that
can entrap an economy in a middle-income level are a low level of innovation, poor quality of
institutions and unfavourable demographics.
From  a  certain  point  of  view,  the  ability  of  any  country  to  move  up  the  development  ladder
depends  on  the  upgrade  of  its  internal  economic  system,  from  an  efficiency-driven  into  an
innovation-driven  economy.  Obviously,  upgrading  the  whole  economic  systems  and  adopting
best practices is easier said than done.
Diminishing marginal returns on labour and capital, as well as a reduced scope for total factor
productivity growth, coming mainly from imported technologies, decelerate growth and increase
the  risks  of  getting  stuck  in  a  ‘middle  income  trap’.  Therefore,  progression  to  the  next
development stage requires improvement of the human capital stock, facilitation and innovation
in production processes, advancement of domestically generated technology and expansion of
high value added exports. In a nutshell, the SEE countries need to transform themselves into
innovation-driven economies.
At this point, the role of institutions broadly determines the rule of law, the investment climate and
the  protection  of  intellectual  property,  the  quality  of  education  and  infrastructure,  as  well  as
access to finance. Upgrading institutions to EU standards is therefore of paramount importance.
2. The convergence process in Albania
Throughout  the  transition  period, Albania  has  experienced  a  relatively  fast  catch-up  process,
starting from a comparatively low income per capita level. This has, nevertheless, stalled after
the financial crisis. While Albania, currently a middle income country, has not fallen yet, in my
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
opinion, in ‘the middle income trap’, the risks of doing so are present.
Let me briefly examine why.
The  institutional  setup  in  Albania  has  been  largely  contributory  to  the  convergence  process.
Macroeconomic policymaking has improved considerably in the past years. The Bank of Albania
operates under an inflation targeting regime, modelled closely after the ECB’s framework. The
exchange rate is free floating, thereby facilitating the absorption of any adverse shocks. Fiscal
policy is on a steady consolidation path to reduce the country’s risk premia and enhance its fiscal
space in order to deal with potential future shocks. The authorities have adopted fiscal rules that
mandate a steady reduction of public debt. Several policy initiatives have been implemented to
strengthen financial stability. A de-euroization strategy has been developed and launched. Legal
impediments  to  collateral  execution  and  NPLs  resolution  have  been  overcome.  A  Bank
Resolution Law has been recently passed. In addition, the independence and efficiency of the
Financial Supervisory Authority and the Deposit Insurance Agency has been strengthened.
Despite  this  progress,  several  deep  structural  imbalances  still  exist  that  prevent  the
transformation  of  Albania  into  an  innovation-driven  economy.  According  to  the  WEF  Global
Competitiveness  Indicators,  we  are  still  lagging  behind  in  institutional  development,  business
sophistication, innovation, technological readiness, financial market development, rule of law, and
quality  of  the  judiciary.  In  order  to  tackle  those  impediments,  various  structural  reforms  have
been carried out in the public administration, in education, in the tax system and practices, in the
pension system and in the energy sector. Last year a major revise of the justice system was
approved  to  address  what  is  considered  one  of  the  main  bottlenecks  of  growth  and
competitiveness. Although  the  reform  is  still  being  implemented  and  it  is  early  to  assess  its
effects, it underscores the Albanian authorities’ commitment to address structural weaknesses.
On the other hand, Albania has benefited from a positive demographic position as a result of its
young and vibrant labour force, but has suffered from continuous net migration towards more
developed countries. While emigration has provided a steady flow of remittances and has eased
labour market pressures, it has also drained the country of its highly skilled labour force. The
latter might have long-term repercussions on innovation and can have implications on the so-far
convergence progress realised.
With that being said, let me now conclude.
3. Towards a steady convergence path
SEE countries are at risk of falling into ‘a middle income trap’. As such the economic systems
need  to  be  transformed,  through  carefully-designed  and  well-targeted  policies  that  promote
domestic innovation, modernise institutions, and cushion the effects of adverse demographics.
It  is  clear  that  the  load  of  reforms  remains  with  the  SEE  countries  authorities’  themselves. A
domestic  ownership  of  reforms  is  of  utmost  importance  for  the  democratic  process  and  the
ultimate success of convergence.
However,  while  these  policies  need  to  be  carried  out  regardless  of  external  factors,  EU
integration has a fundamental importance on economic convergence dynamics.
After  the  economic  and  financial  crisis,  appetite  for  further  EU  enlargement  declined,  due  to
waning popular support and shifting policy priorities towards reform. As the EU’s mood drifted
away  from  enlargement  and  from  further  integration,  countries  relaxed  their  drive  for  reform.
These developments coincided, or let me rather say, induced a stall in the convergence process
in several SEE countries.
As a final thought, the EU institutions themselves can facilitate this process further through:
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Providing transparent and objective EU integration guidelines;
Emphasising the need of institutional convergence throughout this process;
Continued monitoring and reporting on the progress of individual countries.
On  one  hand,  this  will  enhance  the  positive  leverage  of  the  EU  integration  process  on  the
development  of  our  countries  and  societies.  On  the  other,  it  will  increase  the  cost  of  non-
compliance and possibly induce positive compliance competition amongst the countries in the
region.
Thank You!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
