Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Supporting the backbone as we sprint
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippine  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry's  (PCCI)  43rd
Philippine Business Conference and Expo, Manila, 18 October 2017.
 PCCI President George Barcelon; Philippine Business Conference and Expo Chair  Joey Leviste,
Undersecretary Jonas Leones, co-workers in government; PCCI officers and members, special
guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Thank you Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI) for the opportunity to speak
during this 43rd Philippine Business Conference and Expo.
I am often asked how the BSP addresses wealth inequality and if we support Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).  While this is not directly written in our charter, we approach our
mandate with precisely this as a key strategic goal.
Maintaining Price and Financial Stability Benefit All Sectors
Maintaining price and financial stability are the BSP’s primary mandates. Keeping inflation low
and  stable  benefits  everyone,  especially  MSMEs.    A  managed  inflation  and  stable  financial
system allow MSMEs the best foundation to grow.  Reduced uncertainty allows expansion.
In  this  regard,  I  am  happy  to  report  that  amidst  various  challenges,  the  domestic  economy
continued to deliver on all fronts.  Real GDP grew by 6.5 percent in the second quarter of 2017,
making  us  one  of  the  fastest  growing  economies  in  Asia.  This  also  extends  our  streak  of
uninterrupted growth for 74 consecutive quarters.
Let  me  stress  that  beyond  the  nominal  numbers,  we  also  emphasize  the  quality  of  growth.
Economic  expansion  is  driven  by  broad-based  factors  with  the  re-emergence  of  the  industry
sector, particularly manufacturing, as another key growth driver.  We are optimistic that we will
be able to achieve our high growth targets of 6.5 – 7.5 percent this year and even faster beyond,
fuelled  by  the  massive  infrastructure  agenda  of  the  government.  Government  investment
spending, which picked up in Q2, confirms this important direction.
The positive alignment between growth and inflation has been a sustained narrative.  Maintaining
price stability amid a challenging global and domestic environment validates our inflation targeting
framework.    Inflation  expectations  continue  to  be  well-anchored.    The  year-to-date  average
inflation rate of 3.1 percent puts us firmly on track to stay within the target range of 3.0 percent ±
1.0 percentage point for 2017. In spite of recent inflation pick-up, we project average inflation in
2017 to remain at about 3.2 percent.  This is also our forecast for 2018–2019.
The  sound  and  stable  condition  of  Philippine  banks  has  also  been  one  of  the  anchors  of
sustained  performance  of  the  domestic  economy.    Over  the  medium-term,  we  expect  the
country’s  banking  system  to  continue  its  robust  performance  based  on  sound  fundamentals. 
The  reforms  pursued  by  the  BSP,  along  with  banks’  commitment  to  improve  their  ability  and
capacity to manage risks have resulted in significant improvements in the quality of bank assets
and capital.
In terms of the country’s overall external payments position, the balance of payments as of the
first eight months of 2017, posted a deficit of US$1.39 billion. This is sustainable and represents
less than one percent of GDP.  This can be readily financed.
The balance of payments deficit can be attributed, in part, to stronger growth in imports as the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy  continues  to  expand  rapidly  and  ramps  up  investments.    The  deficit  also  reflects
rebalancing  of  portfolio  capital  flows  in  line  with  potential  monetary  policy  normalization  in
advanced economies. Similarly, some residents are pre-paying their foreign debt to manage their
risk exposures.  We are likewise seeing a pick-up in outward investments both to take advantage
of regional business opportunities and to diversify investment portfolios.  We look at all these as
healthy developments that support economic growth and resilience.
In  the  meantime,  we  stay  calm  as  the  country’s  gross  international  reserves  (GIR)  remained
ample  as  of  end-September  2017  at  US$81.4  billion.    This  is  more  than  enough  to  cover  8.5
months of imports of goods and services and 5.5 times the country’s short-term debt obligations.
As part of the adjustment mechanism we employ to protect our economy, we have allowed a
modest and gradual depreciation of the peso.  This flexibility makes us more resilient, prevents
overheating, and enhances the price competitiveness of our exports of goods and services. 
Supporting the Backbone
 Since I began this speech, I have mentioned the word “growth” several times... As the economy
grows (AND as we prepare to sprint forward) it is important to support our backbone.  MSME
sector is the backbone and a crucial driver of our economy.
We  all  know  the  statistics.  MSMEs  comprise  99.5  percent  of  all  registered  business  firms
nationwide and contribute the largest share of total jobs generated at 61.6 percent.  However,
MSMEs account for only 35.7 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product!
MSMEs  are  unable  to  reach  their  full  potential  due  to  a  range  of  barriers,  including  financial
access, characteristic of MSMEs even in other countries. Indeed, bank lending to MSME leave
1/
much to be desired, comprising only 6.1% of total loan portfolio.
  80% of SME investments are
internally financed compared to only 10% that are bank financed.
Giant Leaps Bridge Gaps
At the BSP, we are troubled by these numbers and take them seriously.  We have been hard at
work providing the regulatory environment that will create a more inclusive financial system.  We
strongly  believe  that  the  deeply  ingrained  barriers  to  financial  access  –  cost,  information
asymmetry,  and  lack  of  infrastructure,  among  others  –  are  market  frictions  that  can  be
addressed without compromising on other policy objectives.
Enabling Access to MSME Credit
To promote MSME access to finance, we have pursued continuing prudential reforms to improve
the  overall  environment  for  credit  allocation  in  the  economy.    We  implemented  the
comprehensive credit risk management (CRM) guidelines for banks under Circular No. 855. The
rationale is that with robust credit risk management, banks can be more flexible, extend more
credit, and implement innovative credit products and lending programs. The intention is for banks
to  focus  on  cash  flow  analysis  and  ability-to-pay  rather  than  collateral  when  determining  a
borrower’s  creditworthiness.    Collateral  (particularly  real  estate)  should  only  play  a  secondary
role in credit decisions.  This addresses a significant issue since MSMEs often lack collateral
even if these are fundamentally good businesses.
 In  addition  to  providing  an  enabling  regulatory  environment,  the  BSP  also  initiated  the  Credit
Surety  Fund  (CSF)  program  as  convenor  and  promoter.    The  CSF  is  a  credit  enhancement
scheme to improve the credit worthiness of MSMEs that experience difficulty in obtaining bank
loans.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Early this month, the 50th CSF was established in Cauayan City, Isabela and the 51st CSF will
be launched in two (2) weeks in Batangas City. The program already covers 31 provinces and 19
cities nationwide. 
Expanding Network
Our progressive regulatory issuances have allowed a wider range of financial products, a more
expanded physical and virtual reach of financial services, more competition, easier on-boarding
of customers, and more protection for financial consumers. 
To  date,  the  wide  range  of  microfinance  services  of  banks  cover  nearly  1.7  million
microentrepreneurs  with  an  outstanding  portfolio  of  P13  Billion.    Bank’s  microbanking  offices
(MBOs)  have  allowed  cities  and  municipalities  previously  with  no  banking  presence  to  enjoy
banking  services.  There  are  now  747  MBOs  in  434  cities  and  municipalities  all  over  the
archipelago  .  We  expect  this  to  further  expand  with  our  recent  issuance  (Circular  No.  940)
allowing third party retail outlets to function as bank cash agents.
Complementing this is Circular No. 950 on the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act. 
This  allows  implementation  of  reduced  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  rules  for  certain  low-risk
accounts and the use of technology for face-to-face contact requirements. These amendments
aim to facilitate frictionless customer on-boarding which is currently a major pain point for those
reaching unserved and underserved markets.
The Digital Leap
Building on the gains of our policy initiatives over the years, we are setting our sights on digital
innovation.  Digital solutions not only present opportunities for cost savings and efficiency gains,
but also provide potential break-through in reaching the unserved and underserved markets on a
massive scale.
The BSP’s approach has been to scale regulations according to the risks involved to ensure that
beneficial  innovations  and  efforts  for  financial  inclusion  are  not  hampered  by  unwarranted
compliance burden. 
Currently, the BSP is working closely with various innovators on the launch of additional digital
financial services covering mobile financial services via social network, online micro-investment
platform, and use of digital cash.
Moreover, the BSP has been working closely with the national government for the implementation
of a biometric-based digital identity system.  The initiative is envisioned to facilitate the provision
of  more  efficient,  transparent  and  equitable  government  and  financial  services,  especially  to
those who have been disenfranchised due to lack of an acceptable ID.
Finally, the BSP is currently working with the industry towards enabling more Filipinos to have
access to a transaction account to send and receive payments via any electronic device through
the National Retail Payment System (NRPS).  The NRPS, and the payment ecosystem that is
envisioned  to  arise  from  it,  is  positioned  to  be  a  platform  for  fintech  innovations.  This  can
dramatically  lower  the  cost  of  doing  business  for  our  MSMEs,  as  well  as  enable  more    e-
commerce.  Work  has  been  ongoing  here  and  we  look  forward  to  launching,  next  month,  the
Batch Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) Credit to be called “PESO Net” and following that, the Real
Time Low Value Push ACH or “InstaPay”.  Our MSMEs will surely benefit from these initiatives by
broadening  their  customer  reach,  reducing  the  cost  of  managing  cash,  and  providing  greater
access to credit.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Stepping and Leaping Together to Bridge Gaps
While much has been accomplished, the figures on MSME financing show that more needs to be
done. An MSME finance ecosystem that services the needs of MSMEs at various stages of their
growth path must be in place. These services are not exclusively bank credit but involve a mix of
providers and products  that are suited to the MSMEs needs and capacities.
There  is  an  urgent  need  to  develop  financial  infrastructure  to  support  MSME  financing.  This
includes a credit information system, efficient secured transaction registries and a well-run credit
guarantee  system.      We  are  also  very  focused  in  pursuing  ambitious  reforms  to  deepen  our
domestic  debt  market  and  to  further  liberalize  our  foreign  exchange  regime  to  make  doing
business generally easier.  The BSP is closely working with partners in government, the private
sector, and international organizations on all these fronts and will stay engaged and supportive of
these important initiatives.
However,  coordination  and  collaboration  of  multiple  players  is  needed.    Only  through  our
cumulative efforts will MSMEs be provided greater and affordable access to capital and finance.
This will allow them to engage in more productive, innovative, and profitable activities contributing
to national development.
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the BSP, I am very honored to share this vision of synergy
and cooperation with you.  Let us take the steps and leap forward together.
Thank you and mabuhay tayong lahat!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
