   Annual Financial Lunch of the French Chamber of Great Britain 
London, 23 November 2017 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
 “Europe, France and the United Kingdom:  
facing our common economic challenges” 
         Press contact: Clémence Choutet (+ 33 1 42 97 74 51; clemence.choutet@banque-france.fr). 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 5 
It is a pleasure to be in London today and I wish to thank you for inviting me to speak at your 
Annual  Financial  Lunch.  The  destiny  of  France  and  the  United  Kingdom  has  indeed  been 
linked  for  a  very  long  time;  the  existence  of  the  French  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Great 
Britain, which was established 143 years ago, is a good illustration of these firm and lasting 
ties. In this regard, I would like to express our full solidarity for the series of terrorist attacks 
that hit London recently. King Georges VI declared in 1940, and his words still apply to this 
day, that: “It is not the walls that make the city, but the people who live within them. The walls 
of London may be battered, but the spirit of the Londoner stands resolute and undismayed.”  
I believe that the spirit of resilience that is so characteristic of Londoners is what we need the 
most in times of crisis. We are and will always remain close friends and partners, even if we 
will  no  longer  –  unfortunately  –  be  in  the  same  European  Club  when  Brexit  is  completed. 
Today, I will first elaborate on two challenges that will continue uniting us: the need for good 
national  economic  policies,  pro-business  and  long-term  oriented;  and  the  need  for  active 
multilateralism to face our global challenges. Then, I will dwell on a challenge that we will 
have to address together: our future relationship and Brexit.  
 
 I. 
The need for pro-business and long-term national economic policies  
Let me start with the challenge of national economic policies. In the euro area, the economic 
recovery is now robust and broadly-based across countries and sectors. GDP growth should 
stand at at least 2.2% in 2017 according to our ECB forecast. The ECB’s accommodative 
monetary policy has contributed to this acceleration of growth in the euro area. Yet monetary 
policy  cannot  be  the  only  game  in  town.  Structural  reforms  in  each  country,  along  with 
stronger European coordination, are of the essence to boost potential growth in the medium 
term and to treat the fatal disease of mass unemployment. In recent years, several European 
countries, including in Southern Europe, have successfully carried out in-depth reforms that 
are yielding positive results in terms of growth and employment. Germany, the Netherlands 
and  Nordic  countries,  as  well  as  Spain  and  Portugal,  are  proof  that  economic  success,  
a  solid  single  currency,  and  the  European  social  model  are  compatible.  We  should  run  
pro-business,  long-term  oriented,  fiscally  sound  economic  policies,  while  keeping  the  core 
elements  of  a  common  social  model,  which  can  be  the  DNA  and  pride  of  Europe  in  this 
highly divided world. The social model that we share in the Eurozone combines a high level 
of public service, relatively low levels of inequality – much lower than in the United States – 
and a good intensity of social dialogue. Call it “social market economy” if you want, without 
prejudice to the intense and legitimate debate within the UK today.  
Page 2 sur 5 
 
In France, growth has started to pick up, reaching 0.6% and 0.5% in the second and third 
quarters of 2017 respectively. However, despite strong job creation, the unemployment rate 
is  still  high,  at  9.4%  in  the  third  quarter  of  2017.  Therefore,  stepping  up  reforms  is  now  a 
priority in France too, with a focus on two main areas: sustainably consolidating our public 
finances,  and  aiming  to  achieve  a  structural  economic  transformation,  with  a  major 
simplification effort in the labour market, and large-scale investment in education, vocational 
training and apprenticeships.  
The  new  government,  under  Mr.  Macron’s  Presidency,  has  made  decisive  steps  in  that 
direction. I stress this as an independent central banker. As regards public finances, France 
still has one of the highest public spending levels among OECD countries, at 56% of GDP in 
2016. The French government is committed to reducing this ratio by 3 GDP points within the 
next 5 years. Besides, measures have been taken to keep public deficits below the threshold 
of  3%  of  GDP.  For  the  first  time  in  10  years,  the  government  deficit  should  be  below  this 
threshold in 2017 (2.9%). Needless to say, these efforts have to be pursued in the future, as 
the European Commission stressed yesterday while acknowledging the progress France had 
already made.    
As  regards  the  structural  transformation,  the  government  has  decided  to  act  rapidly  by 
passing legislation by decree in the first months of its mandate. A substantial labour market 
reform  was  approved  last  summer  and  has  already  been  implemented.  It  provides  more 
flexibility  to  firms  by  giving  social  partners  more  room  for  negotiation  and  reducing 
uncertainties  regarding  contract  terminations.  Moreover,  measures  were  announced  to 
promote employment by reducing labour costs: the transformation of the CICE – credit tax for 
competitiveness and employment – into a permanent reduction of social contributions, and 
the  transfer  of  social  contributions  financing  health  and  unemployment  insurance  to  a  flat 
income tax with a larger base (CSG). In addition, measures have been taken to reduce the 
tax  burden  on  investment;  the  abolition  of  wealth  tax  on  all  financial  investments,  the 
reduction  of  the  corporate  income  tax  towards  the  EU  average  or  the  flat  tax  at  30%  on 
capital  income.  By  supporting  equity  financing,  these  measures  should  hopefully  enhance 
the creation and development of firms, especially innovative SMEs. Funds will be devoted to 
vocational  training.  A  forthcoming  reform  of  vocational  training  and  apprenticeship  is 
expected  next  year,  which  is  badly  needed  as  the  French  economy  is  still  experiencing 
labour  shortages  despite  high  unemployment.  These  reforms  should  have  a  significant 
impact on growth and employment in the long term.  
   Page 3 sur 5 
II. 
The need for active multilateralism to face our global challenges. 
Let me now turn to my second point: the need for active multilateralism to face our global 
challenges.  In  the  current  context,  international  cooperation  between  countries  is  maybe 
more important than ever. Beyond the EU’s borders, and with all our partners, we have to 
strive to maintain the collective rules of the game in order to preserve the improvement in the 
global economic environment.  
The global recovery has indeed been gathering pace since 2016: according to the latest IMF 
forecast, global growth should stand at 3.6% in 2017, after 3.2% in 2016. However, there are 
two major risks threatening growth: first, financial instability, with the continued rise in global 
public and private debt since the start of the 2000s – from 190% of global GDP in 2001 to 
230%  in  2016.  The  2008  crisis  stemmed  from  this,  but  this  trend  has  unfortunately  not 
slowed down since; the private debt in emerging countries (namely corporate debt) has risen 
particularly rapidly. Any temptation to dilute the financial regulations implemented in the wake 
of the 2008 crisis would be all the more worrying.  
Since the G20 summits of London and Pittsburgh in 2009, the regulatory effort that has been 
undertaken  is  unprecedented,  in  particular  in  the  banking  sector:  by  increasing  both  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  banking  sector  own  funds,  the  Basel  III  reform  has  considerably 
enhanced the robustness of banks; in addition, it ensures better account is now taken of the 
diverse  risks  to  which  banks  are  exposed,  thanks  to  the  introduction  of  two  new  liquidity 
ratios  for  bank  cash  levels.  But  beyond  Basel  III,  we  should  finalise  measures  that  target 
non-banks.  We  must  ensure  a  balance  between  financing  channels.  The  priority  has  now 
shifted from the solvency of banks, which has improved substantially, to the liquidity of 
the shadow banking sector, particularly funds and asset management companies that are 
exposed to the risks of sudden panic-driven runs. 
We have to make sure that this internationally agreed regulatory framework is implemented 
everywhere with consistency. Unilateral deregulation would be nothing less than a lose-lose 
scenario with serious consequences for the stability of the global financial system – we would 
be paving the way for the next financial crisis – as well as the competitive landscape for US, 
British  and  European  banks.  As  Bank  of  England  Governor  and  Financial  Stability  Board 
Chair Mark Carney advocated in Washington in April, what we need is: “the combination of 
robust 
transparent 
implementation and intensive supervisory cooperation”.  
international  standards  and  greater 
trust  as  a  consequence  of 
The  second  risk  is  related  to  the  protectionist  tendencies  in  the  United  States,  after  the 
election  of  the  president.  We,  Europeans,  shoulder-to-shoulder  with  Canada,  Japan  and 
others  elsewhere,  must  resolutely  defend  international  economic  relations  based  on 
 
commonly  respected  rules  and  multilateral  institutions:  their  deterioration  would  dampen 
world trade and economic activity. 
Page 4 sur 5 
 III. 
Our future relationship and Brexit. 
There is one obvious challenge nevertheless that we will have to face together: our future 
relationship and Brexit. A year and a half ago, the British people chose to leave the EU and, 
even  if  we  regret  it,  we  respect  this  democratic  decision.  Now  we  have  to  work  towards 
reducing uncertainty and the negative impact it may have for the United Kingdom and, albeit 
to a lesser extent, for the European Union. The Banque de France is not directly involved in 
the  Brexit  negotiations;  this  falls  within  the  remit  of  governments  and  the  European 
Commission,  and  more  specifically  Michel  Barnier,  who  is  conducting  this  mission  with 
impressive commitment. I sincerely wish that we can achieve a constructive agreement. Let 
me say it loud and clear: no one is seeking to punish the UK in any way and we truly hope to 
keep the UK as a close partner. 
But preserving the interests of the EU, its citizens, its businesses, its Member States, means 
that the agreement with the UK should not undermine what we have managed to achieve in 
Europe in the economic field: one of our strongest assets is our single market; it removes all 
internal borders and regulatory obstacles to the free movement of goods, capital, services, 
and persons in the European Union. For the sake of consistency, there is one principle in 
particular to which we have to stick in preparing the agreement between the EU and the UK: 
in  the  single  market,  you  cannot  separate  access  and  rules.  For  the  financial  services 
industry, this means that you can hardly expect to obtain a European passport if you do not 
accept the single market's rules.  
London is and will remain in the future a global financial centre, but the architecture of the 
European  financial  system  may  have  to  evolve  in  this  regard.  We  cannot  foresee  the 
outcome  of  the  negotiations  –  which  I  hope  will  be  in  the  interest  of  both  parties  –  but  all 
actors should as of now undertake all the necessary preparations to avoid any potential “cliff-
edge” risk. London will and should probably continue to attract and transform savings from all 
over the world. In this respect, on a more personal note, allow me to comment on what I read 
with  surprise  in  some  British  newspapers  last  July:  I  personally  never  met  with  the  City’s 
Special Representative to the EU, Mr Browne, and the Banque de France has never wished 
for Brexit to be detrimental to the City of London, and we have friendly and frequent contact 
with the City of London Corporation.  
But, besides savings from the rest of the world, the savings of the EU-27 Member States will 
be increasingly handled within the single market, given its significant size and the safety of its 
 
rules. This means that we will move towards some degree of “Europeanisation” for wholesale 
banks, insurers and asset managers.  
Page 5 sur 5 
It is symmetrically the duty of Europe and its member countries to be business-friendly and 
attractive  to  the  financial  industry.  We  should  not  achieve  this  by  lowering  the  bar  for  our 
common  regulations:  the  SSM,  EIOPA  and  ESMA  are  duly  mobilised  to  prevent  certain 
entities that keep their resources outside the EU from setting up empty shell corporations in 
the EU, mere company name plates, to benefit from passporting rights. We should rather be 
attractive  by  offering  a  stable  and 
including 
infrastructures,  labour  skills  and  labour  laws,  and  taxes.  There  is  some  fair  but  positive 
emulation  in  this  regard.  In  this  new  environment,  the  Paris  financial  centre  has  obvious 
advantages,  building  on  the  very  welcome  measures  announced  in  July  by  our  Prime 
Minister  to  strengthen  Paris’  attractiveness.  To  name  a  few,  France  has  the  biggest 
investment banks in continental Europe, the largest asset management industry and is the 
leading  private  equity  investor;  and  French  universities  are  renowned  worldwide  for  the 
excellence of their finance teaching. And, last but not least, Paris will have the privilege of 
welcoming the EBA. 
favourable 
framework 
investors, 
for 
Furthermore, the euro area has to keep control of the risks regarding its currency, the euro, 
and euro-based transactions. Some financial market infrastructures located in London, which 
are key for the EU, will soon become off-shore to the EU as a consequence of Brexit. This is 
particularly  problematic  when  these  infrastructures  could  put  the  EU’s  financial  stability  at 
risk, as they represent 70% of the daily euro clearing business, equivalent to around EUR 
930  billion  (GBP  792  billion)  in  trades  per  dayi.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Commission 
proposed – and we support – a location policy for CCPs. Clearing activities in euro, for all 
those  of  “super-systemic”  importance,  must  be  located  where  the  supervision  of  the 
Eurosystem can be exercised effectively. It is a matter of consistency for monetary policy and 
financial stability.  
 To  conclude,  let  me  quote  a  sentence  attributed  to  one  of  the  great  British  statesmen, 
Benjamin Disraeli: “circumstances are beyond human control, but our conduct is in our own 
power.” We are indeed going through a difficult period, which puts the friendship between our 
countries  to  the  test.  But  we  have  to  face  it  together.  Our  objective  should  be  to  reach  a 
lasting  and  consistent  agreement  allowing  our  countries  to  remain  closely  linked  to  each 
other in the future. I believe that it is our common desire and interest. Thank you for your 
attention. 
                                                            
i House of Lords, report 2016 ; https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldeucom/81/81.pdf 
