Ed Sibley: Is it legal? A question of culture
Speech  by  Mr  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Eversheds
Sutherland  Conference  "Leadership  and  Culture  Change  in  Financial  Services",  Dublin,  14
November 2017.
 With thanks to Claire Lanigan, Ciara Murphy, Claire Nevin and Enda Nolan for their assistance
in drafting
Introduction
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here this morning to speak at this well-
timed and highly relevant event.   
There  has  been  much  discussion  on  culture  in  Irish  financial  services  in  recent  months,
particularly, but not exclusively, with reference to the Irish retail banks. 
1
I  spoke  at  an  event  recently   during  which  I  highlighted  the  breakdown  in  public  trust  and
confidence in banking, and the need for meaningful cultural change to repair and restore trust.   I
will expand further on this issue today as it extends beyond banking, and will also cover the work
of the Central Bank with regard to behaviour and culture and the connected topic of diversity.   
The importance of culture
Culture is a somewhat nebulous concept, and much more difficult to define and measure than
profitability,  pricing,  compliance  with  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  minimum  capital
requirements, liquidity coverage ratios, and so on.  But, that does not make it any less important
2
– as the saying goes, it eats strategy for breakfast .
The Financial Stability Board defines culture as an “institution’s norms, attitudes and behaviours
related to risk awareness, risk taking and risk management, or the institution’s risk culture."  Or
to  put  in  another  way,  an  organisation’s  culture  is  formed  by  the  assumptions,  values,
expectations and beliefs, which drive behaviours of staff. When we talk about culture, what we
are really talking about is behaviour.   
3
Culture therefore drives the values and beliefs that govern how individuals treat others, perform
their  tasks,  take  decisions,  assess  risk,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  do  the  right  thing  to
ensure  they  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.  It  is  the  foundation  upon  which  effective
governance is built and is critical to firms’ long-term prosperity. Importantly, experience  shows
that behaviour has a predictive value with respect to firms’ future stability.
4
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  regulated  firms’  behaviours  and  cultures  are  within  the  purview  of
regulators, both from a prudential and a conduct perspective .  
5
While culture may be somewhat nebulous, the impacts of cultural problems are not.  The list of
scandals affecting both the treatment of customers and the financial strength of firms is long and
inglorious.    These  are  not  limited  to  financial  services,  as  we  can  see  from  politics,  and  the
entertainment, telecoms, airline industries and so on, but pension misselling, payment protection
insurance  misselling,  LIBOR  rigging,  ‘rogue’  trading,  and  so  on,  and  most  recently  tracker
mortgages  have  had  a  corrosive  effect  on  trust  in  financial  services. As  has,  obviously,  the
catalogue of failures that led to the financial crisis, the effects of which are still very much with us
today. 
It is clear that there were multiple failures and multiple individual and collective decisions leading
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
up to the financial crisis, for example, collective groupthink, business model and strategy failures,
governance  and  control  issues,  financial  misconduct,  excessive  optimism,  regulatory  failures,
political interference and so on.  There are behavioural and cultural linkages across all of these
failures.
The behaviours and underlying cultures within financial services firms were wholly inappropriate. 
Short  termism  was  incentivised,  particularly  with  respect  to  shareholder  returns.    Effective
internal challenge of the prevailing views was not. 
Decisions were made in the short-term interest of the shareholder (or at least management’s
interpretation of it), and whether decisions were legal, with too little consideration of whether they
were ethical or in the interests of the customer.  Ironically, this behaviour has been massively
destructive for long-term shareholder value, as well as customers, and financial stability.
Unfortunately, as the tracker mortgage scandal has amply demonstrated, this ‘is it legal?’ attitude
still pervades in too many institutions.  On this specific point, the Central Bank is under no illusion
that  continued  and  concerted  pressure  is  required  to  ensure  all  affected  customers  receive
redress and compensation and banks comply with our findings.  I expect all the main banks will
be subject to Central Bank enforcement investigations. As part of these investigations, interviews
with relevant individuals have been and will be conducted, and large volumes of documentation
have been and will continue to be gathered and reviewed. 
Moreover,  I  expect  the  boards,  the  individuals  on  the  boards  and  the  executives  to  be
accountable  and  to  be  held  to  account  for  not  only  the  initial  decisions  which  started  the
consumer detriment, but the persistent and ongoing behaviours and decisions that magnified this
harm over an extended period.  As well as answering to the Central Bank, I would expect them
collectively  and  individually  to  be  taking  a  long  hard  look  in  the  mirror,  and  as  pre-approved
control function holders to be actively considering their responsibilities regarding disclosure and
whistleblowing.
In more general terms, as the reputation of financial services firms has been damaged there is a
tendency for a greater degree of commoditisation of services, products and product providers.  If
consumers do not trust providers or their products, they are understandably going to be more
driven by price, when other factors may also be important in terms of suitability.  Concerns are
so  deep  rooted  that  there  is  a  lack  of  trust  regarding  pricing  (e.g.  car  insurance,  mortgage
pricing), and customer treatment (e.g. re mortgage and SME borrowers in distress). 
In  this  context,  it  is  unsurprising  that  the  Central  Bank,  together  with  other  international
supervisory  bodies,  including, inter  alia:  the  Bank  of  International  Settlements,  the  European
Central Bank; the Group of 20; the New York Federal Reserve and the Bank of England  have
identified culture as an important issue.
What does good look like?
6
While  regulators  have  strengthened  the  structural  requirements  around  governance  risk,
including remuneration rules, these rules are only a partial solution and are not sufficient to drive
appropriate culture in firms, which is the responsibility of the board and senior management.
In its paper on Banking Conduct and Culture: A Call for Sustained and Comprehensive Reform,
the  G30  outlined  that  “Banks  should  specify  their  cultural  aspirations  through  a  robust  set  of
principles,  and  fashion  mechanisms  that  deliver  high  standards  of  values  and  associated
conduct  consistent  with  the  firm’s  purpose  and  broader  role  in  society" .  While  focused  on
banks, this paper resonates and is relevant across other financial services sectors.
7
Although there is no one action that will ensure that a good culture is achieved, there are clear
actions  that  can  be  taken  to  seek  to  ensure  a  firm’s  culture  is  improved  and  in  line  with  that
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
espoused by the board. These include:
1.     The board taking responsibility for the culture of the firm and understanding the behaviours
that culture drives – for example through the establishment of an ethics subcommittee to the
Board; or a measurement or monitoring by the board of the firm’s culture through engagement
with management, employee surveys or employee focus groups.
2.     The board overseeing (e.g. through an ethics subcommittee):
recruitment policy,
hiring decisions,
implementation of remuneration policies that reward and incentivise appropriate behaviours
in line with the desired culture; and
reviews  of  board  effectiveness,  committee  structures  and  staff  performance  review
processes.
3.          The  board  overseeing  product  development  and  usage,  including  considering  how
behavioural economics and marketing are being used, to ensure that customer interests are at
the heart of the process – i.e. products are truly in the customers’ best interests, and not taking
advantage of, for example, short term benefits with longer term costs.
4.     As I will come to, the board actively promoting diversity and inclusion at all levels of the firm
to improve decision-making.
5.     Requiring Internal Audit to include a culture audit in the annual audit plan. This might include
the extent to which culture is cascaded by the articulation of expected behaviours.
6.     Ensuring all three lines of defence have a responsibility for driving culture at a business line
level  rather  than  enterprise  level  so  that  culture  is  truly  embedded  in  the  institution’s  risk
management framework.
7.     Ensuring incentivisation (in its broadest sense, i.e. not just financial) is fundamentally linked
to  appropriate  behaviours;  for  example,  ensuring  promotion,  recognition,  and  the  variable
compensation element of remuneration is consistent with the behaviours expected of employees
to ensure the culture of the firm is reinforced.
8.     Driving consistent communication of the desired culture from the Board, recognising the
importance of ‘tone from the top’, to all staff levels of an institution.
9.     Actively celebrating, incentivising (e.g. recognising and promoting), those who come forward
to identify issues and behaviours that are not in line with or at least risk factors regarding the
espoused values and desired culture of the firm.
And all of the above to be informed by questions that not only relate to whether the actions are
legal, or in compliance with regulatory requirements (important as they are), but rather questions
such as:
Is this sustainable?
Is it in the long-term interests of our customers?
Does this fit with our espoused values?
Is this right?
How are my staff incentivised to act? and
How does my organisation treat people that raise problems, issues and concerns?
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Diversity
There is strong evidence that diversity and inclusion has a role to play in improving culture. 
Groupthink  has  been  identified  as  a  contributing  factor  to  the  financial  crisis.  There  is  strong
research  to  show  that  diversity  at  senior  levels  of  regulated  entities  can  help  to  reduce  the
8
likelihood  of  groupthink,   improve  decision-making,   increase  the  level  of  challenge,
  and
improve risk management.
10
11
9
There  are  also  increasing  numbers  of  studies  that  show  that  diversity  is  a  competitive
differentiator;  specifically,  that  when  companies  embrace  gender  and  ethnic  diversity  at  the
leadership level, they are more likely to be successful – or to put it another way, they are less
likely to fail. Correlation and causation are sometimes difficult to determine, but the correlation
between greater diversity and business performance is certainly clear.
12
McKinsey’s   research  in  this  area  suggests  that  companies  in  the  top  quartile  for  gender  or
racial and ethnic diversity are more likely to have financial returns above their national industry
medians.  Companies  in  the  bottom  quartile  in  these  dimensions  are  statistically  less  likely  to
achieve above-average returns.
In my own experience, a lack of diversity at senior management and board level in organisations
is a leading indicator of elevated behaviour and culture risks – again as evidenced in the tracker
mortgage scandal.
In this context, it is concerning that a significant imbalance in gender and other diversity aspects
remains at senior levels operating in most regulated firms in Ireland. Approximately 80% of the
most senior and influential appointments in regulated firms in Ireland between 2012 and 2016
were male.
  Comparisons are almost certainly worse for any other measure of diversity.  This
is not a unique circumstance in Ireland. The Empowering Productivity Report, sponsored by the
UK Treasury and the Bank of England, concluded that UK Financial Services had an average of
23% female representation on boards, but only 14% on Executive Committees.
13
14
This is not to suggest that diversity is all about gender.  Experiments from behavioural science
has  shown  the  importance  of  personality  types  on  our  risk  taking  behaviours.  These  findings
suggest that having a board made up of more optimistic individuals than pessimistic individuals
is dangerous and should be avoided.
The  UK  Financial  Services Authority  report
  into  the  collapse  of  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland
identified  significant  overconfidence  by  board  members  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  and  in
particular  in  relation  to  the  acquisition  of  ABN  AMRO.  The  Dutch  Central  Bank
  has  also
identified  a  tendency  towards  consensus  and  optimism  in  organisations.  Overconfidence  and
optimism can depend on our biological makeup.
16
15
Studies have shown (e.g. Mischel)
 that more depressed people, who have a low psychological
immune system tend to self-rate their performance in various tests quite accurately. Individuals
with higher psychological immune systems tend to rate themselves far higher than their actual
performance (i.e. they are overconfident).
17
18
The cookie jar experiment
 asks people to estimate how many coins there are in a transparent
cookie jar. When people do this independently, the accuracy of the average judgement rises with
the number of estimates and is generally very close to the actual number of coins.  But if people
hear or see each other’s estimates, the mean can shift wildly up or down. This experiment has
been completed across many different groups by age, sex, culture and so on, all giving the same
result. The experiment highlights an important point; better results are achieved through diversity
and independent opinion.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As I have commented on in the past, we have reviewed a sample of diversity policies in regulated
firms, which many financial services firms are now required to have (under the CRD, Solvency II
and the Central Bank’s Corporate Governance Codes).   In the main, they are striking for their
lack of ambition. They should not just be about ticking the box from a compliance perspective –
again, that question of ‘is it legal’ arises. Much more is needed to be done, and our supervisory
efforts in this regard are going to increase.
Regulatory response
The Central Bank continues to enhance its approach to behaviour and culture, including learning
from international best practice.  Work has been undertaken in banks and insurance firms from a
prudential  perspective,  and  in  the  consumer  area  we  have  developed  a  framework  for  the
assessment  of  culture  in  regulated  entities.   As  has  been  well  documented,  this  work  will  be
expedited across the retail banks over the coming months, and be rolled out further after that.  
A variety of tools will be used to assess culture in regulated firms, including how boards and
senior  management  are  delivering  against  the  good  practices  outlined  earlier.    These  include
considering:
key risk indicators and triggers, for example; staff turnover, and risk appetite breaches;
approach to staff incentivisation;
staff training;
onsite inspections;
staff surveys;
board and executive management meetings observation;
interviews across the organisation; and
product design, development and monitoring (including how customers are incentivised).
This  is  not  with  the  aim  of  delivering  the  impossible  and  frankly  undesirable  outcome  of  a
standardised  culture  across  all  financial  services  firms,  but  of  assessing  the  extent  to  which
regulated  firms  are  delivering  the  cultures  they  espouse  and  identifying  improvements  that
reduce prudential and conduct risks. 
We expect institutions to  critically  evaluate  their  culture,  considering  what  type  of  culture  they
want to develop, how staff are incentivised to behave, and to be held to account as to whether
the culture they want is the culture they have and how would they know if it is not.
We will also be stepping up our work from a diversity and inclusion perspective – linked to our
work  on  culture.    It  will  increasingly  feature  in  our  ongoing  supervision  and  inspection  work,
supported  by  analytics.    We  expect  regulated  firms  to  meaningfully  address  diversity  and
inclusion  in  the  boardroom,  at  the  executive  level  and  the  pipeline  of  talent  needed  to  run  the
organisation in the long-term.
Conclusion
I will conclude here. 
Restoration of trust in the financial services system is necessary for the delivery of the Central
Bank’s  vision  for  financial  services  as  a  whole  –  specifically,  that  it  functions  well,  is  well-
managed and well-regulated and it serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the
long term.  Rebuilding trust, undoubtedly is in all of our interests.
In this context, culture is a critically important topic. I am under no illusions that creating the right
culture within organisations can be difficult to achieve. That does not mean that we should not
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
try, and in the effort, necessary improvements will be made.  These improvements will reduce
the risks of further failures to add to the litany of historic failures, and that when they do occur in
the future, they are identified and resolved more quickly.
When planning this speech, I had hoped to spend more time on positive aspects of culture, and
to give positive examples of it working well in certain firms.  The aim of this would have been to
differentiate between the good and the bad, to avoid dis-incentivising change, by suggesting that
all firms are the same.  I have chosen not to do this today, not because there are no examples of
good practice, but because I believe my limited time was better focused on the need for change. 
There are real opportunities for leadership (across sectors, and by individual firms) to turn the
dial, to drive change, to differentiate positively, to show: that the mistrust is no longer valid, that
lessons have been learnt, that you have demonstrably, definitively and permanently changed, and
that  the  behaviours  and  cultures  by  and  within  your  firms  and  industries  are  in  the  long  term
interest of both your customers and your shareholders.  
This  opportunity  for  change  is  every  bit  as  urgent  as  the  technology,  business  model  and
regulatory changes that are frequently focused on. 
I am still sceptical as to whether the cultures and values that firms espouse are, in many cases,
the ones that they really want and believe in, and will be sustained at moments of real pressure. 
But, it is my job to be sceptical.  It is your customers’ views that are more important, and it is the
treatment of them, that you are demonstrably putting them first, that is the true test. And only
through cultural change can you pass this test again and again, and in doing so, restore trust in
the system.
I thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Address to the Association of Compliance Officers - 10 November 2017
“Culture eats strategy for breakfast” was first articulated by Peter Druker.
Financial Stability Board Guidance on Supervisory Interaction with Financial Institutions on Risk Culture, 7 April
2014.
Examples:  Honohan  Report  2010  ‘  ..risky  borrowing  and  lending  behaviours’;  DIRT  inquiry  1986–1998
‘misbehaviour by banks in facilitating tax evasion’; Tracker mortgage review 2017.
For details on the Central Bank’s financial regulation structure, see Address to the Association of Compliance
Officers – 10 November 2017
Examples: Bank of International Settlements, 2016; ECB, 2015; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2017; Bank
of England, 2016.
Group of thirty (G30), Banking Conduct and Culture: A Call for Sustained and Comprehensive Reform, 2015.
Daily,  C.M.,  Dalton,  D.R.  and  Cannella,  A.A.  (2003) Corporate  governance:  Decades  of  dialogue  and
data. Academy  of  management  review,  28(3),  pp.371–382.;  Maznevski,  M.  L.  (1994) Understanding  our
differences: Performance in decision-making groups with diverse members. Human Relations, 47(5), pp. 531–
552.; Robinson, G. and Dechant, K. (1997) Building a business case for diversity. Academy of Management
Executive,  11,  pp.  164–177.;  Zelechowski,  D.  and  Bilimoria,  D.  (2004) Characteristics  of  women  and  men
corporate inside directors in the US. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 12(3), pp. 337–42.
Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H. and van Praag, M. (2013) The impact of gender diversity on the performance of
business teams: evidence from a field experiment. Management Science, 59, pp. 1514–1528.
Terjesen,  S.,  Sealy,  R.  and  Singh,  V.  (2009)  Women  directors  on  corporate  boards:  A  review  and  research
agenda. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 17(3), pp. 320–337
Adams,  R.B.  and  Ragunathan,  V.  (2015) Lehman  sisters. FIRN Research Paper.; Kirrane, S (2017)  Should
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  regulators  require  regulated  entities  to  have  gender  diversity  on  their  boards,  Warwick  Business
School.
Vivian Hunt, Dennis Layton, and Sara Prince, McKinsey & Company, January 2015.
See Central Bank of Ireland - Gender breakdown of applications received for certain roles in regulated firms
2012 to 2016.
Jayne-Anne  Gadhia,  CEO,  Virgin  Money, Empowering  Productivity  –  Harnessing  the  Talents  of  Women  in
Financial Services, March 2016.
FSA Report into failure of RBS, 2014.
DNB, Supervision of Behaviour and Culture, 2015.
Mischel.W , The Marshmallow Test: Why self-control is the engine of success. Little,Brown, and Company, 2014.
Kahneman, D. Thinking Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
