Peter  Praet:  Communicating  the  complexity  of  unconventional
monetary policy in EMU
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
2017 ECB Central Bank Communications Conference "Communications challenges  for  policy
effectiveness, accountability and reputation", Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2017.
 1
Central  bank  communication  has  been  fundamentally  affected  by  the  fallout  from  the  global
financial and economic crisis.  Throughout that period, central banks succeeded in preventing a
de-anchoring of inflation expectations. To do so, they adopted a broad range of unconventional
measures,  the  functioning  of  which  is  very  difficult  to  explain  to  the  public.  This  applies,  for
example, to the notion of negative nominal interest rates, which is hard to communicate because
it challenges the conventional wisdom that thrift and patience are virtues that deserve pecuniary
remuneration. Against this backdrop, I would like to discuss three communication challenges that
are particularly relevant to the euro area and the ECB’s monetary policy.
The  first  challenge  is  to  bear  in  mind  the  multi-country  nature  of  our  monetary  union,  which
requires communication to be tuned to the specific context of different national audiences so as
to ensure broad participation in the public debate on euro area monetary policy.
The second challenge for monetary policy communication is to take into account the increasing
complexity  of  monetary  policy  by  ensuring  consistency  over  time  and  clarifying  the  state
contingency of the policy stance. To ensure consistency over time, it is essential for the central
bank  to  adopt  a  clear  organising  framework,  centred  on  the  ultimate  objective,  for  the  ECB
consisting of price stability, and adhering to a state-contingent reaction function that determines
how  the  monetary  policy  stance  adjusts  to  changing  economic  conditions. As  the  economic
environment  that  monetary  policy  faces  may  indeed  be  subject  to  massive  swings,  state
contingency may entail pronounced differences in the monetary policy stance over time. This, in
turn,  requires  careful  explanation  –  in  particular  in  circumstances  that  call  for  unconventional
measures and, hence, leave markets and the general public without empirical precedent to help
them anticipate and rationalise the central bank’s actions.
The third challenge is for the communication framework to provide clarity on the use of specific
tools in a multi-instrument context, when the central bank reaction function acquires an additional
dimension. In normal times, the central bank reaction function mainly specifies the contingencies
for  loosening,  tightening  or  maintaining  a  given  policy  stance.  In  unconventional  times,  it  also
needs to spell out which tool would provide the first margin of adjustment if a change in policy
stance  were  to  appear  warranted,  and  how  the  adjustment  in  one  policy  instrument  would
interact with the others.
Reflecting the multi-country nature of Economic and Monetary Union
To gauge the complexity of monetary policy communication in a multi-country currency union,
just consider some of the headlines on the expanded asset purchase programme (APP) which
appeared in major newspapers in different countries, both inside and outside the euro area, in
January 2015.
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Starting from the outside perspective, reports in media outlets in the United States and the United
Kingdom  spanned  the  full  spectrum,  with  some  saying  that  the  ECB’s  “bond-buying  proposal
beats all expectations” and the ECB “gets it (almost) right”, while others felt that the “stimulus
may be too little or too late”.
Within the euro area, newspapers in some countries claimed the ECB was a “central bank going
the wrong way”, as the APP would fuel inflation and “make everything more expensive”. In other
countries  the  tone  was  markedly  different,  with  the  programme  considered  “convincing”  and
conducive to an economic environment in which “there’s no excuse for the recovery not to start”.
In addition to this wide range of media perspectives, the crisis has had a profound impact on the
way  in  which  the  public  views  institutions.  For  instance,  judging  from  different  Eurobarometer
surveys, trust in European institutions, including the ECB, clearly declined during the crisis and
has only started to recover in recent years (see Figure 1), while remaining consistently higher
than  the  levels  of  trust  enjoyed  by  national  governments  and  parliaments.  The  fall  and  rise  in
public trust in turn runs roughly in parallel with the performance of the economy, as reflected in,
for  instance,  the  unemployment  rate  –  a  point  that  also  emerges  from  systematic  empirical
2
analysis.
These levels of trust often coincide with a disconnect between, on the one hand, the way central
banks communicate their policies and, on the other hand, the public’s perception and awareness
of the goals that central banks try to achieve and the means by which they operate.  As Andy
Haldane remarked earlier this year, this disconnect means that we, as central bankers, have to
4
“rethink how and with whom we engage”.
3
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
   3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The level of trust in the ECB also differed greatly across countries in the years following the crisis
and the dispersion still remains above pre-crisis levels despite some recent declines (see Figure
2).  Such  widely  differing  perceptions  across  countries  pose  a  challenge  for  central  bank
communication in our monetary union.
The  ECB  has  sought  to  address  this  challenge  with  what  I  would  refer  to  as  a  “two-layered
federal structure of communication”.
The first layer consists of a set of “centralised” communication channels through which the ECB
discharges  its  duty  to  explain  its  euro  area-wide  policy  conduct  to  the  public  and  fulfils  the
accountability requirements vis-à-vis elected representatives as required by the Treaties.
These  channels  include:  the  introductory  statements  at  the  press  conferences  following  the
Governing  Council’s  monetary  policy  meetings,  in  which  the  President  explains  our  decisions
and summarises the economic and monetary analysis on which they were based; the monetary
policy accounts, which report, with additional detail, the deliberations leading up to the Governing
Council’s  decisions;  speeches  by  Governing  Council  Members;  a  panoply  of  publications
bringing together the economic, monetary and financial information that serves as input to the
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
underlying policy assessments; and our public accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament,
in the form of our Annual Reports, the President’s testimony before the Committee on Economic
and Monetary Affairs, and our replies to questions from Members of the European Parliament.
“decentralised”
These  centralised  communication  channels  are  complemented  by 
communication channels at national level where, in particular, the national central banks of the
Eurosystem  play  an  integral  role.  Equipped  with  in-depth  knowledge  of  their  respective
economies, and – literally and figuratively – sharing a common language with their audiences,
national  central  banks  are  essential  in  explaining  ECB  policies  to  the  broader  public  in  their
countries.  This  communication  with  national  audiences  is  also  important  given  that  economic
conditions may at times diverge in different parts of the euro area. The national central banks are
then  well  placed  to  correct  the  potential  dissonance  between  the  rationale  of  monetary  policy
actions tailored to the conditions of the euro area as a whole and those that national audiences
may  consider  more  appropriate  for  their  own  economies.  Explaining  the  common  monetary
policy  stance  in  a  national  context  is  in  practice  a  very  challenging  task,  especially  when
countries are hit by asymmetric shocks.
Reflecting the increasing complexity of monetary policy
The  challenge  for  communication  to  preserve  consistency,  acceptance  and  trust  across
geographies is accompanied by another, no less intricate, challenge: ensuring consistency over
time.
Central banks’ monetary policy instruments have undergone a sea change over the last decade.
The policy-controlled short-term interest rates of the ECB, the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of
England and the Bank of Japan dropped from levels between 4% and 5% to essentially zero (see
Figure 3) in a relatively short space of time. Since the beginning of the crisis, these central banks’
balance  sheets  have  grown  significantly  above  levels  that  for  decades  had  been  considered
typical (see Figure 4).
  5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
    6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Such a profound change in policy conduct requires us to carefully explain that consistency does
not mean constancy. Consistency means that we are faithful to our mandate and seek to deliver
the  monetary  policy  stance  that,  given  the  prevailing  economic  conditions,  maximises  our
chances of attaining our objective over the policy-relevant horizon. Pursuing our mandate has
entailed pronounced shifts in the frequency of policy changes and in the nature and composition
of instruments.
What is important, however, is that these shifts are governed by a clear organising framework
which: (i) centres on the ultimate objective, price stability for the ECB; (ii) embeds a view on the
monetary policy transmission mechanism that maps policy measures with the ultimate objective;
and  (iii)  yields  a  reaction  function  that  determines  how  the  monetary  policy  stance  adjusts  to
changing economic conditions. This organising framework provides a way for us to manage the
difficult balancing act of responding to material changes in the outlook for price stability in a timely
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
manner, while ensuring that there is sufficient evidence to justify our actions.
The key economic rationale for monetary policy communication is to make this reaction function
understood by markets and the broader public. It does so not only by announcing the prevailing
policy but also by stating the reasons and detailing the assessments that led the central bank to
adopt  it,  thereby  allowing  observers  to  more  efficiently  infer  patterns  than  would  be  possible
without such communication.
Moreover, in recent years, many central banks have gone a step further to make their reaction
function more transparent and concrete. Communication on the prevailing policy and the thinking
behind it has been complemented by guidance on the future policy course. In providing forward
guidance on their main policy tools, central banks have specified the time period over which they
expect or intend to preserve a certain instrument calibration and stipulated the contingencies that
would warrant a change in instrument calibration.
This  innovation  in  the  communication  framework  has  directly  served  to  signal  consistency  in
policy conduct at a time when, first, proximity to the effective lower bound on policy-controlled
short-term interest rates might have raised doubts as to the central bank’s options to deliver the
requisite  amount  of  monetary  easing;  and,  second,  the  adoption  of  new,  previously  unknown,
policy  tools  left  observers  without  a  clear  historical  reference  point  to  gauge  the  central  bank
reaction  function.  Furthermore,  especially  in  its  outcome-based  formulation,  forward  guidance
has  explicitly  maintained  the  state  contingency  of  policy  conduct  and  established  a  clear  link
between the policy objective and the future evolution of policy tools – a consideration that also
formed the backdrop for the Governing Council’s decision in October to reconfirm the outcome-
based  element  of  its  forward  guidance  on  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme,  which
remains contingent on a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
Overall, our forward guidance framework has left a clear imprint on the market’s ability to gauge
our  policy  intentions.  One  potential  metric  by  which  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of  forward
guidance on key ECB interest rates is the sensitivity of forward rates to macroeconomic news. In
the presence of clear guidance on the policy rate path, forward rates which embed investors’ rate
expectations should be less reactive – over short to medium-term horizons – to macroeconomic
surprises and instead be anchored by central bank communication. Observing this metric over
time, it becomes clear that the introduction of our measures – including the forward guidance on
policy rates – has been followed by a pronounced decline in the sensitivity of forward rates at the
shorter end of the term structure, where monetary policy expectations have the biggest impact,
while  rates  at  the  longer  end  have  remained  around  their  historical  average  (see  Figure
5).  Moreover, the more muted responsiveness that accompanied the introduction of the policy
package in mid-2014 also went along with a pronounced flattening of the short to medium-term
6
segment of the forward curve (see Figure 6).
5
  8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
   9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  have  been  communicating  about  our  asset  purchase  programme  by  disclosing  two
parameters: the pace of purchases per month, and a date by which the Governing Council could
end  the  net  purchases,  provided  we,  by  that  date,  see  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of
inflation consistent with our inflation aim.
This  combination  of  date-based  and  outcome-based  forward  guidance  has  made  it  easier  for
market participants to calculate the stimulus being provided each time our programme has been
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
(re)calibrated.  The  date-based  element  suggests  the  minimum  amount  of  stimulus  that  the
programme could be expected to deliver. The outcome-based element – very fundamentally –
ties the programme to our inflation aim.
Have market expectations internalised the state-contingent nature of our monetary policy? And
which  element  has  prevailed  in  shaping  market  expectations:  the  date-based  or  the  inflation-
contingent element?
Market expectations for the likeliest terminal date of the APP have not coincided with the “expiry
date”  communicated  in  the  most  recent  programme  recalibration,  but  have  instead  typically
extended beyond this expiry date. In other words: in forming their predictions about the most likely
date  for  purchases  to  end,  markets  have  not  just  looked  at  the  date-based  element  of  our
guidance.  They  have  also  considered  the  outcome-based  element,  which  allows  for  the
possibility of a purchase horizon extending beyond the expiry date, if that is necessary to attain a
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. This, in turn, indicates that the state contingency of
the APP has been well understood by market participants.
Clarifying the interaction between monetary policy instruments
In normal times, central banks adapted their monetary policy stance by influencing the level of
one short-term interest rate. In unconventional times, communication has had to cope with the
new  challenge  of  explaining  the  complementarities  between  policy  tools,  as  non-standard
monetary policy has become multidimensional.
To  ensure  that  their  reaction  function  is  understood,  central  banks  have  to  explain  how  their
policies take into account these essential complementarities in the transmission of the individual
tools  –  although  this  may  significantly  increase  the  complexity  of  the  messages  they  have  to
convey.  In  this  context,  it  is  perhaps  no  coincidence  that  the  complexity  of  the  introductory
statements delivered at the ECB’s press conferences, as measured by common indices of text
readability, has also increased, and started to do so just around the time when we began the
latest round of non-standard measures in mid-2014 (see Figure 7).
  11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  multi-instrument  policy  toolkit  is  more  complex  because  it  adds  a  further  dimension  to  the
central  bank  reaction  function.  It  not  only  has  to  map  contingencies  with  modifications  of  the
policy stance – it also needs to clarify which tool would provide the first margin of adjustment if a
change  in  the  policy  stance  were  to  appear  warranted  and  how  the  adjustment  in  one  policy
instrument would interact with the others.
This evolution in the policy toolkit has been fully reflected in the evolution of the ECB’s approach
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
to forward guidance in the different phases of the crisis. Forward guidance on interest rates was
first adopted in July 2013 as a means to insulate the euro area from the global financial turmoil
that had followed the so-called taper tantrum episode a few weeks earlier. This proved to be an
effective firewall. But the subdued inflation outlook, as well as other headwinds to the euro area
recovery,  stemming  from,  for  instance,  subdued  bank  credit,  required  a  more  comprehensive
policy package. So in the summer of 2014 we launched a complex package of policy measures
that were to be  adopted  in  a  sequential  and  state-contingent  manner  as  economic  conditions
evolved.
Given  the  essential  interaction  between  policy  tools  in  their  transmission  to  the  economy,  the
ECB accompanied the expanded asset purchase programme that it announced in January 2015
with an adjustment to the forward guidance framework, moving from a previously singular focus
on policy rates to a dual approach combining and integrating the different elements of guidance
7
on policy rates and asset purchases (see Figure 8).
Communication about the intended horizon of net asset purchases and the expected future path
of policy rates has been a key component of our policy strategy. Our forward guidance on policy
rates  has  acted  as  an  enabling  condition  for  the  purchases  to  exert  their  full  impact.  In  the
absence of reassurances that policy rates would remain anchored around levels close to their
lower bound for the entire life of the net purchases, the downward impact of asset purchases on
term premia could have been partly neutralised by expectations of rate increases. At the same
time, the conditionality attached to the intended horizon and size of our net asset purchases has
reinforced the signalling power of our forward guidance on rates.
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
.
Conclusion
Monetary policy communication faces several distinct challenges. It has to be accessible to and
useful for a variety of audiences. It has to be consistent in diverse economic circumstances. And
it has to clearly convey the central bank’s reaction function, also when the latter entails a diverse
set of instruments.
To  meet  these  challenges,  the  ECB’s  communication  uses  a  broad  range  of  channels  to
express the Governing Council’s policy intentions at euro area level and to explain it to national
audiences. It has made further efforts to make this reaction function understood by markets and
the  broader  public,  not  least  by  providing  detailed  information  on  the  thinking  underlying  its
actions. And, in recent years, it has made its reaction function more transparent and concrete by
adopting an integrated forward guidance framework.
We  will  continue  to  engage  with  the  general  public  and  to  guide  market  expectations  as  new
challenges  arise.  This  means  that  we  have  to  continue  reflecting  and  having  constructive
debates on how to shape central bank communication in the future.
1
2
I would like to thank Federic Holm-Hadulla for his support in the preparation of this speech.
See, for instance, Ehrmann M., Soudan, M. and Stracca, L. (2013), Explaining EU citizens’ trust in the ECB in
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
normal and crisis times, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 115(3), pp. 781-807. It is also interesting to
note that deteriorating economic and fiscal conditions in one euro area country seem to reduce the level of trust
in  the  EU  of  citizens  in  other  countries;  see  Ioannou  D.,  Jamet,  J.-F.  and  Kleibl,  J.  (2015), Spillovers  and
Euroscepticism, Working Paper Series, No 1815, ECB.
In this vein, see also the evidence in Ehrmann et al. (2013), which indicates that a “higher degree of knowledge
about the ECB generates more trust in normal times and even more so during the financial crisis”.
See  the  speech  given  by  Andrew  G.  Haldane,  Chief  Economist,  Bank  of  England  entitled A  Little  More
Conversation, A Little Less Action at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Macroeconomics and Monetary
Policy Conference on 31 March 2017.
See also Coenen, G., Ehrmann, M., Gaballo, G., Hoffmann, P., Nakov, A., Nardelli, S., Persson, E. and Strasser,
G. (2017), Communication of monetary policy in unconventional times, Working Paper Series, No 2080, ECB,
and the references quoted therein.
Given the unique structure of the euro area’s monetary policy transmission mechanism, anchoring the short
and intermediate segments of the yield curve around levels consistent with a very accommodative monetary
policy stance has been even more critical for the ECB than for other central banks engaging in similar policies.
For further details, see my speech at the Fixed Income Market Colloquium in Rome on 4 July 2017.
For additional details on the rationale of this forward guidance framework, see my remarks at the MMF Monetary
and Financial Policy Conference on 2 October 2017 in London.
3
4
5
6
7
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
