Ed  Sibley:  Innovation  and  insurance  in  Ireland  -  a  supervisory
perspective
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
to the Insurance Ireland, Annual President's Conference, Dublin, 29 November 2017.
 With thanks to Tim O’Hanrahan for his assistance in preparing these remarks.
Introduction
Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen. I would like to thank Insurance Ireland for the invitation to
speak to you today, at its Annual President’s Conference.
As this is my first speech to an insurance audience since my appointment as Deputy Governor, I
will  cover  three  broad  topics:  i)  the  work  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  (Central  Bank)  in  the
context of the European Supervisory Framework, ii) regulatory priorities for 2018; and iii) matters
most relevant to the theme of your conference today, “InsurTech & Innovation”.
Let  me  begin  by  acknowledging  the  insurance  industry’s  important  role  in  Ireland  for  both
individuals and businesses. From the provision of motor insurance to saving for the future and a
myriad of services in between, insurance firms play an important role in people’s lives on a daily
basis and play a vital role in the functioning of the economy.
As  insurance  is  such  an  important  activity,  effective  prudential  and  conduct  regulation  and
supervision  is  of  fundamental  importance.  Insurance  policyholders  need  to  understand  the
products they purchase and know that an insurance firm will provide cover throughout the term of
the insurance contract and have the financial strength to pay valid claims in the future.
1) European Supervisory framework
This brings me to the European insurance regulatory framework, which is part of the broader
European System of Financial Supervision. This includes the European Central Bank (ECB), the
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM);  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB);  the
European  Supervisory Authorities  (ESAs),  including  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupation
Pensions Authority (EIOPA); and National Competent Authorities (NCAs), such as the Central
Bank.
In the banking sector, the ECB is ultimately responsible for supervision, discharged through the
SSM, which comprises the ECB and NCAs. In the insurance sector, this is the responsibility of
the national authorities, operating as part of the wider European regulatory ecosystem, albeit one
that it is less hard-wired than for banking supervision.
Throughout  the  European  Union  (EU),  insurance  supervision  is  undertaken  in  line  with  the
Solvency II framework. This aims to ensure that insurance firms operating across the EU are
subject to the same regulatory and supervisory standards wherever they are based. EIOPA’s key
priorities  include  supporting  this  aim  through  the  driving  of  supervisory  convergence  and  the
building up of a common European supervisory culture . This reflects and supports the benefits
of a level playing field for the significant amount of cross border insurance activity across the EU.
1
EIOPA’s approach to delivering greater convergence includes, inter alia: conducting peer reviews
of national authorities, arranging platform  meetings between supervisory authorities, facilitating
bilateral  engagements  between  supervisory  authorities,  and  attending  supervisory  colleges.
EIOPA also publishes guidelines  on areas not covered by regulatory or implementing technical
2
3
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards and recommendations on the application of EU law.
National authorities are required to comply or explain why they are not in compliance with EIOPA
4
guidelines.  EIOPA  has  also  recently  published  a  common  supervisory  culture   document,  in
which it describes the key characteristics of high quality and effective supervision.
Central Bank of Ireland in context of European Supervisory Framework
This backdrop is important context to the Central Bank’s approach to regulation and supervision
of  the  insurance  sector.  Our  approach  recognises  the  fundamental  importance  of  this
framework, as a supervisor of purely domestic firms, of outwardly focused firms and for those
5
operating in Ireland through the right of establishment or freedom to provide services .
The importance of the European framework is reflected directly in my role as Deputy Governor. I
am a member of the Supervisory Board of the SSM, of the General Board of the ESRB, of the
Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority (EBA), and of the Board of Supervisors
of  EIOPA.  More  importantly,  my  teams  are  heavily  involved  with  the  various  bodies  in  the
European  supervisory  framework,  to  ensure  that  we  understand,  operate  to  and  influence  its
continued development and evolution.
Ireland plays an important role in the European insurance sector, with significant cross border
activity,  with  both  business  coming  into  and  from  Ireland.  It  is  important  that  our  supervisory
framework  is  designed  to  a  high  standard,  continually  updated  and  consistently  implemented.
The strength of the regulation and supervision of the firms providing services from Ireland across
the EU is critical to the reputation and attractiveness of Ireland as a prominent location of EU
insurance  provision,  as  well  as  to  the  discharging  of  our  European  financial  stability
responsibilities.  Driving  greater  convergence  of  supervision  and  regulation  in  other  EU
jurisdictions is critical to Irish financial stability and protecting Irish customers, as well as levelling
the playing field for domestic players.
The Central Bank will continue to prioritise delivering in line with, and making a strong contribution
to,  the  evolution  of  the  European  supervisory  framework.  This  remains  a  cornerstone  of  our
approach to both business as usual supervision and changes driven by Brexit.
One  area  where  greater  regulatory  convergence  is  needed  is  in  relation  to  recovery  and
resolution. The Central Bank does not operate a zero failure regime. All firms can face difficulties.
Some may recover, but others may fail. Where failure does occur, it should happen in an orderly
manner  without  significant  financial  stability  or  consumer  protection  issues.  An  appropriate
framework is necessary to ensure failure is managed in a manner that minimises the impacts on
financial stability, policyholders and beneficiaries in both home and host member states.
In banking, the recovery and resolution framework, while not perfected, is further advanced than
in  the  insurance  sector  and  lessons  can  be  learned  from  this  framework.  In  2017,  EIOPA
published an opinion calling for a minimum degree of harmonisation in the field of recovery and
resolution for insurers . In August, the ESRB published its view that an effective recovery and
resolution  framework  would  reduce  risks  to  financial  stability  from  a  failure  in  the  insurance
sector .  In  2018,  EIOPA  will  start  to  assess  the  need  of  a  harmonised  approach  to  national
insurance guarantee schemes. I am supportive of these efforts in this area.
2) Supervisory and regulatory priorities
6
7
I will turn now to our supervisory priorities for insurance firms.
The main, overarching objectives of prudential supervision of insurance firms is the safeguarding
of financial stability and the protection of policyholders and beneficiaries. In the Central Bank, we
are focussed on delivering an effective, intrusive, analytical and outcomes-focused approach to
 2 / 7
8
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervision. This is risk-based and anchored by our PRISM  supervisory methodology.
8
These objectives, which are directly relevant to any consideration of the opportunities and risks
relating to Insurtech & innovation, require that insurance firms:
have sufficient financial resources including under a plausible but severe stress;
have sustainable, capitally accretive business models, over the long-term;
are well governed, have an appropriate culture, with effective risk management and control
arrangements in place, which are commensurate with their nature, scale and complexity;
can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs; and
fully meet reporting and disclosure requirements.
Observations
So, if this is what I expect of insurance firms, what do I see? In my initial engagements, and
reflecting on the diligent work of my colleagues in insurance supervision, it is clear that there is
work to be done across the sector to meet these expectations (recognising that recovery and
resolution is a work in progress from a regulatory perspective).
When considering the sufficiency of financial resources, the prominence of significant amounts
of  risk  transfer  is  noteworthy.  This  is  clearly  a  legitimate  and  common  risk  management
technique.  However,  the  elevated  use  of  reinsurance  and  associated  capital  relief  and
counterparty  exposure  raises  questions  regarding  the  true  financial  strength  of  a  firm,  its
substance and counterparty credit risk. Unfortunately, we are also dealing with isolated examples
of deficiencies in the calculation of technical provisions, which is clearly of critical importance to
the financial strength of an insurance firm.
On a more positive note, the processes regarding Own Solvency and Risk Assessments, while
still requiring enhancement and bedding in, are proving to be a useful approach to determining
overall solvency needs.
In relation to the sustainability of business models, it is clear that there has been some recovery
in  the  non-life  sector  in  Ireland.  But  challenges  remain  across  both  life  and  non-life,  not  least
because  of  the  sustained  low  interest  environment.  Furthermore,  as  I  will  come  to,  digital
transformation will have a significant impact on the sector.
Solvency II requires that the system of governance shall be proportionate to the nature, scale and
complexity of the operations of the insurance undertaking. Many firms have complex products,
significant  outsourcing  with  high  levels  of  reinsurance,  and  there  is  a  need  to  enhance
governance,  risk  management  and  control  arrangements  in  line  with  this  complexity  and  the
associated risks.
Specific priorities for 2018
I will turn now to specific priorities for insurance supervision for 2018. The following areas will
feature in our priorities for next year:
i) Core supervisory activity: As referred to earlier, my number one priority is to ensure that my
teams deliver an effective, intrusive, analytical and outcomes-focused approach to supervision.
This involves our day to day supervisory team engagement with regulated firms, inspections and
analysis  –  the  three  core  functions  of  prudential  supervision.  We  will  follow  and  continue  to
enhance the PRISM framework with an emphasis on the core insurance risks including Pricing,
Underwriting,  Investment,  Reserving  and  Governance.  We  will  also  relentlessly  pursue
improvements  in  those  areas  that  I  identified  earlier,  to  bring  insurance  firms  within  our
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervisory risk appetite.
ii) Brexit: Brexit will have a direct and negative impact on the Irish economy. This impact will have
knock  on  effects  on  the  Irish  financial  services  system.  Even  in  a  best-case  scenario,  new
frictions and duplications, with associated costs, will emerge in the European financial services
system.  The  loss  of  the  UK  voice  from  the  European  system  of  financial  regulation  is  also
negative for Ireland.
There is considerable uncertainty and complexity for firms in dealing with Brexit, regarding, for
example contract continuity, portfolio transfers, reinsurance, appropriate governance structures
and regulatory treatment of third country branches by both the home and host state.
While some firms have robust plans that deal with a range of scenarios, other firms’ plans are
not  as  advanced  as  they  need  to  be.  Some  firms  have  not  considered  a  scenario  of  a  ‘hard’
Brexit with no transition period. More work is required to be prepared for this plausible scenario.
With  regard  to  Brexit  related  authorisations  and  approvals,  we  will  continue  to  prioritise  our
authorisation activity and continue to deliver on our commitment of being transparent, predictable
and consistent in our approach to authorisations and material business changes. Where Brexit
has  a  material  impact  on  business  strategy  and  business  models,  we  will  challenge  firms  to
ensure they appropriately address associated risks.
iii) Outsourcing: Outsourcing risks are a priority across the entire European supervisory system.
The issue is prominent in existing firms, and also in relation to Brexit related applications. There
are  clear  guidelines  regarding  material  outsourcing,  which  in  too  many  cases  are  not  being
adhered  to.  We  will  continue  to  review  how  regulated  entities  demonstrate  that  they  are
discharging  their  regulatory  obligations  when  they  outsource  functions  or  any  insurance  or
reinsurance activities, to both group and / or non-group companies.
iv)  Reporting  and  Disclosure:  I  recognise  the  very  significant  increase  in  reporting  obligations
associated with Solvency II, and the challenges these give rise to. In fact, the Central Bank is
having  to  assess  and  evolve  its  own  processes  to  deal  with  the  very  sizeable  increase  in
regulatory  data  submissions  across  all  sectors.  Nonetheless,  accurate,  timely  and  complete
regulatory  reporting  is  critical  to  the  effectiveness  of  supervision.  We  will  continue  to  assess
firms’ compliance with reporting and disclosure requirements on an on-going basis.
I will focus the remainder of my remarks on the main topic of today’s conference.
3) InsurTech & innovation
The risks, impacts and opportunities for the insurance industry arising from technology changes
are a key focus both locally and internationally. EIOPA  and the IAIS  have held roundtables and
issued papers on insurance technology (Insurtech) and financial technology (Fintech) firms.
10
9
History  is  replete  with  examples  of  industries  being  transformed,  created  and  disrupted  by
technology  changes.  This  dates  back  centuries,  but  the  pace  of  this  change  and  the  risks
associated with it are increasing, in what seems like an exponential way.
If one looks at the motor industry, some of the world’s largest technology companies and the
world’s  leading  car  manufacturers  are  all  investing  heavily  in  the  development  of  autonomous
systems that will change the very nature of driving, and, therefore, of motor insurance. In this
context,  it  is  noteworthy  that  motor  insurance  is  the  most  important  non-life  line  of  business
representing over 50% of the non-life market in several EU member states.
It is clear that change is coming. On this specific example, many questions arise, including:
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
who will be insured?
who will own the data generated by these vehicles?
how will the data be shared?
can the owner of the data better understand the risk profile of the vehicle and be able to offer
more tailored insurance?
It is clear that insurtech not only raises question in relation to what is insured, but how it will be
insured,  and  how  the  different  channels,  providers  and  products  combined  with  changing
customer  demands  will  impact  on  existing  insurance  firms.  Future  viability  is  dependent  on
answering  these  questions,  and  the  successful  adaption  of  business  models  to  meet  these
challenges.
As  you  will  doubtless  hear  from  other  speakers,  the  exponential  increase  in  the  availability,
collection, and interrogation of data is but one of these opportunities and challenges. Again, using
the  motor  insurance  industry  as  an  example,  we  can  see  a  sharp  increase  in  the  use  of
telematics and data analysis to improve the understanding of drivers’ behaviours. This provides
an ability to track behaviour, better price for risk and actively incentivise the reduction in risky
behaviours – so delivering positive impacts for road safety. This may reduce the number and the
severity of claims, which would be of obvious benefit to all, and ultimately should result in lower
premiums for policyholders.
As  the  volume  of  data  increases,  firms  must  invest  in  a  proper  data  governance  framework.
There  are  a  host  of  challenges  in  collecting,  analysing  and  understanding  the  data  to  make
appropriately  informed  decisions.  The  ability  to  collect  large  volumes  of  data  also  poses
questions  of  how  that  data  is  processed  and  used.  EIOPA  has  identified  possible  price
discrimination  issues  in  its  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  public  consultation  on
Fintech   and  US  regulators   have  spent  time  considering  "price  optimization"  tools,  which
determine the premium to be charged to policyholders.
11
12
The  Central  Bank  does  not  have  a  role  in  the  setting  of  premiums.  In  fact,  all  supervisory
authorities in the EU are explicitly prohibited by European law from doing so. However, we do
have a role from both a conduct and prudential perspective in considering how this data is used,
in both the interests of the firm and its shareholders, and its customers.
IT risk
As  the  digital  transformation  continues  in  the  insurance  industry,  information  technology  risks
increase,  both  in  terms  of  probability  and  impact.  The  insurance  industry  holds  particularly
sensitive personal data and there is a history of cyber attacks against insurance firms.
The  Central  Bank  continues  to  build  and  enhance  its  approach  to  IT  risks  to  enable  the
assessment and challenge of the effectiveness of regulated firms’ mitigation of these risks.
. This set out
A year ago, we published Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks
in  relatively  straightforward  terms,  our  minimum  expectations  of  firms,  of  all  types,  and  in
particular of their boards and senior management when it comes to addressing IT and cyber risk.
We have required assurance from external auditors of high impact insurance firms, regarding
their governance of cyber security risk and issued questionnaires to other insurance firms to gain
sectoral insights.
13
We now have a dedicated IT risk inspection team that will cover all sectors in 2018. While this is
still a relatively small team - particularly compared to the resources applied by regulated firms -
we are still identifying material issues in too many firms.
The  evidence  from  our  increasingly  intrusive  IT  risk  supervision  indicates  that  neither  the  IT
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment nor the governance and control arrangements are adequate to satisfactorily mitigate
these risks, and to be truly prepared to meet the challenges of technology and business model
change associated with InsurTech & Innovation.
Conclusion
I will conclude here.
The  insurance  industry  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  Irish  financial  services  industry  and  for  the
economy and its citizens. The intensity and intrusiveness of our approach to supervision of the
sector  will  continue  to  reflect  this  importance.  We  will  continue  to  ensure  that  we  are  both
operating to and influencing European norms of supervision, which I firmly believe is of significant
benefit to the long-term sustainability of the insurance firms operating in Ireland – whether serving
the domestic market or operating on a cross-border basis.
While the sector has not suffered the same extent of failures as others, we are not complacent
and  it  is  clear  that  improvements  are  required  in  the  governance  and  operations  of  many
insurance firms operating in and from Ireland. By delivering these improvements, insurance firms
will  be  best  placed  to  rise  to  the  considerable  challenges  and  opportunities  arising  from
InsurTech & Innovation.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Speech by Gabriel Bernardino, Chairman of EIOPA at the 7th Annual Conference:  Insurance  and  Pensions
Reloaded: A Game Changer
EIOPA has developed co-operation platform meetings in relation to cross border insurance. Platform meetings
between relevant national supervisory authorities are set up when issues of supervisory concerns are detected.
The platform meetings facilitate the sharing of information and coordination of actions by the home supervisory
authority. Several platforms have been established in 2017.
In accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council,
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
EIOPA - Infographic: A Common Supervisory Culture
Insurance firms authorised in one EU member state have a right to provide insurance in other EU member
states. Such firms operate on either a right of establishment basis or a freedom to provide services basis. The
right  of  establishment  basis  involves  the  setting  up  of  a  branch  in  the  host  member  state  and  providing
insurance from that branch. The freedom to provide services basis involves the provision of insurance services
directly from the home member state.
EIOPA    - Opinion  to  Institutions  of  the  European  Union  on  the  harmonisation  of  recovery  and  resolution
frameworks for (re)insurers across member states
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  – Advisory  Technical  Committee  –  Insurance  Expert  Group  - Recovery  and
resolution for the EU insurance sector: a macroprudential perspective August 2017  
The Probability Risk and Impact System (PRISM) is the Central Bank’s risk-based framework for the supervision
of regulated firms.   It supports our challenging firms, judging the risks they pose to the economy and the
consumer and mitigating those risks we judge to be unacceptable. See Introduction to PRISM
EIOPA – Round Table on InsurTech
IAIS – Report on Fintech Developments in the Insurance Industry
EIOPA    - Response to the Commission’s public consultation on FinTech: A more competitive and innovative
European Financial Sector
National Association of Insurance Commissioners - Price Optimization
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
13
Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
