November 30, 2017 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Fukushima 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Fukushima Branch. 
 The Bank has implemented quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- or QQE for short 
-- since April 2013 and introduced various additional measures such as the negative interest 
rate  policy  and  yield  curve  control,  all  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  inflation  target  of  2 
percent. 
 As a result of these measures, Japan's economy has been improving. Of course, I know that 
many people argue that, although the economy is said to be improving, they are not feeling 
the effects of this improvement because the real economic growth rate has been just a little 
over  1  percent  on  average  recently.  However,  this  is  the  first  time  in  16  years  that  the 
economy  has  registered  positive  growth  for  seven  consecutive  quarters,  from  the 
January-March quarter of 2016 through the July-September quarter of 2017. 
 Today, I would like to explain monetary policy measures conducted by the Bank and what 
they have achieved, and then discuss what to make of arguments circulating with respect to 
the purported dangers of bold monetary policy. 
 I. Monetary Easing Measures and Economic Activity 
The Bank has implemented QQE since 2013, with the aim of achieving the inflation target 
of 2 percent. As a result, the money stock and lending have been growing at a faster pace. 
Moreover, due to the decline in nominal interest rates and the rise in inflation expectations, 
real  interest  rates  --  nominal  interest  rates  minus  expected  inflation  rates  --  have  declined 
considerably. 
 What  sorts  of  results  has  this  had  for  economic  activity?  Chart  1  shows  developments  in 
major  economic  indicators.  The  chart  shows  that  production,  exports,  consumption,  and 
aggregate  supply  of  capital  goods  (a  proxy  variable  for  business  fixed  investment)  all 
 1 
 started  to  recover  when  QQE  was  introduced,  or  even  slightly  before  then.  However, 
consumption and production became sluggish following the consumption tax hike in 2014. 
This sluggishness appears to have become pronounced  on the whole particularly  since the 
end  of  2014,  when  exports  decreased  with  the  slowdown  in  world  trade.  Nevertheless, 
economic indicators as a whole in Japan have been recovering in line with the recovery in 
world trade that began around mid-2016. 
  These economic  indicators  experienced  ups  and  downs  after  the introduction  of  QQE,  but 
one indicator that has continued improving almost constantly is employment. Chart 2 shows 
developments in the number of employees and the unemployment rate. It has been said that, 
although  the  number  of  employees  increased,  this  was  limited  to  non-regular  employees. 
However,  the  share  of  non-regular  employees  among  all  employees  has  leveled  off. 
 2 
 Looking at the shares of non-regular and part-time employees among all employees in the 
Labour Force Survey released by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications and 
the Monthly Labour Survey released by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, we see 
that both peaked out after the turn of 2017.   
  Productivity Also Has Risen 
Since the introduction of QQE, there has been heated debate over the importance of growth 
strategy; this is because, even though employment has increased, productivity has not risen, 
and  economic  growth  will  not  continue  without  a  rise  in  productivity.1  In  fact,  however, 
productivity has risen, as indicated in Chart 3. Productivity shown in the chart is estimated 
by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and represents 
real purchasing power parity GDP per hour worked. QQE began in 2013, yet Japan marked 
                                                 
1  Igarashi Takanobu, "Seichō senryaku de keizai wa seichō suru ka," Mitsubishi UFJ Research and 
July  2013,  http://www.murc.jp/thinktank/rc/column/igarashi/column 
Consulting  Co.,  Ltd., 
/igarashi130716. 
 3 
 the highest rate of increase in productivity among major countries from 2012 to 2016, with 
an annual rate of 1.2 percent. Japan's average for the 10 years prior to this was 0.8 percent; 
therefore,  Japan's  productivity  rose  even  after  the  introduction  of  QQE.  Moreover,  the 
capital-labor ratio per worker has declined.2  This means that productivity would have risen 
even further if there had been sufficient investment. 
  When growth accounting methodology was developed several decades ago, the growth rate 
of an economy's output was decomposed into capital inputs, labor inputs, and technological 
progress (total factor productivity). The results obtained through this methodology showed 
that  the  contribution  of  technological  progress  to  the  economic  growth  rate  was  80  to  90 
percent.  I  am  reminded  of  the  heated  argument  prevailing  at  the  time  that,  despite  such 
results, unless new capital investment is made, new technology cannot be adopted, and thus 
                                                 
2  See Cabinet Office, Annual Report on the Japanese Economy and Public Finance 2017, July 2017, 
figure 16. 
 4 
 technological  progress  should 
include  capital 
inputs  --  namely,  capital-embodied 
technological  progress.  This  argument  has  not  received  much  attention  in  recent  years; 
however,  it  is  true  that,  if  demand  does  not  grow,  then  new  investments  cannot  be  made, 
and  if  new  investments  cannot  be  made,  then  equipment  featuring  advanced  technologies 
cannot be used. It is  wrong to view supply and demand as being separate, and to consider 
that Japan's economic problems are rooted in the supply side of the economy.3 
 I  would  like  to  note  that  monetary  easing  measures  and  growth  strategy  are  not  in 
opposition to one another, but actually complement each other. What is more, deregulation 
as part of growth strategy includes measures aimed at improving the efficiency of existing 
industries,  thereby  reducing  employment.  On  such  occasions,  monetary  policy  measures 
will make it easier to carry out deregulation by improving the economy and producing labor 
shortages. 
 The Economy Has Improved, despite Claims That People Are Not Actually Experiencing 
Such Improvement 
It is often claimed that, although the government says that the economy has improved, the 
public  is  not  actually  experiencing  this  improvement  in  their  daily  lives.  However,  how 
should  we  measure  the  public's  perceptions  regarding  their  daily  lives  in  the  first  place? 
Public  opinion  polls  offer  clues  in  this  regard.  Chart  4  shows  answers  to  the  following 
question in a public opinion poll: "How would you describe the lifestyle of your household 
compared to this time last year?" 
                                                  
3  For  growth  accounting  and  capital-embodied  technological  progress,  see,  for  example,  David  N. 
Weil,  Keizai  seichō  [Economic  Growth],  2nd  ed.,  trans.  Hayami  Hiroshi  and  Hayami  Hitoshi 
(Tokyo:  Pearson  Kirihara  K.K.,  2010),  183-86,  216-17.  It  seems  that  recent  macroeconomics 
textbooks do not emphasize the concept of capital-embodied technological progress. 
 5 
  The  chart  shows  that  only  a  very  small  number  of  respondents  answered  that  their 
household  circumstances  or  lifestyles  have  become  better  off  or  improved  compared  with 
one year ago. While the proportion of such respondents is currently slightly over 5 percent, 
even  during  the  period  of  high  economic  growth  between  the  mid-1950s  and  the  early 
1970s, when real GDP grew by around 10 percent every  year, the only period when more 
than 10 percent of people replied that their circumstances or lifestyles had become better off 
or improved was from 1959 to 1963.4  The results indicate that people do not feel the effects 
                                                 
4  In  the  time-series  data  of  the  Public  Opinion Survey on  the  Life  of  the  People  conducted  by  the 
Cabinet  Office,  the  share  of  respondents  answering  that  their  household's  lifestyle  "improved" 
exceeded  30  percent  during  the  high  economic  growth  period.  This  figure,  however,  requires 
attention because of the following. The surveys conducted between 1965 and 1991 and in 1994 first 
asked  "What  aspects  of  your  household's  lifestyle  have  improved  compared  with  around  this  time 
 6 
 of improvement in the economy. Nevertheless, looking at an indicator derived by deducting 
the share of respondents who answered that their household circumstances or lifestyles have 
"deteriorated" from the share of those who answered that these have "improved," it appears 
to  be  moving  very  closely  in  line  with  economic  developments.  After  rising  in  2013,  the 
indicator  fell  due  to  the  consumption  tax  hike,  and  since  then  it  has  been  rising  again 
together with the steady improvement in the economy. 
 II. Arguments against QQE 
As  I mentioned so far, Japan's economy has been improving due to QQE, which began in 
April  2013.  However,  there  are  always  those  who  are  against  QQE.  I  consider  that  these 
opposing  views  can  be  divided  into  three  arguments.  The  first  states  that  there  is  no 
relationship  between  QQE  and  the  current  improvement  in  the  economy,  and  that  the 
economy would have improved even without QQE. The second  argument states that QQE 
has produced positive effects for some people, but that it also has produced negative effects 
for  a  number  of  others.  The  third  argument  is  that,  although  QQE  may  be  bringing  about 
positive results at the moment, it most certainly will give rise to extremely serious problems 
in the future. 
                                                                                                                                                
last year? Choose from among the following" (the choices were as follows: food; clothing; durable 
consumer  goods  such  as  electrical  appliances,  furniture,  and  automobiles;  housing;  leisure;  other; 
and nothing has improved). The survey then asked "When viewed on the whole, do you think that 
your household's lifestyle has improved, deteriorated, or remained the same compared to last year?" 
(the question is phrased somewhat differently depending on the survey year). Since the question was 
posed  in  such  a  specific  manner,  many  people  were  likely  to  have  answered  that  their  household's 
lifestyle has "improved," recalling, for example, electrical appliances that they newly purchased or 
family  trips  taken  that  year  as  opposed  to  not  taking  any  the  previous  year.  For  this  reason,  for 
surveys  conducted  between  1965  and  1991  and  in  1994,  Chart  4  shows  responses  to  "Have  your 
household circumstances of late improved, deteriorated, or remained the same compared with around 
this  time  last  year?"  --  a  question  that  did  not  ask  about  specific  aspects  that  improved  in  their 
lifestyle.  The  only  difference  in  the  questions  is  the  phrase  "lifestyle"  and  "household 
circumstances."  Moreover,  a  possible  reason  why  only  a  small  number  of  people  responded  with 
"improved" over the years is that this question does not offer "somewhat improved" in the response 
options. 
 7 
 The  First  Argument:  There  Is  No  Relationship  between  QQE  and  Economic 
Improvement 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  argument.  As  I  have  explained  so  far,  improvements  have  been 
seen in a number of indicators since the introduction of QQE; thus, I can hardly believe the 
claim  that  Japan's  economy  would  have  improved  even  without  QQE.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
difficult to technically prove my view that QQE has brought about improvements in Japan's 
economy, because it is impossible to compare the situation of the economy from 2013 up to 
the present between cases where QQE has been implemented and where QQE has not been 
implemented.  What  I  can  compare  is  merely  the  situation  before  the  implementation  of 
QQE  --  that  is,  until  2012  --  and  after  the  implementation  --  from  2013.  Because  the 
economic situation differs between these periods, the effects of QQE cannot be technically 
proven by this comparison. 
 Given  this,  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  QQE  now  in  order  to  make  my  argument  more 
convincing. If QQE is terminated and the economy deteriorates, many people would believe 
that the economic upturn  had been driven by QQE. Nevertheless, this experiment will not 
be  persuasive  enough  because  of  the  differing  economic  situations  between  the  period 
through 2012 and from 2013. 
 Should  this  experiment  be  carried  out,  interest  rates  will  soar,  the  yen  will  jump,  stock 
prices will crash, and the economy will plunge into recession. Such a dangerous test must 
not be carried out. In addition, it is possible without such a reckless experiment to make an 
assessment that compares Japan's economy through 2012 and from 2013  up to the present 
by  adjusting  the  situation  of  the  economy  in  each period to  be as  similar as  possible.  The 
results  obtained  from  this  assessment  show that  QQE  has  exerted  its  intended  effects.  For 
example,  Professor  Ryuzo  Miyao  at  the  University  of  Tokyo  --  a  former  Policy  Board 
member of the Bank -- presented an analysis based on a vector autoregression (VAR) model 
that  the  impact  of  an  expansion  of  the  monetary  base  raised  production  and  the  inflation 
rate.5 
                                                  
5  Miyao Ryuzo, "Hi dentōteki kin'yū seisaku no kōka wa aru no ka 2," chap. 3 in Hi dentōteki kin'yū 
seisaku [Unconventional Monetary Policies] (Tokyo: Yuhikaku Publishing Co., Ltd., 2016). 
 8 
 Moreover,  making  comparisons  of  the  economic  situation  in  Japan  with  those  in  various 
other  countries  that  adopted  monetary  easing  during  different  phases  will  support  my 
argument. For example, during the Great Depression, the U.S. economy recovered steadily 
when it abolished the gold standard and shifted to monetary easing in April 1933, but it fell 
back into recession when the level of monetary easing was reduced from 1936 to 1937.6 
 Chart 5 shows developments in real GNP, the money stock (M2), and prices in the United 
States  during  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s.  It  is  evident  that  real  GNP  and  prices 
dropped  significantly  in  line  with  the  decline  in  M2,  and  recovered  steadily  with  the 
increase  in  M2.  Then,  in  1937,  real  GNP  and  prices  declined  again  as  M2  decreased, 
showing that it was a failure to exit from monetary easing too early. However, as monetary 
easing was resumed, real GNP started to recover from 1938 with the increase in M2. 
                                                   
6  Adachi  Seiji,  "Ryōteki  kanwa  no  deguchi  wa  nihon  keizai  ni  totte  kiken  ka,"  chap.  8  in 
Abenomikusu wa shinkasuru: Kin'yu ganseki riron o tou, ed. Harada Yutaka, Kataoka Goushi, and 
Yoshimatsu Takashi (Tokyo: Chuokeizai-sha, 2017). 
 9 
 As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  actually  difficult  to  totally  refute  the  argument  that  Japan's 
economy would have become better even without QQE. However, by referring to a number 
of  cases  in  the  past,  I  believe  that  it  is  now  understood  that  it  was  monetary  easing  that 
brought about the recovery in Japan's economy. 
 The Second Argument: The Effects of QQE Have Not Become Widespread 
The  second  argument  is  that  QQE  has  produced  positive  effects  for  some  people  but  also 
has  produced  negative  effects  for  a  number  of  others.  For  example,  labor  shortage  is 
certainly  a  favorable  condition  for  job  seekers,  but  it  is  a  potential  disadvantage  from  the 
standpoint of employers. Nevertheless, I feel that it is better to suffer from a lack of people 
who  engage  in  selling,  manufacturing,  and  transportation  for  a  marketable  product  than 
from  the  problem  of  a  product that  is  not  selling.  If  a  product that  is  not  selling  comes to 
pose a management crisis, it will become necessary to cut employment, which is a hard task 
for  managers.  After  the  2008  financial  crisis,  I  heard  from  numerous  corporate  managers 
that  they  were  forced  to  cut  their  workforce  and  had  never  before  had  such  a  painful 
experience. I cannot imagine that there are any managers in Japan who would find it easy to 
cut their workforce. This is why I feel that it is much better to have too few people than too 
many. 
 Some  argue  that  only  a  limited  number  of  people  receive  the  benefits  from  the  economic 
recovery and that benefits do not reach them. This argument goes that, although income has 
risen  on  the  whole,  many  people  do  not  experience  much  increase  in  income  and  income 
disparities have expanded. Let us take a look at how income distribution changed after the 
introduction of QQE. 
 According to the Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions 2016 released by the Ministry 
of  Health,  Labour  and  Welfare,  the  child  poverty  rate  (the  share  of  children  aged  17  or 
under living in households with equivalent disposable income at or below 50 percent of the 
 10 
 median)  fell  from  16.3 percent  in  2012 to  13.9  percent in  2015.7  In  this  same  survey,  the 
overall poverty rate fell from 16.1 percent to 15.6 percent over this period. 
 There  is  another  argument  that  QQE  has  put  the  banking  industry  in  a  difficult  situation, 
saying that low interest rates are squeezing bank profits.  But one of the major reasons for 
such  a  situation  is  that  banks  are  suffering  from  a  lack  of  borrowers.  In  Japan,  private 
nonfinancial corporations as a whole have been experiencing  excess net savings, and their 
currency and deposits accumulated to as much as 254 trillion yen as of end-June 2017.8  Of 
course,  it  is  natural  that  bank  profits  are  squeezed  if  long-term  interest  rates  decline, 
because  banks  generally  raise  short-term  funds  and  invest  them  in  long-term  assets. 
However, if we simply compare long-term interest rates and bank profits, it does not seem 
appropriate to say that low interest rates always reduce bank profits. 
 Chart 6  shows  developments  in banks' operating  profits  from  core  business and  long-term 
interest  rates  (10-year  Japanese  government  bond  [JGB]  yields).  Operating  profits  from 
core  business  represent  stable  earnings  of  banks,  such  as  profits  earned  from  fund 
management  in  the  form  of  lending  and  securities  investment,  for  example.  Interest  rates 
have  fallen  in  a  mostly  consistent  manner  since  1990,  yet  I  do  not  believe  that  this  is 
correlated  with  banks'  operating  profits  from  core  business.  For  example,  even  though 
interest  rates  fell  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s,  operating  profits  recovered.  In  1999,  when 
the zero interest rate policy was introduced, operating profits rose along with interest rates. 
In 2001, the quantitative easing policy was introduced, yet operating profits rose thereafter. 
Both operating profits and interest rates fell following the termination of quantitative easing, 
but this is largely due to the 2008 financial crisis.  After the introduction of  QQE in 2013, 
due  to  the  improvements  in  the  economy,  the  financial  situation  of  borrowing  firms 
                                                 
7  Equivalent disposable income is calculated by dividing household disposable income by the square 
root of the number of people in the household. It is believed to represent the standard of living per 
member of the family. The reason for using the square root instead of the number of people itself in 
the calculation is that there are costs of living shared among the members of the household, which 
tend to become lower per person as the number of people in the household grows larger. Equivalent 
disposable income is thought to make it possible to compare per capita disposable income between 
households with different numbers of people in the household. 
8  Bank of Japan, Flow of Funds Accounts (2nd Quarter 2017; Preliminary), September 2017. 
 11 
 improved,  credit  costs  decreased,  and  banks'  net  income  increased.9  In  other  words,  bank 
profits are affected by the situation of the economy as a whole, in addition to developments 
in interest rates. Although operating profits from core business fell in fiscal 2015 and 2016, 
I  think  that  this  is  partly  due  to  the  sluggishness  of  the  economy  that  followed  the 
consumption tax hike. It is true that banks' net profits have been declining since fiscal 2016, 
but I would like to emphasize that they had been improving prior to that. 
                                                   
9  Net income is calculated by deducting credit costs, such as loan-loss provisions, from the sum of 
operating  profits  from  core  business  and  the  profits  and  losses  on  sales  of  securities.  Other  items 
such as extraordinary gains/losses are also added/deducted. 
 12 
 Furthermore, if bank profits depend on a rise in nominal interest rates, QQE is a policy that 
will  lead  to  an  increase  in  interest  rates  in  the  end.  This  is  because  interest  rates  also  rise 
when  prices  rise.  If  interest  rates  are  raised  even  though  prices  are  not  rising,  then  the 
economy will deteriorate, prices will fall, and interest rates will have to be reduced further. I 
believe that such policy measures continued from the 1990s until the introduction of QQE.10 
Looking  ahead,  I  believe  that  prices  will  rise,  and  that  we  can  expect  to  see  interest  rates 
rise along with them. 
 The Third Argument: QQE Will Cause Serious Problems in the Future 
Lastly, let me turn to the argument that QQE may be bringing about positive effects at the 
moment, but most certainly will give rise to extremely serious problems in the future. The 
argument goes that, at some point, monetary easing will suddenly give rise to hyperinflation, 
a  collapse  of  the  yen,  a  surge  in  interest  rates,  a  plunge  in  bond  prices,  and  so  forth.11 
However, such fears are not at all likely to happen. Given this, the argument seems to have 
converged  on  the  discussion  that  the  Bank  will  face  significant  problems  of  making  large 
losses for a protracted period when it heads toward an exit from monetary easing -- that is, 
when  it  reduces  the  level  of  monetary  easing.  Regarding  this  argument,  it  is  of  course 
possible that the Bank may register losses. 
 Those  who  support  this  argument  claim  that,  when  the  public  merely  acknowledges  the 
possibility that the Bank may register losses -- even if such a thing does not actually happen 
-- the yen will collapse and Japan's economy will experience hyperinflation.12  However, if 
this argument is valid, why is the collapse of the yen or hyperinflation not happening now? I 
often ask this question, but have never received an answer. 
                                                 
10  For  the  relationship  among  nominal  interest  rates,  financial  institutions'  profits,  and  monetary 
policy,  see  Harada  Yutaka, "Naze  nihon  no  kin'ri  wa  hikui  no  ka,"  Keiki  to  saikuru,  no.  62, Japan 
Association of Business Cycle Studies, November 2016. 
11  In Harada, Kataoka, and Yoshimatsu, Abenomikusu wa shinkasuru, this sort of theory is criticized 
by referring to it as the "big rock theory." 
12  In "The Role of Capital for Central Banks" (the outline of a speech given at the Fall Meeting of 
the Japan Society of Monetary Economics on October 25, 2003), Kazuo Ueda provided the general 
opinion that, when a central bank falls into capital deficiency, a loss of credibility in the central bank 
causes  a  depreciation  of  the  currency,  a  high  rate  of  inflation,  a  functional  decline  in  payment 
systems, and other problems (note that Mr. Ueda is not necessarily stating this as his own opinion). 
 13 
 I  consider  that  the  Bank  may  register  losses  on  its  statement  of  income  at  the  exit  from 
monetary  easing,  but  believe  that  nothing  negative  will  happen  to  the  economy.  I  will 
explain the reason behind my view. 
 Let us first look back in history. Since 1980, as far as I can confirm, there have been about 
20 cases in which central banks  recorded losses or fell into capital deficiency.13  Although 
details are not available for all cases, countries that suffered from economic turmoil such as 
inflation were Jamaica, the Philippines, and Venezuela in the 1980s and 1990s. On the other 
hand, inflation rates did not rise in West Germany in the 1970s, the Czech Republic in the 
1990s-2010s,  Chile  from  the  1990s  up  to  the  present,  or  in  Switzerland  in  the  2000s  and 
2010s. The reason why economic turmoil did not happen in these countries is clear. Most of 
the assets of central banks in these countries are foreign assets. If inflation occurs, the value 
of their countries' currencies depreciates, whereas the value of  foreign assets denominated 
in  their  home  currencies  appreciates.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  mechanism  in  which,  if 
impairment  of  central  banks'  assets  brings  inflation,  inflation  itself  recovers  the  value  of 
these assets. Therefore, it is impossible that serious problems will occur because of central 
bank losses. 
 Why, then, could sharp inflation not be restrained in Jamaica and other countries? In these 
countries,  central  banks  increased  money  to  assume  government  debt  and  issued 
high-interest-bearing bonds to absorb the increased money. As a result, these central banks 
made  losses  due  to  increased  interest  payment.14  It  is  a  matter  of  course  that,  if  central 
banks issue banknotes to assume government debt, they inevitably will suffer from inflation 
regardless of their financial situation. In the case of Japan, however, as I have explained on 
                                                 
13  Reza Vaez-Zadeh, "Implications and Remedies of Central Bank Losses," in The Evolving Role of 
Central Banks, ed. Patrick Downes and Reza Vaez-Zadeh (Washington: International Monetary Fund, 
1991).  Peter  Stella,  "Central  Bank  Financial  Strength,  Policy  Constraints  and  Inflation,"  IMF 
Working Paper, WP/08/49, International Monetary Fund, February 2008. 
14   Stella,  "Central  Bank  Financial  Strength."  Mario  B.  Lamberte,  "Central  Banking  in  the 
Philippines: Then, Now and the Future," Discussion Paper Series No. 2002-10, Philippine Institute 
for Development Studies, September 2002. 
 14 
 various  occasions,  the  fiscal  deficit  has  been  decreasing  after  the  introduction  of  QQE.15 
The  ratio  of  the  general  government  deficit  to  GDP  has  declined  significantly  from  8 
percent in 2012 -- the level before the introduction of QQE -- to 2 percent in 2016. Of the 6 
percentage point decrease, 1.5 percentage points, or 8 trillion yen, is due to the consumption 
tax hike in 2014, and the remaining 4.5 percentage points is due to the economic recovery 
brought about by economic stimulus measures such as QQE.16 
 In addition, the Bank of Japan employs a price stability target of 2 percent. This means that, 
when  the  timing  of  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  is  in  sight,  the  Bank  will 
taper monetary easing or tighten monetary policy. This situation totally differs from that in 
Jamaica or other countries that experienced sharp inflation. 
 Why Does the Exit Pose a Problem? 
As  I  explained  earlier,  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  the  situations  in  Jamaica,  the  Philippines, 
and  Venezuela  were  completely  different  from  that  in  Japan,  and  as  for  countries  such  as 
Switzerland, central bank assets consist of foreign assets. Given this, I believe that there are 
doubts  over  what  will  happen  in  countries  where  the  majority  of  assets  consist  of 
government bonds denominated in their own currencies, such as Japan. 
 "Exit" here refers to the Bank's termination of monetary easing followed  by an increase in 
interest rates and a reduction of the monetary base because achieving 2 percent inflation is 
in sight as a result of monetary easing. At the exit, the Bank will have to raise interest rates. 
By  way  of  example,  possible  ways  to  do  so  are  as  follows:  by  abandoning  the  negative 
interest rate policy currently carried out by the Bank and raising the interest rate applied to 
excess reserves, or by selling JGBs held by the Bank. 
 At this point in time, the Bank has not reached any decisions on an exit policy. It is easier to 
understand  the  topic  by  thinking  in  terms  of  hiking  the  interest  rate  applied  to  excess 
reserves, and so I would like to explain it in this way. Those who contend that the exit will 
                                                 
15  See,  for  example,  Harada  Yutaka,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan: 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Gifu," Bank of Japan, June 2017. A reduction in fiscal 
deficit decreases the possibility that the Bank of Japan will have to assume such deficit. 
16  Ministry of Finance, Japanese Public Finance Fact Sheet 2017, April 2017, 24. 
 15 
 be  dangerous  make  the  claim  that,  even  if  the  Bank  raises  the  interest  rate  on  excess 
reserves,  the  interest  rates  on  JGBs  that  it  purchased  in  the  past  will  remain  low,  and 
therefore the Bank will suffer enormous losses. It is certainly possible that the Bank could 
suffer  losses  because  it  will  receive  a  low  yield  despite  paying  out  a  high  yield.  Such 
proponents explain that, if the Bank suffered losses, then confidence in the currency would 
be undermined, and this would lead to hyperinflation, the collapse of the yen, and a surge in 
interest rates. 
 However, while yields on even JGBs at present are around 0 percent, they were 3 percent 
until  about  the  middle  of  the  1990s.  The  reason  is  that,  at  that  time,  the  real  economic 
growth  rate  was  high  and  prices  were  rising.  If  prices  rise,  interest  rates  will  also  rise 
eventually. This means that it will be possible to purchase higher yielding JGBs. Of course, 
until  that time, the  Bank will  have  to  hold low  yielding  JGBs  while  paying  high  yields  to 
banks in order to prevent an overheating of the economy. However, in the end, the central 
bank will always make a profit in the long run, since it buys high yielding JGBs using cash 
and current account deposits that carry almost no costs. Thus, the Bank will not make a loss 
in the long run that could pose a danger. 
 In the first place, over the course of monetary easing in Japan, the economy improved and 
the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio also improved, backed by an increase in tax revenues; thus, 
focusing  on  the  Bank's  deficits  that  will  temporarily  occur  at  the  time  of  the  exit  is  an 
argument that fails to see the forest for the trees. 
 Some  are  of  the  opinion  that,  because  central  banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  are 
heading for the exit, Japan should follow suit. However, it makes perfect sense to me that 
Japan's  exit  should  come  later  than  theirs.  To  begin  with,  although  inflation  rates  in  the 
United States and Europe are below 2 percent, they are hovering at around 1.5 percent. This 
differs from the situation in Japan, where the rates do not reach even 1 percent. Furthermore, 
Japan  introduced  the  quantitative  easing  policy  --  which  was  large  in  terms  of  scale  --  in 
2013,  whereas  the  United  States  and  Europe  started  theirs  in  2008.  Because  of  the 
difference in the timing of starting such policy, it is no surprise that the timing of the exit 
differs as well. 
 16 
 III. Path toward Achieving the 2 Percent Price Stability Target 
As I mentioned earlier, QQE has produced significant effects so far. There is no basis to the 
claims regarding the dangers or side effects of QQE. The only problem is that prices have 
not  risen.  In  relation  to  this,  it  is  often  questioned  why  wages  and  prices  have  not  risen 
despite labor shortages.17  My answer is simply that labor shortages have been insufficient. 
When wages increase, so do prices. This is because, although a rise in wages increases costs, 
these  costs  are  easily  passed  on  to  prices  due  to  increased  demand  caused  by  a  rise  in 
income. Since my time here is limited, I would like to focus on prices. 
 Chart 7 shows the Phillips curve representing the relationship between the inflation rate and 
the output gap in Japan. The regression lines shown here indicate this relationship for each 
of  the  following  periods:  from  the  January-March  quarter  of  1983  to  the  January-March 
quarter of 2013, from the January-March quarter of 1983 to the October-December quarter 
of 1995, from the January-March quarter of 1996 to the January-March quarter of 2013, and 
from  the  April-June  quarter  of  2013  to  the  July-September  quarter  of  2017.  All  of  these 
regression  lines  show  that,  unless  the  output  gap  exceeds  about  2.5  percent,  the  inflation 
rate  does  not  reach  2  percent.  Looking  at  the  regression  line  for  the  period  from  the 
January-March quarter of 1983 to the October-December quarter of 1995, it is evident that 
the  output  gap  necessary  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation  is  about  2.5  percent,  and  the 
observed inflation rate at the time was 1.5 percent. It can be concluded that, if inflation rates 
continue  to  rise  at  about  1.5  percent  and  the  output  gap  rises  to  about  2.5  percent,  then  2 
percent  inflation  will  be  achieved.  Since  the  current  output  gap  is  in  the  range  of  1.0-1.5 
percent,  in  order  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation,  the  positive  output  gap  needs  to  further 
widen to about 2.5 percent, and at the same time, the inflation rate must continue to rise at 
about 1.5 percent. 
                                                  
17  Genda Yuji, ed., Hitode busoku na noni naze chingin ga agaranai no ka (Tokyo: Keio University 
Press, 2017). 
 17 
   18 
 Why Is 2 Percent Inflation Necessary? 
I  would  like  to  explain  why  2  percent  inflation  is  necessary  by  referring  to  the  Bank's 
official view and adding my personal views. 
 My interpretation of the Bank's official view on this matter can be summarized as follows. 
First, aiming at achieving 0 percent inflation entails the risk of actually aiming for deflation, 
given the upward bias of the consumer price index (CPI). Second, the equilibrium interest 
rates -- which are achieved in the long run -- tend to be lower on a nominal basis when the 
aim is 0 percent inflation. That being the case, there will be virtually no room for lowering 
interest rates should the economy fall into recession. In order to avoid this, it is necessary to 
provide  a  so-called  buffer  for  nominal  interest  rates  by  raising  the  inflation  rate.  What  is 
more,  inflation  can  be  dealt  with  by  raising  interest  rates,  and  thus  inflation  can  be 
considered to be easier to deal with than deflation. Third is the global standard. Given that 
other  major countries  aim  at  achieving  2  percent  inflation,  if  Japan  were the only  country 
with  a  lower  target,  this  would  result  in  an  appreciation  of  the  yen,  which  would  create 
turmoil  in  firms'  investment  plans.  If  Japan  maintains  the  same  inflation  rate  as  other 
countries, I feel that this will serve to stabilize foreign exchange over the long term. 
 Of these theories, I would like to add  explanations for why  I support the second and third 
points. The buffer theory  of interest rates in the second point is completely different from 
the  one  advocated  by  the  Bank  in  the  past.  The  previous  theory  aimed  at  raising  interest 
rates  preemptively  even  when  the  economic  recovery  was  insufficient,  because  if  interest 
rates were too low, it would be difficult to implement stimulus measures during recessions. 
Such monetary policy resulted in a complete failure.18 
                                                  
18  The transcript of the February 2007 Monetary Policy Meeting, at which an interest rate hike was 
decided, was released on July 31, 2017. In relation to this, in an interview by Jiji Press, Kazumasa 
Iwata -- who was deputy governor in 2007 -- said that it was a failure to raise interest rates. In the 
same interview, Atsushi Mizuno -- who was a Policy Board member in 2007-- said that he thought it 
was better to raise interest rates by a certain degree in order to secure a buffer for monetary easing 
when the economy deteriorated (reported by Jiji Press at 8:52 a.m. on July 31, 2017). Mizuno's view 
explains the Bank's past thinking on the buffer. 
 19 
 The correct theory regarding the buffer should be raising interest rates after confirming that 
price increases have gained  enough momentum. I would like to emphasize that the Bank's 
current thinking on the buffer theory is totally different from the previous incorrect one. 
 As for the third point, I believe that the stability in foreign exchange rates led by the global 
standard  theory  holds  true  to  a  certain  degree.  The  yen's  exchange  rate  against  the  U.S. 
dollar  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  with  the  2  percent  inflation  target  has  moved  in  the 
range of 100-120 yen, and appears to be roughly stable at around 110 yen. I think that this 
situation can be described as stable, taking into account that the yen rose from 120 yen to 80 
yen against the dollar around the time of the 2008 financial crisis. 
 Moreover,  there  is  another  reason  for  the  Bank's  committing  to  the  2  percent  inflation 
target;  namely,  we  cannot  fully  grasp  the  actual  degree  of  the  current  economic  recovery. 
Specifically,  we  do  not  actually  know  the  exact  structural  unemployment  rate,  the  bottom 
line that will lead to inflation if lowered any further. If the Bank had  terminated monetary 
easing based on estimates that the structural unemployment rate was about 3.5 percent, the 
current unemployment rate of 2.8 percent would not have been achieved.19  I think that we 
probably  will  be  able  to  achieve  an  even  lower  unemployment  rate.  The  reason  why  the 
lower  unemployment  rate  was  achieved  and  a  bubble  has  not  occurred  is  because  the 
inflation  rate  is  set  as  the  direct  target  for  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  given  the  rise  in 
                                                 
19  The  following  publications  showed  that  the  structural  unemployment  rate  was  in  the  range  of 
about  3.0-3.5  percent  using  unemployment-vacancy  analysis.  Ministry  of  Health,  Labour  and 
Welfare, Analysis of the Labour Economy 2015, September 2015. Cabinet Office, Annual Report on 
the Japanese Economy and Public Finance 2015, August 2015. Bank of Japan, "The Bank's View" 
in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  October  2014.  The  Bank,  from  the  April  2015 
report, deleted the description regarding the structural unemployment rate from the main text of "The 
Bank's View" and added the following in a footnote to "The Bank's View": "This rate [the structural 
unemployment  rate]  is  calculated  to  be  around  3.5  percent  or  lower  recently  under  a  specific 
methodology." Then, from the April 2016 report, this description was deleted from that footnote and 
instead moved to a footnote to "The Background." From the July 2016 report, the actual level of the 
structural unemployment rate referred to in that footnote was replaced by the following expression: 
"the  structural  unemployment  rate  defined  here  differs  from  the  concept  of  Non-Accelerating 
Inflation  Rate  of  Unemployment  (NAIRU),  and  does  not  show  a  direct  relationship  with  prices  or 
wages." On the other hand, developments in the structural unemployment rate have been provided in 
a chart in the report that shows that the rate is currently approximately 3 percent. 
 20 
 wages, nonmanufacturing firms are making efforts toward streamlining business processes 
and making labor-saving investment. 
 Concluding Remarks 
Now,  let me  wrap  up my  remarks.  The  Bank's  QQE  has  resulted  in  expanding  the  money 
stock,  lending,  and  so  forth.  Both  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  have  fallen.  This  in  turn 
has  resulted  in  increases  in  production,  exports,  consumption,  and  business  fixed 
investment. 
 There are always those who argue against QQE, but as I have already explained, there is no 
basis to any of these arguments. 
 The only problem is that prices have not risen. In relation to this, it is often questioned why 
wages  and  prices  have  not  risen  despite  labor  shortages.  My  answer  is  simply  that  labor 
shortages  have  been  insufficient.  If  the  current  monetary  policy  is  maintained,  labor 
shortages will intensify further as the economy improves, and there will be a phase in which 
both  wages  and  prices  increase.  If  their  momentum  is  strong  enough,  the  Bank  will  start 
reducing the level of monetary easing. 
 Some argue that there will be dangers associated with an exit from monetary easing as the 
Bank heads toward reducing the level of monetary easing, but as I have explained, there are 
no such dangers. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
    21 
