Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Continuity and change - not an either/or
Keynote  luncheon  presentation  by  Mr  Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng
Pilipinas  (BSP,  the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  6th  Annual  dbAccess  Philippines
Conference, organized by Deutsche Bank, Makati City, 4 October 2017.
 I thank Deutsche Regis Partners for inviting me to this conference and for the opportunity to
speak  before  capital  market  players  and  other  members  of  the  business  community  about
BSP’s initiatives for both continuity and change.
In  this  invitation,  there  is  the  simple  but  powerful  recognition  that  new  leadership  does  not
necessarily mean the exclusion of either one of these possibilities of continuity and change…
there is no need to choose one path over the other. 
While there are instances when new leaders must re-write organizational strategy, gladly, when
I came into the Governorship of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas a little over three (3) months
ago, this was certainly not the case. 
I  have  been  a  Central  Banker  for  the  past  thirty-six  (36)  years.    I  am  proud  to  be  part  of  an
institution that has consistently helped provide an enabling environment for a robust and stable
economy through the effective delivery of its mandates of price and financial stability.  Confident
of this, when I became BSP Governor, I stressed the value of building on (and working with) the
foundations built by my predecessors.
This is not to say that no improvements are forthcoming or that things shall be static.  Not at all. 
In  the  BSP,  we  value  dynamism  and  constantly  seek  to  level-up  in  the  way  we  design  and
implement policy.
In  the  BSP,  our  objective  is  for  there  to  be  both  continuity  and  change  in  the  pursuit  of  our
mandates.      There  is  no  intrinsic  contradiction  or  hint  of  schizophrenia  in  this  statement. 
Renowned  Harvard  Business  School  educator  Michael  Porter  said,  “continuity  of  strategic
direction and continuous improvement in how you do things are absolutely consistent with each
other. In fact, they’re mutually reinforcing." 
The  challenge  is  to  find  the  equilibrium  between  continuity  and  change.      While  change  is
necessary to remain relevant and to improve … Constant change, unguided by strategy and
purpose,  and  pursued  only  for  its  own  sake,  will  result  in  chaos,  confusion  and  a  dearth  of
direction.
This is why there is much value in dialogues such as these.  These discussions are venues not
only  for  us  to  provide  latest  updates  on  the  monetary,  external  and  banking  sectors  and  our
outlook  for  these  sectors,  but  it  also  allows  for  an  exchange  of  ideas,  where  feedback  is
welcome,  and  critical  questions  can  be  asked,  providing  us  with  additional  input  when  we
consider our reform initiatives and policy decisions.  
I have read that to find equilibrium between continuity and change one must: first have a deep
understanding of the operating context; second take a holistic approach, and third, for success
and sustainability of policies, work with all facets of the environment. I will present my message
following this outline. 
First, the Operating Context
The Philippines is recognized among one of the fastest growing and most resilient economies in
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  region  and  the  world,  enjoying  a  sweet  spot  of  high  growth  and  manageable  inflation
complemented by a strong and resilient financial system.
GDP growth averaged 6.4 percent in the first semester of 2017. As of the second quarter of
2017, the Philippines posted 74 consecutive quarters of uninterrupted growth (i.e., Q1 1999 to
Q2 2017) or a span of 18.5 years, with growth accelerating in recent years.
The  government  has  set  a  growth  target  of  6.5  to  7.5  percent  for  this  year,  and  7.0  to  8.0
percent  for  2018  up  to  2022.  We  believe  these  targets  are  attainable,  given  strong
macroeconomic fundamentals, rising government spending on critical infrastructure and human
capital development, increasing private sector investments, and strong domestic consumption
on the back of rising incomes of the country’s young and educated workforce.
This  strong  economic  performance  did  not  happen  overnight.    Rather,  it  is  the  result  of
meaningful reforms pursued since the 1997 Asian financial crisis.  The list of reforms is long
and  wide  ranging.    Among  its  highlights  is  the  adoption  in  2002  of  the  inflation  targeting
framework.   
Since 2009, we have consistently achieved our inflation target, except only in 2015–2016 when
inflation went below 2% due to unusually low oil prices. This track record has reinforced the
credibility of the BSP’s inflation targeting framework.
With its sound macroeconomic fundamentals, the Philippines’ economic outlook in the years
ahead  continues  to  be  promising.    Inflation  for  the  first  8  months  of  this  year  averaged  3.1
percent, well within the target range of 2.0 to 4.0 percent for this year. 
We have often been asked why we have not yet raised policy rates given that inflation is trending
higher this year and also given the signaling of monetary policy normalization in the advanced
economies particularly in the United States.
Based on latest estimates by the BSP, average annual inflation in 2017 to 2019 will settle at
around 3.2 percent, just above the mid-point of the target band of 2.0 to 4.0 percent.  This within-
target inflation outlook essentially drives our policy decision.  The independent inflation forecasts
of the IMF and the private sector are also broadly in line with our own estimates.
We expect the combination of high growth and low inflation to be sustained on the back of the
economy’s rising productive capacity and prudent conduct of monetary and fiscal policy. 
With  respect  the  banking  sector,  the  BSP  has  implemented  reforms  to  promote  financial
stability and foster a broad-based and inclusive growth. 
First  –  We  aligned  our  financial  regulations  with  international  best  practices  (such  as  Basel
Core  principles,  and  FATF  recommendations)  while  at  the  same  time  adopting  the  global
standards to our unique domestic conditions.
Second – we implemented macro-prudential reforms that aim to assess and mitigate risks to
the financial system as a whole (or “systemic risks”).
Third, we pursued financial inclusion advocacies to enable greater access to financial services,
strengthened  the  consumer  protection  framework,  embarked  on  targeted  financial  education
programs, and provided an enabling regulatory environment for fintech; and  
Fourth  –  of  significance  is  the  passage  of  a  law  in  2014  that  allows  the  full  entry  of  foreign
banks.    This  complements  BSP’s  other  initiatives  to  further  liberalize  the  industry.  These
reforms  promote  healthy  competition  in  the  banking  system  that  drives  more  efficiency  and
better service delivery. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Philippine banking system today is on very sound footing.  It continues to be a stable anchor
for the economy.  Again, this is the result of deep and meaningful financial sector reforms boldly
implemented.
Key performance indicators show double-digit growth in assets funded by sustained growth in
deposits;  expansion  in  lending;  improved  asset  quality;  profitable  operations;  and  more  than
adequate capitalization.  
On  the  currency  –  the  peso  exchange  rate  is  market-determined  and  flexible.    It  acts  as  an
effective shock absorber for the economy.  Since the beginning of the year, we have allowed a
modest and gradual depreciation of the peso which we consider to be consistent with economic
fundamentals,  complements  the  Philippines’  gradual  shift  from  a  consumption-led  to  an
investment-led economy and bolsters our export price competitiveness.  The exchange rate has
now stabilized at the present narrow range.  Based on our studies, the pass-through effect of
this on inflation is very minimal.
This development is reflected in the country’s external payments position, wherein rising imports
have  resulted  in  a  modest  deficit  in  our  current  account.  The  country’s  overall  balance  of
payments  (BOP)  position,  nonetheless,  is  very  manageable  and  can  stand  resilient  against
external headwinds as we see stable flows from remittances and receipts from BPO services
as well as increasing tourism revenues and foreign direct investments in the years ahead. We
estimate a moderate BOP deficit of less than one percent of GDP this year.
Providing liquidity buffers to the BOP is the country’s international reserves which stand at over
$81 billion, equivalent to almost 9 months of imports of goods and payment of services. In fact,
the country’s GIR exceeds our gross external debt of USD 72.5 billion, which has reduced to the
equivalent of 23.5 percent of GDP. 
I would also like to emphasize that in view of the country’s strong external payments position,
the Philippines has become a creditor to the IMF since 2010 from being a chronic debtor.
Strong macroeconomic fundamentals – robust economic growth, manageable inflation, healthy
external accounts, and a stable banking system – these are the fruits of the sound economic
management and purposeful reforms implemented in the past.
Given this very positive backdrop, continuity is not only wise but necessary.   Rest assured the
BSP shall stay committed to the sound conduct of its core functions – namely monetary policy,
banking supervision and improvement of the payments system. 
As in the past, we will also continue in our practice of crafting meaningful and proactive policy
reforms that are aligned with best practices and international standards, but which at the same
time are sensitive to our unique domestic conditions. In the process, we will continue to engage
relevant stakeholders so that policies are attuned to what is happening on the ground.
One  example  of  this  commitment  in  practice  is  our  recent  enhancement  of  corporate
governance standards among BSP-supervised institutions. The Monetary Board lately approved
revised  corporate  governance  standards,  with  the  BSP  expecting  board  members  of  its
regulated  entities  to  promote  a  culture  of  good  governance.  Another  example  is  the
enhancement of surveillance tools on the exposures of banks and other supervised institutions
to  the  real  estate  sector.  The  Monetary  Board  approved  enhancements  to  the  prudential
reporting requirements for the supervised entities in order to strengthen oversight of their real
estate and project finance exposures.
Second, our Holistic and Inclusive Approach
The economy’s stellar performance does not warrant complacency.  There is still an important
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
task ahead of us.  While the Philippines is fast growing, about a fifth of our population still lives
below the poverty line. 
At the BSP, we are passionate about empowering Filipinos, especially those from lower income
groups and we strive to include them in the formal financial system. 
To reshape the financial system, we will leverage on digitization, to make it more responsive to
the  broader  economy,  transforming  it  so  that  no  one  is  left  behind.  We  encourage  digital
innovations and fintech solutions through an enabling regulatory environment while raising the
bar for guarding against cybercrime and related risks. With digital innovation and fintech, the
reach  of  financial  services  in  the  country  will  expand  and  at  much  lower  cost,  benefitting
consumers and providers alike.
We launched the National Retail and Payments System, which aids the rise of digital innovation
and  fintech.  With  NRPS,  electronic  fund  transfers  from  one  account  to  any  account  will  be
possible, thus easing payments and financial transactions.
We intend to achieve greater financial inclusion through further liberalization of our branching
guidelines and the introduction of basic deposit accounts.  Further, we are closely working with
the national government for the adoption of a biometric-based foundational ID system.  These
proposals  intend  to  broaden  financial  access  points  and  will  bring  millions  of  unbanked  to
participate in the digital finance ecosystem. 
Third, Working with the Environment
This  morning,  I  understand  that  Finance  Secretary  Carlos  Dominguez  and  other  ministers
talked to this group about the government’s massive infrastructure program and the tax reforms
being pushed to fund the huge investments necessary to fund the program.
I  am  pleased  to  inform  that  with  these  national  government  initiatives  in  mind,  the  Bangko
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  has  lined  up  additional  game-changing  financial  sector  reforms  in  the
medium-term. 
Last  August,  the  BSP,  together  with  the  Department  of  Finance  (DOF),  Securities  and
Exchange Commission (SEC) and Bureau of the Treasury (BTr), presented the capital market
roadmap to hasten the development of the domestic debt market.  The initial phase will focus on
improving benchmark markets as this is critical in pricing risk assets and other capital market
instruments.
The reform package aims to: (1) increase the volume of treasury bills, (2) provide a transparent
mechanism covering the issuance of government securities, (3) establish a reliable yield curve,
(4) develop a set of obligations, rights and incentives of market makers, (5) introduce an efficient
repo market, and (6) strengthen regulatory oversight over the repo and fixed income market.
We  will  follow  a  coordinated  and  deliberate  sequenced  approach  to  ensure  smooth
implementation of these reforms.   
I am happy to report that to date, we have seen progress from these initiatives.  For instance,
since June, the BTr has been sending “report cards” to Government Securities Eligible Dealers
(GSEDs)  highlighting  their  performance  in  the  primary  and  secondary  markets.    These  will
serve as basis for future recognition of market makers. 
We have seen performance of GSEDs improve following the release of these report cards and
the unveiling of the roadmap, through improved subscriptions, higher participation in pre-auction
surveys,  and  more  GSEDs  providing  indicative  bids.    Bid  submissions  show  tighter
convergence and presence of outliers are now more limited.  From a difference between the
highest and lowest bids of 190 bps, spread is now around 25bps. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Soon, the BTr will announce the preliminary market makers and will launch the actual enhanced
GSED program early next year.  By November of this year, we also look forward to the first trade
in the repo market.
We are also further liberalizing and rationalizing foreign exchange rules. This is consistent with
efforts to enhance the ease of doing business and facilitate job-generating investments.  There
is  also  the  aim  of  improving  data  capture  for  effective  policy  decision-making.      The
amendments of FX regulations are part of a broader thrust for an organized FX market in order
to enhance transparency, improve price discovery, and make available more FX instruments,
particularly hedging products.
Finally, we will further promote competition in the banking sector by welcoming more foreign
players  that  can  bring  in  international  expertise  in  customer  service,  innovation,  and  even
additional FDIs. Since the full liberalization of the banking sector in 2014 through Republic Act
No. 10641, the entry of ten (10) foreign banks has been approved by the BSP. We expect – and
we  want  –  more  players  to  come  in  and  serve  the  growing  financial  needs  of  our  robustly
growing economy.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippines  has  come  a  long  way,  achieving  investment  grade
sovereign rating status, and becoming an economic outperformer even in the wake of external
headwinds.  In  the  next  cycle  of  economic  transformation,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  play  an
instrumental role by staying committed to its mandates of price and financial stability, and by
topping this up with the pursuit of additional game-changing financial sector reforms.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
  5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
