Address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank 
at The Economist Corporate Network event 
  Johannesburg 
 30 October 2017 
 The performance of and outlook for the South African economy 
 Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 Thank you to The Economist for inviting me  to come and address you on the topic 
‘The  performance  of  and  outlook  for  the  South  African  economy’.  This  is  a  very 
pertinent topic, which could not be more relevant at this stage.  
 Last  week,  when  presenting  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement,  Finance 
Minister  Gigaba  announced  that  National  Treasury  had  revised  its  forecasts  for 
domestic GDP1 growth to 0.7% in 2017 and 1.1% in 2018, an adjustment of 0.6 and 
0.9  percentage  points  respectively,  from  the  projections  made  in  February.  These 
forecasts are in line with those released two weeks earlier by the IMF2  in its October 
2017 World Economic Outlook, with the IMF similarly having scaled down its forecasts 
for South African GDP growth, by 0.3 and 0.1 percentage points for 2017 and 2018 
respectively.  
                                                            
1 gross domestic product 
2 International Monetary Fund 
 Page 1 of 11 
Describing  government’s  view  of  the  economy,  the  former  US3  President  Ronald 
Reagan  once  put  it  this  way:  “If  the  economy  moves,  tax  it.  If  it  keeps  on  moving, 
regulate it. And if it stops moving, subsidise it.” In my view, almost every economy has 
been  through  all  these  phases  –  and  South  Africa  is  currently  moving,  albeit  at  a 
relatively much slower pace than we would all like, and would be required to address 
the challenges of unemployment and inclusive economic development.  
 The  slack  in  growth  is  perhaps  the  most  crucial  economic  issue  in  South  Africa  at 
present. Indeed, when it downgraded South Africa’s sovereign  credit rating in June, 
ratings  agency  Moody’s  listed  ‘reduced  growth  prospects’  as  one  of  the  three  key 
drivers of the downgrade. Yet at the same time, most observers of the global economy 
concur that the world’s economic and financial situation is more favourable than it has 
been for years.  
 So why is South Africa missing out on the global recovery? What has driven the poor 
performance of the past few years? Will this trend continue? If so, what role can the 
South African Reserve Bank (or SARB) can play in making a contribution to address 
the issue? These are the questions that I will attempt to answer in my address today. 
 When activity is volatile but broadly underperforming  
 The ability to analyse trends in the South African economy has been complicated of 
late by the high volatility in quarterly GDP data. The standard deviation of the quarter-
on-quarter  seasonally  adjusted  change  in  GDP  has  been  close  to  2.0  percentage 
points, on average, over the  past five years. To some extent, this volatility makes it 
difficult to use the latest data point as an indication of a trend or to determine ‘in real 
time’ inflections in the pace of activity. For example, data for the fourth quarter of 2016 
and the first quarter of 2017 showed that the South African economy was in ‘a technical 
recession’, with two consecutive contractions, however marginal they may have been. 
This was followed by a rebound of 2.5% in the second quarter. 
                                                            
3 United States 
 Page 2 of 11 
Surprisingly  enough,  this  short-term  volatility  was  not  limited  to  those  demand 
components  which,  like  public-sector  investment  or  inventory  changes,  regularly 
experience  large  deviations  from  the  trend.  Rather,  it  extended  to  generally  more 
stable aggregates, for example the household consumption of services. At this stage, 
it is difficult to say to what extent this volatility reflects changes in household-sector 
behaviour or data measurement challenges. What we can assume, however, is that 
the  underlying  trend  of  the  economy  is  somewhere  ‘in-between’  the  latest 
observations.  We  may  not  be  in  a  recession,  but  it  is  quite  doubtful  that  the  2.5% 
momentum of the second quarter can be sustained. 
 It  seems  pretty  certain  that  South  Africa  is  presently  mired  in  very  low  growth. 
Following  an increase of only 0.3% in GDP last year, our models project  a meagre 
expansion of just 0.6% in 2017. These numbers continue to fall short of the domestic 
population  growth  of  around  1.5%.  This  means  that,  in  per-capita  terms,  GDP  is 
declining and is likely to drop back this year to levels last seen in 2011. Effectively, 
real  GDP  per  capita  will  only  have  grown  by  4%  overall  over  the  past  10  years, 
compared with a growth of 20% over the previous 10 years.   
 Furthermore,  as  mentioned  earlier,  South  Africa  seems  to  be  ‘missing  out’  on  the 
global  recovery.  Because  we  are  an  open  and  relatively  small  economy,  with 
commodity-dependent exports and hence terms of trade that are highly sensitive to 
global industrial demand, our domestic cycle generally moves ‘in sync’ with its global 
counterparts.  South  Africa  entered  and  exited  the  2008-09  global  recession  with  a 
slight  delay,  but  more  or  less  at  the  same  time  as  most  of  the  world’s  largest 
economies.  Such  cyclical  patterns  are  largely  unavoidable,  and  the  best  that 
macroeconomic  policy  can  do  is  to  limit  their  magnitude  and  hence  their  potential 
distortionary effects.  
 What  is  worrying,  however,  is  that  while  the  gap  between  South  African  and  world 
growth hovered at around zero just before and during the global recession, this growth 
gap has gradually widened ever since. It has averaged 1.8 percentage points in the 
last  five  years,  stood  at  2.9  in  2016,  and  –  based  on  the  IMF’s  and  the  SARB’s 
forecasts – could increase to 3.0 in the current year. A similar observation arises when 
 Page 3 of 11 
comparing  South  Africa  to  its  upper-middle-income  peers4:  in  2002-07,  domestic 
growth was, on average, 0.4 percentage points below this group’s median; last year, 
the gap had widened to 2.5 percentage points. 
 Not ‘a traditional recession’ but ‘a slow grind to a halt’ 
 How can we explain this lacklustre performance of the South African economy? And 
how can we explain its underperformance versus its peers?  
 In  many  ways,  the  downturn  of  the  past  few  years  does  not  display  the  traditional 
characteristics  of  a  recession.  For  example,  there  was  no  build-up  of  inflationary 
pressures that necessitated the shift to a restrictive, demand-constraining monetary 
policy.  Inflation  has  displayed  a  rising  trend  since  2011,  resulting  in  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  of  the  SARB  raising  the  repurchase  rate  by  200  basis  points 
between  January  2014  and  March  2016.  But  by  our  own,  admittedly  imprecise, 
calculations,  the  real  interest  rate  remained  below  its  neutral  level  for  most  of  that 
period. This would suggest that while monetary policy provided less stimulus, it did not 
turn outright restrictive. 
 Equally, we did not see the kind of asset-price bubbles or the build-up of other financial 
vulnerabilities  which  typically  precede  a  recession,  as  the  unwinding  of  such 
imbalances  generally  results  in  lower  private-sector  appetite  for  borrowing,  tighter 
lending  standards  by  banks,  and  a  rise  in  precautionary  savings  by  households.  In 
recent years, in part thanks to the generally accommodative stance of monetary policy, 
banks’ non-performing loans have declined, the number of home repossessions has 
equally  fallen  to  low  levels,  and  while  equity  prices  have  performed  strongly,  home 
prices have broadly stagnated in real terms.  
 Admittedly, growth in loans and advances to the private sector slowed in 2016, from 
almost 9% year on year in late 2015 to a low of 4.5% in November last year. Yet this 
deceleration proved milder than in previous downward phases of the business cycle. 
Confidence  in  the  retail  banking  sector,  as  measured  by  the  EY  Financial  Services 
                                                           
4 This refers to the World Bank’s definition of ‘upper-middle income’, which comprises 56 countries. 
 Page 4 of 11 
Index,  remains  above  par,  in  contrast  to  the  other  major  sectors  of  the  domestic 
economy.  Civil  cases  for  debt  and  insolvencies  are  below  the  average  of  the  past 
decade,  even  though  surveys  show  that  consumers  are  feeling  increasingly 
vulnerable.5 As for the savings ratio of households, while it rose from -2% of disposable 
income in 2013 to around 0% thus far in 2017, it is only back to the levels last seen 
after the global recession in 2008 and remains very low by historical standards. 
 Rather than ‘a traditional recession’, then, what South Africa experienced was ‘a slow 
grind  to  a  halt’  that  was  driven  more  by  long-term  supply  factors  than  by  long-term 
demand  factors.  Admittedly,  several  external  factors,  besides  short-term  domestic 
disruptions, contributed to the weakness in GDP growth.  
 The recovery in world demand since the global financial crisis has been sluggish and 
has  displayed low trade intensity by historical standards.  For example,  the average 
annual  real  import  growth  in  South  Africa’s  export  markets  –  as  measured  by  the 
OECD6 – amounted to only 3.0% in the last five years and 2.1% in 2016, compared to 
the 8.6% in the five years leading up to the global recession.7 And this was not just a 
volume story: the prices of domestic commodity exports also fell, resulting in a decline 
in South Africa’s terms of trade by 7% between 2011 and 2014. 
 On the domestic front, the drought that affected South Africa over the 2015/16 summer 
season resulted in an 8% contraction in agricultural output last year, which shaved off 
0.2%  from  the  2016  GDP  growth.  Safety-related  stoppages  also  affected  mining 
production in 2016.  
 Yet  both  these  external  and  domestic  factors  do  not  explain  the  full  extent  of  the 
economic slowdown. Nor do they explain why our domestic economy, in contrast to 
many of its peers, has failed to get much traction in the first half of 2017. After all, the 
end of the drought, together with the improving global environment and the recovery 
                                                           
5 For example, the Consumer Financial Vulnerability Index (computed by the Bureau of Market 
Research, the University of South Africa, and Momentum) showed a significant deterioration in 
the second quarter of 2017. 
6 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
7 The OECD calculates export market growth for a specific country as the weighted average of import 
growth in its trading partners, with the shares of these partners in the country’s total 
exports as weights. 
 Page 5 of 11 
in  South  Africa’s  terms  of  trade  from  the  second  quarter  of  2016  onwards,  was 
expected to engineer at least some economic rebound – but so far it is missing. 
 Most  likely,  the  key  to  this  lack  of  growth  resides  in  a  self-reinforcing  ‘negative 
feedback  loop’  of  policy  uncertainties,  low  private-sector  confidence,  subdued 
investment  in  productive  capacities,  and  poor  competitive  performance.  Causality 
implications between growth and confidence go both ways. Attempts by our in-house 
research  to  identify  the  possible  causes  of  the  ever-widening  gap  between  South 
African and world growth have found that the negative impact of low confidence has 
increased in recent years, explaining as much as 1.15 percentage points of that gap 
in 2016. 
 In  turn,  weak  business  confidence  amid  disappointing  demand  performance  has 
depressed private-sector fixed investment. Last year, it contracted by 6.8%. As of the 
second quarter of 2017, it was down by 2.7% year on year and stood at 11.8% of GDP 
compared to a high of more than 15% at the start of the global recession – its lowest 
level since 2004. In an environment of low consumer confidence and a lack of property 
price  growth  in  real  terms,  the  housing  sector  does  not  remain  immune  to  such 
subdued  performance.  Because  of  such  softness  in  capital  formation,  as  well  as 
subdued  productivity  growth,  the  potential  pace  of  GDP  growth  has  slowed  to  an 
estimated 1.1% in both 2016 and 2017 from more than 3% at the start of the decade. 
 Weak  private-sector  investment,  currently  focusing  mostly  on  replacing  obsolete 
capital rather than creating new capacities, coupled with a shortage of skilled labour 
and,  possibly,  product  market  rigidities,  appears  to  be  weighing  on  external 
competitiveness and export performance. South African firms may be slow to adjust 
to changes in global demand patterns; they may lack the innovative edge to keep pace 
with foreign competitors. While the causes may be uncertain, the fact remains that, 
over the past decade or two, South African export volumes have consistently fallen 
short of the demand in its trading partners, implying a loss of market share.8 A trend 
towards real exchange-rate depreciation has not helped. In fact, market share often 
                                                           
8 The OECD’s measure of export market growth for South African goods and services shows average 
annual growth of 5.0% since 2010. Over that same period, though, the average annual growth in 
South African exports has only been 2.2%.  
 Page 6 of 11 
stagnated in the aftermath of rand-depreciation phases but it declined when the local 
currency recovered. 
 Most likely scenario: a modest recovery 
 The  question  remains:  will  economic  stagnation  persist  in  South  Africa?  There  are 
presently some grounds for very prudent optimism for the next year or two.  
 The external economic environment has improved. Last month, the IMF again revised 
upwards its forecast for world growth in both 2017 and 2018, by 0.1 percentage points 
in each case, to 3.6% and 3.7% respectively, up from 3.2% last year. Such upward 
revisions mark a welcome break from the pattern of earlier years, when forecasters 
regularly pushed back the timing and the scale of the global recovery. Furthermore, 
this recovery is relatively broad-based, both geographically and across sectors, and it 
is not generating the kind of price pressures that would prompt the major central banks 
to aggressively tighten monetary policy and, as such, curtail that recovery. 
 Closer to home, the decline in inflation over the past year has provided some breathing 
space to the consumer, allowing some gains in real disposable income despite net job 
losses. Equally, the decline in the current account deficit, to 2.2% of GDP on average 
in the first half of the year from as high as 5.9% of GDP in 2013, is helping (together 
with  an  elevated  global-investor  appetite  for  higher-yielding  government  debt)  to 
shelter domestic financial markets from external or local shocks. This explains, in part, 
why the rand and domestic bonds have not shown a strong or durable reaction, this 
year, to adverse political or policy news. 
 In  recent  months,  some  domestic  high-frequency  data  have  shown  signs  of 
improvement. Following a downward trend lasting more than three years, new vehicle 
sales,  expressed  in  seasonally  adjusted terms,  rose  by  10%  in  September from an 
April  low.  Manufacturing  production,  which  had  stagnated  for  the  past  five  years, 
increased  in  both  July  and  August  to  its  highest  levels  in  more  than  a  year.  The 
rebound  in  the  mining  sector  has  been  even  more  pronounced.  It  would  therefore 
appear that both sectors will contribute positively to GDP growth in the third quarter of 
 Page 7 of 11 
this year. The RMB/BER9 business confidence index, while still well below the neutral 
50 mark, rose off eight-year lows in the previous quarter. 
 However, all this is no cause for premature celebration. Many factors still limit the room 
for a meaningful improvement in South African economic growth. Confidence remains 
highly  vulnerable  to  upcoming  political  events  given  their  potential  implications  for 
important  government  policies;  it  also  remains  vulnerable  to  the  risk  of  further 
sovereign credit rating downgrades. A further rise in the oil price could boost inflation 
and undermine the terms of trade. And the extent of the impact that the normalization 
of  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced  economies  could  have  on  emerging-market 
assets, including the rand and domestic securities, is still unclear. 
 Even  in  a  relatively  favourable  scenario  –  where  confidence  gradually  improves, 
inflation remains moderate, and the output gap gradually closes – structural factors 
are likely to limit the scope for a meaningful growth pickup. Productivity performance 
remains weak, with an average annual gain of only 1.2% in the past five years. The 
shortages of skilled labour are likely to remain acute for an extended period  of time 
even if educational outcomes improve. Job-searching costs are high, making it  that 
much more difficult for low-skilled people to find employment. And the relatively high 
concentration in many sectors, together with elevated regulation, results in barriers to 
entry for new firms.10  
 Consequently,  even  with  the  gradual  removal  of  infrastructure  bottlenecks  –  for 
example, as more power supply comes on stream – it is difficult to envisage much of 
a pickup in potential growth in the next two years or so. For these reasons, the SARB 
projects only a moderate acceleration in actual real GDP growth, from 0.6% this year 
to 1.2% in 2018 and 1.5% in 2019. 
 How can monetary policy help? 
 How should monetary policy respond to such a situation? Conventional wisdom may 
argue  that,  in  the  wake  of  a  slowdown,  interest  rates  should  be  reduced  so  as  to 
                                                           
9 Rand Merchant Bank / Bureau for Economic Research 
10 See OECD Economic Survey: South Africa, 2017. 
 Page 8 of 11 
rekindle domestic demand. The SARB is cognisant of the fragile economic situation, 
and to the extent that its decisions remain consistent with its mandate of ensuring price 
stability, it takes appropriate actions to support economic activity. The 25 basis points 
cut in the repurchase rate in July, which had been made possible by an improvement 
in  the  inflation  outlook,  illustrates  this  approach.  However,  an  aggressive  easing  of 
monetary  policy  –  for  the  sole  purpose  of  kick-starting  the  economy  –  could  yield 
disappointing returns for an unacceptable degree of risk, for the following reasons.  
 First,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  monetary  policy  was  not  tight  at  the  start  of  the 
downturn, nor was that downturn the consequence of restrictive financial conditions. 
In recent years, South Africa’s monetary stance merely moved from loose to roughly 
neutral. Surveys and economic data support this assessment: fewer businesses than 
usual  report  the  level  of  interest  rates  as  an  obstacle  to  expansion  –  in  contrast  to 
political uncertainty, which has grown as a constraint in recent years. Equally, at 9.4%, 
the ratio of household debt-servicing costs to income is in line with long-run historical 
norms. 
 Second, because the downturn reflects non-monetary factors, it is doubtful how much 
rate reductions, at present, would stimulate demand. The experience of the advanced 
economies since the most recent global recession shows that if conditions are not met 
for  a  rise  in  private-sector  willingness  to  borrow,  rate  cuts  are  likely  to  have  limited 
influence  on  credit  and  demand  growth.  For  example,  if  the  main  concern  of  many 
businesses is a lack of policy and regulatory clarity, it is doubtful whether lowering the 
cost  of  capital  will  entice  them  to  invest.  Equally,  risk-averse  households  may  use 
lower interest rates to ensure a faster repayment of their debt rather than increasing 
their expenditure or investing in new residential property. 
 Third, even if demand were to respond to meaningful interest-rate cuts, the economy’s 
supply constraints might soon limit its ability to meet the increase in demand, resulting 
in higher prices either directly or indirectly via a rise in imports that would widen the 
trade balance and depreciate the exchange rate. Domestic demand in South Africa – 
and this includes household consumption as well as fixed investment  – has always 
been  import-intensive,  even  in  periods  of  prevailing  economic  slack.  And  while  our 
 Page 9 of 11 
estimates of the output gap point to some degree of slack in the economy, others (such 
as capacity utilization in manufacturing) paint a more ambiguous picture. 
 Fourth, the risks to the inflation outlook appear presently too skewed to the upside to 
allow the SARB to embark on a sizable monetary stimulus without fears of a sustained 
overshoot in the inflation target range. Ongoing careful assessment of evolving data 
and vigilance continue to be imperative. Our own models suggest that, because of the 
rigidities in the domestic wage and price formation process, the output gap does not 
have a large impact on inflation trends. By contrast, the sensitivity to changes in the 
rand, which could easily depreciate in the event of sizable rate cuts, is generally higher, 
even if it appeared to decline in recent years. 
 Conclusion: the merits of a stability-oriented framework 
 Nevertheless,  monetary  policy  does  have  a  role  to  play  in  attaining  stronger,  more 
sustainable economic growth in South Africa.  However, it remains the SARB’s view 
that the best way it can assist in reaching this goal is by fostering medium-term price 
stability so as to minimise the distortionary effects of a volatile inflation. In particular, 
historical  evidence  –  both  in  South  Africa  and  abroad  –  suggests  that  when  price 
expectations are better anchored, any shock to inflation is more transient and hence 
allows  the  central  bank  greater  latitude  to  quickly  respond  to  a  slowdown  in  real 
economic activity. 
 South  Africa’s  inflation-targeting  regime  is  bearing  fruit  in  that  respect.  Inflation 
expectations (as measured by the BER11 survey of analysts, businesses, and trade 
unions)  are  currently  better  anchored  than  in  the  early  years  of  the  inflation  target 
range. This, in turn, has resulted in more moderate fluctuations, both in the short-term 
and  in  the  long-term  interest  rates,  over  the  economic  cycle.  The  SARB  remains 
concerned,  however,  that  these  expectations  have  become  too  closely  anchored 
around the upper end of the 3-6% target band. Not only does this raise the risk that 
any shock to prices will result in a durable overshoot of the target range; it also leaves 
South  African  inflation  structurally  higher  than  in  most  of  its  trading  partners.  This 
                                                           
11 Bureau for Economic Research 
 Page 10 of 11 
means  that  external  competitiveness  can  only  be  maintained  through  a  regular 
weakening  of  the  rand,  which  perpetuates  a  cycle  of  inflation  and  exchange-rate 
depreciation that probably adds to the risk premiums in financial assets and, in turn, 
unnecessarily raises the cost of capital. 
 In  fact,  international  experience  suggests  that,  since  they  have  adopted  a  similar 
regime, most of the other emerging countries that have managed to keep a lower rate 
of inflation than South Africa have also enjoyed a stronger rate of economic growth. 
Looking  at  a  dozen  or  so  large  and  open  emerging  economies  with  an  inflation-
targeting regime, we find that the sample’s median GDP growth (since the adoption of 
the regime) has been about 0.5 percentage points higher than South Africa’s whereas 
its inflation rate has been about 2.0 percentage points lower. If anything, the growth 
gap is even bigger in the years since the global financial crisis.  
 In  conclusion,  it  would  appear  that  the  economic  difficulties  that  South  Africa  is 
currently facing are not an indictment on the monetary-policy framework that has been 
followed for the past 15 years or so. Rather, they illustrate that even a well-calibrated 
monetary policy cannot, on its own, address the economy’s structural challenges. Of 
course, monetary policy is always perfectible; its framework can evolve as underlying 
economic structures change. And the SARB remains committed to constantly looking 
for ways of carrying out its mandate better.  
 But at the end of the day, a central bank has too few tools at its disposal to solve the 
large number of problems that we are currently facing – both here and abroad. This 
brings to mind the words of James Penney, businessman and entrepreneur: “Growth 
is never by a mere chance, but it is a result of forces working together.”  
 Thank you. 
    Page 11 of 11 
