Benoît  Cœuré:  Asset  purchases,  financial  regulation  and  repo
market activity
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the ERCC General Meeting on "The repo market: market conditions and operational challenges",
Brussels, 14 November 2017.
1
Let me thank the organisers for inviting me here today.
 The repo market is a cornerstone in the transmission of monetary policy. In its traditional role, it
is a prime short-term funding market for banks. Before the outbreak of the global financial crisis,
secured  transactions  accounted  for  around  a  third  of  the  daily  turnover  in  euro  area  money
markets  according  to  money  market  statistical  reporting  (MMSR)  data.  Today,  their  share  is
closer to two-thirds.
Movements in short-term repo rates therefore change the market-based financing conditions for
banks  and,  hence,  their  conditions  for  trading  with  their  ultimate  customers  –  firms  and
households.  This  means  that  repo  rates  are  a  prime  channel  through  which  changes  in  the
monetary policy stance are transmitted to the broader financial market and the real economy.
In  addition,  the  repo  market  plays  an  important  intermediation  role  in  the  financial  system  by
being the main vehicle for sourcing and financing government bonds. In this role, the repo market
critically supports the liquidity of the bond market. It offers investors the possibility to finance long
positions and to borrow securities to deliver into short positions. Interruptions in the repo market
may therefore affect the entire term structure of interest rates.
The implication is that central banks need to have a watchful eye on developments in the repo
market to ensure that it transmits and reflects the intended monetary policy stance. This includes
monitoring the impact of their own actions on repo market activity, as well as the effects of other,
external factors that could potentially drive a wedge between central banks’ own intentions and
actual financial market conditions.
In fact, two watchful eyes are not too many, in view of the risks that this market may pose to
financial  stability.  Because  repo  trades  are  predominately  of  a  very  short-term  nature,  and
secured  funding  can  create  a  false  sense  of  security  when  collateral  prices  are  in  fact  often
procyclical ,  excessive  reliance  on  repo  market  funding  may  quickly  turn  into  a  source  of
instability for the financial system as a whole. The scars from the great financial crisis are still
visible today.
2
In my remarks today I would like to discuss two factors that have recently been highlighted by
market observers, practitioners and academics alike as potentially challenging the intermediation
capacity  of  repo  markets,  namely  central  bank  asset  purchases  and  post-crisis  prudential
3
regulation.
I will show that the ECB’s asset purchase programme (APP) left a visible footprint in the repo
market, but that last year’s modifications to our securities lending facility contributed to restoring
an  appropriate  balance  between  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  our  measures  and  the  smooth
functioning of repo markets. I will also provide empirical evidence that challenges the view that
financial regulation has adversely impacted repo market activity so far. But I will also argue that
further evidence is needed to draw conclusions on this matter.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Asset purchases and repo market activity
Let me start with the impact of central bank asset purchases on recent repo market activity.
Asset  purchases  may  have  two  broad  effects  on  repo  markets.  The  first  is  their  impact  on
excess  liquidity.  With  central  banks  exchanging  large  amounts  of  reserves  for  longer-dated
securities, banks may no longer need to tap the interbank market, both secured and unsecured,
to manage their short-term liquidity needs. As a result, trading volumes may fall.
The  second  effect  is  closer  to  one  of  the  main  transmission  channels  of  asset  purchase
programmes,  namely  portfolio  rebalancing.  In  imperfect  financial  markets,  those  in  need  of
scarce securities, or those who have a special preference for them, need to bid harder to obtain
them,  thereby  pushing  up  their  price  and  lowering  their  yield  –  which  then  delivers  financial
conditions supportive of higher output and prices in the real economy. There is growing empirical
4
evidence that this channel has been very effective in the euro area.
The flip side to this is that, although purchases are conducted in the secondary cash market,
price adjustments in this market can also be expected to affect conditions in the repo market. A
simple way to think about this is through short-selling. Bonds being richer in the cash market will
make it more difficult to borrow them via reverse repos. This should also push up the price in the
repo market, all else equal.
In addition, investors who own more expensive securities should be able to profit from them by
obtaining lower funding costs in the repo market. In other words, because the cash and the repo
market often intermediate the same asset, it is natural that changes in one market may have
5
repercussions in the other.
Both  effects  have  clearly  left  a  footprint  in  the  repo  market.  But  one  needs  to  look  beyond
aggregate data to understand the full impact of the ECB’s APP.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
For example, there has been no overall fall in average euro repo market turnover since the great
financial  crisis.  Daily  volumes  in  the  repo  market  even  rose  in  recent  years,  despite  the
considerable increase in excess liquidity. You can see this clearly on my first slide. According to
MMSR data, turnover was close to €350 billion daily in the second quarter of this year, up from
around €250 billion a few years ago.
What has changed, however, is the type of transaction executed in the repo market. This you
can see clearly on this slide and on the next. First, there has been a clear shift from unsecured to
secured  transactions  since  the  crisis.  Second,  as  can  be  seen  on  the  next  slide,  increasing
excess liquidity has led to a notable decline in the share of trades backed by general collateral
(GC),  which  is  traditionally  used  to  obtain  funding  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  may
suggest that proceeds from the sales of securities, together with the ECB conducting its main
refinancing  operations  at  fixed  rate  full  allotment,  have  increasingly  acted  as  a  substitute  for
funding in the interbank market.
At  the  same  time,  we  have  observed  an  appreciable  increase  in  collateral-driven  or  specific
repos. You can see this on the right-hand side. In other words, repos are increasingly conducted
6
as a means to move securities among market participants, not primarily to raise cash.
There  might  be  several  reasons  for  this.  Smaller  inventories  held  by  market-makers  after  the
crisis,  for  example,  may  cause  them  to  source  bonds  in  the  repo  market  more  often.
Alternatively,  short-selling  activity  may  have  increased,  a  phenomenon  often  observed  at,  or
close to, monetary policy turning points when investors expect yields to rise.
One factor that is likely to have contributed to the rise in special repos is policy-induced scarcity,
however.  This  can  best  be  seen  when  considering  the  German  Bund  market.  Here,  our
purchases  have  absorbed  a  multiple  of  net  issuance  in  recent  years,  meaning  that  we  have
actively reduced the stock of outstanding bonds held by private market participants.
The  consequence  is  that  investors  in  search  of  these  securities  increasingly  need  to  pay  a
premium, a specialness premium, which, broadly speaking, reflects the costs of the difficulty in
finding a lender of the security. The premium will then depend on the scarcity of the underlying
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
asset and their holding structure: many of the residual government bond holders are unwilling to
sell  them,  or  will  sell  them  at  a  higher  price  due  to  regulation  or  their  own  asset-liability
management rules.
You can see this on my next slide. Our asset purchases have coincided with a notable increase
in the share of German bonds that trade “special” in the repo market, meaning they trade at a
premium over GC rates. Before we started our purchases, typically less than 5% of bonds in the
German repo market were trading special. In the second half of last year, this share increased to
more than 50%. Year-end events, which I will come back to later, pushed their share even higher.
You can also see that specialness did not increase immediately with the start of our purchases
under  the  public  sector  purchase  programme  (PSPP)  in  March  2015.  The  reason  might  be
related to potential non-linearities in the way supply changes affect market outcomes. That is,
price effects from the flow of purchases may only become visible the moment supply effectively
starts to constrain demand.
Reverse  supply  effects  are  also  clearly  visible  on  the  same  chart.  When  the  ECB  Governing
Council,  in  December  last  year,  decided  to  also  accept  cash  as  collateral  in  our  securities
lending facility, we effectively increased the supply of bonds available in the repo market, thereby
7
swiftly reducing the share of bonds trading special.
The price effects of this decision can be seen on the next slide. Before we accepted cash as
collateral, there was a strong positive relationship between the level of excess liquidity and repo
rates, not only for trades backed by German collateral, but also for those involving French and, to
a  lesser  extent,  Italian  securities.  The  moment  we  amended  our  securities  lending  facility  in
December last year, the relationship broke down, as you can see on the right-hand side.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Recent ECB analysis confirms the intimate relationship between cash and repo markets and the
impact of supply and demand effects.  The authors estimate that a 1% reduction in the effective
supply  may  increase  specialness,  on  average,  by  up  to  five  basis  points.  Studies  for  the  US
market come to qualitatively similar conclusions.  In other words, whether a bond trades special,
and by how much, depends crucially on its effective supply, which is itself affected by factors
such as the amount of investors that are willing to lend out securities in the repo market.
8
9
These effects are also found to be persistent. You can see this on the same slide. The “scarcity”
premium  stabilised  in  spite  of  continuously  increasing  excess  liquidity,  but  did  not  regress.  In
other words, continued scarcity in the cash market implies that the remaining holders of bonds
continue to benefit from lower financing conditions. You can also see this on the previous slide. In
2017,  looking  through  the  occasional  ups  and  downs,  around  30%  of  the  bonds  continued  to
trade special.
The  objective  of  our  decision  to  also  accept  cash  in  securities  lending  was,  therefore,  not  to
prevent  all  instances  of  specialness.  Put  simply,  this  would  have  meant  acting  in  the  cash
market or to sterilise bond purchases, which would run counter to our desired monetary policy
stance. The present inflation outlook requires financing conditions to remain accommodative for
a considerable period of time.
Our objective was rather to support smooth repo market functioning, also with a view to avoiding
episodes of extreme specialness, such as at the end of a year or quarter. Extreme specialness
may  result  in  serious  market  malfunctioning,  with  investors  choosing  to  strategically  fail  to
deliver.  It  is  therefore  fair  to  say  that  the  initial  restriction  –  only  lending  bonds  against  other
PSPP-eligible  securities  –  was  too  penalising  and  is  likely  to  have  contributed  to  the  growing
specialness premium in the segment of the yield curve where the Eurosystem was intervening
most heavily last year.
You  can  see  this  on  the  next  slide.  Purchases  under  the  PSPP  in  Germany  have  long  been
concentrated in medium to long-term maturities due to the restriction, at that time, not to conduct
purchases below the deposit facility rate (DFR). Increasing scarcity in that segment of the cash
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
market then also translated into a persistent rise in the specialness premia of such bonds, even
when abstracting from year-end effects.
Our decision to accept cash as collateral in securities lending, and to allow purchases below the
DFR,  contributed  to  relieving  this  pressure.  Premia  across  maturity  buckets  are  now  broadly
similar.  The  relatively  low  specialness  premia  for  bonds  with  shorter  maturities,  in  turn,  also
suggests that the majority of holders of such bonds – mainly non-euro area investors without
access to our deposit facility, as I illustrated in a previous speech – were, and remain, generally
willing to provide them in sufficient quantity in the repo market.
10
Yet, this chart also reinforces the point I made earlier about the flow and stock effects of our
purchases:  with  the  effective  supply  of  bonds  gradually  shrinking  over  time  as  a  result  of  our
purchases, specialness premia have been persistently inching upwards.
 While stock effects
reinforce one of the key transmission channels of the APP by increasing the “value for money” –
the bang for the buck – of new net purchases in terms of their impact on financial conditions, we
also need to be mindful that a shortage of government bonds may over time adversely affect the
intermediation capacity of repo markets.
11
There are two reasons for this. First, government bonds are the main type of collateral used in
repo markets, primarily because of their safety and liquidity. According to MMSR data, euro area
government  bonds  represent  more  than  80%  of  the  collateral  used.  Second,  the  supply  of
safe private collateral is necessarily scarce , while the supply of safe public collateral has fallen
on account of both a decline in net issuance and the downgrades in sovereign credit ratings. For
example, the share of euro area bonds rated AAA by at least two rating agencies has fallen from
levels around 60% before the great financial crisis to around 20% today. In other words, safe debt
is in short supply and debt in long supply is less safe.
12
13
This is also why the Governing Council’s decision of 26 October, when it decided to extend the
horizon  of  its  asset  purchases  by  another  nine  months,  and  to  reduce  the  pace  of  monthly
purchases to €30 billion, emphasised the contribution of the stock of acquired assets, together
with forthcoming reinvestments, to providing continued monetary support.
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial regulation and repo market activity
Asset purchases are not the only factor affecting supply and demand conditions in cash and repo
markets. This brings me to the second part of my remarks. As you know, a number of liquidity
regulations  affecting  banks,  such  as  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR)  and  the  liquidity
coverage ratio (LCR), require banks to hold a sufficient quantity of high-quality liquid assets.
At face value, these regulations could be expected to have contributed to bumping up demand for
government bonds, thereby reinforcing the effects of the ECB’s APP. But because, as a result of
our asset purchases, banks hold a large amount of central bank reserves, which count as high-
quality  liquid  assets,  such  regulations  are  unlikely  to  have  been  a  key  driver  of  increasing
collateral scarcity.
These reforms, however, are likely to have affected the repo market in different ways. One of
them you can see on my next slide. Here I show the distribution of repo market activity for one-
day  tenor  contracts  exchanged  bilaterally  or  via  central  clearing  counterparties  (CCPs)  for
German collateral. The chart shows an interesting feature, namely that the market attaches a
premium to centrally cleared transactions.
The  reasons  for  this  are  unlikely  to  surprise  you:  the  leverage  ratio  allows  for  offsetting  cash
proceeds to be netted off when the transactions are with the same counterparty, have the same
end  date,  and  are  conducted  in  the  same  settlement  system.  This  means  that  although  repo
transaction  are  not  part  of  the  2009  Pittsburgh  central  clearing  mandate,  which  covers  OTC
derivatives, centrally cleared transactions have a premium because they make those trades less
capital intensive compared with non-nettable ones. According to MMSR data, around two-thirds
of repo transactions are already cleared centrally.
So, what we seem to have observed so far is that the leverage ratio – contrary to much-voiced
concerns – has not led to a reduction in repo volumes, but rather to a change in the way trades
are settled. And to the extent that these trades are increasingly intermediated through CCPs, this
is  clearly  a  positive  development.  CCPs  reduce  counterparty  and  systemic  risks  and  help
 7 / 10
14
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
clearing members economise the use of scarce collateral.
 There is also empirical evidence
15
that clearing increases market resilience in periods of stress.
Resilience  of  trading  volumes  to  regulatory  reforms  is  also  confirmed  by  empirical  analysis
conducted by ECB staff – the results of which will be published in the ECB’s financial stability
review on 29 November. I will offer a short preview today.
In  this  report,  ECB  staff  assess  the  effects  of  recent  regulatory  reforms  on  repo  market
developments at quarter-end, based on supervisory data for a sample of more than 50 banks
directly supervised by the euro area’s single supervisor. Micro data are important to ensure that
aggregate repo market developments do not mask a significant impact of regulatory reforms at
the individual bank level.
The  findings  suggest  that,  although  banks’  adjustments  to  higher  leverage  ratios  seem  to  be
somewhat  correlated  with  a  reduction  in  their  repo  volumes,  the  effects  are  not  found  to  be
economically meaningful relative to other exposures. Other regulatory measures, such as the
LCR  or  the  NSFR,  are  found  to  have  had  no  statistically  significant  impact  so  far  on  repo
volumes.  The  study  also  highlights  that  the  more  significant  falls  in  banks’  outstanding  repo
volumes  at  year-end  are  likely  to  have  also  been  driven  by  additional  factors,  such  as
contributions to the single resolution fund or national bank levies.
These findings are not the final word on the matter, of course. The repo market is in a state of
transition  as  the  report  by  a  study  group  of  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System
(CGFS), chaired by Bank of England Deputy Governor Jon Cunliffe, recently concluded. In this
respect,  the  CGFS  also  recommended  in  April  that  a  further  study  on  repo  markets  be
undertaken within the next two years.
This means that policymakers will continue to closely monitor developments in repo markets and
financial  markets  more  generally.  Some  effects  can  only  be  thoroughly  assessed  once  the
reforms  have  been  implemented  more  meaningfully,  while  others  may  become  clearer  at  an
earlier  stage.  For  example,  it  seems  undisputable  that  regulatory  reforms  have  contributed  to
temporary volatility in repo market activity on reporting dates.
Specifically, window-dressing behaviour of banks appears a likely unintended effect of regulation.
I  would  therefore  encourage  further  analysis  of  methods  that  could  help  reduce  volatility  and
thereby contribute to a smoother functioning of markets. In this respect, you will have seen in a
recently  published  Opinion  of  the  ECB  on,  inter  alia,  amendments  to  the  EU  Capital
Requirements Regulation (CRR), that the ECB supports the review of the calculation method for
the leverage ratio.
16
I have also previously voiced support as CPMI Chair for implementing the leverage ratio in a way
that  does  not  create  disincentives  for  centrally  cleared  transactions,  namely  by  offsetting  the
initial margin in the case of derivative exposures related to client clearing.
17
All these exercises, however, should not be mistaken for tolerance of a relaxation of regulation.
Post-crisis  reforms  aim  to  curb  excessive  leverage  and  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale
funding, and for good reasons. This is also why the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has published
specific recommendations, including a framework for minimum haircuts for securities financing
transactions (SFTs).
18
19
The FSB has also assessed the potential financial stability risks related to collateral re-use in
SFTs.
  The  latter  may  contribute  to  a  build-up  of  leverage  and  increase  interconnectedness
among  market  participants.  The  FSB  concluded  that  regulatory  reforms,  in  particular  the
leverage ratio and the liquidity requirements, are important to mitigate these risks.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
This means that the implementation of the Basel III reforms will have effects on repo markets, as
intended. These might look undesirable from an institution-perspective but they will have system-
wide benefits.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The repo market is undergoing significant change. Regulation is forcing market participants to re-
examine the extent of their engagement and make more efficient use of their balance sheets.
This  adjustment  process  coincides  with  central  banks  worldwide  adopting  a  series  of
unconventional monetary policy measures that have also affected the nature and scope of repo
market activity.
Some of these effects will prove temporary, others more permanent. Their full impact can only
be assessed in earnest once markets have fully transitioned to their new steady state. From a
central bank perspective, it is important to ensure that our own measures do not adversely affect
the intermediation capacity of repo markets. Our decision in December last year to also accept
cash  as  collateral  in  our  securities  lending  facility  has  proven  very  effective  in  this  respect.  It
contributed to mitigating risks of extreme specialness, while preserving the effectiveness of our
policy measures in the pursuit of our price stability objective.
At the same time, a high degree of persistence in repo specialness lends support to the idea that
the stock of securities already held by the ECB is likely to be a powerful channel through which
our measures can help preserve accommodative financing conditions, even after the end of our
net asset purchases.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I would like to thank Riccardo Costantini for his contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
See Gorton, G. (2012), “Securitized banking and the run on repo”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 104(3),
pp.  425-451;  and  Holmstrom,  B.  (2015),  “Understanding  the  role  of  debt  in  the  financial  system”,  Bank  for
International Settlements, Working Paper No 479, January.
See Committee on the Global Financial System (2017), “Repo market functioning”, CGFS Papers, No 59; and
International Capital Market Association (2015), “Perspectives from the eye of the storm: The current state and
future evolution of the European repo market”.
See e.g. Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets:
lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864; Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi
and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB's asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper No
1956; and Blattner, T.S. and M. Joyce (2016), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications for
QE”, ECB Working Paper No 1957.
For a theoretical disposition, see Duffie, D. (1996), “Special Repo Rates”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 51(2), pp.
493-526.
See e.g. International Capital Market Association (2017), “European Repo Market Survey”, No 33, October.
Securities  purchased  under  the  PSPP  have  been  made  available  for  securities  lending  in  a  decentralised
manner by Eurosystem central banks since 2 April 2015. As of 8 December 2016, Eurosystem central banks
have the possibility to also accept cash as collateral in their PSPP securities lending facilities without having to
reinvest it in a cash-neutral manner. The aim of securities lending is to support bond and repo market liquidity
without unduly curtailing normal repo market activity. The Eurosystem is primarily targeting market participants
with market-making obligations and is monitoring the securities lending activities closely so as to ensure the
ongoing effectiveness of the arrangements. In September 2017, securities on average worth €60 billion were
lent out by the Eurosystem, of which around €15 billion were lent out against cash as collateral. For further
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
details please see the section Securities lending.
See Corradin, S. and A. Maddaloni (2017), “The importance of being special: repo markets during the crisis”,
ECB Working Paper No 2065. The authors study the case of ECB SMP purchases of Italian sovereign bonds in
the second half of 2011. The SMP portfolio was strictly buy-to-hold and purchased securities were not lent out.
See D’Amico, S., R. Fan and Y. Kitsul (2014), “The scarcity value of Treasury collateral: Repo market effects of
security-specific supply and demand factors”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper No 2014-60;
and Jordan, B.D. and S.D. Jordan (1997), “Special Repo Rates: An Empirical Analysis ”, The Journal of Finance,
Vol. 52(5), pp. 2051-2072.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Bond scarcity and the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the Club de
Gestion Financière d’Associés en Finance, Paris, 3 April.
One should note here the difference between the development of repo funds rate and the average specialness
premia after our decision to also accept cash as collateral in securities lending. While the former stabilised, the
latter continued to increase.
Ongoing efforts to recreate safe, transparent and consistent securitisation may, to some extent, support the
supply of safe private collateral.
Against this background, rebalancing the euro area fiscal stance towards faster debt reduction in high debt
jurisdictions, and using fiscal space where it is available, would yield benefits for the supply of safe collateral.
See e.g. Corradin, S., F. Heider and M. Hoerova (2017), “On collateral: implications for financial stability and
monetary policy”, ECB Working Paper No 2107.
See e.g. Mancini, L., A. Ranaldo and J. Wrampelmeyer (2015), “The Euro Interbank Repo Market”, The Review of
Financial Studies, Vol. 29(7), pp. 1747–1779.
See the Opinion of the European Central Bank of 8 November 2017 on amendments to the Union framework for
capital requirements of credit institutions and investment firms (CON/2017/46).
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The known unknowns of financial regulation”, panel contribution at the conference on
Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy IV, Washington D.C., 12 October. See also the ongoing FSB-led review of
incentives to centrally clear, the Derivatives Assessment Team (DAT).
See FSB (2015).
See FSB (2017).
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
