REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  AT  THE  POLICY  PANEL  ON  “REFORMULATING 
MONETARY  POLICY 
IN  EMERGING  MARKETS  AND  THE  NEED  FOR 
MACROECONOMIC  POLICY  COORDINATION”.  CONFERENCE  ON  GLOBAL 
ENVIRONMENT  AND  POLICY  CHALLENGES 
IN  EMERGING  MARKETS 
ORGANIZED BY THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY. Antalya, 
Turkey, December 2, 2017.1 
Largely as a result of the difficulties faced following the outburst of the Global 
Financial  Crisis,  macroeconomic  policy  coordination  has  gained  increasing 
relevance  in  recent  years.  This  has  two  dimensions.  Domestically,  a  context 
characterized  by  stubbornly  low  rates  of  inflation  and  deflationary  risks, 
anemic economic growth or outright contraction, as well as monetary policies 
constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  on  interest  rates,  particularly  in  the 
advanced  economies,  underline  the  need  to  jointly  activate  different  policy 
levers  in  order  to  effectively  overcome  such  a  situation.2  In  a  second 
dimension,  the  growing  and  increasingly  complex  interlinkages  in  the  world 
economy  brought  about  by  the  ongoing  process  of  economic  and  financial 
globalization  have  increased  the  potential  for  spillovers  and  boomerang 
effects of domestic policy measures in the major economies, thus highlighting 
the importance of coordinating actions at the international level under certain 
circumstances, for instance, in the presence of global shocks 
                                                            
1 The opinions and views expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
2 See Jazbec, Boštjan and Biswajit Banerjee (2017): “Rethinking Monetary-Fiscal Policy Coordination”, 
Proceedings of a Seminar Jointly Organised by the Bank of Slovenia and the International Monetary Fund. 
1 
 While  the  above  arguments  apply  fundamentally  to  advanced  economies, 
clearly,  the  importance  of  an  adequate  coordination  of  macroeconomic 
policies is nowadays more pressing for emerging market economies (EMEs) as 
well.  In  fact,  the  challenges  resulting  from  globalization  can  be  even  more 
acute for these countries. It is also worth noting that the policy response in 
advanced economies to the Global Financial Crisis has sharply increased the 
volatility of capital flows to EMEs, with episodes of large inflows alternating 
with  bouts  of  outflows.  Simultaneously,  the  crisis  has  reduced  the  global 
growth  potential,  fostered  anti-globalization  sentiment  and,  in  general, 
substantially increased uncertainty. 
In  light  of  the  above,  the  following  remarks  will  focus  on  the  domestic 
dimension  of  policy  coordination  in  EMEs,  including  measures  beyond  the 
strictly macroeconomic realm. 
The advantages of a coordinated and balanced approach to policy rest on a 
number of merits. Among these, it is worth noting the potential to exploit the 
synergies of multiple policies acting simultaneously.3 In addition, reliance on a 
multi-pronged  strategy  reduces  the  likelihood  of  an  over-burden  of  policy 
instruments  when  these  are  used  in  isolation,4  while  the  possibly  adverse 
effects  on  the  overall  performance  of  the  economy  arising  from  the 
implementation  of  some  policies  may  be  compensated  by  action  in  other 
fronts.  
                                                            
3 See Gaspar, Vitor, Maurice Obstfeld and Ratna Sahay (2016): “Macroeconomic Management When Policy 
Space Is Constrained: A Comprehensive, Consistent, and Coordinated Approach to Economic Policy”, IMF 
Staff Discussion Note No. 16/09, September. 
4 See Davig, Troy and Refet S. Gürkaynak (2015): “Is Optimal Monetary Policy Always Optimal?”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Research Working Paper No. 15-05, July. 
2 
 Seen  from  the  perspective  of  monetary  policy,  which  are  the  key  areas  for 
coordination that deserve to be underlined? 
A  first  one  is  exchange  rate  policy.  In  theory,  flexible  rate  regimes  allow 
countries  the  implementation  of  a  fully  autonomous  monetary  policy.  In 
addition,  they  are  widely  regarded  as  an  efficient  mechanism  for  the 
adjustment of the economy to external shocks. Nonetheless, as volatile flows 
of capital across borders have led to acute swings in exchange rates, doubts 
have emerged as to the degree to which such frameworks isolate economies 
from developments abroad. In particular, sharp fluctuations of the exchange 
rate can have significant effects on the real economy, domestic prices and the 
financial sector, especially in EMEs. Of course, this does not imply that floating 
rates should be discarded in favor of alternative regimes. Instead, the issue is 
how to increase the efficiency of floating exchange rates during episodes of 
disruptive  volatility.  A  frequently  noted  option  is  the  temporary  use  of 
complementary 
intervention  mechanisms 
to  support 
the  adequate 
functioning of currency markets.5 
Fiscal policy is a second crucial area of coordination for monetary policy. The 
erosion of space following the Global Financial Crisis, in combination with the 
end  of  the  commodities  boom  that  preceded  it,  has  to  a  large  extent 
constrained the role of fiscal policy in many emerging market economies. In 
light  of  the  extant  evidence,  both  theoretical  and  empirical,  suggesting  the 
pernicious  effects  that  weak  fiscal  positions  can  have  on  the  overall 
performance  of  the  economy,  for  instance  through  an  adverse  impact  on 
                                                            
5 See Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia and Paolo Mauro (2013): “Rethinking Macro Policy II: Getting 
Granular”, IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 13/03, April. 
3 
 expected inflation, interest rates and the exchange rate,6 it should not come 
as a surprise that the typical policy response in these countries has sought to 
favor the rebuilding of fiscal strength even under conditions of weakness in 
economic activity.7 In fact, the potentially compensating effects on the latter 
deriving  from  the  strengthened  credibility  of  the  macroeconomic  policy 
framework  and  the  lessened  upward  pressure  on  current  and  expected 
interest rates further justify this as a sensible course of action. However, the 
usefulness  of  fiscal  policy  measures  to  counter  negative  shocks  to  our 
economies  should  not  be  disregarded,  particularly  in  a  context  of  solidly 
anchored fiscal accounts. 
The  active  implementation  of  measures  directly  oriented  to  the  financial 
sector  represent  a  third  fundamental  component  of  a  coordinated  policy 
package. In particular, as the experience of the recent and previous episodes 
demonstrates, a healthy financial system is of paramount importance for the 
efficient transmission of monetary policy to the rest of the economy. In fact, 
failure  to  set  in  motion  the  measures  needed  to  reestablish  the  well-
functioning of the financial sector in case of disruptions would imply a heavy 
burden  on  monetary  policy.  Furthermore,  the  margins  of  maneuver  for  the 
latter, e.g. the possibility to increase interest rates in the face of inflationary 
pressures, may be constrained under situations of fragility in the former.  
                                                            
6 See, for instance, Sargent, Thomas, Noah Williams and Tao Zha (2009): “The Conquest of South American 
Inflation”, Journal of Political Economy Vol. 117(2):211-256, April; Bianchi, Franceso and Cosmin Ilut (2017): 
“Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix and Agents’ Beliefs”, Review of Economic Dynamics Vol. 26:113-139, October; 
and Woodford, Michael (2001): “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking Vol. 33(3):669-728, August. 
7 See Végh, Carlos, Luis Morano, Diego Friedheim and Diego Rojas (2017): “Between a Rock and a Hard 
Place: The Monetary Policy Dilemma in Latin America and the Caribbean”, World Bank LAC Semiannual 
Report, October. 
4 
 On the other hand, the build-up of financial imbalances and vulnerabilities that 
might ensue following a relaxation of the monetary policy stance, especially if 
sustained  over  a  prolonged  period  of  time,  can  effectively  be  countered  by 
targeted  micro-  and  macroprudential  measures.  Conversely,  situations  that 
require a tighter monetary policy stance, but for which a more nuanced effect 
on  the  real  economy  is  desired,  may  call  for  a  simultaneous  relaxation  of 
prudential  measures  that  perk  up  economic  activity  via  easier  lending 
conditions,  provided  the  health  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  remain 
within safe margins.8 
Lastly,  although  generally  operating  over  a  longer-term  horizon,  structural 
reform  should  also  be  a  strategic  part  of  policy  coordination  in  emerging 
market economies. By providing incentives to improve the overall functioning 
of domestic input and product markets, increasing their competitiveness and 
strengthening  the  institutions  within  which  they  operate,  policies  that 
overhaul  structural  aspects  of  the  economy  foster  efficiency  gains  that 
increase its productive potential.  
Thus, a successful implementation of structural reform can ultimately result in 
strengthened  buffers  in  other  areas  of  policy as,  for  instance,  an  expanding 
productive  capacity  may  offset  the  potentially  adverse  impact  of  restrictive 
fiscal and monetary policies on economic activity; increased competition and 
efficiency resulting from structural reform alleviate inflationary pressures; and 
possibly higher fiscal revenues in a context of faster economic growth, both 
                                                            
8 See García-Cicco, Javier, Markus Kirchner, Julio Carrillo, Diego Rodríguez, Fernando Pérez, Rocío Gondo, 
Carlos Montoro and Roberto Chang (2017): “Financial and Real Shocks and the Effectiveness of Monetary 
and Macroprudential Policies in Latin American Countries”, BIS Working Paper No. 668, October. 
5 
 actual and potential, reduce the level of public debt relative to the economy’s 
GDP. 
Naturally,  the  implementation  of  structural  adjustment  policies  faces  a 
number of challenges and some resistance is likely to arise, mostly as a result 
of the redistributive effects, both across time and across sectors, inherently 
imbedded in them. Thus, it will frequently be important to place actions in this 
realm  within  the  context  of  a  broader-ranging  plan  that  contemplates 
countering, and coordinated, measures in other fronts. For instance, fiscal and 
monetary  easing  may  reduce  the  short-term  output  costs  associated  to  the 
economy’s process of adjustment in the aftermath of structural reform, while 
the enhancement of the social safety net and the enactment of other targeted 
programs may alleviate the costs of transition.  
Let me turn now to Mexico’s experience regarding the role of policy efforts in 
the  above-mentioned  areas  in  overcoming  the  macroeconomic  challenges 
faced in recent years. 
Inflationary pressures in Mexico have increased significantly since early 2017, 
owing  to  a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  peso  and  a  number  of  supply  shocks. 
Thus, the rate of growth of the headline consumer price index rose from 3.36 
percent in December 2016 to 6.59 percent in the first half of November of this 
year.  The  Banco  de  México’s  response  to  these  developments  has  been 
aggressive, as the reference rate has risen by 400 basis points over the course 
of the two years since December 2015, to a level of 7.0 percent at present.  
While  the  task  is  not  finished  yet,  the  results  thus  far  can  be  deemed  as 
satisfactory,  since  inflation  is  expected  to  decline  sharply  in  2018  and  long-
 6 
term 
inflation  expectations  have 
remained 
stable. 
Furthermore, 
macroeconomic stability has been preserved, in the context of a sharp decline 
in  oil  prices,  stints  of  uncertainty  in  international  financial  markets,  the 
increase  in  interest  rates  in  the  United  States,  and  the  results  of  last  year’s 
electoral  process  in  that  country.  At  the  same  time,  economic  activity  has 
shown resilience to shocks thus allowing a moderate rate of growth.  
However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  above  developments  have  also 
benefitted  from  a  balanced  recourse  to  monetary  and  other  policy 
instruments. In particular: 
1.  Given  the  high  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate,  a  number  of  measures 
have been implemented to ensure adequate conditions of operation in 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  In  particular,  the  Foreign  Exchange 
Commission  has  introduced  a  mechanism  for  the  hedging  of  foreign 
exchange  risks  of  up  to  US$20  billion,  that  does  not  imply  the  use  of 
international  reserves.  This  strategy  is  consistent  with  a  flexible 
exchange rate regime that plays a key role as a shock absorber, allows 
market forces to determine the equilibrium real rate, and rests on the 
premise that the value of the currency is supported mainly by economic 
fundamentals. 
2.  Challenges for the implementation of monetary policy in Mexico were 
compounded, particularly in 2014 and 2015, by concern regarding the 
country’s fiscal position, in view of the marked increase in public sector’s 
debt. However, the fiscal authorities have embarked on a consolidation 
strategy, a policy shift that is yielding a primary surplus and a drop in 
public sector indebtedness relative to the economy’s output this year 
7 
 for the first time in a decade. This indicator is, according to the latest 
projections,  expected  to  continue  trending  downwards 
in  the 
foreseeable future. However, it is also true that public finances still face 
significant challenges over the long term that will need to be addressed 
in due course. 
3.  Thanks in large part to the continued efforts undertaken over several 
decades,  which  have  gathered  momentum  since  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis, Mexico’s financial system is profitable, liquid and well-capitalized, 
and  supported  by  moderate  levels  of  private  sector  debt,  including 
households, and the absence of evident risks of a systemic nature. Far 
from representing an obstacle to its implementation, the health of our 
financial  system  has  proven  to  be  a  most  valuable  asset  for  Mexico’s 
monetary policy, as it has allowed an efficient operation of transmission 
mechanisms, and a sharp increase in interest rates without significant 
adverse side effects on banks or other financial institutions. 
4.  Structural reform policies spanning through a wide array of sectors have 
made important strides over the last few years. Although it may still be 
too early to draw conclusive assessments of the efforts undertaken, as 
most of these changes are still in their implementation phase, a number 
of  positive  results  are  already  evident.  Of  particular  importance  for 
monetary  policy  are  the  beneficial  effects  that  increased  competition 
across a number of key markets, and especially in telecommunications, 
has had on the evolution of domestic prices, both directly and indirectly. 
The structural reform of the Mexican economy is a long-term endeavor 
that  will  take  several  years  to  fully  materialize,  whose  potential  is 
 8 
conditional  on  its  correct  implementation,  and  which  needs  to  be 
complemented  by  efforts  in  other  areas.  But  it  is  certainly  reassuring 
that the process has, to a significant extent, lived up to the expectations 
it has generated. 
All 
in  all,  a  policy  approach  encompassing  multiple 
instruments  has 
undoubtedly ameliorated the magnitude of the challenges for monetary policy 
in Mexico. However, as is natural to expect, it has not fully eradicated them. 
At  the  current  juncture,  the  Mexican  economy  is  facing  a  deceleration  of 
economic activity, a rapid although expected to decline rate of price growth, 
and  a  situation  of  higher-than-usual  uncertainty  deriving  from  a  number  of 
factors,  of  both  domestic  and  external  origins,  with  the  normalization  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  United  States,  the  renegotiation  of  NAFTA  and 
presidential  elections  in  2018,  among  them.  In  virtue  of  the  potentially 
opposing implications that the realization of alternative scenarios may have 
for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  it  will  be  essential  to  adhere  to  an 
approach emphasizing prudence and timely action, and the continued support 
of policy measures in other areas. 
 9 
