 An address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Payments Innovation Conference 
Sandton Convention Centre, Johannesburg 
5 October 2017 
   The South African Reserve Bank’s perspective 
on a changing and innovative payments environment 
 
Introduction 
 
Fellow Deputy Governors, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the first Payments Innovation Conference 
organised  by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB),  which  we  are  hosting  in 
collaboration with domestic and international payments stakeholders. This conference 
takes place at an appropriate time as innovation and technology have the potential to 
spur growth and development. 
 
According to EY’s FinTech Adoption Index1, South Africa boasts financial technology 
(FinTech) adoption levels of 33%, which is in line with the global average. The survey 
respondents expect this type of adoption to increase to an average of 52% globally, 
with South Africa counting among the countries with the highest intended use among 
consumers at 71%. 
 
The purpose of this conference is therefore to develop deeper insights into emerging 
innovations  in  the  payments  ecosystem,  which  we  hope  will  provide  a  better 
understanding  of  regulatory  frameworks,  stimulate  debate,  and  spur  development 
within the payments space in support of our country’s developmental objectives. 
                                            
1  EY.  2017. 
‘EY  FinTech  Adoption 
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-fintech-adoption-index-2017/$FILE/ey-fintech-adoption-index-2017.pdf. 
Index  2017  –  The 
rapid  emergence  of  FinTech’.  Available  at 
 Page 1 of 9 
My address today will focus on the SARB’s perspective on the changing and innovative 
payments environment. 
 
We  are  in  an  era  of  unprecedented  exponential  change,  where  rapid  advances  in 
technology  have  the  potential  to  fundamentally  change  financial  services.  The 
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), for example, reports 
that,  in  2014,  there  were  1 800  FinTech  companies  with  a  total  funding  of 
US$5.5 billion. This has risen to over 8 800 FinTech companies with investment of 
US$100.2 billion by 2016.2 
 
Technology’s  impact  extends  beyond  mere  services.  It  also  allows  for  the 
democratisation of communication and information, and thus for the transfer of power 
to  the  end  user.  Countries  and  institutions  were  previously  the  main  controllers  of 
communication  and  information  due  to  high  barriers  to  entry,  such  as  information 
asymmetries and the large capital investment that was required to facilitate access. 
This has fundamentally changed. 
 
Powerful  and  super-fast  processors,  cheaper  computing  power,  wide  availability  of 
access  devices,  and  the  roll-out  of  high-speed  broadband  have  created  an 
environment primed for a burst of innovation and ideas. Due to these rapid advances 
in  technology,  there  has  been  an  increasing  effort  to  take  advantage  of  these 
developments in service offerings, including within the financial services sector. 
 
The emergence of FinTech, that covers digital innovations and technology-enabled 
business model innovations in the financial sector, also presents exciting opportunities. 
Examples of innovations that are fundamental to FinTech today centre around value 
provision in the lending environment, value storage in the form of wallets and tokens, 
value protection in the form of insurance and investments, as well as value transfer in 
the  payments  and  remittances  areas.  Cryptocurrencies  that  utilise  block  chain 
technologies,  new  digital  advisory  and  trading  systems,  artificial  intelligence  and 
machine learning, peer-to-peer lending, equity crowdfunding and the Internet of things 
are some of the better-known developments that are normally cited. The drivers of 
                                            
2 
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 2017. ‘Research report on financial technologies’. Available 
at https://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD554.pdf. 
 Page 2 of 9 
disrupt existing industry structures and blur industry boundaries; 
facilitate strategic disintermediation; 
revolutionise how existing firms create and deliver products and services; 
provide new gateways for entrepreneurship; and 
democratise access to financial services 
these  developments,  from  the  demand  side,  emanate  from  shifting  consumer 
preferences and an expectation for more, faster and cheaper services. From the supply 
side, they emanate from opportunities presented by evolving technology, as well as 
the changing regulatory environment. Currently, there is intense global interest in these 
developments, as is evident from numerous research initiatives, consourtium efforts, 
collaborative bank experimentations, venture capital deployment, as well as a number 
of central bank projects. 
 
According  to  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  working  paper  on  The 
FinTech opportunity3, these innovations may: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
 
Although FinTech enterprises have changed the way in which financial services are 
structured, provisioned, and consumed, they have not acquired dominance yet. They 
do, however, have the potential to significantly change the competitive landscape. The 
World Economic Forum4 (WEF) highlights eight factors that have the potential to alter 
the competitive landscape of the financial ecosystem, namely:5 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
the commoditisation of cost bases; 
the redistribution of profit pools; 
ownership of the customer experience; 
the delivery of financial services through platforms; 
the monetisation of data; 
automation in the workplace; 
systemically important technology firms; and 
financial regionalisation due to differing regulatory priorities and customer needs. 
                                            
3  BIS Working Papers [Paper?] No. 655, The FinTech opportunity, Thomas Philippon, Monetary and Economic Department, 
August 2017. Available at http://www.bis.org/publ/work655.htm. 
4  World Economic Forum (WEF). 2017. ‘Beyond fintech: A pragmatic assessment of disruptive potential in financial services’. 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Beyond_Fintech_-_A_Pragmatic_Assessment_of_Disruptive_Potential_in_Financial_Services.pdf 
5  World Economic Forum (WEF). 2017. Beyond FinTech: a pragmatic assessment of disruptive potential in financial services. 
Available at 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Beyond_Fintech_-_A_Pragmatic_Assessment_of_Disruptive_Potential_in_Financial_Services.pdf. 
 Page 3 of 9 
These  developments  also  have  the  potential  to  rapidly  alter  the  payments  space. 
Innovation  in  the  payments  ecosystem  is  resulting  in  an  expansion  of  payment 
services, broadening the reach of payments platforms and networks. 
 
Payment services innovations have recently included the leveraging of mobile devices 
and connectivity to make payments simpler and more convenient and to reduce the 
use  of  cash  and  make  payments  less  visible  to  payers.6  A  preliminary  analysis 
conducted by  the  SARB  reveals  that  the  current  crop  of  innovations  leverages  the 
existing foundations of the payments infrastructure and that these new firms integrate 
themselves into existing value chains. 
 
For  example,  mobile  technology  has  catalysed  the  introduction  of  new  mobile 
point-of-sale (POS) players in South Africa. These players have deepened the reach 
of electronic payment networks by targeting flea markets, self-employed artisans such 
as plumbers and spaza shops in rural areas – all previously underserved markets in 
terms of access to card payment networks. The potential of this type of technology 
means that, in the near future, we could possibly triple the level of the current 600 POS 
devices per 100 000 citizens to close to 2 000. This vividly demonstrates the potential 
of FinTech to broaden the network and deepen inclusion. 
 
Other  benefits  that  innovation  may  bring  about  include,  operational  simplification, 
counterparty risk reduction, clearing and settlement time reduction, liquidity and capital 
management improvement and fraud minimisation. 
 
It  should,  however,  be  recognised  that  while  these  developments  present  tangible 
benefits, they may also give rise to certain challenges, including, but not limited to 
issues related to privacy as well as regulation, criminality and law enforcement. Given 
this  reality,  a  balance  necessarily  need  to  be  struck  when  developing  regulatory 
frameworks. 
 
 
 
                                            
6 
‘The  future  of  financial  services: how  fs:h  disruptive  innovations  are  reshaping  the  way  financial services  are structured, 
provisioned  and  consumed’.  An  industry  project  of  the  financial  services  community.  fsc.  Prepared  in  collaboration  with 
Deloitte Final Report, June 2015. Available at http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_future__of_financial_services.pdf. 
 Page 4 of 9 
The innovation trade-off 
The possible benefits of innovation are numerous and broad, and those that are often 
touted relate to costs, convenience, and speed. Big Data and information analytics that 
allow financial intermediaries to understand and cater to their customers’ needs at an 
individual level presently exist and already in wide use. These developments have the 
potential to lead to advances in risk management, credit extension processes and an 
economy  that  potentially  makes  less  use  of  cash.  The  inclusion  of  previously 
under- and unserved consumers into formal financial services through the introduction 
of novel and bespoke products is a promising and welcome development. 
 
As stated above, the pursuit of these developments, in the absence of appropriate and 
sound  regulatory  frameworks,  could  lead  to  the  emergence  of  new  risks.  As  an 
example, with these advances in technology, some of the platforms and systems have 
moved to the cloud. This is compounded by the rapid  improvements and usage of 
mobile devices. 
 
A WEF white paper highlighted that in order to improve risk management, it is important 
to highlight that the right tools should be used, including:7 
a. 
b. 
c. 
data on the emerging new innovation and its potential impact; 
assessment tools for the systemic risks introduced by innovation; 
a more standardised regulatory treatment framework for new competitors across 
jurisdictions; and 
an improved mechanism for public-private cooperation to combat cyberattacks. 
d. 
 
A further key regulatory consideration is to support initiatives that could assist in easing 
frictional costs, within the system and the economy, and to respond to the need for all 
interbank payments to be processed and finalised in near real-time. 
 
Cybersecurity 
 
There is no doubt that cyber-threats have increased substantially over the past few 
years.  As  technology  evolves  and  is  more  widely  embraced  and  become  more 
                                            
7  World  Economic  Forum  (WEF).  2017.  ‘Balancing  financial  stability,  innovation,  and  economic  growth’.  Available  at 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/IP/2017/FS/WEF_Whitepaper_FSIEG.pdf. 
 Page 5 of 9 
accessible, criminal activity is rapidly expanding to the cyber-world. The source of this 
threat vector is both privately and state-sponsored - the latter is far more difficult to 
counter. Cybersecurity and strengthening resilience across the entire value chain is 
therefore non-negotiable. In response to this reality, the SARB hosted a Cybersecurity 
Conference with the theme of ‘Collaboration for building cyber-resilience’ last year. The 
conference was an important event for creating a platform to share experiences from 
both global and local stakeholders, creating awareness and a common understanding 
of the fundamental issues, and assisting in determining the deficiencies that needs to 
be addressed. 
 
Through this Payments Innovation Conference, we will also explore payment threats 
and security interventions in the digital age, with a focus on the analysis of emerging 
threats  in  the  payments  domain  and  counteracting  threats  (the  tactics,  tools,  and 
techniques) in order to remain safe and secure in the digital age. 
 
It is important to recognise that, in an interconnected world, one is only as safe as the 
weakest  link.  It  is,  therefore,  crucial  for  us  to  think  about  how  to  strengthen  the 
resilience of the wider financial system. 
 
Developments in regulations and policy objectives 
 
The South African Reserve Bank Act 90 of 1989 (SARB Act) bestows the mandate of 
ensuring the efficiency, safety and soundness of the entire payments value chain and 
related matters on the SARB. Aligned to this mandate in the SARB Act is the enabling 
legislation, namely the National Payment System Act 78 of 1998, which ‘‘provides for 
the management, administration, operation, regulation and supervision of the payment, 
clearing  and  settlement  systems  in  the  Republic  of  South  Africa8.  In  the  quest  to 
execute  this  mandate,  the  SARB  endevours  to  increasingly  establish  an  enabling 
regulatory environment for innovation to take place. 
 
One of the benefits of payments innovation is the potential expansion of access to 
financial services and achieving financial inclusion to reach the under- and unserved 
                                            
8  See the National Payment System Act, available at www.resbank.co.za > Regulation and supervision > National Payment 
System (NPS) > NPS Legislation. 
 Page 6 of 9 
consumers and to reduce transaction costs while providing greater transparency with 
simpler products and greater convenience and efficiency. By leveraging technology 
and proactively shaping a conducive environment for innovation through regulation, 
the  payments  system  can  serve  as  a  gateway  to  achieving  financial  inclusion  and 
address the need to deepen and strengthen access for both consumers and providers. 
 
As the payments industry becomes increasingly innovative and continues to improve 
the traditional payments landscape, regulatory and legislative frameworks need to be 
flexible  and  adaptable  to  these  changes  and  provide  an  enabling  environment  for 
innovation to thrive. Furthermore, the regulatory framework should remain robust and 
resilient to risks that may be posed to the safety and efficiency of the payments system. 
 
A number of developments have necessitated a rethink of the adequacy and relevance 
of  the  existing  payments  regulatory  framework.  These  include  global  policy 
developments,  relating  to  financial  inclusion,  access,  financial  stability,  financial 
integrity  and  competition, 
international  best  practice  and  standards,  and 
recommendations  from  global  policy-setting  structures,  including  the  assessments 
undertaken  by  institutions  such  as  the World  Bank  and  the  International  Monetary 
Fund. 
 
How the South African Reserve Bank collaborates with the industry 
 
In  2015,  the  SARB  initiated  a  project  to  develop  a  vision  for  the  national  payment 
system.  This  process  culminated  in  the  drafting  of  the  National  payment  system 
framework and strategy: Vision 2025 document (Vision 2025). The SARB is currently 
in the last phase of consultations with the industry regarding the strategies that will be 
implemented  to  advance  the  development  of  the  national  payment  system.  The 
Vision 2025 process has and will continue to be consultative and collaborative. 
 
In March 2016, the SARB Executive approved the establishment of an internal Virtual 
Currencies (VCs) and Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) Steering Committee 
(SteerCo) and working group. Subsequently, we established a FinTech SteerCo and 
working group. These structures are tasked to strategically review the emergence of 
FinTech  initiatives  and  assess the  related use  cases. Their  primary  responsibilities 
 Page 7 of 9 
include the facilitation of the development and review of policy positions for the SARB 
across its regulatory domains. This will be undertaken through an analysis of both the 
pros and the cons of emerging FinTech innovations, as well as through the testing of 
appropriate regulatory responses to these developments. 
 
The  SARB  is  also  looking  forward  to  exploring  the  potential  for  sandboxes  and 
innovation hubs to test the relevance of existing regulatory frameworks and make the 
necessary changes, where appropriate. 
 
An  intergovernmental  FinTech  working  group  consisting  of  various  government 
agencies – including the SARB, National Treasury, the Financial Intelligence Centre, 
the  Financial  Services  Board  and  the  South  African  Revenue  Service  –  was  also 
established  in  December 2016.  Its  main  purpose  is  to  assess  different  FinTech 
innovations and their impact on the South African regulatory landscape. This is aimed 
at fostering safe FinTech innovation in South Africa. 
 
Conclusion 
 
I  hope  that  the  focus  of  the  next  two  days  will  be  on  the  potential  innovative 
developments within the payments systems environment and the possible benefits that 
these  may  give  rise  to.  This  calls  for  critical  reflections,  including  on  how  we  may 
collaborate in order to advance the development of and growth in our economy. This 
conference thus presents an opportunity to jointly contemplate the payments system’s 
development potential and the roles that each one of us could play in realising this 
aspiration.  Frank  and  open  discussions  are  required  on  our  strengths  and 
shortcomings, with a specific focus on where we can do better and how we should 
position the South African payments system going forward. 
 
As a regulatory authority, the SARB will also continue to focus on areas where policy 
and regulation may be improved to provide the financial industry with a more enabling 
regulatory environment. I would like to reassure you that the SARB is committed in its 
support of innovation and the responsible improvement of the services offered to all 
our people in a manner that does not give rise to increased threats to the soundness 
or stability of the wider financial system. 
 Page 8 of 9 
Finally, I would like to encourage the industry to continue collaborating and innovating, 
while also supporting policy objectives and taking cybersecurity risks into account. 
 
Thank you. 
 Page 9 of 9 
