Stephen  S  Poloz:  Opening  statement  before  the  Standing  Senate
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the Standing
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 1 November 2017.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are pleased to be back before you today to discuss the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
which we published last week.
When  we  were  last  here  in  April,  we  were  celebrating  the  fact  that  we  had  upgraded  our
economic forecast following a long period of disappointment. I am happy to tell you that many of
the  positive  trends  that  we  saw  then  have  continued.  Sources  of  economic  growth  have
broadened across sectors and regions, and the process of adjustment to the oil price shock is
essentially complete.
The Bank raised its policy interest rate twice since our last visit, in July and September. We did
this  in  the  context  of  very  strong  economic  growth  over  the  first  half  of  the  year  and  solid
progress in the labour market. Over the summer, we saw evidence of firming inflation and an
economy that was rapidly closing its output gap. With these two rate increases, we have taken
back  the  cuts  we  made  in  2015,  which  were  crucial  in  helping  the  economy  adjust  to  the  oil
shock.
Growth in the first half of the year averaged just over 4 per cent at an annual rate. This reflected
strong consumer spending backed by rising employment and income, together with increased
business  investment  and  a  jump  in  energy  exports.  We  are  now  starting  to  see  signs  of
moderation in the second half, which we forecast in July. Growth in consumption and investment
is expected to ease, and growth in housing is projected to slow further, in part because of the
measures introduced by the Ontario government in April.
All told, we forecast that the economy will expand by 3.1 per cent this year, before slowing to 2.1
per  cent  in  2018.  This  is  still  faster  than  the  growth  rate  of  potential.  We  estimate  that  the
economy is now operating close to its capacity. Inflation should reach our 2 per cent target in the
second half of next year, a little later than earlier projected because of the temporary impact of
the stronger Canadian dollar this year.
We are at a crucial spot in the economic cycle, and significant uncertainties are clouding the way
forward. In our MPR, we identified the four most important sources of uncertainty. I will touch on
these now.
The  first  issue  is  inflation  itself.  There  have  been  several  conjectures  about  the  apparent
softness of inflation in Canada and many other advanced economies. Some have argued that
globalization  is  restraining  inflation.  This  could  be  due  to  increased  imports  from  lower-cost
countries, for example, or the effect of Canadian companies participating in global supply chains.
Others point to the impact of digitalization on the economy. They suggest that digital technologies
could  lower  barriers  to  entry  in  some  sectors  and  lead  to  more  competition.  The  rise  of  e-
commerce  may  be  changing  price-setting  behaviour. And  digital  technologies  could  promote
innovation and higher productivity, which could create disinflationary pressure.
The second issue is the degree of excess capacity in the economy. We note several signs that
point  to  slack  remaining  in  the  labour  market.  For  example,  the  participation  rate  of  young
workers is still below trend, and average hours worked are less than we would expect. With the
economy now operating close to capacity, we expect to see investment by companies, together
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
with job creation by new and existing firms, and rising productivity. This should serve to raise the
economy’s  potential  output,  increasing  the  amount  of  non-inflationary  growth  that  is  possible.
However, this process is highly uncertain and not at all mechanical, so we have built it into our
projection in a conservative way.
The third issue is the continued softness in wage growth. While employment growth has been
strong  in  Canada,  wages  have  not  kept  pace.  The  slack  in  the  labour  market  is  certainly
responsible, in part, for this effect, and there will be a lag between the time this slack is used up
and  when  we  see  stronger  wage  growth.  However,  other  factors,  including  globalization,  may
also be affecting wage dynamics.
Finally,  the  fourth  issue  is  the  elevated  level  of  household  debt  and  how  that  might  affect  the
sensitivity  of  the  economy  to  higher  interest  rates.  Bank  staff  have  recalibrated  our  main
economic model used for projections to capture key information about housing and debt. This
work tells us that the economy is likely to respond to higher interest rates more than it did in the
past. However, we will watch incoming economic data closely for evidence to support this idea.
We  will  also  look  to  see  how  the  household  sector  is  responding  to  the  new  rules  about
mortgage underwriting.
We also outline several other risks in the MPR. Taken together, these give us a balanced outlook
for  inflation.  We  have  not  incorporated  into  our  projection  the  risk  of  a  significant  shift  toward
more-protectionist trade policies in the United States, given the range of potential outcomes and
the uncertainty about timing. However, we acknowledge that uncertainty about future US trade
policy is having some impact on business confidence and investment spending, and this impact
is reflected in our outlook.
In  this  context,  Governing  Council  judged  that  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  is
appropriate. We agreed that the economy is likely to require less monetary stimulus over time,
but we will be cautious in making future adjustments to our policy rate. In particular, the Bank will
be  guided  by  incoming  data  to  assess  the  sensitivity  of  the  economy  to  interest  rates,  the
evolution of economic capacity, and the dynamics of both wage growth and inflation.
With  that,  Mr.  Chairman,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  would  be  happy  to  answer
questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
