Yannis  Stournaras:  The  Greek  economy  -  prospects  and  main
challenges
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 2nd EU-Arab World
Summit on "The Greek economy: Prospects and main challenges", Athens, 10 November 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today. The EU-Arab Summit is a forum that improves
communication and fosters cooperation between Europe and the Arab World. Regular dialogue
between  the  two  parties  improves  understanding,  builds  trust,  addresses  concerns  and
challenges, and removes barriers. These positive effects are reflected in improved cooperation
at both regional and global level, in the context of multilateral institutions and international fora.
This promotes cross-border trade and investment flows, which, in turn, raise economic growth
and prosperity in both areas. In the last two days in Frankfurt I had the benefit of participation in
the High-Level Policy Dialogue between the Eurosystem and Gulf Countries’ central banks and
monetary agencies.
In my intervention today I will focus on the Greek economy: First, I will present the progress that
has been made in Greece since the start of the crisis. Second, I will discuss the outlook for the
economy  and  the  main  risks  and  remaining  challenges  that  must  be  addressed.  Third,  I  will
underline the preconditions for a sustainable recovery of the Greek economy. Finally, I will point
out the advantages of investing in Greece.
1. Progress since the start of the crisis
Despite past mistakes, occasional delays and even serious backtracking, economic adjustment
in Greece has been one of the largest ever undertaken by any country. Since the beginning of the
sovereign  debt  crisis  in  2010,  Greece  has  implemented  a  bold  programme  of  economic
adjustment that has fully eliminated fiscal and external deficits and improved competitiveness.
The general government balance  turned  into  a  surplus  of  0.5  percent  of  GDP  in  2016
from  a  deficit  of  15.1  percent  of  GDP  in  2009.  The  primary  surplus  (that  is,  the  general
government balance net of interest payments) was 3.7 percent of GDP in 2016, from a 10.1
percent of GDP deficit in 2009. This represents one of the largest, if not the largest, fiscal
adjustments ever undertaken in economic history. Based on this progress, on 25 September
2017, the European Council  repealed  its  2009  decision  on  the  existence  of  an  excessive
deficit.
The  current  account  deficit  has  fallen  by  15  percentage  points  of  GDP  since  the
beginning of the crisis, with the current account effectively being in balance over the last two
years.
Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored and price competitiveness is almost
back  at  its  level  of  the  year  2000.  It  is  worth  noting  that  this  has  been  achieved  mainly
through  the  painful  process  of  internal  devaluation,  that  is,  through  reductions  in  nominal
wages and salaries.
A  bold  programme  of structural  reforms  and  privatizations  has  been  implemented.
Reforms cover the pension system, the health system, labour markets, product markets,
the  business  environment,  public  administration,  the  tax  system,  and  the  budgetary
framework. According to a recent Lisbon Council report (EuroPlus Monitor, September 2017
Update), Greece is ranked first  among  the  28  countries  of  the  European  Union  on  the
basis of the Adjustment Progress Indicator.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a result of these efforts, openness has improved substantially and the economy has
started to rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors. For example, the share
of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 30.2% in 2016. Exports of goods
and services, excluding the shipping sector, have increased by 41% in real terms since their
trough in 2009.
Finally,  the  banking  system  has  been restructured  and  consolidated.  Significant
recapitalization, following stringent stress tests along with in-depth asset quality reviews,
now ensures that Greek banks are among the best capitalized in Europe. This fact, along
with an NPE coverage ratio of 47 percent and good collateral, play a catalytic role in allowing
banks to address the pressing issue of reducing significantly the stock of non-performing
loans.  In  addition,  significant  institutional  reforms  have  been  initiated  aiming  at  providing
banks  with  a  variety  of  means  of  reducing  non-performing  loans. According  to  incoming
data, there has been progress since the beginning of the year in the area of banks’
Non Performing Exposures (NPE). At  end-June  2017,  the  stock  of  NPEs  (including  off
balance sheet items) was 3.2% lower than at end-December 2016.
2. The short and medium-term outlook of the Greek economy
The economic recovery continues and growth is gathering pace following the completion of the
second review and the positive impact it had on confidence and liquidity. The consolidation of
growth  dynamics  is  reflected  not  only  in  GDP  figures,  but  also  in  the  performance  of  several
short-term indicators of economic activity, such as: industrial production, retail sales, dependent
employment flows in the private sector, and real exports of goods, tourist arrivals and receipts.
The improved outlook for the economy boosted economic sentiment, increased bank deposits,
improved  Greece’s  credit  rating  and  led  to  successive  declines  in  the  banks’  dependence  on
central bank financing: for example, Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) for Greek banks now
stands at €26.9 billion, down from its peak of €90 billion in July 2015. In addition, yields of Greek
government bonds declined to late-2009 levels, which allowed the Greek government to return to
international markets, after a period of three years, on July 25. Moreover, the slope of the yield
curve steepened, implying improved investor perceptions for the outlook of the Greek economy.
Corporate bond yields have also fallen to historically low levels. Meanwhile, Greek banks have
made their way back to international financial markets by selling covered bonds.
Looking forward recent soft data, such as the manufacturing PMI and the economic sentiment
indicator, point to a sustained recovery in the  coming  months. Overall, in 2017 the Bank of
Greece  estimates  that  GDP  will  increase  by  approximately  1.7%.  For  2018  and  2019,
growth is projected to accelerate to 2.4% and 2.7% respectively.  These  projections  are
mainly based on the assumption that the reform programme will be implemented smoothly and
according to the existing timetable.
3. Risks and major challenges ahead
Despite the positive signs that are being recorded today and the progress achieved, there are still
downside risks to the outlook of the Greek economy.
In  the  short-term,  the  main  risk  is a  delay  in  the  completion  of  the  third  review  of  the
programme, which will fuel a new cycle of uncertainty. In such a case economic recovery and
the return to international financial markets will prove to be short-lived.
In addition, there are  external  risks associated with developments in global financial markets
and geopolitical factors.
There are also some medium-term challenges that need to be addressed in order to strengthen
the positive outlook. In particular:
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The currently high and persistent long-term unemployment raises inequality, posing a risk
for social cohesion and increases the risk that human capital is destroyed, affecting long-
term potential growth.
Banks  continue  to  be  burdened  with  the  large stock of non-performing loans  and  are,
thus, unable to provide sufficient credit to the private sector.
Investment  remains  at  a  very  low  level,  due  also  to  the  fact  that,  despite  considerable
progress, the business environment is not yet considered as friendly as it should be towards
private investment. For example, according to the Global  Competitiveness  Index of the
World  Economic  Forum,  competitiveness slightly deteriorated in 2017–2018. According
to this Index, the most problematic factors for doing business in Greece are considered to
be  high  tax  rates,  inefficient  government  bureaucracy,  tax  regulations,  policy  and
government instability, access to finance and corruption.
The general government debt-to-GDP ratio has risen to unsustainable levels.
4. Preconditions for a sustainable recovery
To  address  the  existing  risks  and  challenges  and  to  remain  on  a  sustainable  recovery  path,
economic policy must focus on the following eight issues:
i. Attract FDI and increase openness
As  already  mentioned,  the  economic  adjustment  and  the  structural  improvements  in  Greece
during the past seven years have been one of the largest ever undertaken by any country. Among
other benefits, this has minimized the various risks, has rendered Greece more business friendly
and created significant investment opportunities. However, domestic savings are insufficient to
meet investment needs which, after a long period of very low investment rates, are significant
even though capacity utilization remains low in some sectors. Thus, besides restoring access
of companies to capital markets and to bank funding, conditions should be encouraged
that will attract foreign capital, notably Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).
FDI,  besides  closing  the  investment  gap,  promotes  greater  trade  ties  with  countries  and
companies  with  cutting  edge-technologies.  This  facilitates the  participation  in  global  value
chains (GVCs).  FDI  and  participation  in  GVC  improve  both  physical  and  human  capital,  spur
innovation and contribute to the development of new products and services in high value added
sectors, thus boosting productivity.
Domestic and foreign investment and the integration in GVC will increase openness and improve
both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  Greek  exports.  This,  in  turn,  will  accelerate  the  reallocation  of
productive resources towards exports and will raise the long-term potential output. At the same
time, the production of high technology goods and the provision of high technology knowledge-
intensive services will improve the capacity of the country to retain and attract talents.
ii. Pursue privatizations, reforms and improve institutions
Despite the progress achieved so far, there is still a lot to be done in the areas of privatizations,
structural reforms and the quality of institutions. Privatizations, which are at a mature stage,
need to be completed quickly. In order to attract both domestic and foreign investment, further
emphasis  should  be  put  on  reforms  that  foster  competition  in  product  and  services  markets,
which in turn raises productivity and employment.
At this point I want to emphasize that well-functioning institutions matter for economic growth and
enable countries to address significant challenges, because they affect incentives for people and
businesses  to  invest  in  physical  and  human  capital,  technology  and  the  organization  of
production. As pointed out in the seminal work of Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), institutions
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
can  increase  both  aggregate  economic  growth  and  improveincome  distribution,  because  they
guarantee  property  rights  and  enforce  contract  law,  providing  incentives  for  people  and
businesses to invest and innovate, while at the same time the State provides adequate education
and a sufficient level and quality of public infrastructure, allowing people and businesses to thrive.
Hence, good institutions enable growth and poverty reduction. At the same time economic and
social progress also facilitates better institutions. Well-functioning institutions improve non-price
competitiveness,  enhance  business  confidence  and  reduce  the  country  risk,  leading  to  more
domestic and foreign investment. Therefore, besides macroeconomic and fiscal adjustment,
more economic flexibility via the adoption of structural reforms and sound institutions
lead to more resilience, faster recovery after an adverse shock and higher long-term
growth.
Institutions have improved in a number of cases over the course of the years. For example, the
independence of the Hellenic Statistical Authority (EL.STAT) and the new Tax Revenue Authority
has  been  established  by  law.  In  addition,  over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  new  institutions  and
regulatory  authorities  have  been  established.  For  example,  the  creation  of  the  Parliamentary
Budget  Office  and  the  Fiscal  Council  improves  oversight  on  public  finances.  However,  much
more needs to be done in a number of areas.
According  to  the  Global  Competitiveness  Index  2017–2018  of  the  World  Economic  Forum,
Greece ranks in the 87th position out of 137 countries in terms of institutions. Greece ranks quite
low in terms of the efficiency of government spending, the burden of government regulation, and
the efficiency of the legal framework in settling disputes and in challenging regulations. Moreover,
according to the World Bank’s “Ease of Doing Business” ranking on the conditions for setting up
a business, Greece’s position has improved significantly in 2011–2017 (from 148 in 2011 to 37 in
2017), but remains low relative to its European peers.
Therefore,  particular  emphasis  should  now  be  placed  on  upgrading  the  education  system,
improving public administration, cutting red tape, lowering the regulatory burden and ensuring the
predictability and stability of legislation, reducing entry barriers into network industries, retail trade
and professional services as well as in enhancing judicial efficiency. With regard to independent
authorities, it is important to strengthen the role and administrative and financial autonomy, as
well  as  accountability  towards  the  Parliament,  of  the  authorities  responsible  for  regulating,
supervising and maintaining a level playing field in the markets.
It should be taken into account that most of the reforms to be implemented entail fewer short-
term costs relative to those implemented earlier on in the programme (i.e. labour and pension
reforms).  However,  taking  into  account  the  synergies  with  the  already  implemented  reforms,
upcoming  reforms  are  expected  to  yield  immediate  net  gains  in  terms  of  faster  economic
recovery.
Moreover, flexible economic structures and better institutions not only lead to higher long-term
growth but also reduce the probability of severe recessions.
iii. Tackle the NPL problem
In  the  banking  sector, the large volume of non-performing loans and the problem of the
strategic  defaulters  prevent  the  banking  system  from  financing  economic  growth.  All  the
necessary  measures  have  now  been  legislated  and  the  regulatory  framework  has  been  re-
formulated  in  order  to  be  able  to  address  the  NPL  problem  in  an  efficient  and  expeditious
manner.
As I mentioned earlier, incoming data point to a reduction in NPEs and this is mainly driven by
loan write-offs. However, banks should utilize all the available toolbox to reduce troubled assets,
and in particular speed up the sale of NPLs. To accelerate the reduction of the NPL stock, the
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
new electronic auctions platform should become fully operational as soon as possible. Particular
emphasis should also be placed on the restructuring of viable companies and the liquidation of
non-viable ones. This will release resources to support new and existing sound investment and
business initiatives, thereby supporting the economic recovery. The recent modernisation of the
institutional framework allows the co-operation of banks with loan servicers and various non-bank
entities and private investors, such as private equity funds, in order to restructure the underlying
business.
iv. Adopt a growth friendly fiscal policy mix
The Bank of Greece has proposed the adoption of a more growth friendly fiscal policy mix.
More  emphasis  has  to  be  placed  on  cutting  non-productive  expenditures  and  increasing  the
public  sector  efficiency,  including  the  management  of  state  property.  This  is  important  since,
according to OECD estimates, state property in Greece is among the highest as a percent of
GDP in OECD member-states. The scaling down of an oversized and inefficient public sector
and the improvement in tax administration will lead to a fairer distribution of the fiscal burden and
will  facilitate  the  reduction  of  the  excessively  high  tax  rates.  According  to  the  Global
Competitiveness  Index  2017–2018,  Greece  ranks  last  and  second  to  last  as  regards  the
adequacy of the tax system to provide incentives to invest (137th out 137 countries) and to work
(136th out of 137 countries).
v. Support Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
1
SMEs  are the backbone of the Greek economy in terms of employment and gross value
added (GVA). In 2015, they accounted for 75.1% of total GVA and for 87.3% of employment in
non-financial corporations. Very small or micro SMEs (employing less than 10 people) accounted
for 59.1% of total employment and for 35.9% of GVA in the non-financial corporate sector. The
larger share of SMEs in total employment relative to their share in GVA suggests that there is a
problem  of  low  productivity,  which  is  more  pronounced  for  very  small  SMEs.  Given  the
prevalence  of  SMEs  in  the  Greek  economy,  policy  efforts  should  also  be  targeted  towards
providing  incentives  for  cluster  development,  alongside  with  measures  to  provide  affordable
funding  via  the  banking  sector,  the  capital  markets  and  the  official  sector  through  various  EU
initiatives. These concerted efforts will allow SMEs to adopt new technologies and benefit from
economies of scale as they will gain access to international distribution channels and to foreign
markets.
vi. Remove various barriers to investment
Besides improving the business environment and lowering taxation, it is necessary to remove
decisively  and  definitively  the  obstacles arising  from  various  small  or  large  organized
interests and groups, which exacerbate the business climate and hamper the materialization
of  new  investment  and  the  implementation  of  privatizations,  even  those  already
approved.
The removal of capital controls as a result of the gradual improvement of the economy and the
return  of  full  confidence  will  improve  the  investment  climate  and  help  attract  foreign  direct
investment.
vii. Promote innovation and a more effective use of human capital
Innovation-driven growth, supported by knowledge-based capital (or intangible assets), is critical
to improving living standards.
The efforts of previous years, mainly through the use of resources from the European Structural
Funds, have led to a partial improvement in the country’s performance in many areas, with the
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
expenditure in research and development (R&D) being on an upward trend over the period 2011–
2016. R&D expenditure reached €1,733 billion or 0.99% of GDP in 2016 from €1,391 billion or
0.67%  of  GDP  in  2011.  Despite  the  continuing  rise,  Greece  records  one  of  the  lowest  R&D
intensities compared to its euro area peers (2.0% of GDP).
However, innovation-based growth is based on a much wider range of elements than just R&D
spending, such as employee skills and training, investment in information and communication
technologies (ICT), organizational know-how, databases, design, brands and various forms of
intellectual property.
A more effective use of domestic high-skilled human capital requires the adoption of policies
and reforms that encourage research, facilitate the diffusion of technology and boost
entrepreneurship. Companies should be incentivized to increase investment in R&D in order to
improve their capacity to innovate. Universities and research institutes should be encouraged to
cooperate  with  the  private  sector  to  commercially  exploit  research  results  and  ideas.  These
initiatives  will  promote  innovation,  increase  productivity  and  facilitate  the  transition  to  a
knowledge-based economy.
The improvement in institutions and the implementation of the reform and privatization program
will provide incentives for the initiation of new investment projects. New investment goes hand-in-
hand with job creation and is, thus, expected to facilitate the reduction of the unacceptably high
unemployment rate. However, certain aspects of structural reforms and the stabilisation of the
economy might have negative distributional effects. Hence, it is essential to provide immediate
support  to  the  unemployed  and  those  marginally  attached  to  the  labour market  by
employing active labour market policies and targeted social transfers to counter the temporary
income loss and to shorten job-transitions. In the medium-term, emphasis should be placed on
skill upgrading and retraining policies to get people back to work as well as improvements
in  education,  given  that  investment  in  human  capital  is  a  prerequisite  to  an  inclusive  and
sustainable growth model.
viii. Address the public debt overhang
Decisive and concrete actions are needed to ensure the sustainability of Greek public debt.
The Eurogroup reaffirmed last June its commitment to the principles contained in the May 2016
statement,  and  specific  mention  was  made  of  measures  that  could  be  taken,  if  necessary,
regarding public debt reprofiling.
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  put  forward  a  specific  proposal  for  extending  the  weighted  average
maturity of interest payments on EFSF loans of at least 8.5 years. If adopted, such a proposal
would support both the recovery of the economy and the country’s creditworthiness. This is more
so if it is combined with a lower fiscal target, that is a primary surplus of 2.0 percent of GDP
instead of 3.5 percent, and more privatisations.
This mild debt reprofiling proposal is vital for debt sustainability in Greece, while it involves only a
negligible cost for its partners. It would also pave the way for the inclusion of Greek government
bonds  in  the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing  programme,  which  in  turn  will  facilitate  sustainable
market access, the return of more deposits to the Greek banks and, ultimately, the full abolition
of capital controls.
5. Greece has the potential to become an attractive investment destination
I will now briefly refer to some factors and structural features that make Greece an attractive
place  to  invest.  First,  the policy changes that have taken place over the past seven years,
coupled  with  the  decisive  implementation  of  the remaining  reforms,  improve  confidence,
enhance business climate and generate positive growth prospects providing incentives for the
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
initiation of new domestic and foreign direct investment.
Second, economic policy is and will remain prudent. The most crucial factor that ensures the
implementation of the reforms required for the Greek economy to prosper in the context of the
Economic and Monetary Union is the emergence of a strong political consensus in Parliament
and  society  in  favour  of  keeping  Greece  in  the  euro  area.  In  addition, adherence to the EU
macroeconomic  and  fiscal  rules and  the  strict  monitoring  by  the  EU  as  part  of post-
programme  surveillance  which  is  already  envisaged  for  programme  member-states  with
relatively high public debt, precludes the emergence of new imbalances.
Third,  Greece  benefits  from  a large  amount  of  EU  funds which aim at boosting growth and
jobs. In particular, the EU funds programmed to be disbursed to Greece for the period 2014 to
2020 amount to €35.9 billion, or 20% of Greece’s 2016 GDP.
Fourth, Greece is both a European Union and a euro area member state. Hence, enterprises
located in Greece enjoy the benefits of currency and price stability and have access to the EU
Single Market. They face a stable institutional environment, enjoy investor protection, and have
access  to  a sound  banking  system which  is  under  the  oversight  of  the European  Central
Bank.
Fifth,  there  are  several non-price  competitiveness features  that  make  Greece  an  attractive
place  to  invest.  Greece  has  a highly  skilled  human  capital by  international  standards.
According  to  the  2017–2018  Global  Competitiveness  Report  of  the  World  Economic  Forum,
Greece ranks relatively high in higher education and training (44th out of 137 countries) and,
in particular, in the tertiary and the secondary education enrollment rates. Moreover, Greece also
receives a relatively good ranking in technological readiness (50nd) and in some innovation
and business sophistication factors like the application for patents (PCT patents: 37th), and
particularly in the availability of scientists and engineers (10th). In addition, Greece receives a
relatively good ranking in terms of the strength of investor protection (41th) and in terms of its
infrastructure (38th) as well as the number of procedures to start a business (36th) and the
degree of customer orientation (48th).
Sixth, one of Greece’s most important advantages is its geographical location in Southeastern
Europe. Being at the crossroads of three continents and in close proximity with the Middle-
East and the Arab world, Greece provides significant investment opportunities as a transport
and energy hub. Given that Greece is a major tourist destination country, there are significant
investment opportunities in tourism conditional on expanding the capacity and quality of tourism
infrastructure.  Investment  opportunities  also  exist  in  sectors  such  as logistics,  networks,
shipping,  trade,  pharmaceutical,  manufacturing,  and  mining  and  quarrying.  Since  many
Arab  countries  seek  to  diversify  their  investment  base,  these  sectors  in  Greece  provide  a
mutually beneficial opportunity for doing so.
Seventh, it has already been mentioned that Greece has a sizeable state real estate property
that is available for utilization by private investors under the privatization programme. Both the
current  privatization  programme and  the  private  investment  needs  generate  profitable
investment  opportunities  for  foreign  investors.  Despite  some  missteps,  there  is  already
encouraging evidence. FDI inflows reached almost €2.8 billion in 2016 (1.6% of GDP). It is the
biggest FDI inflow recorded since 2010 and was mainly directed to services sectors (i.e. hotels
and  restaurants,  transportation,  financial  intermediation  and  real  estate  activities).  In  the first
eight months of 2017 the total inflow has already reached €2.7 billion. The increased FDI flow
and  the  continuation  of  the  privatization  programme  (e.g.  the  recent  sale  of  the  train
operator Trainose S.A. to Trenitalia, the extension of the Athens International Airport Development
Agreement  for  20  additional  years) indicate  that  major  foreign  investors  see  positive
prospects on the future of the Greek economy.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last  but  not  least,  Greece,  being  a member  of  the  EU,  NATO  and  other  international
multilateral organizations, enjoys peace, security and enhanced cooperation with its partners.
6. Conclusions
The ongoing reform and fiscal adjustment effort is bearing fruits. The fiscal and current account
imbalances  have  now  been  corrected,  important  and  long-needed  reforms  have  been
implemented, competitiveness has improved and the banking sector is adequately capitalized.
The economy is now recovering and growth is gathering pace.
However, more needs to be done. Greece is now facing three stock imbalances, namely a high
rate  of  unemployment,  a  high  public  debt  and  a  high  stock  of  NPLs  in  bank  portfolios.  These
three crisis legacies, coupled with the significant investment requirements in order to improve the
economy and modernize its public and private infrastructure, will remain the major challenges for
Greece over the coming years.
In  addition,  we  still  have  some  way  to  go  in  order  for  Greece  to  tap  the  financial  market  on
sustainable terms after the end of the current programme in August 2018. To this end, the Greek
authorities must pursue the remaining reforms forcefully and close the 3rd review before the end
of the year, in order to improve the credit rating of the country. At the same time our European
partners should specify in more detail the medium-term debt reprofiling measures according to
the  Eurogroup  agreement  and,  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Greek  authorities,  provide  more
clarity on the post-programme support for the Greek economy.
These actions will improve the investment climate and attract foreign direct investment. This, in
turn, will facilitate the return to financial normality after seven years of significant sacrifices by the
Greek  people.  More  flexible  economic  structures  coupled  with  sound  institutions  and
macroeconomic fundamentals will accelerate the reallocation of productive resources towards
tradable and exportable goods and services, making the economy more resilient to future shocks
and raising long-term potential growth.
Sources:
Acemoglu D. and J. Robinson, 2012 Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty, Publisher: Crown Business.
Bank of Greece, 2017. Monetary Policy Report 2016–2017, July.
Draghi,  M.,  2017.  Structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area.  Introductory  remarks,  18  October.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp171018.en.html  
Draghi, 
October.www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2017/html/ecb.is171026.en.html  
Introductory 
2017, 
Statement 
M. 
26
European Commission, 2017. A new start for job and growth in Greece – almost two years on,
situation as of 10 June 2017.Brussels.
European Commission, 2017. Investment in the EU Member States: An analysis of drivers and
barriers, Institutional paper 062, October.
National  Documentation  Centre,  2017.  R&D  expenditure 
www.ekt.gr/el/news/21148.
in  Greece 
in  2016.
OECD, 2016, Greece, OECD Economic Surveys, Paris.
OECD, 2016, Statistical Insights: Government assets matter too not just debt.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
IMF, 2017, Global prospects and policies, World Economic Outlook, October.
Lisbon Council 2017, EuroPlus Monitor, September Update
Sondermann, D., 2016. Towards more resilient economies: the role of well-functioning economic
structures, ECB Working Paper No 1984.
Stournaras, Y. , 2016 “Partners for Growth and Development” “Prospects of the Greek economy
after  six  years  of  adjustment”  Speech  at  the  EU-Arab  World  Summit  in Athens,  3  November.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=384&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
”  Speech  at  an  event  organized  by 
Stournaras, Y., 2017. “Greece: A comeback to the financial markets? Are we near the finishing
line? 
in  Frankfurt,  31  May.
the  Economist 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=441&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras,  Y.,  2017.  “The  Greek  economy:  challenges  and  prospects”  Speech  at  an  event
organized  by  the  British  Hellenic  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Athens,  28  September.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=472&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras,  Y.,  2017.  “Greece and the global economy: Prospects and main challenges
ahead”  Speech  at  an  event  organized  by  Credit  Suisse 
in  Athens,  11  October.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=476&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras, Y., 2017. “Seeking reform in modern and contemporary Greece” Speech at an event
organized 
20  October.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=479&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
American 
Hellenic 
Athens, 
Union 
the 
by 
in 
World Economic Forum, 2017. The Global Competitiveness Index 2017–2018 edition.
1
Employing less than 250 people.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
