William C Dudley: The evolving structure of the US treasury market
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  The  Evolving  Structure  of  the  U.S.  Treasury  Market:  Third  Annual
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 28 November 2017.
 Vic  Chakrian,  Ellen  Correia  Golay,  Frank  Keane,  Matthew  Milroy,  Marcus  Petersen,  Liza
Reiderman,  William  Riordan,  and  Nathaniel  Wuerffel  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  these
remarks.
On behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and our co-sponsors—the U.S. Department
of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, and the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission—I would like to
welcome you to this year’s conference on the structure of the U.S. Treasury market.  As always,
what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
This is the third year the New York Fed has co-hosted the Treasury market structure conference,
which  provides  an  opportunity  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  the  changing  landscape  of  the
Treasury  market.    Many  of  you  remember  the  market  volatility  of  October  15,  2014,  that
precipitated  the  need  for  additional  engagement  between  the  private  and  public  sectors  about
Treasury  market  structure.    The  Joint  Staff  Report  on  the  Treasury  flash  event,  the  Treasury
Department’s  subsequent  request  for  information,  and  the  work  that  has  followed  identified  a
number  of  changes  that  have  reshaped  the  Treasury  market  over  the  last  decade.    These
include  the  increased  electronification  of  trading,  the  changing  nature  of  intermediation  and
liquidity,  and  the  entry  of  new  market  participants.    In  light  of  these  changes,  the  Joint  Staff
Report  highlighted  four  important  priority  areas  for  additional  work.    In  taking  these  efforts
forward,  we  have  benefited  from  ongoing  engagement  with  market  participants  and  other
members of the public. 
The  first  priority  is  gatherings  like  this  one,  where  both  private  and  official  sector  participants
come together to study and share views on what the market’s evolution means for its structure
and  liquidity.    Understanding  how  the  Treasury  market  is  evolving  can  enable  us  to  be  good
stewards of its trajectory.
A second priority is improving the availability of data on activities in the cash market.  After the
historic  volatility  that  occurred  on  October  15,  2014,  the  official  sector  had  limited  access  to
transaction data.  This resulted in a months-long lag in the process to gather and analyze data
from the event.  The introduction this year of transaction data reporting by broker-dealers to the
official sector is thus a critical step forward.  While closing this data gap for the official sector is
an  important  milestone,  work  remains  to  ensure  that  the  scope  of  collection  is  sufficiently
complete  and  dynamic  to  maintain  coverage  of  relevant  firms,  as  intermediaries  and  liquidity
providers  evolve.    One  initiative  in  this  direction  is  the  Board  of  Governors’  plan  to  collect
transaction data from depository institutions. 
Looking  ahead,  I  expect  that  a  continuing  priority  will  be  increasing  data  transparency  to  all
market participants and to the public in a manner that supports—and does not harm—market
liquidity and integrity.  Part of the successful evolution of the modern Treasury market will be
adapting to the data needs of its participants. I believe transaction data reporting to the public
based on careful study will ensure that the Treasury market does not fall behind other markets,
will promote a robust and level playing field, and will help safeguard the liquidity characteristics
that make the Treasury market the benchmark for risk-free trading around the world.
The rise of electronic trading, another market feature highlighted in the Joint Staff Report, helped
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  identify  a  third  priority  area:  the  market  practices  and  risks  associated  with  the  Treasury
market.  Market infrastructure—including the financing of Treasury transactions, as well as the
clearing and settlement of those transactions—seldom merits investor attention until an element
that is vital to smooth functioning of the market goes awry.  The history of financial markets is
filled  with  examples—some  recent—in  which  confidence  in  trading  collapsed  after  market
participants no longer knew or could assess the underlying risk of market engagement, leading
them  to  disengage.    While  such  disengagement  may  be  rational  from  the  perspective  of  an
individual participant, it is destructive to the collective market function. 
A  major  infrastructure  issue  for  the  Treasury  market  has  been  the  clearing  and  settlement
practices of the cash market.  This can be opaque, with a majority of trades cleared away from
central counterparties (CCPs).  While central clearing is more uniformly used in other segments
of  the  Treasury  market—such  as  futures—many  market  participants  elect  to  clear  and  settle
cash  Treasury  transactions  in  a  bilateral  fashion.    This  process  includes  many  market
participants: trading venues, clearing agents, and clearing banks.  No single participant has a
view of the entire clearing and settlement system.
The  Treasury  Market  Practices  Group  (TMPG),  a  New  York  Fed-sponsored  group  of  market
professionals  working  to  support  the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the  Treasury  market,  has
concentrated its recent efforts on this topic.  Preliminary findings include an increasing volume of
linked  trades  that  clear  centrally  on  one  side  and  bilaterally  on  the  other.  This  work  has  also
uncovered  information  asymmetries  in  clearance  and  settlement  risk  management,  which
potentially could lead to a mispricing of these risks.  Moreover, increased understanding about
the depth, breadth, and durability of credit arrangements that support clearance and settlement
seems  desirable.    This  would  improve  market  integrity  through  greater  understanding  of  risk
throughout the clearing and settlement process and how it is affected by different conditions.
Since the financial crisis, there has been an effort to strengthen the resiliency of repo market
infrastructure,  which  is  another  important  element  of  Treasury  market  plumbing.    Immediately
after the crisis, the Federal Reserve was active in pushing reform of the tri-party repo market,
which  had  been  a  locus  of  stress  in  2008.    More  recently,  Treasury  repo  markets  have
undergone further changes, including market adaptations to post-financial crisis regulations, and
the introduction of multiple programs expanding access to central clearing to a wider range of
market  participants.    These  markets  also  have  been  affected  by  efforts  to  set  heightened
expectations for CCPs with regard to liquidity risk management, margins, and governance and
recovery  planning.    This  is  consistent  with  the  Treasury  Department’s  recommendation  that
regulators  ensure  appropriate  risk  management  at  CCPs  and  other 
financial  market
infrastructures.    For  example,  earlier  this  month,  the  SEC  approved  the  Capped  Contingency
Liquidity  Facility—a  liquidity  risk  management  tool  for  the  DTCC’s  Fixed  Income  Clearing
Corporation (FICC).  This tool helps to ensure that FICC will have sufficient liquidity to cover the
default of a Government Securities Division member to which FICC has the largest exposure. 
This development reflects another positive step toward a safer centrally cleared repo market, and
aligns well with broader official sector efforts to maintain a well-functioning and robust Treasury
repo market.
Finally, the Joint Staff Report identified the importance of strong interagency monitoring of the
Treasury  market,  in  close  collaboration  with  the  public.    Judging  by  this  gathering,  the
commitment to this task is strong—which is good because many questions remain.  How can
the  Joint  Member  Staffs  and  private  stakeholders  best  collaborate  to  ensure  stability  in  the
Treasury  market  as  the  market  structure  evolves  and  new  technologies  are  applied?    How
should  practices  and  culture  evolve  accordingly?    Will  new  technology  and  automation  in  the
marketplace  introduce  unexpected  challenges  or  risks  to  Treasury  market  participants?   Are
there opportunities to improve market transparency in a way that sheds light on risk issues that
emerge as the market continues to evolve?  Are the regulatory requirements imposed upon the
Treasury market appropriate in the current environment?  Has a competitive level playing field
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
been maintained given the evolving structure?  And, are there any changes that could improve
the functioning, efficiency and/or integrity of the Treasury market?
As I highlighted before, answering such questions well could require greater transparency.  It is
important for officials and market participants to fully understand the range of market elements. 
These  include  the  relative  size  of  transaction  volumes  by  various  players,  the  breadth  and
resiliency of platforms used to facilitate risk transfer, and the robustness of market infrastructure
under  contingent  circumstances.    More  broadly,  interagency  efforts  and  collaboration  with  the
public  to  shed  light  on  the  evolving  structure  and  its  risks  are  critical  to  protecting  Treasury
market  function  and  supporting  investor  confidence.    Because  we  benefit  from  the  Treasury
market being the deepest and most liquid market for government securities, complacency should
not be an option.  We need to work together to ensure that the longstanding confidence in the
Treasury market is sustained in the future.
This conference provides an excellent opportunity to continue this discussion and work on these
issues.  Thank you for coming.  I look forward to today’s dialogue and the ongoing engagement
between the Joint Member Staffs and the public.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
