Andreas  Dombret:  A  brighter  global  economy  and  its  downside
risks
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  a  reception  to  bid  farewell  to  Mr Alexander  Sattler  and  to  welcome  Mr  Peter  Kern  as  the
Bundesbank's representative in Mumbai, Mumbai, 30 October 2017.
 1. Introduction
Governor Patel
Mr Consul General Morhard
Ladies and gentlemen
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  at  this  reception  to  bid  farewell  to Alexander  Sattler  and  to
welcome Peter Kern as the Bundesbank’s representative in Mumbai.
Some may still wonder why the Bank’s representative in India isn’t located in your capital, New-
Delhi. But a prime objective for us as a central bank is to stay close to our community. With the
Reserve  Bank  of  India  based  here  in  Mumbai,  we  have  our  peers  and  representatives  of  the
financial community close by.
Mutual  exchange  is  necessary  in  a  globalised  financial  world.  We  all  know  that.  But  when  it
comes to issues we all currently face, we can sometimes focus so much on our own situation
that we blank out the views and experiences of others. I therefore wish to take this opportunity of
speaking before representatives of the Indian financial community to share my views on current
financial matters that should be of concern for both Europe and India.
2. Monetary policy change and consequences
It is a rather gratifying task to talk about challenges when the global economy is actually in an
encouraging state. We are seeing a sustained, broad-based upturn in industrial countries and
consolidated  growth  in  emerging  markets.  That  was  also  one  of  the  crucial  takeaways  from
the  IMF  meeting  in  Washington.  There  was  a  unanimous  view  that  the  world  economy  has
continued to strengthen. On top of this, the economic upswing is broadly based. Virtually all the
industrial countries are performing somewhat better now than was expected at the beginning of
the year. Having witnessed the global financial crisis and subsequent downward spirals, there is
currently  a  feeling  of  relief.  For  the  financial  sector,  growth  typically  provides  new  business
opportunities and typically decreases credit risks.
The  good  thing  about  a  stronger,  brighter  global  economy  is  that  this  gives  actors  room  for
manoeuvre. Indeed, there is no better time to fix a leaky roof than when the weather conditions
are fair.
And  while  we’re  fixing  the  roof,  we  might  want  to  carry  out  some  additional  precautionary
measures to prepare us for the next storm. And indeed we should feel obliged to do so. While it
can be easy to be carried away by the idea of an upward spiral where problems will miraculously
fix themselves, good weather, unfortunately, doesn’t last forever.
We should therefore use this sunny spell not only to make important fixes – like accomplishing
the  full  set  of  reforms  initiated  after  the  financial  crisis  –  but  also  to  carry  out  routine
precautionary measures.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
As far as monetary policy is concerned, we need to make sure that everyone is able to cope with
a rise in interest rates. Given a strengthened macroeconomic environment and the expectation of
higher inflation the Federal Reserve System has already increased its monetary policy rate. Both
led to a rise in the long-term interest rates in the United States in the past twelve months.
And even in the euro area capital market rates went up – but less than in the US. One reason is
that  financial  markets  already  expected  that  the  ECB  Governing  Council  will  prolong  its  ultra-
loose  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  last  week  to  reduce  the
monthly volume of its net asset purchases from 60 bn to 30 bn euro beginning in January and
lasting at least until September 2018. But with this decision, ladies and gentlemen, the Governing
Council  has  by  no  means  slammed  on  the  brakes.  It  has  rather  layed  off  the  gas  pedal
somewhat.  Given  the  favourable  current  macroeconomic  outlook  and  the  upwards  trend  for
domestic price pressure in the euro area a clear end time of net purchases would have been
appropriate.
And  so,  in  principle,  the  low  interest  rate  environment  in  the  euro  area  will  be  lasting.  This
intensifies the revenue problem of euro area banks. But even if longer-term interest rates in the
euro area would rise in the tow line of US capital market rates, this would imply a challenge for
euro area banks. Given my current role in the field of banking supervision, I am quite concerned
about banks’ management of these interest rate risks. The key risk is then the so-called interest
rate risk in the banking book. Only a few weeks ago, we published our 2017 survey of over 1,500
small and medium-sized German credit institutions. In a scenario of rising interest rates, while
institutions would initially and on average face a sharp decline in profits, they would be better off
in  a  medium-to-long-term. A  comparable  stress  exercise  has  been  done  for  large  euro  area
banks as well. With respect to a change in the interest rate environment, a key lesson was that
risks depend to a large extent on how banks are set up. Have they agreed on floating rate loans
with their customers or on fixed rates? How long is their average asset duration? For a majority
of large European banks in the test, higher interest rates would lead to largely contained risks
and also a higher net interest income in three years’ time. An interest rate hike therefore poses
individual challenges for banks and requires individual remedies.
Problems  caused  by  the  monetary  policy  change  particularly  in  the  US  are,  of  course,  not
confined  to  financial  institutions.  There  is  a  general  and  empirically  tested  idea  that  emerging
countries  may  also  suffer.  Historically,  we  have  witnessed  large  capital  inflows  to  emerging
countries in so-called “risk on” periods, where capital was abundant in advanced economies and
when  conditions  nurtured  the  “search  for  yield”.  Flights  to  safety  or  monetary  tightening  of
the US dollar have led to capital outflows from emerging countries, currency depreciations, and
financial crises. Recently, in the spring and summer of 2013, talks about monetary tapering led to
sharp exchange rate reactions.
However,  emerging  countries  are  not  completely  at  the  mercy  of  global  factors  such  as  the
monetary policy of large economies or international economic cycles. One obvious precautionary
measure is to build up foreign exchange reserves. This “safety shield” allows these countries to
dampen depreciation pressure. Indeed, emerging economies have accumulated a large stock of
foreign  exchange  reserves 
the
Bundesbank  indicates that foreign exchange reserves are indeed an effective tool to counter
depreciation pressure. But it also shows that the monetary “safety shield” is not a cure-all. In
order to keep private investors in the country, a country should rather strive for a healthy policy
mix that targets domestic economic development.
3. Bundesbank representatives in Mumbai
last  15  years.  Recent  empirical  research  by 
the 
in 
1
Ladies and gentlemen
Our concern for financial stability requires us to cast our net wide and always keep track of the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
latest  developments  in  the  most  important  economies  of  the  world.  For  the  Bundesbank,  our
representatives and representative offices abroad fulfil an important role in this respect.
I would like to first thank Mr Alexander Sattler for his service in Mumbai from October 2014 until
September of this year. He has been here during eventful times. Among other things, India has
seen  a  strong  reform  momentum  –  the  reform  of  tax  on  goods  and  services  being  the  most
recent result. India’s reforms have received a lot of international attention. Throughout this period,
the Bundesbank has benefited from our reliable hotline to Mumbai.
I would also like to warmly welcome his successor, Mr Peter Kern. The job at our representation
requires not only all the professional knowledge, which he – like Mr Sattler – of course brings
along. But this job is also a lot about personal contact, as I said in the beginning. For example,
our Bundesbank representative in Mumbai always stands ready to present our views regarding
current developments in the euro area and in Germany.
I can only encourage everyone here in this room to get in contact with Mr Kern whenever needed.
Mr Kern may be new to India, but he is not new to this position. From December 2008 to January
2012 he was in our representative office in Sao Paolo, Brazil – which means he even stayed one
year longer than the usual three-year term. He is a very open-minded person. One of his first
preparations was to sign up for a Hindi language course.
I am convinced that Peter will – like Alexander Sattler – do a very good job sharing knowledge
between India and Germany.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Bundesbank Monthly Report, October 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
