Sabine Lautenschläger: Banking supervision – what next?
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Banking
Supervision, Resolution and Risk Management Conference during the 20th Euro Finance Week,
Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2017.
 “What  next  in  banking  supervision  and  resolution?”  is  the  title  of  this  panel  discussion.  Well,
before we discuss what comes next, let us take a quick look at what has happened in recent
years.
Since 2014, we have built European banking supervision from scratch. We have hired people,
devised methods and set up processes. There are certainly still things that need to be improved,
but by and large the system runs smoothly.
As that is the case, there will be less construction work to be done in the years ahead. But this
doesn’t mean that we will sit idly by, quite the opposite. The banking sector is facing a whole
range of challenges, as you well know, and we have our part to play.
Let me mention a few points – and it’s not a comprehensive list. There is the banks’ search for
profitability and their need to cut costs and adjust their business models. There is Brexit. There is
digitalisation and there are cyber risks. There are the Basel III reforms, which need to be finalised
and then implemented. And there are efforts to further strengthen proportionality.
I could go on, but allow me to focus on just one of the core topics which the banks – and we –
have to deal with: non-performing loans, NPLs for short. Most NPLs are legacy issues. European
banking supervision has, so to speak, inherited them. It’s a major problem that we have to tackle
– or rather, the affected banks have to.
For them, the non-performing loans weigh on profits; they require provisioning, and they are a
constant drain on banks’ human resources, which could be put to more profitable use. And NPLs
undermine  trust  –  to  what  extent  do  markets  trust  a  bank  with  a  balance  sheet  that  is
considerably impacted by NPLs? In other words, non-performing loans make the affected banks
weaker and keep them from lending to the economy.
Banks which manage to forcefully address this legacy can focus on the future and attract new
investors and new business, instead of forever having to look to the past. These banks can do
their job: finance the economy.
That makes it imperative to sort out NPLs. And there has been quite some progress on this front.
Since 2015, significant banks in the euro area have brought down their non-performing loans by
almost €200 billion; from €989 billion to €795 billion. That said, NPLs are still too high in parts of
the banking sector.
That  is  why  banks  have  to  act.  And  times  could  not  be  better.  We  can  look  back  at  18
consecutive quarters of economic growth; this is a robust, broad-based economic recovery.
Now is the time to sort out the issue of non-performing loans. Banks need ambitious yet realistic
plans to deal with their stocks of NPLs. And they need the right governance for these plans.
Earlier  this  year,  the  ECB  published  its  “Guidance  to  banks  on  non-performing  loans”. Along
these lines, and as part of our supervisory dialogue, we take a close look at the banks’ ability to
manage their NPL stocks. We then scrutinise the plans devised by the banks to reduce those
stocks. We will start providing our feedback later this month.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banks  have  to  carefully  consider  how  they  will  react  should  any  performing  loans  happen  to
become non-performing. So, with the future in mind, we have to ensure that the problem of NPLs
does not recur. New NPLs should therefore be conservatively provisioned within a reasonable
period of time. This would serve to strengthen the balance sheets of banks, enabling them to
focus on their core business.
That’s why we have drafted an addendum to our guidance on non-performing loans. It sets out
how we expect banks to provision for future NPLs. The main goal is to have timely provisioning,
which should prevent new NPLs from becoming a problem with systemic implications.
But let me say that while our expectations are firm, there are no automatic actions attached to
them. We will discuss with each affected bank individually why it is not fully provisioning for loans
which have been non-performing for several years. Only if the results of this structured dialogue
do not convince us will we consider Pillar 2 measures. We have followed this path before, for
instance with our recommendation on dividend distribution policies and the Asset Quality
Review.
The  addendum  to  our  guidance  on  non-performing  loans  explains  our  methodology  and  is
currently  the  subject  of  a  public  consultation.  This  consultation  will  increase  transparency  for
banks, and the public, and it will help to ensure a level playing field. So, while it is ultimately up to
the banks to deal with NPLs, we supervisors play a role too. It’s our job to address vulnerabilities
in the banking sector. NPLs are probably the single biggest challenge – and of course they are a
drag on the entire economy.
And while I am convinced that the ECB has led the way with its work on NPLs, we are not the
only ones who can and should take action. European finance ministers agreed, in July this year,
on  an  action  plan  to  tackle  NPLs.  Also,  national  governments  can  help  to  resolve  the  NPL
problem by reforming their legal and judicial systems. In some countries, it can take quite a long
time to recover NPLs in court. This is something that can only be addressed at national level by
national governments.
NPLs are a joint problem, and we need to make a joint effort to resolve it. Each party has to play
a role: banks, supervisors and politicians. In line with our mandate, we supervisors have done
and will continue to do what is necessary.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
