Yannis  Stournaras:  Greece  and  the  global  economy  -  prospects
and main challenges ahead
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  an  event  organized  by
Credit Suisse, Athens, 11 October 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you tonight and have the opportunity to share my
thoughts on the prospects for the Greek economy against the backdrop of brighter prospects for
the  global  and  euro  area  economy.  I  will  focus  on  the  following  issues:  First,  I  will  say  a  few
words  about  the  international  environment.  Second,  I  will  present  the  progress  that  has  been
made in Greece since the start of the crisis. Third, I will discuss the outlook for the economy and
outline the main risks and remaining challenges that must be addressed. Fourth, I will discuss
the  preconditions  for  a  sustainable  recovery  of  the  Greek  economy.  Finally,  I  will  make  some
remarks about the need to improve the EMU architecture.
1. The international environment
The global  economy  is  maintaining  a  solid  pace  of  expansion.  Business  and  consumer
confidence  indicators  suggest  that  sentiment  remains  upbeat,  while  financial  conditions  in
advanced  economies  remain  supportive,  underpinned  by  accommodative  monetary  policies.
Financial  markets  in  emerging  market  economies  remain  resilient  and  capital  flows  towards
these economies are robust. Looking ahead, global economic activity is expected to accelerate
moderately.  Improving  activity  in  advanced  economies  is  underpinned  by  monetary  and  fiscal
policies.  In  emerging  market  economies,  growth  is  expected  to  remain  resilient  in  commodity
importers, while activity in commodity exporters will bottom out after deep recessions in these
economies. World trade is projected to expand in line with global activity over the medium term.
Nevertheless,  there  are several medium to long-term challenges affecting the prospects of
the global economy. First, productivity growth has slowed across advanced, emerging market,
and low-income countries at a time of significant innovation and technological change. Second,
income  inequality  has  increased  in  advanced  economies,  leading  to  growing  dissatisfaction
among electorates and a sharp swing in sentiment against globalization. Third, the generally low
level of global inflation and wage growth, especially in advanced economies, is linked, inter alia,
to  globalization,  labour  market  slack  and  labour’s  weakened  bargaining  position,  the  growing
importance of services, increases in labour supply and more work of a temporary and part-time
nature. These, difficult to predict, changes have affected the position and the slope of the Phillips
curve in these economies, that is the relationship between labour market slack and inflation, and
pose  a  number  of  dilemmas  for  monetary  policy.  These  dilemmas  would  have  been  lighter  if
other  policies,  such  as  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reforms,  had  been  more  responsive  to  the
needs of the real economy.
Closer  to  home, the economic expansion in the euro area is continuing and becoming
increasingly resilient. The euro area economy has enjoyed 17 consecutive quarters of
growth,  and  the  latest  data  indicate  continued  momentum  in  the  period  ahead.  The
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  is  supporting  domestic  demand.  Employment  growth
and  the  slight  increase  in  employee  compensation  are  supporting  households’  disposable
income. These, coupled with increasing household wealth, are benefiting private consumption.
The recovery in investment is supported by improvements in corporate profitability and the very
favorable financing conditions. Buoyant foreign demand supports euro area exports, though the
recent appreciation of the euro represents a source of uncertainty for the overall contribution of
net trade to economic growth.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Headline inflation is expected to decline in the short term, driven mainly by base effects in the
energy component. Looking further ahead, headline inflation is expected to remain clearly below
a level that is consistent with the ECB inflation aim over the next two years, averaging 1.5% in
2019. Furthermore, the recent volatility in the exchange rate represents a source of uncertainty
which requires monitoring with regard to its possible implications for the medium-term outlook for
price stability. Developments in core inflation still do not show convincing signs of a sustained
upward  trend.  For  this  reason,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  recently  confirmed  the
need for monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels
that are below, but close to, 2%.
2. Progress since the start of the crisis
Let  me  now  turn  to  Greece.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  Greece  has
implemented a bold programme of economic adjustment that has eliminated fiscal and external
deficits and improved competitiveness.
The general government balance turned into a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2016 from a
deficit  of  15.1  percent  of  GDP  in  2009.  Between  2009  and  2016, the  primary  balance
(according to the programme definition) improved by about 14 percentage points. In 2016 the
primary surplus was close to 4.0 percent of GDP outperforming significantly the target of 0.5
percent.  This  represents  one  of  the  largest  fiscal  adjustments  ever  undertaken  by  any
country. Based  on  this  progress,  on  25  September  2017,  the  European  Council
repealed its 2009 decision on the existence of an excessive deficit.  For  2017  it  is
projected that the primary balance target of 1.75 percent of GDP will be reached with a safe
margin.
The current account deficit as a percentage of GDP has fallen by 15 percentage points
since the beginning of the crisis, with the current account effectively being in balance over
the last two years.
Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored and price competitiveness is almost
back at its level of 2000 and can be expected to continue to improve with the implementation
of further product market reforms that raise competition in various sectors of the economy. It
is  worth  noting  that  this  has  been  achieved  through  the  painful  process  of  internal
devaluation, that is, through outright reductions in nominal wages and salaries.
At  the  same  time,  a bold  programme  of  structural  reforms has  been  implemented
covering  the  pension  system,  the  health  system,  labour  markets,  product  markets,  the
business environment, public administration, the tax system and the budgetary framework.
Its implementation, alongside the privatization and real estate development programme, is
on-going.
Finally,  the  banking  system  has  been restructured  and  consolidated.  Significant
recapitalization, following stringent stress tests along with in-depth asset quality reviews,
now ensures that Greek banks are among the best capitalized in Europe. This fact, along
with an NPE coverage ratio of 47 percent and good collateral will play a considerable role in
allowing  banks  to  address  the  pressing  issue  of  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans.  In
addition, significant institutional reforms have been initiated aiming at providing banks with a
variety of means of reducing non-performing loans.
As a result of these efforts, the economy has already started to rebalance towards tradable,
export-oriented sectors. A few numbers are indicative of this trend:
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the share of exports of goods and services in GDP increased from 19% in 2009
to  30.2%  in  2016  with  most  of  this  increase  stemming  from  exports  of  goods.  In  fact,
according to Eurostat data, Greece’s exports of goods have increased by 43% since 2009 in
real  terms,  compared  to  42%  for  the  euro  area  and  47%  for  Germany,  Europe’s  export
engine.
Second, between 2010 and 2015, the relative price of tradables versus non-tradables
rose by about 10%. As a result, the relative size of the tradables sector, measured by
Gross Value Added, grew by approximately 12% in volume terms and by about 24% in
nominal terms. Finally, in terms of employment, the size of the tradables sector increased
relative to the non-tradables sector by around 8%. Whereas both sectors have been hit hard
by  the  recession,  tradables  have  performed  better  than  non-tradables  as  outward-looking
companies 
in
competitiveness.
taking  advantage  of 
their  exports, 
improvement 
increased 
the 
Overall,  this  increased  openness  implies  that  Greece  is  better  placed  to  take  advantage  of
improved global growth prospects.
3. The short and medium term outlook of the Greek economy
The economic recovery continues and growth is gathering pace following the completion of the
second review and the positive impact it had on confidence and liquidity. The consolidation of
growth  dynamics  is  reflected  not  only  in  GDP  figures,  but  also  in  the  improvement  in  various
short-term indicators:
Following the rebound of economic activity in the first quarter of 2017, real GDP increased
at a faster rate in the second quarter. Positive drivers of growth were exports of goods and
services,  government  consumption  and  private  consumption,  while  gross  fixed  capital
formation  declined,  mainly  due  to  the  significant  fall  in  disbursements  from  the  Public
Investment Programme.
Industrial production performed exceptionally well in the first eight months of 2017.
Retail sales volume in the first seven months of 2017 increased.
Employment has been growing at healthy rates since mid-2014 despite the stagnation of
economic activity. The rebound is largely driven by greater job-market flexibility due to past
structural  reforms. As  a  result,  the unemployment  rate has  now  fallen  to  just  above  21
percent, down from its peak of over 27 percent.
The improved outlook for the economy and the completion of the second review contributed to
the  decline  in  Greek  government  bond  yields  to  late-2009  levels  and  facilitated  the return  to
international  markets  on  July  25.  Moreover,  the slope  of  the  yield  curve  steepened,
implying improved investor perceptions for the outlook of the Greek economy. Corporate bond
yields have also fallen to historically low levels. Finally, Fitch recently upgraded Greece’s
credit rating on account of the sustained recovery and the decline in political risk.
On  top  of  the  above,  the  following  developments  are  worth  highlighting: The  successive
reductions in the ELA ceiling, the increase in deposits, FDI inflows and the rise of soft
data indicators like the PMI and economic sentiment.
At the same time, there has been progress since the beginning of the year in the area of
banks’  Non  Performing  Exposures  (NPE). At  end-June  2017,  the  stock  of  Non-Performing
Exposures  (including  off  balance  sheet  items)  was  3.2%  lower  than  at  end-December  2016.
Following  the  pattern  of  previous  quarters,  the  outflow  of  NPEs  coming  from  collections,
liquidations and sales of loans was rather limited. Instead, the key driver for the reduction in the
stock  of  NPEs  over  the  past  quarter  has  been  loan  write-offs,  especially  in  the  business  and
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumer portfolios which reached €3.3 billion for the first half of 2017.
Finally, there is progress in reforms despite the recurrent delays in programme implementation.
According  to  a  recent  Lisbon  Council  report  (EuroPlus  Monitor,  September  2017  Update),
Greece is still ranked first among the 28 countries of the European Union on the basis of
the Adjustment Progress Indicator. This implies that Greece has put the worst of the first half
of 2015 slippage behind it and has started to improve again.
3.1 Growth forecasts for 2017–2019
Overall, in 2017 the Bank of Greece estimates that GDP will increase by approximately
1.7%. For 2018 and 2019, growth is projected to accelerate to 2.4% and 2.7% respectively.
Consumption is expected to rebound modestly, driven by robust employment which is recovering
faster  than  output  on  account  of  the  previously  implemented  labour  market  reforms  and  the
active labour market programmes in place. Investment is projected to increase as confidence is
restored and financial conditions improve. Exports are projected to continue their positive trend,
benefiting not only from the benign global economic outlook but also past improvements in cost
competitiveness.
These projections are based on the assumption that the reform and privatization programme will
be implemented smoothly and according to the set timetable.
4. Risks and major challenges ahead
Despite the positive signs that are being recorded today and the progress achieved, there are still
downside risks to the outlook of the Greek economy.
The most significant and immediate risk is a delay in the completion of the third review of
the programme. This should be avoided as it would fuel a new cycle of uncertainty that would
lead to the suspension of investment plans, it would delay the repayment of government arrears
and would not facilitate a normalization of financial conditions. In such a case economic recovery
and the return to international financial markets will prove to be short-lived.
In addition, there are significant external risks associated with the strengthening of the euro
and  the  likelihood  of  economic  growth  slowing  in  the  euro  area.  There  are  also  significant
geopolitical  risks that  could  increase  the  risk  aversion  of  international  investors  as  well  as
exacerbate the refugee crisis.
Besides the downside risks, there are also upside opportunities related to the inclusion of Greek
sovereign debt in the ECB’s quantitative easing programme (QE), which will improve liquidity and
confidence and will result in a more benign than currently projected economic outlook.
4.1 Medium and long-term challenges
In addition to these risks to the recovery, there are also some medium to long-term challenges
that need to be addressed in order to strengthen the positive outlook. In particular,
The  currently  high long-term  unemployment increases  the  risk  that  human  capital  is
destroyed, affecting long-term potential growth. Potential growth is also negatively affected
by  the  emigration  of  young  and  highly-qualified  professionals.  Moreover,  persistent
unemployment  has  negative  effects  on  life  satisfaction  and  health,  undermining  trust  in
public institutions and posing a risk for social cohesion.
Despite the progress made so far, banks continue to be burdened with the large stock of
non-performing loans and are, thus, unable to provide sufficient credit to the private sector
in order to support economic activity.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Investment remains  at  a  very  low  level,  and  this  is  not  only  due  to  delays  in  the
disbursement of the Public Investment Programme and the lack of bank lending, but also to
the  fact  that  the  business  environment  is  not  yet  considered  as  friendly  as  it  should  be
towards private investment.
The general government debt-to-GDP ratio has risen to unsustainable levels. This
implies that for many years to come a significant amount of public resources will have to be
directed to the servicing of debt-related obligations. This can be done either by compressing
spending  and  scaling  down  the  public  sector  or  by  increasing  revenue.  However,  raising
revenue by maintaining the currently exceptionally high tax rates constitutes a drag on long-
term  growth. High tax rates are a disincentive for launching new investment plans
because companies know that on a permanent basis a substantial part of their future profits
will  be  transferred  to  the  state.  In  addition,  high  tax  rates  are  a  disincentive  to  work  and
create incentives for tax evasion for both businesses and households, increasing the size of
the underground economy. At the limit, high taxes and social contributions force businesses
to move their businesses to countries with more favorable tax regimes.
Despite  substantial  progress  in  various  areas,  qualitative  indices  reflecting  the business
environment suggest that Greece is still ranked low relative to other European countries.
For example, according to the Global Competitiveness Index of the World Economic Forum,
competitiveness slightly deteriorated in 2017–2018. The most problematic factors for doing
business in Greece are considered by the above Forum to be the following: high tax rates,
inefficient  government  bureaucracy,  tax  regulations,  policy  and  government  instability,
access  to  finance  and  corruption.  The  authorities  need  to  continue  to  put  emphasis  on
improving non-price competitiveness and public sector efficiency.
These  challenges  must  be  tackled  urgently  in  order  to  avoid  hampering  the  strengthening
recovery and the long-term prospects of the Greek economy.
5. Preconditions for a sustainable recovery
In the medium to long-term the growth prospects of the Greek economy are positive because the
structural reforms implemented raise total factor productivity and consequently potential growth.
According  to  estimates  by  the  OECD,  the  full  implementation  of  all  reforms,  both  those
undertaken and those scheduled as part of the ESM programme, is expected, ceteris paribus, to
boost real GDP over a 10-year-horizon by about 13%. And this figure excludes further positive
effects from structural reforms which cannot be easily quantified such as the modernisation of
the  public  administration  and  the  judiciary  system,  the  strengthening  of  insolvency  regulations
and the resolution of non-performing loans. In-house work by the Bank of Greece points to similar
estimates of the effects of structural reforms. However, in order to reap these potential gains, a
number of conditions should be satisfied.
a. Create the conditions to encourage investment
The economic adjustment and the structural improvements during the past seven years have
rendered Greece more business friendly and have created significant investment opportunities.
However, domestic savings are insufficient to meet the investment needs of the Greek economy
which, after a long period of very low investment rates, are significant. Thus, besides restoring
access of companies to capital markets, conditions should be encouraged that will attract foreign
capital, notably Foreign Direct Investment.
This presupposes the smooth and timely implementation of the agreed reforms and privatization
programme  in  order  to  further improve  the  business  environment  and  cut  red-tape.  In
addition, the Bank of Greece favours a more growth friendly fiscal policy mix. More emphasis
has to be placed on cutting non-productive expenditures and managing state property effectively.
This is important since, according to OECD estimates, state property in Greece is among the
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
highest as a percent of GDP in OECD member-states. The scaling down of an oversized and
inefficient public sector will facilitate the reduction of the excessively high tax rates benefiting the
private economy and facilitating the return to growth.
Besides improving the business environment and lowering taxation, it is necessary to remove
decisively and definitively the obstacles arising from various small or large vested interests
and groups, which exacerbate the business climate and hamper the materialization of new
investment  and  the  implementation  of  reforms  and  privatizations,  even  those  already
approved.
Last but not least, the removal of capital controls would be a manifestation of the improving
confidence both in the stability of the banking system and the sustainable recovery of the Greek
economy. This will, in turn, facilitate the improvement of the investment climate and help attract
foreign direct investment.
b. Speed up the implementation of the privatization and reform programme
Despite the progress achieved so far, there is still a lot to be done in the areas of privatization
and  structural  reforms.  Privatisations  which  are  at  a  mature  stage  need  to  be  completed
quickly.  Other  reforms  have  to  be  completed  before  the  end  of  the  programme,  including,  for
example, the liberalization of the energy market and the opening of the remaining professions. In
addition, universities and research institutes should be encouraged to cooperate with the private
sector, in order to promote innovation and the transition to a knowledge-based economy. These
initiatives will increase productivity and reduce costs for consumers.
c. Tackle the NPL problem
In  the  banking  sector, the  large  volume  of  non-performing  loans  and  the  problem  of
strategic  defaulters prevent  the  banking  system  from  financing  economic  growth.  All  the
necessary  measures  have  now  been  legislated  and  the  regulatory  framework  has  been  re-
formulated  in  order  to  be  able  to  address  the  NPL  problem  in  an  efficient  and  expeditious
manner. Banks need to follow faithfully the targets agreed with supervisors. Particular emphasis
should be placed on the restructuring of companies and the closure of non-viable businesses.
This  will  release  resources  to  support  new  and  existing  sound  investment  and  business
initiatives, thereby supporting the economic recovery.
d. Address debt sustainability concerns
Decisive and concrete actions are needed to ensure the sustainability of Greek public debt,
while, according to the Bank of Greece, there is also a strong case for a more realistic
adjustment of medium-term fiscal targets. The Eurogroup reaffirmed in June its commitment
to  the  principles  contained  in  the  May  2016  statement  and  specific  mention  was  made  of
measures  that  could  be  taken,  if  necessary,  regarding  public  debt  reprofiling.  The  Bank  of
Greece  has  put  forward  a  specific  proposal  for  extending  the  weighted  average  maturity  of
interest payments on EFSF loans by at least 8.5 years. The calculations show that this could
make a significant contribution to debt sustainability, even if primary surpluses were to fall to 2
percent  of  GDP  from  2021  onwards  rather  than  from  2023  as  envisaged  in  the  Eurogroup
agreement. If adopted, such a proposal would certainly support both the recovery of the economy
and  the  country’s  creditworthiness,  especially,  if  the  fiscal  space  created  by  the  reduction  of
fiscal targets is used to reduce taxes on labour and capital.
This mild debt reprofiling proposal is vital for debt sustainability in Greece, while it involves only a
negligible cost for its partners. It would pave the way for the inclusion of Greek government bonds
in  the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing  programme,  which  in  turn  will  facilitate  sustainable  market
access.  This  will  set  in  motion  a virtuous  circle:  greater  investor  confidence  in  Greece’s
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic prospects will encourage the return of more deposits to banks, allow for a smooth exit
from the current programme, and, ultimately, the full abolition of capital controls.
6. Some remarks about the future of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
Last but not least, given that the recovery is accelerating in the euro area, now is the right time to
consider  the  future  of  Europe  and  in  particular  possible  ways  to  strengthen  the
Economic and Monetary Union.
A lot has been done in recent years to enhance the functioning of the EMU. Policy actions
have  focused  on  addressing  institutional  weaknesses,  structural  fragilities  and  excessive  risk
taking that led to the sovereign debt crisis and the negative feedback loop between sovereigns
and banks, which in turn undermined euro area stability. Some key initiatives were the provision
of  intergovernmental  loans  to  Greece,  the  establishment  of  the  EFSF,  and  its  successor  the
ESM, the creation of a banking union and the application of stricter rules on banking regulation
and supervision, the establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  creation  of
appropriate  macro-prudential  instruments  which  allowed  greater  emphasis  on  identifying  and
addressing  system-wide  risks.  Moreover,  various  monetary  policy  interventions  by  the  ECB
played a pivotal role in supporting the euro area economy and safeguarding price and financial
stability.
Despite these changes, the new institutional setting of the EMU is far from being appropriate to
address a future crisis. The changes made so far mainly aim at closing loopholes rather than
strengthening EMU. Euro area policy makers cannot rely solely on the ECB and expect that it will
keep  monetary  policy  loose  indefinitely.  Efforts  should  focus  on  improving  the  resilience  and
potential  growth  of  our  economies  and  on  reinvigorating  real  convergence  as  the  way  of
improving the well-being for all euro area citizens. The time for action is now, because the euro
area economy is on a stable footing.
First,  the  economic  rebalancing  mechanisms  (i.e.  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure)
should be reinforced and operate symmetrically, i.e. both for countries with external deficits and
for  countries  with  external  surpluses.  Second,  the  institutional  reforms  proposed  by  the  Five
Presidents’ Report and the  European  Commission  are  in  the  right  direction  because  they  will
improve  economic  policy  coordination,  facilitate  convergence  and  allow  for  risk  reduction  and
greater private and public risk sharing. The key institutional reforms for the new EMU architecture
are the following:
initiatives,  on 
instruments  and 
the  creation  of  a  framework  for incentivizing structural reforms and aligning national
and EMU priorities by placing more emphasis on the links between financing via European
Union  (or  euro  area) 
the  one  hand,  and  reform
implementation, on the other;
the completion of the Banking and Capital Markets Union;
the creation of a central fiscal-macroeconomic stabilization function;
the adoption of a European Safe Asset;
the transformation of the ESM into a European Monetary Fund;
the creation of a euro area Treasury; and
an increase in the accountability of European Institutions to the European Parliament.
Moving forward in this direction would safeguard the monetary union’s resilience, its viability and
the long-term prosperity of its citizens.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
7. Conclusions
Over the past seven years, Greece has gone a long way in adjusting its major macroeconomic
imbalances,  reforming  its  economy  and  restoring  competitiveness.  The  economy  is  now
recovering and growth is gathering pace. An important factor behind this improvement was the
emergence of a strong political consensus in favour of keeping Greece in the euro area. In
their majority, Greek political parties are not only in favour of the euro, but also have supported
measures in Parliament, sometimes with heavy political and social cost, to ensure that Greece
remains  in  the  euro  area.  This new political reality resolves, once and for all, any future
uncertainty regarding the course of the country and ensures the implementation of the
reforms required for the Greek economy to prosper in the context of a deepened and
completed Economic and Monetary Union.  Building  on  this  political  consensus,  the  Greek
authorities  must  pursue  the  remaining  reforms  forcefully  in  order  to  improve  the  investment
climate,  take  full  advantage  of  the  brighter  global  prospects  and  put  the  economy  on  a
sustainable growth path.
Such  policies  will  address  the  three  stock  imbalances  that  remain  (high  unemployment,  high
public debt and a large volume of non-performing loans), attract foreign direct investment and
facilitate  the  reallocation  of  productive  resources  towards  tradable  and  exportable  goods  and
services. This, in turn, will boost financial markets’ confidence about the prospects for the Greek
economy and will signal the exit from the crisis. Nevertheless, despite the progress achieved so
far, we still have some way to go in order for Greece to tap the financial markets on sustainable
terms after August 2018. This will happen if the country can achieve a credit rating enabling it to
refinance  its  debt  at  interest  rates  compatible  with  debt  sustainability  and  if  banks  have
appropriate and adequate collateral to have full access to the ECB’s refinancing operations (and
not only to ELA). To this end, the reform effort has to be stepped up to close the third review.
Adequate and timely specification of the medium-term debt relief measures in the context of the
decisions  taken  in  the  Eurogroup  is  also  necessary,  as  is  constructive  dialogue  between  the
Greek government and the institutions on the type of support for the Greek economy after the end
of the programme in August 2018. In this way, we can ensure a return to financial normality after
seven years of significant sacrifices by the Greek people.
Sources:
Draghi, 
statement, 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2017/html/ecb.is170907.en.html
Introductory 
Mario, 
2017. 
7 
September.
Draghi,  Mario,  2017.  Building  on  the  achievements  of  post-crisis  reforms,  21  September.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170921.en.html
Draghi,  Mario,  2017.  Youth  unemployment 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170922_1.en.html
in 
the  euro  area,  22  September.
Draghi,  Mario,  2017.  Introductory  statement.  Hearing  of  the  Committee  on  Economic  and
Monetary 
Parliament.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170925_2.en.html
European 
Affairs 
the 
of 
ECB,  2017.  September  2017  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,
Frankfurt.www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.ecbstaffprojections201709.en.pdf?
a13047040af5611b7e0cda69c6a88bf2
ECB,  2017.  Economic  Bulletin, 
bulletin/html/eb201706.en.html
Issue  6,  Frankfurt. www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-
European Commission, 2015, “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, Report by
Jean-Claude Junker in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
and Martin Schulz, 22 June.
European Commission, 2017, Reflection paper on the Deepening of the Economic and Monetary
Union, 31 May, Brussels.
OECD, 2016, Greece, OECD Economic Surveys, Paris.
OECD,  2016,  Statistical  Insights:  Government  assets  matter  too,  not  just  debt.  Praet,  Peter,
2017. 
2017.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170913.en.html
September 
Karl-Otto 
Lecture, 
Pohl 
13 
Stournaras,  Yannis,  2017.  “Greece:  A  comeback  to  the  financial  markets?  Are  we  near  the
finishing line? ” Speech at an event organized by The Economist in Frankfurt, 30 May.
Stournaras, Yannis, 2017. “The Greek economy: challenges and prospects” Speech at an event
organized by the British Hellenic Chamber of Commerce in Athens, 28 September.
Zhang,  Tao,  2017.  Global  economic  challenges  and  opportunities,  Speech  to  the  59th Annual
Meeting  of 
for  Business  Economics,  25  September.
www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2017/09/25/sp092517-global-economic-challenges-and-
opportunities?cid=em-COM-123–35930
the  National  Association 
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
