Andreas  Dombret:  Between  integration  and  reform  -  current
developments in the euro area and Germany
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), Mumbai, 31 October 2017.
1. Introduction: Quo vadis Europe?
 Mr Chauhan
Mr Steinrücke
Ladies and gentlemen
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  back  in  Mumbai,  and  it  is  an  honour  to  be  speaking  at  the
Bombay Stock Exchange.
The Bombay Stock Exchange is prospering, with its BSE Sensex reaching all-time highs, beyond
33.000 points. I am hopeful that this is a sign of India’s economy growing in a strong and broad
fashion in the future, after some recent setbacks.
Talking about economic setbacks and recoveries: I have been asked to talk about the economic
situation in the euro area and in Germany. I am happy to do so, and will also take the opportunity
to discuss their economic future in light of the current political situation.
Wherever I go these days, people ask me: Where is Europe heading? Will the EU recover? Or
will it eventually break up? Brexit and the rise of populism have raised doubts about the Union’s
future.
In this debate, one side is calling for the EU to disintegrate substantially, or at least to go not any
further with integration. In the other corner are EU proponents. They think that the answer to the
political and economic problems is more integration, not less.
I  think  both  views  are  not  balanced  enough.  Neither  more,  nor  less  integration  are  per  se
solutions  to  the  problems  that  Europe  is  facing.  We  must  instead  take  a  closer  look  at  the
problems at hand and solve them with problem-oriented reforms.
In  my  talk,  I  will  explain  to  you  that  the  economies  of  both  Germany  and  the  euro  area  are
currently doing quite well. Yet I will highlight the fact that important fundamental problems have
not been dealt with either at all or at least not sufficiently. I will argue that this is an important
explanation for the current political troubles in the EU. To counter these political tensions, we
need problem-oriented reforms in the euro area as well as in the individual member states. I will
outline important directions for such reforms.
2. The German and euro area economy: Better…
Let’s start with the current economic situation in the euro area. Until recently, despite extensive
monetary easing, the pace of recovery since the financial crisis has been disappointing. Lately,
however, there have been clear signs of a broad economic recovery.
Recent  figures  show  a  sound  GDP  growth  of  0.6%  for  the  second  quarter  of  2017.
Unemployment stood at 9.1% in July, well down from its peak of 12.1% in 2013.
Moreover, both the IMF and the ECB staff have recently upped their growth expectations for the
1
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
euro area.
At the same time, the healthy upswing of the German economy is continuing: 2017 will be the
fourth consecutive year of GDPgrowth outpacing potential output.
Growth has gained further momentum and the upswing has become more broadly based. Thus
far,  the  major  drivers  have  been  consumption  and  housing  investment.  Recently,  industrial
activity, exports and business investment have also made significant contributions to growth.
Looking ahead, the very high level of confidence among firms and households suggests that the
upswing will continue not only into the second quarter of 2017, but also beyond.
A  very  positive  effect  of  the  economic  upswing  has  been  the  substantial  reduction  in
unemployment.
3. …but not yet good
With regard to the Euro area as a whole, however, a recent study has shown that the labour
market is in worse shape than the official job figures suggest, with workers unlikely to see real
increases in pay because of the level of underemployment.  A measure of “slack” in the labour
market indicates that about 15% to 18% of the euro area workforce are without jobs or would like
to work more – which is nearly double the official unemployment rate. Underemployment is even
growing further in weaker labour markets, such as those in France and Italy.
2
The still weak labour market in many regions of the euro area is one of the most severe ongoing
repercussions of the recent financial crisis and an indication that the recovery is not yet strong
enough. This is particularly true with respect to the high level of underemployment among young
people and in peripheral regions.
Thus, while the euro area economy looks increasingly healthy on average, it becomes clear on
closer inspection that a lot still remains to be done to move onto a sustainable, integrative path of
prosperity.
This is also one of the reasons why populist extremists are still making electoral gains.
4. The political landscape: More populism in sight?
When we look at the German general election five weeks ago, however, although a populist party
came in third, things need a more differentiated explanation – only half of the populist supporters
were economically disaffected. I will come to that in a moment.
In  my  eyes,  though,  the  positive  outcome  is  one  of  government  stability:  Chancellor  Merkel’s
conservative Union has remained the largest force in parliament.
But she faces the difficult task of forming what has been dubbed the Jamaica coalition with the
business-friendly Free Democratic Party and the Green party. The negotiations have just begun
and  are  challenging.  But  I  am  confident  that  an  agreement  can  be  reached  and  that  German
political stability will stay intact. And that the German economy’s strong growth momentum will
also remain intact, which, in turn, will be a strong basis for continued growth of the euro area
economy.
Yet  this  election  reveals  a  deeper,  inconvenient  truth  –  that  people  are  not  convinced  that
politicians have found sustainable solutions for longer-term social cohesion. This is mirrored in
the first far-right party entering the Bundestag since 1949: Alternative for Germany, or AfD for
short.  It  is  now  the  third-biggest  party  in  the  Bundestag,  having  received  almost  13%  of  the
popular vote.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
About half of the party’s voters are economically disaffected – people without jobs, people with
declining real income and people fearing future losses.
This is the economic side of why protectionism and populism have enjoyed support in Germany.
The AfD,  like  many  other  populist  parties,  blames  the  economic  malaise  on  globalisation  and
European integration – and are demanding that they be reversed.
These  simple  explanations  offer  intuitively  appealing  solutions  to  Europe’s  problems.  But  they
overshadow the mid-term economic challenges, which need to be tackled urgently, however.
If we do not solve these mid-term challenges, populist influence might well grow – and that would
put global and European cooperation at risk. These unresolved problems could become the roots
of serious political conflict.
Can this really become such a problem? I have one word for that: Brexit.
In June 2016, UK voters decided to leave the EU – they had been told that they would be able to
save their money and put it to better use, and that they could once again control their destiny in
the global economy, all without any negative consequences. Unfortunately, the campaign was
built  on  false  anti-EUinformation.  These  intuitively  appealing  anti-European  sentiments  did  find
support – to a substantial degree – among economically disaffected citizens.
Where are we now? Brexit is definitely happening, and it is more and more likely to be a hard one
–  by  which  I  mean  that  there  will  be  a  complete  exit  rather  than  a  partial  one.  The  UK  and
the EUwill go their separate ways in March 2019. After we agree on how to separate, we will start
to negotiate the terms of our future partnership. At the moment, it is possible that we could start
this second phase in December of this year – this is the guidance of the EU Council, but for it to
happen  substantial  progress  has  yet  to  be  made  on  several  fundamental  issues  such  as  the
rights of EUcitizens in the UK after Brexit.
Since negotiations have been going rather slowly, there may be a transition period of two years
from  2019  to  2021  –  during  which  the  old  rules  would  still  apply  and  the  terms  of  the  new
partnership could be implemented. What kind of economic partnership this will be has yet to be
determined. If we do not find a solution, the EU and the UK will trade under rules set by the World
Trade  Organization  –  which  is  in  nobody’s  interest,  but  could  be  particularly  harmful  to
the UK economy. I hope that all parties involved will be able to negotiate an economic partnership
that underscores the close political amity between the UK and the EU.
5. Neither less, nor more – but better: Reforms are needed
Brexit  shows  that  less  integration  is  not  the  solution  to  the  root  causes  of  our  economic
problems.
But a simple case of more integration is not a solution either.
One thing should be put first: The EU appears stronger today than it did a year ago. This was
reflected by Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s State of the Union address on the
13th of September, and in French President Emmanuel Macron’s plan to reform the EU, as set
out in his speech on the 26th of September. I agree with them that a strong EU is in the best
interest  of  all  Europeans  and  that  it  can  play  an  important  role  in  international  relations.  More
integration may thus be warranted.
But  I  think  that  we  should  get  the  order  right:  first  reform,  then  the  next  steps  towards  more
integration.
This is especially true with regard to the European monetary union. The euro area will remain
vulnerable,  as  long  as  its  fundamental  stumbling  block  remains  unchanged:  its  asymmetric
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutional  design.  Member  states  surrendered  sovereignty  in  monetary  policy  matters  to
the ECB, but retained ownership of their fiscal and economic policies.
This  creates  two  big  challenges:  first,  a  common  monetary  policy  for  economies  that  are  at
different  developmental  stages  –  like  France  and  Greece  –  and  at  different  stages  of  the
business cycle. Second, the moral hazard that arises when governments borrow too much in
order to take advantage of lowered interest rates as a result of averaging in the currency union.
We need solutions to both problems. For the first, no simple, realistic solution is available. The
economic convergence of the euro area will take time. Far-reaching structural reforms need to
be  undertaken  in  countries  in  order  to  narrow  the  gap  to  the  best-performers  with  respect  to
competitiveness.
The second problem – excessive borrowing by governments – could, in theory be much more
easily solved. However, the necessary political reforms have made little progress so far.
Formally, the EU has a set of fiscal rules that restrict public lending – the Stability and Growth
Pact.  Yet  these  were  regularly  violated  before  the  financial  crisis,  without  any  meaningful
consequences.  In  response,  the  EU  reformed  it,  but  the  discretionary  scope  was  actually
expanded even further.
The European Commission, albeit foreseen as the guardian of the Stability and Growth Pact, has
already exploited scope on several occasions and invariably interpreted the rules very generously
in doing so. Some euro-area countries have been breaching the rules for nine years now.
What  is  needed  to  strengthen  the  fiscal  rules  is  a  simple  and  transparent  design  and
[3
implementation  of  the  rules.
  An  independent  institution  taking  over  responsibility  for  fiscal
surveillance from the Commission would be a key step towards a less political approach. One
promising way would be to strengthen the role of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) in
fiscal surveillance.
However,  if  member  states  retain  their  fiscal  autonomy,  the  sustainability  of  public  finances
needs further safeguards than rules alone.
It  is  therefore  essential  that  the  binding  force  of  the  rules  be  additionally  shored  up  by  the
disciplining effect of the market. In other words, interest rate levels and thus financing costs have
to be realigned more closely with the risks in government budgets.
For  this  essential  function  of  a  modern  market  economy,  we  need  investors  and  stock
exchanges  such  as  the  Bombay  Stock  Exchange,  as  they  are  the  economic  equivalent  of
political checks and balances.
The only way to achieve that, however, is to give the no bail-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty
more credibility again. Investors have to perceive a more credible threat of losing money if they
buy bonds from governments that have unsound public finances. One proposal put forward by
the Bundesbank thus envisages changing the contractual terms for sovereign bonds in the euro
area by introducing an automatic maturity extension for them as soon as the issuing government
applies for an ESM programme.
Up to now, a large part of the assistance loans have ended up being used to pay off the original
creditors. This means that the original creditors, such as banks, are then let off the hook – at the
expense of taxpayers.
In contrast, extending maturities would leave them on the hook, and they could still be held liable
if a later debt restructuring were necessary.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
To sum up: Neither less nor more integration at any price is a panacea for the problems in our
economies.
And  that  is  why,  not  only  the  euro  area,  but  also  the  member  states  have  to  tackle  reforms
sooner rather than later.
Let  me  focus  on  the  German  case,  and  point  to  two  challenges:  first,  we  need  to  face  our
demographic  challenges  ahead;  second,  we  need  to  ensure  that  those  who  lose  out  from
globalisation and digitisation are compensated.
One major challenge for the German economy is the foreseeable ageing and shrinking of the
domestic population and its impact on potential output growth in the medium term.
In  view  of  the  shrinking  domestic  labour  force,  it  can  be  assumed  that  Germany’s  potential
growth will drop below one percent in the next decade.
We need to mitigate this effect by encouraging more women and older people to participate in
the  labour  force.  What’s  more,  we  will  probably  be  forced  to  think  about  raising  the  statutory
retirement age.
A second important task is that we need a fairer market economy – to encounter the fears of
people moving down to a lower layer of societal strand.
We  need  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  two  types  of  policies:  those  that  foster  the
competitive dynamics of market economies, and those that ensure the social cohesion that is
necessary for market economies and indispensable to democratic societies.
The most obvious tools are fiscal policy instruments that serve to strengthen the social security
system,  which  provides  financial  compensation  to  individuals  such  as  those  who  are
unemployed.
At least as important as the provision of financial compensation is making sure that people are
capable of helping themselves. To that end, we need better education and higher qualifications:
countries  need  to  promote  equal  access  to  high-quality  primary,  secondary  and  tertiary
education. What is crucial to educational success in 5 to 50 years is that we increase public
spending on qualified personnel. Moreover, active labour market policies shall support the jobless
in their efforts to qualify for other professions.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
The euro area’s economy has made it through the rain and is now under relative sunny skies. Yet
clouds still hover over the less-than-complete recovery – a lot remains to be done.
The Germany economy, on the other hand, has been in the sun for quite some time now, and
even the short term outlook is quite promising. Yet, serious medium-term risks loom.
A vital euro area requires more reform: The monetary union must be reformed – but it is not a
matter  of  simply  more  –  or  less  –  European  integration.  Instead  we  need  problem-oriented
reforms of its institutional design.
Moreover,  member  states  must  embrace  reform.  For  example,  Germany  has  to  face  the
demographic  challenges,  and  its  economic  policy  has  to  strike  the  right  balance  between
fostering the competitive dynamics of market economies and ensuring the social cohesion that is
necessary for democracies.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am confident that this is possible – but policymakers have to take their responsibility to reform
very serious.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
GDP projection by IMF: 2017: 2.1% (+0.2 pp); 2018: 1.9% (+0.2 pp); GDP projection by ECB staff; 2017: 2.2%
(+0.3 pp); 2018: 1.8% (+0.0 pp); 2019: 1.7% (+0.0 pp).
European Central Bank (2017), Assessing labour market slack. ECB Economic Bulletin 2017 (3): 31–35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly Report, June
2017
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
