Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Readying  the  financial  sector  amid  the
evolving war on terrorism financing
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Third  Counter-Terrorism  Financing  Summit  2017  "Powering
Regional  Solutions  Through  Strengthened  Alliances  and  Innovations",  Kuala  Lumpur,  22
November 2017.
 “Readying the financial sector amid the evolving war on terrorism financing”
Welcome  to  Sasana  Kijang,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  We  are  pleased  to  host  the  3rd  Joint
Regional  Counter-Terrorism  Financing  Summit  2017  with  our  partners,  the  Australian
Transaction  Reports  and  Analysis  Centre  (AUSTRAC)  and  Pusat  Pelaporan  dan  Analisis
Transaksi Keuangan (PPATK) Indonesia.
The Summit, which was first held in 2015 in Sydney, has now become a hallmark event for many
across  the  region;  policy  makers,  law  enforcement  personnel,  the  financial  intelligence
community  and  financial  industry  players.  The  Summit  is  a  cumulation  of  the  year’s  work  in
producing impactful outcomes for counter terrorism financing. With over 400 participants from
over 30 countries and international organisations, this Summit is a testament to our commitment
and  determination  to  strengthen  our  cooperation  in  combating  undesirable  financial  activities
across the globe.
The nature of terror and terrorism financing is much more complex, say, compared to ten years
ago. Numerous new methods to raise, move and store funds, were conducted through small-
scaled  transfers  via  banks  or  money  services  businesses. And  in  some  cases,  via  physical
transportation of cash. Recent advancements in financial technology provide new opportunities
for  anonymity.  We  should  envisage  that  terrorist  financiers  will  attempt  to  benefit  from
anonymous transactions made possible by innovations of new payment products and services
such as internet-based payment systems, prepaid cards and virtual currencies.
fundraising 
Likewise, 
such
as “crowdfunding” have increased in prominence, in addition to other more traditional sources of
funds  such  as  proceeds  of  criminal  activities,  conventional  donations,  and  funding  from
legitimate purposes.
social  media  and  other  online  platforms 
through 
As change is a constant, collation of data points that this environment will continue to persist.
Global internet users have increased from 397 million in the year 2000 to nearly 3.9 billion as of
June 2017, an impressive growth of almost 1000%.
Similarly, global investment activities in the FinTech industry have increased from USD9 billion in
2010 to USD25 billion in 2016. If this trend is anything to go by, the financial industry will be hard
pressed to mitigate, identify and prevent cases of abuse in the system.
There  is  no  doubt  that  rapid  technological  developments  have  offered  immense  potential  for
economic growth. Unfortunately, they have also spawned new ways for terrorist organisations to
acquire, move and manage their funds. There are other risks not anticipated before, such as
remote  radicalisation  via  the  internet  that  has  resulted  in  an  increase  in  the  number  of  small
terrorist cells and “lone wolf actors” that makes detecting and halting terrorism financing even
more challenging.
In light of this development, the role of financial sector as a bulwark against terrorists financing
becomes  even  more  critical.  The  financial  system  must  always  be  in  a  state  of  readiness  to
identify and effectively prevent any emerging risk of terrorism financing.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me suggest a three-pronged strategy to erect stronger defences within the financial system.
This will include capitalising on technology, promoting clever partnership between the authorities
and industry, and closer international cooperation.
Capitalising on technology
While technological misuse poses a danger to society’s wellbeing, technology is also an effective
tool to counter terrorism financing. Akin to using a diamond to cut a diamond, we must harness
the vast potential in technological innovations to reinvent and reinforce our lines of defence.
A  rule-based  system,  which  is  at  the  core  of  many  of  such  preventive  programmes  today  is
becoming  increasingly  ineffective.  The  reliance  on  automated  systems  to  monitor  and  detect
suspicious transactions have served us well, but as we move forward, we need to do more. We
need new tools. The adoption of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and big data technology
are tools that would likely be imperative, as suspicious transactions become more complex and
harder to detect.
As we learned from the Innovation Forum at this Summit, the use of artificial intelligence and big
data will have the potential to increase efficiency and accuracy of assessments that is essential
in  a  dynamic  environment.  The  banking  sector  needs  to  adopt  the  latest  and  most  advanced
technologies to improve its risk management framework.
We need to prepare ourselves, as according to many pundits, digital currencies will become the
new norm. The advent of digital currencies as some have forecasted, will mark the beginning of
a new era in the financial sector. As authorities, we cannot be oblivious to these developments.
As  such,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  initiated  the  foundational  work  for  the  development  of  a
regulatory structure for digital currencies. Beginning 2018, Bank Negara Malaysia will designate
persons converting crypto currencies into fiat money currencies as reporting institutions under
the Anti-Money  Laundering, Anti-Terrorism  Financing  and  Proceeds  of  Unlawful Activities Act
2001. This is to prevent the abuse of the system for criminal and unlawful activities and ensuring
the stability and integrity of the financial system.
Strategic partnership 
Dynamic  collaboration  between  the  public  and  private  sector  is  imperative  to  create  an
environment conducive for the creation of innovative solutions. One of the main findings from the
Global FinTech Report published by PWC recently is that legislation is not keeping pace with
innovation, creating significant uncertainty. This tells us that a more adaptable structure in policy-
making,  that  minimises  bureaucratic  hurdles  or  “red  tape”,  could  be  advantageous  under  the
current dynamic environment to encourage potentially important innovations.
For that reason, Bank Negara Malaysia launched its very own FinTech Regulatory Sandbox in
2016 to allow experimentation of FinTech solutions in a ‘live’ environment. A number of innovative
financial solutions have been allowed to operate under this Sandbox initiative, including an e-KYC
solution that could revolutionise the AML/CFT framework in the financial sector in Malaysia. This
initiative allows for the viability of new technologies to be tested in a controlled environment while
simultaneously exploring potential risks and the mitigating measures.
In  addition,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  foster  cooperative  platforms  between  the
authorities  and  financial  institutions  to  enable  “rapid  responses”  to  terrorism  financing  threats.
Early this year, we facilitated an information sharing platform between law enforcement agencies
and selected financial institutions to swiftly and effectively mitigate risks and respond to threats.
Greater access of intelligence information for financial institutions and the increased threats from
ISIL had resulted in the upward trend of reporting of Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs). To
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
put it in perspective, in 2015, the financial intelligent unit (FIU) received 93 terrorism financing
related STRs which led to 14 disclosures to law enforcement agencies. In comparison, between
January and June 2017, we received 346 terrorism financing related STRs which have led to 34
disclosures to law enforcement agencies. Importantly, the quality of STRs submitted has also
improved.
Bank Negara Malaysia is also in the midst of finalising the details of a new requirement for the
Banking and Money Services Business sector to report remittances in high risk areas. The high
risk areas will be determined based on the law enforcement agency’s intelligence on areas that
they view may pose higher risks for funding of terrorism activities.
This is consistent with the Terrorism Financing Regional Risk Assessment findings at the 2nd
CTF Summit in 2016 in Bali, where one of the priority actions identified was for FIUs to improve
the visibility and insights into the nature of terrorism financing in the region. The idea is intended
to  help  FIUs  gain  better  insights  into  the  role  of  financial  and  transit  hubs  in  regional  and
international terrorism financing networks.
Closer international cooperation
Another  area  to  ensure  an  effective  mitigating  strategy  requires  closer  regional  and  global
cooperation,  particularly  in  the  sharing  of  intelligence  and  technical  know-how.  Terrorism  and
terrorism financing are global issues that demand global solutions. Sharing of intelligence and
expertise  across  borders  will  go  a  long  way  towards  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  our  risk
management framework.
In  this  regard,  the  various  working  groups  under  the  CTF  Summits,  the  Financial  Intelligence
Consultative Group and International Community of Experts have done commendable efforts and
initiatives  in  building  capacity  and  sharing  operational  experiences  in  the  region.  This  must
continue to be strengthened given the challenges that we will face.
Conclusion
The fight against terrorism financing is an on-going battle that will continue to evolve in line with
the  ever-changing  landscape  of  the  financial  industry.  In  the  era  of  rapid  technological
advancements, it is essential that the financial sector’s risk management strategy remains agile
in  order  to  mitigate  emerging  risks.  This  requires  not  only  the  development  of  innovative
technology-based  deterrents  and  pro-active  detection  systems,  but  also  effective  cooperation
between the public and private sector, law enforcement domestically and across borders. 
We stand ready to work alongside all key stakeholders, in both the public and private sectors,
local and abroad, to ensure our financial sector is resilient to face the threat of terrorism financing
within the country and in the region.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
