Myun-Shik  Yoon:  Opening  address  -  BOK-SNU 
Institute  for
Research  in  Finance  and  Economics  International  Conference
"Changing Inflation Dynamics"
Opening address by Mr Myun-Shik Yoon, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the
BOK-SNU Institute for Research in Finance and Economics International Conference "Changing
Inflation Dynamics", Seoul, 3 November 2017.
Introduction
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen.
 I  am  very  pleased  that  the  Bank  of  Korea  and  Seoul  National  University  are  co-hosting  this
international conference today on inflation dynamics, which have recently drawn attention from
academia and central banks around the world. I welcome you all most sincerely.
Let  me  express  my  special  gratitude  to  Professor  Chan  Wook  Park,  Vice  President  of  Seoul
National University, who will deliver some welcome remarks shortly. I would also like to thank
Professor  Kiyotaki,  our  keynote  speaker,  and  all  of  our  session  moderators,  speakers,
discussants and panelists. I am very grateful as well to Professor Yeongseop Rhee, Director of
the SNU Institute for Research in Finance and Economics, and his staff, for their efforts in so
thoroughly preparing this conference.
Recent inflation conditions
The  global  economy  has  been  emerging  recently  from  a  long-term  economic  slowdown,  as
economic conditions in both advanced and emerging market economies are now improving. This
is assessed as due in large part to the active and bold monetary policies to achieve economic
recovery pursued by the world’s central banks, which have been often referred to as ‘The Only
Game in Town.’
When we look at inflation, however, we find that it has not emerged from its much reduced level
seen since the global financial crisis. And there have thus been active discussions recently on
the weakened linkage between economic activities and prices, and on the changes in inflation
dynamics that have led to talk of so-called “missing inflation.”
In Korea as well, our economic activities continue to improve steadily, thanks to the favorable
global conditions for example and despite the recent uncertainties surrounding our domestic and
overseas conditions. But core inflation, which reflects our demand-side inflationary pressures, is
still in the mid-1% range.
Research on the recent persistently low inflation
Discussions  of  the  causes  for  the  divergence  between  economic  conditions  and  prices  are
developing actively these days. The most representative argument concerns a so-called Phillips
Curve  flattening,  involving  a  weakened  relationship  between  economic  slack  and  inflation.
Specifically, it is said that the degree to which economic conditions are reflected in wage and
price  decisions  has  fallen  compared  to  the  past,  in  consequence  of  intensified  corporate
competition, structural changes in the labor market and the anchoring of price stability.
Other research has concentrated on structural factors that are said to be pulling inflation down.
Studies focused on the decline in inflation expectations claim that, as the level of expected prices
has fallen during the long period of low inflation, real inflation has slowed as a result. Besides
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
this,  views  have  also  been  raised  stating  that  supply-side  shocks,  including  innovations  in
distribution  and  technological  advancements,  have  led  to  a  continued  structural  weakening  of
inflation pressures.
However, there are also many who find it hard to see the recent weakening relationship between
economic conditions and prices as a structurally fixed development. Two representative grounds
for  this  argument  are  the  non-linearity  of  the  Phillips  Curve,  implying  that  under  conditions  of
economic slack the influence of economic conditions on prices could temporarily decline, and
the time lag between economic activities and their effects on prices.
Ultimately,  regarding  the  question  of  whether  the  inflation  dynamics  have  changed,  and  the
causes for this if they have, we need to monitor any increase in demand-side pressures and the
resulting price movements as the economic recovery strengthens going forward. In-depth follow-
up studies will also need to be conducted continuously, at the same time.
Implications of changing inflation dynamics for monetary policy
An accurate understanding of the relationship between economic activities and inflation is critical
for  effective  monetary  policy  implementation  and  communication  with  the  general  public.  As
inflation remains low even despite their economic recoveries, the US and other major advanced
countries have faced difficulties in deciding when and at what pace they will reduce their degrees
of monetary policy easing.
This  also  shows  the  need  for  continuing  more  in-depth  analysis  of  the  relationship  between
economic activities and inflation. In particular, central banks that are operating inflation targeting
regimes may fall into dilemmas as they try to decide on policy options, while dealing with their
tasks both of anchoring inflation at the target level, and of achieving macroeconomic and financial
stability.
Concluding remarks
Ladies and gentlemen,
I believe that the results of the research to be presented and discussed here today will be very
useful to the Bank of Korea also. The studies on pricing behavior and case analyses of major
countries will help us to better understand the inflation dynamics. And the research undertaken to
discover  effective  monetary  policy  measures  will  help  us  in  conducting  our  future  monetary
policy.
I hope that you will find today’s conference useful and informative, and I look forward to hearing
many insightful ideas that will help us all to cope with the challenges that we now face.
Before closing, I would like to express once again my very deep gratitude to all participants, who
have taken time from their busy schedules to be here, and especially to all staff members from
our Bank and from SNU, who have worked so hard to make this conference possible.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
