   5 de octubre de 2017 
Presentation of the III Seminar in Economic History 
Banco de España 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
   Good morning and welcome to the Banco de España for our III Seminar in Economic History. 
 
The Seminars in Economic History organised by the Banco de España were launched three 
years ago, in 2015. The first one was held on the occasion of the retirement of Pedro Tedde de 
Lorca,  who  for  many  years  was  the  member  of  the  Directorate  General  of  Economics  and 
Statistics  in  charge  of  the  Economic  History  programme  and  that,  by  the  way,  has  been 
recently elected as a member of the Spanish Royal Academy of History.  
 
Last year, in October, we celebrated the second edition of the Seminar.  
 
The main purpose of these seminars is to bring together economic historians from academia 
and economists from the Bank to engage in research into economic episodes of the past with 
relevance for the economic problems of today.   
 
For  many  years  the  Banco  de  España  has  devoted  substantial  resources  to  research  in 
economic history. This tradition goes back to the mid-1960s when a project was launched to 
publish, in one volume, a series of essays tracing the origin and development of the Banco de 
España, one of  the oldest  banks of issue, originally  established in  1782 as  “Banco  de  San 
Carlos”. The result was El Banco de España. Una historia económica and Ensayos sobre la 
economía española a mediados del siglo XIX, both published in 1970.  
 
A few years later, a group of researchers: Rafael Anes, Carlos Fernández Pulgar, Diego Mateo 
del Peral, Pedro Tedde and Gabriel Tortella, undertook a far-reaching project on the history of 
the Spanish banking system. The result was La banca española en la Restauración, published 
in 1974.  
 
Since  then,  a  number  of  books  have  been  published  by  the  Bank  of  Spain,  sometimes  in 
collaboration with  commercial  editors.  To  mention just  two of  these  books:    El  Servicio  de 
Estudios  del  Banco  de  España,  1930-2000;  and  Un  siglo  de  historia  del  sistema  financiero 
español (in Spanish and English). Moreover, the early history of the Bank has been covered by 
three  volumes  written  by  Tedde  de  Lorca:  El  Banco  de  San  Carlos  (1782-1829);  El  Banco 
Español de San Fernando, 1829-1856; and El Banco de España y el Estado liberal, 1847-1874.  
 
The  Banco  de  España has  also  shown  its interest  in  Spanish  economic  history  through  its 
annual research grants programme, financing the collection of Estudios de Historia Económica 
(or, in Banco de España parlance, “the red books”). There are now 72 of these studies, the first 
ones dating back to 1980. The aim of the Banco de España with this collection is to disseminate 
economic history papers written by its own staff or by researchers to whom it has awarded 
grants,  in  order  “to  enhance  knowledge  of  Spanish  economic  history,  paying  particular 
attention to quantitative aspects”. A detailed review of the collection shows that both Spanish 
and  foreign  historians  have  collaborated  in  the  project,  covering  an  agenda  that  includes 
modern  and  contemporary  issues.  Although  the  collection  is  open  to  all  kinds  of  quality 
research, monetary and financial topics predominate. 
 
Now, I would like to say a few words about our library, which has played a key role in our 
economic history studies and research. It was set up in 1931, and from the first half of the 
1970s professor Rojo promoted the formation of a highly specialised library, stepping up 
the acquisition of new collections and the modernisation and expansion of its services.  
 3/4 
  
The most prized section of the library, the so called Fondo de Especial Valor, comprising 
more  than  16.000  pieces  from  the  14th  to  the  19th  centuries  (now  in  the  process  of 
digitalization),  is  a  testimony  to  economic  thought  and  practice  in  Spain  and  Europe;  its 
content  encompasses  16th  century  merchants’  instructions,  writings  of  the  School  of 
Salamanca, the publications of the 17th century arbitristas and the works of 18th century 
Enlightenment thinkers. The collection of royal decrees and proclamations (around 4,000 
documents, including the 1745-1796 compilation ordered by the Count of Campomanes), 
dealing mainly  with  fiscal,  mercantile  and  monetary  matters,  enriches  the  library’s  scope 
with the perspective of legislation topics. The fact that these collections are complemented 
by  others,  such  as  the  Goldsmiths’-Kress  Library  of  Economic  Literature  and  the  King’s 
College collection of the papers of J.M. Keynes, both on microfilm, makes the library an 
excellent repository for undertaking any study of economic history.  
 
Let me conclude with a few words about today’s III Seminar of Economic History that we are 
opening now.  
 
As you can see in the programme, we have about thirty participants from a dozen universities, 
central banks and research centres. Economists from the Banco de España are participating 
as authors and also as discussants of a number of papers on historical episodes that are 
relevant to our  understanding  of the  world  of  today.  Many  thanks  to  all the  participants, 
authors and discussants. 
 
We are really honoured this year to have with us one of the leading expert in the history of 
central banking, Professor Charles Goodhart, for many years at the Bank of England and now 
at the London School of Economics. Thank you very much, Professor Goodhart, for joining us 
today.  
 
Now, without further ado, I give the floor to Pablo Martin Aceña, for his introductory remarks. 
4/4 
 