Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in the euro area
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  Forum  on
Central Banking, Sintra, 19 June 2018.
 The euro area’s economy continues on a growth path and inflation is gradually returning towards
our  objective.  But  uncertainty  permeates  the  economic  outlook.  Recent  data  releases  have
created questions about the durability of the growth outlook. And – as we will discuss over the
next  two  days  –  the  crisis  has  presented  us  with  new  issues  and  fresh  challenges  in
understanding the wage- and price-setting process.
Regarding  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  as  outlined  at  last  week’s  press  conference,  progress
towards a sustained adjustment in inflation has been substantial so far.
With longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, the underlying strength of the euro area
economy and the continuing ample degree of monetary accommodation provide grounds to be
confident that the sustained convergence of inflation towards our aim will continue in the period
ahead, and will be maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our net asset purchases. But
this requires monetary policy in the euro area to remain patient, persistent and prudent.
Recent economic developments
In 2017, growth in the euro area turned out stronger than we had anticipated: the annual growth
rate in the fourth quarter was the fastest for a decade. But in 2018, growth has moderated and,
so far, has come in below our expectations. In the latest Eurosystem staff projections, growth for
2018 has been revised down by 0.3 percentage points.
This has prompted some questions about the sustainability of the ongoing expansion, which is
unusual at such an early stage of the cycle.
In historical terms, the current growth period is comparatively short in length and small in size.
Since 1975, there have been five growth phases in the euro area. The average duration from
trough  to  peak  is  31  quarters,  with  GDP  increasing  by  21%  over  that  period.  The  current
1
expansion has to date lasted just 20 quarters and GDP is less than 10% above the trough.
To  determine  whether  the  moderation  has  any  bearing  on  medium-term  growth,  we  need  to
distinguish between its underlying drivers.
In part, the moderation is related to supply-side factors. Some of these are temporary in nature
and have already subsided, such as the cold winter weather in large parts of the euro area. But
there may also be broader supply factors at play.
In  particular,  there  are  increasing  signs  that  capacity  constraints  are  starting  to  bind  in  some
countries and sectors. Capacity utilisation stands above its long-term average in the euro area
and in all large economies. The question is how much, and how quickly, firms will be able to
increase supply to relieve these limits.
Adjustment is already taking place in the labour market. The labour force participation rate in the
euro area has risen by 1.5 percentage points since the crisis and now stands at an all-time high.
And  businesses  have  been  actively  trying  to  expand  capacity  by  increasing  labour  inputs.
Employment has risen by 8.4 million since mid-2013, and is growing in nearly every euro area
2
economy.
This  has  indeed  been  a  job-rich  recovery.  Compared  with  the  previous  growth  phases  going
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
back to 1975, the contribution of labour to growth has been the highest on record, accounting for
3
almost half of average annual growth.
But the flipside of rising labour utilisation has been a lack of capital deepening. Whereas capital
deepening  contributed  at  least  0.6  percentage  points  to  annual  growth  in  all  those  previous
growth phases, its contribution to the current phase is approximately zero. This could explain
why  signs  of  capacity  constraints  are  now  emerging.  Growth  has  largely  been  achieved  by
applying more labour to existing capital.
Firms should increasingly turn to capital to lift capacity – a process that has already begun as
business investment has picked up and now stands above its pre-crisis level.
Certainly the conditions are in place to further foster investment, including improving profitability
and supportive financial conditions. This is in line with the latest European Commission forecasts
for potential output, which project an increase in the contribution from capital and a decrease
4
from labour over the coming years.
All this suggests that the supply-side factors we are currently seeing are likely to slowly unwind
over  the  medium  term.  Where  we  need  to  pay  closer  attention  in  the  nearer  term  is  to
developments on the demand side.
By and large, the underlying fundamentals of the euro area remain solid. Domestic demand is
robust,  and  the  main  motor  of  the  expansion  –  the  virtuous  circle  between  employment  and
consumption – is still in place. External demand has been less positive, but this may partly reflect
a pullback from the very strong export performance of last year, as well as temporary factors in
our main trading partners.
Yet what is undeniable is that uncertainty surrounding the growth outlook has recently increased.
The downside risks to the outlook come from three main sources: the threat of increased global
protectionism  prompted  by  the  imposition  of  steel  and  aluminium  tariffs  by  the  United  States;
rising oil prices triggered by geopolitical risks in the Middle East; and the possibility for persistent
heightened financial market volatility.
Set against this are some risks to the upside, stemming mainly from the fiscal expansion in the
United States and, more in the medium term, from likely fiscal expansions in several countries in
the euro area.
We will continue to monitor these developments closely. But for now, our growth expectations for
the medium term remain essentially unchanged and we view the risks around that outlook as
broadly balanced.
Outlook for wages and inflation
For monetary policy, the key issue is how growth feeds into wages and then inflation. It is well-
known that the reaction of inflation dynamics to accelerating growth has been atypically slow in
recent years. As I have discussed elsewhere, there are a variety of factors that could explain this,
5
ranging from mismeasurement of slack to a changing relationship between slack and wages.
All this has injected quite some uncertainty into understanding and forecasting wage dynamics,
which persists today. But there are signs that slack is now diminishing, and that the relationship
between slack and wages is slowly re-asserting itself.
Different measures of slack, such as broad and headline unemployment, appear to give a similar
picture  of  lessening  spare  capacity,  although  there  is  still  high  unemployment  among  specific
6
groups and regions.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
See Szörfi, B. and Tóth, M. (2018): Measures of slack in the euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue
3, ECB.
In keeping with this, the unexplained residuals in the standard wage Phillips curve model for the
euro area are gradually reducing, and wage growth is beginning to pick up.
Compensation per employee has lifted from its trough in mid-2016 and is now growing at 1.9%.
So  far,  the  increase  has  been  mainly  explained  by  the  wage  drift  component,  which  tends  to
react  faster  to  cyclical  improvements  in  the  labour  market.  But  annual  growth  in  negotiated
wages has also started to move upwards.
Looking ahead, recent wage agreements notably in Germany, but also in other large countries
such as France and Spain, point to a continuation of these wages dynamics. There are signs
that the restraint in public-sector wage growth, which had in the past dragged on aggregate wage
growth, is starting to relax.
7
We are seeing an increase in domestic cost pressures along the pricing chain.
Domestic  producer  price  inflation  for  non-food  consumer  goods  is  growing  at  its  highest  rate
since February 2013. Producer price inflation in the services sector – where wages represent
around 40% of costs – has also picked up.
That  said,  higher  wage  growth  does  not  mechanically  translate  into  higher  inflation.  Even  if
wages  continue  to  rise  as  we  expect,  we  cannot  exclude  that  structural  factors  beyond  the
central  bank’s  control  might  impede  the  transmission  of  wages  into  consumer  prices.  For
example, more intense competition through globalisation or e-commerce might act to compress
margins. At present, we do not see much evidence that such factors have affected inflation in the
euro area.
What  is  key  is  that  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Here  we  are  seeing  some
positive signs. For example, the latest ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) shows
longer-term inflation expectations stable at 1.9%.
So,  overall,  there  is  growing  evidence  that  broad-based  economic  growth  is  beginning  to
generate positive pricing dynamics. But uncertainty arising from economic developments lingers
throughout the various stages of this process.
Implications for monetary policy
So what does this imply for our current monetary policy?
We have set out three conditions that must be in place for our net asset purchases to end. We
need  to  see  the convergence of inflation towards our aim over the medium term; we need to
have sufficient confidence that this convergence will be realised; and the inflation path needs to
show resilience and be self-sustaining without additional net purchases.
Assessing these conditions is a forward-looking exercise, because the full effects of monetary
policy are felt only after long lags. We have to rely on our projections, the probability distributions
surrounding  them,  and  the  extent  to  which  they  are  dependent  on  our  own  monetary  policy
actions.
In terms of convergence, the latest projections see headline inflation reaching 1.7% in each of the
next  three  years.  Inflation  excluding  food  and  energy  –  a  simple  measure  of  underlying  price
pressures – is expected to climb to even higher levels over the same horizon. These are the
latest  in  a  series  of  projections  which  foresee  inflation  converging  to  our  aim  over  a  policy-
relevant medium-term horizon. Importantly, over the course of the past year, that convergence
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
path has held firm, and the timing of when we expect to attain our objective does not appear to
have receded further into the future.
Our confidence in the inflation path is also rising, on the basis of two indicators we have been
using to assess the probability of inflation convergence.
The first is our own internal estimates of the distribution of future inflation outcomes. ECB staff
have constructed a measure that combines the implied inflation distributions from a variety of
sources  –  Eurosystem  staff  projections,  model-based  estimates,  market-based  measures  of
expectations and surveys such as the SPF. These sources are then weighted by their historical
ability to accurately forecast inflation.
That  aggregate  probability  distribution  of  two-year-ahead  inflation  expectations  has  evolved  in
three dimensions that provide confidence that inflation adjustment is sustainable. The mean of
the distribution has increased, the dispersion of the distribution has narrowed, and the downward
skew has declined.
Second, we have been monitoring a range of measures of underlying inflation, including model-
based  statistical  measures  such  as  what  we  refer  to  as  the  PCCI,   and  exclusion-based
methods such as inflation excluding food and energy.
8
Measures of underlying inflation typically provide some early information about the rate at which
inflation will stabilise in the future, once all the noise that is affecting current observed headline
measures has faded away. Though underlying inflation has not yet shown a clear upward trend,
the improvement in wage growth, domestic producer prices and inflation expectations gives us
more  confidence  that,  as  resource  utilisation  continues  to  tighten,  underlying  inflation  will
eventually begin to rise.
Finally,  market  pricing  provides  some  comfort  on  the  resilience  of  inflation  to  the  anticipated
gradual ending of asset purchases.
Inflation  expectations  are  influenced  not  only  by  economic  fundamentals  and  the  cumulative
impact of our past policies, but also by market expectations of future policy settings, including net
asset  purchases.  Ahead  of  our  meeting  last  week,  the  median  market  expectations  for  net
purchases  beyond  September  2018  were  small.  It  follows  that  the  contribution  to  our  inflation
outlook from expected future net purchases was also modest.
As  a  result  of  this  assessment,  last  week  the  Governing  Council  concluded  that  progress
towards a sustained adjustment in inflation has been substantial so far. As we announced, we
anticipate  that  after  September  2018,  subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  our  medium-term
inflation outlook, we will reduce the monthly pace of the net asset purchases to €15 billion until
the end of December 2018 and then end net purchases.
That decision, while acknowledging the increase in uncertainty, shows that we are confident that
the  projected  convergence  in  the  path  of  inflation  will  occur  with  sufficient  probability  without
further net additions to our stimulus. The economy and the inflation process are developing an
underlying  strength  that  was  previously  absent.  As  a  result,  as  I  described  here  last  year,
9
monetary policy can accompany the economic recovery.
But  the  projected  convergence  remains  reliant  on  the  substantial  cumulative  impact  of  past
policies,  which  are  locked  into  the  supportive  financial  conditions  present  today.  Significant
monetary policy accommodation is still needed to support the further build-up of domestic price
pressures and headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Our latest, unanimous decision ensures that the necessary monetary policy support remains in
place. This support has a number of elements, including the net asset purchases until the end of
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  year,  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated  reinvestments,  and  our
enhanced forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates.
Our decisions also reflected the desire of the Governing Council to retain the ability to react to
potential future shocks to ensure the sustained convergence of inflation to our medium-term aim.
They  embed  precise  elements  of  state  contingency  into  our  forward  guidance.  By  clearly
specifying  and  communicating  our  reaction  function,  we  are  able  to  act  in  a  consistent  and
predictable  fashion. Acting  in  this  way  helps  reduce  any  market  uncertainty  that  might  arise
concerning our future actions.
10
Let me restate our recent decisions on our policy instruments.
First, our anticipated ending of asset purchases in December this year is subject to incoming
data  confirming  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook.  Moreover,  the APP  can  always  be  used  in
case contingencies materialise that we do not currently foresee.
Second,  we  announced  that  we  intend  to  maintain  our  policy  of  reinvesting  the  principal
payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme (APP) for
an extended time after the end of net purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Third, we conveyed our expectation that the key ECB interest rates will remain at their present
levels at least through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure
that  the  evolution  of  inflation  remains  aligned  with  our  current  expectations  of  a  sustained
adjustment path.
This enhanced forward guidance clearly signals that we will remain patient in determining the
timing of the first rate rise and will take a gradual approach to adjusting policy thereafter. The path
of very short-term interest rates that is implicit in the term structure of today’s money market
interest rates broadly reflects these principles.
As  indicated  at  the  ECB  watchers’  conference  earlier  this  year,
  after  the  end  of  net  asset
purchases, the main tool for shaping our policy stance will become the path of our key policy
rates and forward guidance about their likely evolution.
11
Finally,  we  have  stated  that  we  stand  ready  to  adjust  all  of  our  instruments  as  appropriate  to
ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  our  medium-term  aim  of  inflation  below,  but
close to, 2%. Adjustments to our instruments will remain predictable, and they will proceed at a
gradual pace that is most appropriate for inflation convergence to consolidate, taking into account
continued  uncertainty  in  the  economy.  In  short,  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  will  remain
patient, persistent and prudent.
  1
2
3
4
5
The GDP series used to compute the euro area “synthetic” aggregate come from the Euro Area Wide Model
(AWM) database and Eurostat and covers the period 1970 Q1 – 2018 Q1.
In annual terms, employment is not growing only in Lithuania.
European  Commission  data  and  ECB  calculations.  As  growth  accounting  exercises  are  sensitive  to  the
underlying assumptions, exact numbers should be treated with caution.
European Commission (2018), European Economic Forecast, Spring 2018.
See for example Draghi, M (2017), “Accompanying the economic recovery”, Speech at the ECB Forum on Central
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
Banking, Sintra, 27 June.
See Szörfi, B. and Tóth, M. (2018): Measures of slack in the euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB.
See  Fabiani,  et  al.  (2006),  “What  Firms’  Surveys  Tell  Us  about  Price-Setting  Behavior  in  the  Euro Area",
International Journal of Central Banking, 2(3): 3-47.
Persistent and common component of inflation.
Draghi, M (2017), op. cit.
Coenen et al. (2017), “Communication of monetary policy in unconventional times”, Working Paper Series, No.
2080, ECB. The authors find that clearly communicated forward guidance can help reduce market uncertainty.
Draghi, M. (2018), “Monetary Policy in the Euro Area”, speech at The ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference
organised by the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability, Frankfurt, 14 March
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
