Benoît  Cœuré  and  Jacqueline  Loh:  Bitcoin  not  the  answer  to  a
cashless society
Op-ed by Mr Benoît  Cœuré,  Chair  of  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures
(CPMI),  and  Ms  Jacqueline  Loh,  Chair  of  the  Markets  Committee,  published  in  the  Financial
Times under the title "Bitcoin not the answer to a cashless society", 13 March 2018.
 Digital token reveals the weakness of our current payment systems
Next week, finance ministers and central bankers from the group of G20 countries will discuss
bitcoin and other blockchain-based digital tokens. Such cryptocurrencies are poor imitations of
money. Almost nobody prices goods in bitcoin, few use them for payments, and, as a store of
value,  they  are  no  better  than  gambling  in  a  casino.  Policymakers  are  rightly  worried  about
consumer and investor abuses, as well as illicit use.
Yet,  while  bitcoin  and  its  cousins  are  something  of  a  mirage,  they  might  be  an  early  sign  of
change,  just  as  Palm  Pilots  paved  the  way  for  today’s  smartphones.  Cash  will  not  be  king
forever,  even  though  it  still  rules  in  many  parts  of  the  world. New research  from  the  Bank  for
International Settlements (BIS) shows non-cash payments have roughly doubled in size, as a
share of GDP, since the turn of the century. Some Nordic countries are already cutting back on
cash. And  the  iGeneration  is  more  likely  to  reach  for  a  payment  app  than  a  purse.  To  their
children, banknotes and coins may look like museum exhibits.
These trends have sparked a discussion about whether central banks should issue their own
digital  coinage. A  new  report  on  central  bank  digital  currencies  (CBDC),  released  by  the  two
committees we chair at the BIS, sets the scene for this important debate.
What is a CBDC? The answer goes to the heart of money and payments. Today, banknotes and
coins are the only way consumers can access central bank money. The money in your bank
account is actually provided by a commercial bank. Your bank promises to exchange that money
for cash when you go to the ATM. But when you pay bills online or swipe your credit card, you are
using commercial bank money.
Under  the  current  system,  only  financial  institutions  have  direct  access  to  digital  central  bank
money via accounts at their national central bank. A consumer-oriented CBDC would extend that
access to everyone. Although this might not seem like a big step to digitally savvy consumers, it
could  have  far-reaching  ramifications  for  the  role  of  money,  the  financial  system  and  the
economy.
For  example,  a  CBDC  for  all  would  challenge  the  current  model  of  banks  taking  customer
deposits  and  using  that  money  to  fund  the  lending  that  helps  drive  the  economy.  The
consequences  for  bank  business  models  and  financial  stability  would  need  to  be  carefully
parsed. More fundamentally, do we need a CBDC? Existing payment arrangements – based on
commercial money – are already digitally provided and increasingly convenient, instantaneous
and  available  24/7.  Nevertheless,  if  cash  disappeared,  there  would  be  a  stronger  case  to
consider a CBDC. Otherwise, the public would be wholly dependent on commercial money, and
trust in the currency, a key public good, would be reliant on the creditworthiness of commercial
entities  and  on  specific  payment  technologies.  However,  despite  the  growing  popularity  of
electronic payments, the cashless society is not here yet. Demand for bank notes is still growing
in many countries.
If it were to come, a CBDC would have to be as convenient for consumers and businesses to
use as the commercial equivalent. It would have to be hacker-proof. If we want to stop illegal use,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
it should not grant the same anonymity of cash to users. But giving central banks unprecedented
amounts  of  information  about  individuals  is  equally  controversial.  There  is  no  one-size-fits-all
solution.
In sum, thinking carefully about the future of money is timely in view of new technologies and
increasing use of electronic payments. Still, it is not yet clear whether CBDCs for consumers
and businesses are necessary or desirable. The jury is still out, and the answer will clearly differ
country by country.
Away from the public eye, change may also be happening and perhaps sooner. The BIS report
canvasses a second, complementary, model of CBDCs aimed at financial institutions that would
build on the blockchain technologies underlying bitcoin. Such tokenised forms of digital central
bank money could potentially help streamline many of the cumbersome clearing and settlement
processes that are currently needed to complete securities and foreign exchange trades. So far,
however,  central  bank  experiments  with  such  forms  of  CBDCs  have  not  shown  conclusive
benefits for wholesale payments and beyond, but technology and design are evolving quickly.
Despite  its  many  faults,  bitcoin  has  put  the  spotlight  on  an  old  failing  of  our  current  system:
cross-border  retail  payments.  Such  payments  not  only  permit  shoppers  to  easily  buy  goods
online from overseas, but also allow foreign workers to send money home, supporting financial
inclusion and development. However, these payment channels are generally much slower, less
transparent and way more expensive than domestic ones. Improvements here are the best way
of rising to the bitcoin challenge.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
