Evolution of Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in Sri Lanka  
and the Way Forward 
 
by 
 
Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe1 
Senior Deputy Governor 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
 I am deeply honoured to have been invited to deliver the Olcott Oration 2017 and to 
join a list of great Anandians who have delivered this Oration before. I cannot think 
of  a  greater  honour  that  my  school  could  confer  on  me.  I  accepted  this  invitation 
with humbleness, with gratitude and respect, and with great pride. Let me also take 
this opportunity to appreciate the support and guidance I received during my school 
career at Ananda College. The guidance our teachers gave us laid the foundation for 
any success later on in our lives.   
My  oration  today,  is  on  the  rather  technical  topic  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policy.  The  biggest  challenge  that  I  have  to  face  is  to  present  such  a  topic  to  an 
audience  with  a  majority  who  might  not  be  familiar  with  the  technical  jargon 
involved. However, I will attempt to keep the discussion as simple as possible. 
 Central Banking and Price Stability  
The prime responsibility of any central bank  around the world is to maintain price 
stability by way of maintaining low and stable inflation on a sustainable basis. At the 
outset, I would like to discuss why low and stable inflation is important for growth 
and stability of the economy.  
Based  on  experiences  of  many  countries  and  different  time  periods,  we  have  seen 
varying  levels  of  inflation.  When  countries  experience  hyperinflation,  domestic 
prices of goods and services will rise every minute. In such a situation, no one will 
                                                        
1 I would like to note that the views expressed in this oration are my own as an economist and do not 
necessarily reflect  the  views of the  Central Bank  of Sri Lanka. I also  would like  to acknowledge the 
technical support received in preparing the oration from Dr Chandranath Amarasekara and his team 
at the Economic Research Department of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 
 1 
want to hold the local currency, and people will rush straight from the bank to the 
shops  to  buy  goods,  fearing  that  their  currency  holding  will  lose  value  along  the 
way.  In  fact,  the  banking  system  itself  will  collapse.  As  people  lose  faith  in  local 
currency,  the  barter  system,  or  the  exchange  of  goods  for  goods  or  services  will 
become  the  norm,  making  transactions  significantly  more  difficult.  Hyperinflation 
will  also  cause  adverse  redistributive  effects,  destroying  real  value  of  middle  class 
savings in local currency and real incomes of fixed income earners such as  workers 
and  pensioners.  One  can  read  horror  stories  of  hyperinflation  in  Germany  and 
Australia  in  the  1920s,  and  more  recently  in  several  Latin  American  countries  and 
also  in  countries  like  Zimbabwe.  The  episode  of  hyperinflation  in  the  inter-war 
Germany is said to have facilitated the rise of Hitler and the global destruction that 
followed.  The  famous  economics  author  Neil  Irwin,  in  his  book  titled  “The 
Alchemists: Three Central Bankers and a World on Fire”, called the Governor of the 
German Reichsbank at the time, the “worst central banker in history”! 
Let us also look at the other extreme case of price movements, namely deflation. The 
example  that  will  come  to  anyone’s  mind  is  Japan,  which  underwent  what  was 
known as the “lost decade”. Now it is termed the “lost 20 years”! Since early 1990s 
Japan experienced deflation, a continued decline in prices of goods and services. One 
may think that  this is  great!  But what  could  be considered good for a consumer in 
the  short-term  may  not  be  good  for  the  entire  economy,  as  evidenced  by  the 
experience  of  Japan.  Since  then,  the  Japanese  economy  had  experienced  negative 
economic  growth,  a  drop  in  nominal  GDP,  declining  wages  and  negative  interest 
rates! Some indications of sustained growth in Japan are seen only now.  
Fortunately, Sri Lanka has never experienced such episodes in the past, and clearly 
we  want  neither  hyperinflation  nor  deflation  even  in  the  future.  But  what  about 
double-digit  inflation  hovering  around  10-20  per  cent,  as  experienced  in  Sri  Lanka 
for  several  decades  from  1970s?  Empirical  evidence  clearly  shows  that  this  kind  of 
double digit inflation is bad for sustained growth. High and volatile inflation causes 
lenders like banks and other financial institutions to demand a higher fixed interest 
rate on loans to compensate for the risk that inflation will move around, thus raising 
 2 
the  cost  of  finance  for  investment.  At  the  same  time,  financial  institutions  need  to 
offer  higher  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  to  encourage  savers  to  deposit  their 
money  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  high  and  volatile  inflation  eroding  the  real  value  of 
their savings. High and volatile inflation increases the margin between lending rates 
and deposits, and this high cost of financial intermediation penalises both savers and 
borrowers.  High  and  volatile  inflation  encourages  workers  to  bargain  for  higher 
wages.  High  and  volatile  inflation  also  prompts  producers  and  sellers  in  the 
economy  to  add  higher  markups  in  pricing  of  goods  and  services.  The  combined 
result of this self-fulfilling cycle will be lower economic growth and higher current 
account deficits, depleting reserves and volatile exchange rates, and the country will 
end up with a commercial capitalist class of buyers and sellers of imported goods, or 
a class of middlemen! 
Then the question is, what is the appropriate level of low and stable inflation, which 
will result in more desirable outcomes? Most advanced economies set their inflation 
target in the low single digits around 2 per cent. For example, the United States and 
the United Kingdom desire to maintain inflation at around 2 per cent, while in the 
Eurozone it is below but close to 2 per cent. Australia  has an inflation target of 2-3 
per  cent,  and  in  New  Zealand  it  is  1-3  per  cent.  Within  emerging  market  and 
developing  economies,  the  targets  are  slightly  higher.  The  Philippines  and  Chile 
target 2-4 per cent, Indonesia 2.5-4.5 per cent, Brazil 4.5 per cent, South Africa 3-6 per 
cent, while India targets 2-6 per cent of inflation.   
It  must  be  noted  here  that  a  central  bank  could  only  effectively  control  demand 
driven  inflation.  Central  banks  could  do  little  to  address  short-term  disruptions  to 
prices  due  to  adverse  domestic  supply  developments  or  unexpected  international 
commodity price movements. However, central bank  responses will be required to 
contain demand driven inflation, usually identified by movements in core inflation 
indices.  
    3 
Monetary Policy Frameworks 
In order to maintain low and stable, single digit inflation, central banks around the 
world  are  entrusted  with  the  task  of  conducting  monetary  policy  with  varying 
degrees of independence. Central banks use various monetary policy frameworks, as 
there needs to be a mechanism to operationalise the achievement of the end objective 
of price stability using the policy tools given to central banks to fulfil this task.  
Monetary  policy  frameworks  differ  across  countries  depending  on  country-specific 
circumstances  such  as  the  level  of  financial  market  sophistication,  openness  of  the 
economy,  strengths,  capacities  and  independence  of  institutions,  etc.  For  example, 
monetary  policy  frameworks  in  some  countries  are  based  on  currency  board 
arrangements  where  the  value  of  domestic  currency  is  strictly  pegged  to  an 
international  currency.  In  currency  board  arrangements,  domestic  inflation  is 
directly linked to inflation of the country of which its currency is pegged, and then 
the  anchor  for  inflation  will  be  the  exchange  rate.  In  such  strict  exchange  rate 
targeting  regimes,  the  country’s  business  cycles  in  terms  of  growth  and  inflation 
would  be  fully  synchronised  with  the  other  country’s  business  cycles.  In  these 
countries, monetary authorities have very little  leeway to use monetary policy as a 
countercyclical  policy  measure  to  stabilise  growth  and  inflation  in  the  domestic 
economy. In the other extreme end, monetary policy frameworks are based on fully 
fledged  inflation  targeting  regimes  where  inflation  is  directly  anchored  through 
inflation  targets  and  interest  rate  policy,  while  maintaining  fully  floating  exchange 
rates.  Under  this  arrangement,  the  exchange  rate  acts  as  the  shock  absorber  to 
minimise the impact of external shocks on the real economy. In such regimes, central 
banks  have  more  autonomy  to  use  interest  rates  as  an  instrument  to  counter  any 
cyclical economic shocks. There are many central banks that have a combination of 
these  two  extremes,  where  some  are  closer  to  inflation  targeting  and  others  being 
closer to exchange rate targeting with soft pegs with some leeway to use interest rate 
as an instrument to manage inflation and growth. One cannot argue that one regime 
is  superior  to  the  other.  It  all  depends  on  country  circumstances,  and  even  within 
one  country,  monetary  policy  frameworks  move  in  different  directions  at  different 
 4 
times.  Monetary  aggregate  targeting  frameworks  fall  between  these  two  extreme 
regimes depending on the extent of exchange rate flexibility of such policy regimes.   
 Evolution of Monetary Policy Framework in Sri Lanka         
Sri  Lanka’s  monetary  policy  framework  has  also  evolved  from  a  currency  board 
arrangement before the establishment of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in 1950. This 
history  has  been  well  covered  in  the  masterpiece,  “From  dependent  currency  to 
central  banking  in  Ceylon”  written  by  Professor  H  A  de  S  Gunasekera,  in  whose 
honour my retired senior central bank colleague Sirimevan Colombage delivered an 
eloquent speech recently at the University of Peradeniya.  
From  1950  to  1977  Sri  Lanka’s  monetary  policy  framework  was  largely  based  on 
maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  in  terms  of  fixing  the  value  of  Sri  Lanka 
rupee first to the sterling pound and then to the US dollar. Under this fixed exchange 
rate regime, domestic inflation was directly linked to foreign inflation and therefore 
there was no need for an explicit monetary anchor to manage inflation. The Central 
Bank did not have much leeway to control domestic inflation as the fixed exchange 
rate was the anchor to manage inflation. Like many other things, inflation was also 
more or less imported from the United Kingdom those days!  
This system worked well as long as Sri Lanka earned sufficient foreign exchange to 
meet  expenditure  on  imports  without  any  restriction.  For  example,  during  the 
periods  of  export  booms  particularly  in  the  early  1950s,  the  fixed  exchange  rate 
regime  worked  well,  as  foreign  exchange  earnings,  which  arose  due  to  external 
factors  rather  than  domestic  export  promoting  policies,  were  not  only  sufficient  to 
meet current expenditure but also helped build up foreign reserves so that currency 
peg  could  be  maintained  without  foreign  grants  or  borrowings.  The  necessary 
condition for any country to maintain a currency peg with a strong reserve currency 
like  sterling  pound  on  a  sustainable  basis  is  the  country’s  ability  to  earn  sufficient 
foreign  exchange.  In  other  words,  such  a  country  would  require  a  strong  set  of 
export  oriented  policies.  In  technical  terminology,  a  country  should  run  at  least  a 
balanced current account in the balance of payments on a long-term basis for it to be 
 5 
able to maintain a peg with a strong foreign currency. Economies like Japan early on, 
and later Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and even China, given their strong export 
oriented  policies,  were  able  not  only  to  generate  current  account  surpluses  on 
sustainable basis, but as a result, also saw the value of their currencies appreciating 
against major currencies like the sterling pound and the US dollar.   
During the period of Sri Lanka’s fixed exchange rate regime, successive governments 
did  not  pursue  export  oriented  policies  continuously.  There  were  short  episodes 
where  policies  focused  on  export  promotion,  but  there  were  more  times  of  policy 
reversals  towards  encouraging  import  substitution  and  inward  looking  polices. 
From  a  long-term  perspective,  such  polices  were  inconsistent  with  the  need  to 
maintain a fixed exchange rate regime. Under these circumstances, the key challenge 
the  Central  Bank  had  to  face  was  how  to  defend  the  exchange  rate  peg  amidst 
policies  which  did  not  promote  exports.  The  only  choice  available  for  the  Central 
Bank  at  the  time  was  to  restrict  the  use  of  available  foreign  reserves  and  impose 
severe  exchange  control  restrictions.  In  a  way,  the  Central  Bank  at  the  time  was 
successful in maintaining low inflation, which is one of the key responsibilities of the 
Bank,  but  it  failed  to  support  the  multiple  objectives,  which  were  often  in  conflict 
with each other, of the then Central Bank.   
In  addition  to  pursuing  inward  looking economic  policies,  successive  governments 
also  ran  high  budget  deficits  mainly  to  provide  subsidies  and  various  free 
entitlements.    Such  budget  deficits,  even  at  moderate  levels,  caused  more  demand 
for  imports  in  the  midst  of  weak  export  performance,  creating  continued  current 
account deficits, while the Central Bank was required  to maintain a fixed exchange 
rate  regime.  This  was  an  impossible  task  for  the  Central  Bank.  As  a  result,  the 
Central  Bank,  from  time  to  time,  either  devalued  the  rupee  or  maintained  a  dual 
exchange  rate  along  with  severe  restrictions  on  the  use  of  foreign  exchange.  This 
monetary  policy  framework  lacked  credibility  and  created  severe  distortions  to 
market pricing.    
Meanwhile, on the global front, the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, with the 
United  States  declaring  in  1971  that  it  would  cease  to  redeem  US  dollars  for  gold 
 6 
from  its  reserves,  challenged  the  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  that  the  global 
economy  was  used  to operate  in.  In  addition,  the  1973 oil  crisis  caused  inflation  to 
escalate  in all countries, including Sri Lanka, often resulting in a destructive wage-
price spiral. In Sri Lanka, inflation increased to 14.4 per cent by December 1973, the 
highest  level  of  inflation  the  country  experienced  until  then  during  its  post-
independent history. 
   Elsewhere  in  the  world,  following  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of 
exchange rates, the international community was getting used to floating exchange 
rates, where each currency’s value was determined by the international demand for 
the  currency.  This  was  a  new  normal,  prior  to  which  money  has  historically  been 
based on a valuable commodity such as gold.  
 Post-liberalisation Monetary Policy Framework  
In  November  1977,  Sri  Lanka  embarked  on  a  major  economic  liberalisation  move, 
marking  paradigm  shift  from  inward  looking  restrictive  policies  towards  a  liberal 
regime  under  which  trade  and  payments  were  liberalised  to  a  great  extent.  To  be 
consistent  with  the  new  liberal  regime,  the  Central  Bank  abandoned  the  fixed 
exchange  rate  regime  and  moved  to  a  more  market  based  system  of  exchange  rate 
management.  On  15th  November  1977,  the  prevailing  dual  exchange  rates  were 
unified  at  an  initial  rate  of  Rs.  16  against  the  US  dollar.  This  was  an  overnight 
 7 
devaluation of the basic exchange rate by 120 per cent! The rupee was then allowed 
to float under a managed  exchange rate regime. Accordingly, compared to the end 
1976 exchange rate of Rs. 8.83 per US dollar, the exchange rate was recorded at Rs. 
15.56 at end 1977.  
This sharp devaluation addressed the overvaluation of the rupee observed under the 
fixed  regime.  The  subsequent  managed  exchange  rate  regime  allowed  some 
flexibility to determine the value of currency largely on the basis of market demand 
and  supply,  while  attempting  to  prevent  the  overvaluation  of  the  rupee  by 
maintaining  the  real  value  of  the  rupee  against  movements  of  a  basket  of  major 
currencies.   
 The Aftermath of the Managed Float 
The introduction of the managed floating exchange rate was a welcome move from 
the  perspective  of  a  liberal  macroeconomist.  However,  this  resulted  in  new 
challenges to the conduct of monetary policy, particularly as the exchange rate was 
no longer available to anchor inflation expectations like in the past. The Central Bank 
also had to face a new challenge, as the government started to run  extremely  large 
fiscal  deficits  funded  mainly  by  concessional  external  funding  to  develop  public 
infrastructure  such  as  the  accelerated  Mahaweli  scheme.  Annual  fiscal  deficits 
averaged  13.3  per  cent  of  GDP  between  1978  and  1983,  External  current  account 
deficits averaged 10.8 per cent of GDP between 1979 and 1983. Year-on-year inflation 
averaged 15.6 per cent during February 1978 and January 1985, with a peak of 32.5 
per cent in August 1980. It must be mentioned here that rising inflation was a main 
cause  for  the  1980  general  strike,  which  resulted  in  over  40,000  public  and  private 
sector workers losing their jobs.   
Little  wonder  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  started  looking  for  a  new 
framework  to  contain  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  in  the  absence  of  the 
pegged exchange rate system.  
   8 
Beginning of Monetary Aggregate Targeting in Sri Lanka 
The relationship between monetary expansion in terms of the amount of money held 
by the public and inflation has been well recognised in Sri Lanka from the beginning 
of  central  banking  in  the  country.  However,  the  first  mentioning  of  “desired 
monetary  targets”  in  a  Central  Bank  annual  report  in  Sri  Lanka  could  be  found  in 
1982.  The  1982  annual  report  states  that  “the  National  Credit  Plan  for  1982  was 
formulated against the perspective of the prevailing monetary and credit policies. It 
attempted to rationalise the use of private sector credit among different sectors of the 
economy as an instrument of selective credit policy. Having taken into consideration 
the  real  growth,  estimated  rate  of  price  increase  and  increased  monetisation  of  the 
economy,  the  desired  monetary  targets  were  set  in  the  Plan  with  a  view  to 
maintaining the consistency between financial and real output flows in the economy. 
The  monetary  targets  were  then  translated  into  a  permissible  level  of  credit  to  the 
private sector by commercial banks after allowing for the impact of the behaviour of 
the external sector and the credit requirements of the government.” 
This  is  a  classic  characterisation  of  an  annual  monetary  programme,  which  is  a 
crucial element in monetary aggregate targeting. Based on Irving Fisher’s Quantity 
Theory  of  Money,  monetary  aggregate  targeting  seeks  to  explain  the  relationship 
between money growth and nominal economic growth (which is the combination of 
real  economic  growth  and  inflation).  In  this  framework,  as  monetary  policy 
instruments  attempt  to  influence  the  final  objective  of  inflation  by  first  affecting 
monetary aggregates, broad money supply  was considered the intermediate target. 
For operational purposes, reserve money or base money, which could be influenced 
and  monitored  by  the  Central  Bank  on  a  daily  basis,  was  considered  the  operating 
target.  The  operating  target  and  the  intermediate  target,  both  being  monetary 
aggregates, were linked to each other through the money multiplier.   
  9 
  An Evolving Exchange Rate System  
While  monetary  aggregate  targeting  remained  the  framework  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  in  Sri  Lanka,  the  exchange  rate  regime  also  underwent  a  gradual 
evolution. The managed floating exchange rate system broadly remained a crawling 
band arrangement  as  the margin associated  with the foreign exchange transactions 
was  increased  from  time  to  time.  The  degree  of  Central  Bank  intervention  in  the 
foreign exchange market varied over time with balance of payments developments 
and the view of the Central Bank on the direction of the exchange rate.  
Under this monetary targeting framework with a crawling exchange rate, achieving 
price stability proved challenging, as successive governments continued to run high 
fiscal  deficits  even  after  the  completion  of  the  accelerated  Mahaweli  scheme  to 
finance  large  scale  housing  and  road  development  programmes.  In  addition,  the 
three  decades  of  ethnic  conflict  required  successive  governments  to  spend  more 
money  on  defense  expenditure.  In  order  to  maintain  competitiveness  of  the  rupee, 
the Central Bank had to let the currency depreciate to, at least partly, compensate for 
the  inflation  differential  between  Sri  Lanka  and  its  trading  partners  under  the 
crawling peg system. Even though this arrangement helped to alleviate the adverse 
impact  on  exports  to  some  extent,  higher  domestic  demand  created  through 
excessive  fiscal  deficits  led  to  large  current  account  deficits  in  the  balance  of 
 10 
payments,  making  it  difficult  to  maintain  the  crawling  peg  without  a  sharp 
depreciation. 
By  the  year  2000,  Sri  Lanka  experienced  a  significant  decline  in  its  official 
international  reserves,  as  a  result  of  the  considerable  increase  in  expenditure  on 
imports. The increased demand for foreign exchange placed tremendous pressure on 
the exchange rate. Within the managed floating exchange rate regime, this naturally 
resulted  in  increased  pressure  on  international  reserves.  In  order  to  defend  the 
managed  float,  the  Central  Bank  raised  its  policy  interest  rates  to  unprecedented 
levels,  which  later  proved  not  only to  be  an unsuccessful  exercise  but  also  a  costly 
experiment, which largely contributed to the only negative annual real GDP growth 
rate of the country’s history of -1.5 per cent in 2001.  
This  prompted  the  Central  Bank  to  revisit  its  exchange  rate  policy.  On  23rd  of 
January 2001, the Central Bank took the major step of allowing the commercial banks 
to  determine  the  exchange  rate  depending  on  the  supply  and  demand  of  foreign 
exchange in the domestic foreign exchange market. With this move, the Central Bank 
refrained from announcing daily buying and selling rates of foreign exchange, thus 
allowing  freer  foreign  exchange  transactions.  The  change  in  the  exchange  rate 
regime resulted in an overshooting effect with the rupee depreciating by Rs.13 from 
Rs. 98 per US dollar within the first three days, but a relatively quick stabilisation of 
the exchange rate followed.  
As  the  use  of  monetary  policy  to  defend  the  foreign  exchange  rate  was  no  longer 
necessary  under  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka 
was  able  to  conduct  monetary  policy  with  an  increased  focus  on  achieving  the 
Bank’s  objective  of  price  stability.  However,  maintenance  of  price  stability  came 
under heavy pressure under this regime whenever aggregate demand was excessive 
as a result of expansionary fiscal policies.   
Therefore,  at  times  of  such  excessive  domestic  demand  through  fiscal  dominance, 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka intervened in the foreign exchange market to defend 
the  exchange  rate  from  depreciation.  Although  this  was  done  with  the  good 
intention  of  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  in  difficult  times,  experience 
 11 
repeatedly  showed  that  managing  the  exchange  rate  extensively  was  always 
associated  with  a  substantial  loss  of  limited  international  reserves  followed  by  a 
large  depreciation.  The  most  recent  of  such  events  were  in  2011/2012  and  2015. 
During  the  2011/2012  episode,  the  Central  Bank  supplied  US  dollars  4.2  billion  to 
the market on a net basis, while the Central Bank supplied US dollars 3.2 billion to 
the market on a net basis during the year 2015. In spite of these considerable losses of 
reserves, the rupee depreciated against the US dollar by 13.5 per cent by the end of 
the 2011/2012 episode and by 9.0 per cent during 2015.   
Since then, the Central Bank has explicitly announced that international reserves will 
not  be  used  to  defend  an  overvalued  exchange  rate.  Instead,  the  Central  Bank 
intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  aim  to  buildup  international 
reserves.  So  far  during  2017,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  able  to  purchase  over  US 
dollars  1.3  billion  from  the  market  on  a  net  basis  for  this  purpose,  and  improved 
market confidence is shown by the limited depreciation of the currency this year.   
 Gradual Modifications to the Monetary Policy Conduct 
Returning to the previous discussion, it was clear by late 1990s and early 2000s, that 
a  serious  rethink  of  central  banking  in  Sri  Lanka  was  necessary.  In  addition  to  the 
increasingly popular view within international central banking and academic circles 
that  price  stability  must  be  the  overriding  objective  of  a  central  bank,  financial 
innovations,  including  the  development  of  electronic  payments  and  fund  transfer 
systems,  also  prompted  the  Central  Bank  to  upgrade  its  view  on  financial  system 
stability. These factors, as well as many others which are beyond the purview of this 
speech, prompted the Central Bank of Sri Lanka Modernisation Project, resulting in 
legislative, procedural and operational changes in relation to central banking  in Sri 
Lanka. 
With regard to legislative changes, the amendments to the Monetary Law Act (MLA) 
in 2002 were the most important. Accordingly, the multiple objectives of the original 
MLA,  which  included  stabilisation  and  development  objectives  as  well  as 
maintaining  domestic  and  external  value  of  the  rupee,  were  streamlined  to  define 
 12 
the core objectives of the Central Bank as maintaining economic and price stability 
and financial system stability.  
By  this  time,  the  Central  Bank  had  gradually  moved  away  from  direct  controls  to 
market based tools of monetary policy, a process which started with the adoption of 
open economy policies since 1977. The significant advancement in monetary policy 
operations  during  this  period  was  the  introduction  of  the  Repurchase  rate  and  the 
Reverse  Repurchase  rate  of  the  Central  Bank.  The  Central  Bank  introduced  its 
repurchase  facility  in  1993  to  mop  up  overnight  excess  liquidity  from  the  market, 
while introducing the reverse repurchase facility in 1995 to inject overnight liquidity 
to the market. These two rates served as the floor and the ceiling for movements of 
the  interbank  call  money  market  rate.  This  policy  interest  rate  corridor  was  used 
from early 2000s to signal changes in the monetary policy stance of the Central Bank. 
Today this policy corridor is called the Standing Rate Corridor with the floor and the 
ceiling rates being known, respectively, as the Standing Deposit Facility Rate (SDFR) 
and  the  Standing  Lending  Facility  Rate  (SLFR)  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka. 
Open  market  operations  are  conducted  in  a  more  active  auction  based  framework 
with  overnight,  short-term  and  long-term  operations  to  maintain  market  liquidity 
and thereby market interest rates in line with the announced monetary policy stance 
of the Central Bank.  
The  key  operational  changes  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  included  the 
establishment of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Central Bank in 2001 
to  strengthen  monetary  policy  analysis  and  to  improve  the  transparency  of  the 
decision making process. The Central Bank also began issuing regular press releases 
on  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  public,  based  on  an  advance  release  calendar. 
This press release was often followed by a press conference chaired by the Governor 
and accompanied by the senior officials of the Central Bank. The Central Bank also 
introduced  a  Monetary  Policy  Consultative  Committee  (MPCC)  comprising 
academics,  professionals  and  private  sector  representatives,  enabling  the  Central 
Bank  to  obtain  views  of  the  private  sector  to  be  used  in  the  monetary  policy 
formulation process. In addition, the Central Bank started to enunciate its monetary 
 13 
and  financial  policies  for  a  medium-term  horizon  though  a  Road  Map,  which  was 
unveiled at the beginning of each year.  
 105 Consecutive Months of Single Digit Inflation  
In spite of these modifications to the framework of conducting monetary policy over 
time,  Sri  Lanka  continued  to  suffer  from  double  digit  inflation  until  2009  as  a 
combined  outcome  of  high  budget  deficits  and  loose  fiscal  policy,  reactive  rather 
than  proactive  monetary  policy,  frequent  domestic  supply  disruptions  and 
international  commodity  price  shocks.  In  June  2008,  inflation  increased  to  28.2  per 
cent,  the  highest  level  of  inflation  since  1980s.  In  order  to  manage  this  situation 
within the monetary targeting framework, the Central Bank used strict quantitative 
monetary targets with increased policy interest rates while also imposing restrictions 
on access to the Central Bank reverse repurchase facility. In a display of validity of 
monetary targeting, the Central Bank was able to bring down inflation from the peak 
to  near  zero  levels  within  a  12-month  period.  It  was  the  sharpest  disinflation  the 
country has experienced in the history of Sri Lanka, but it must also be noted that the 
weak global commodity prices also contributed to this decline to some extent.  
Nevertheless, the intent of the Central Bank to maintain inflation at mid-single digit 
levels,  which  was  made  clear  through  action  as  well  as  through  communication, 
enabled  the  Central  Bank  to  change  the  mindset  of  the  people  that  Sri  Lanka  is 
typically  an  economy  with  double  digit  inflation.  The  change  in  the  mindset  was 
visible  in  improving  inflation  expectations.  Since  February  2009,  inflation  has 
remained  in  single  digits,  and  105  consecutive  months  of  single  digit  inflation  is 
considered an achievement in the recent history of Central Banking in Sri Lanka.  
  14 
  Infeasibility of Monetary Aggregate Targeting  
However,  Sri  Lanka’s  achievement  of  single  digit  inflation  for  105  consecutive 
months  had  little  to  do  with  monetary  aggregate  targeting.  From  July  2009  to 
September  2017,  the  year-on-year  broad  money  growth  was,  on  average,  17.1  per 
cent. Year-on-year inflation during the same period averaged 5.2 per cent. Based on 
the earlier discussed Fisher’s Quantity Theory of Money, the gap between these two 
figures, that is 11.9 per cent, must reflect average real economic growth during this 
period.  However,  real  economic  growth  averaged  only  6.0  per  cent  during  this 
period.  If  the  argument  is  reversed,  there  is  a  gap  of  11.1  per  cent  between  broad 
money  growth  and  real  economic  growth.  According  to  the  Quantity  Theory,  this 
should  reflect  average  inflation  during  the  period,  which  was  not  the  case.  Even  if 
some allowance is made for changes in velocity of money or money demand due to 
possible behavioral changes and financial sector development, the growth of money 
vs. the real growth of the economy and inflation cannot be explained for this period.  
   15 
  This  was  sufficient  evidence  that  the  strong  and  reliable  relationship  between  the 
goal of price stability and the nominal anchor of money growth, which was essential 
for  the  success  of  the  monetary  aggregate  targeting  framework,  has  significantly 
weakened  over  time.  This  phenomenon  was  not  limited  to  Sri  Lanka,  but  was 
observed over time in many other economies as well. With the ending of monetary 
aggregate  targeting  in  Canada  in  as  early  as  1982,  Gerald  Bouey,  Bank  of  Canada 
Governor  at  the  time  famously  stated  “we  did  not  abandon  monetary  aggregates. 
Monetary  aggregates  abandoned  us.”  Even  the  recent  experience  with  quantitative 
easing  in  many  advanced  economies  yet  again  proved  that  the  tremendous 
expansion  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  that  these  countries  undertook  was 
insufficient to raise either growth or inflation.  
Earlier  it  was  argued  that  Sri  Lanka’s  achievement  of  single  digit  inflation  for  105 
consecutive  months  had  little  to  do  with  monetary  aggregate  targeting.  Instead,  it 
was  a  result  of  the  Central  Bank’s  ability  to  anchor  inflation  expectations,  by 
repeatedly  emphasising  its  utmost  desire  to  maintain  inflation  at  mid-single  digit 
 16 
levels.  The  behaviour  of  the  Central  Bank  during  the  2008-2009  episode  of 
disinflation  would  have  raised  credibility  of  monetary  policy. 
Improved 
communication  also  would  have  played  a  key  role  in  this  achievement.  It  must  be 
noted that the neighbouring economies struggled with double digit inflation during 
some parts of the same period. For example, India was unable to tame inflation until 
2014.  One  might  argue  that  international  commodity  prices  were  in  our  favour. 
However, this was not always true, as global crude oil prices remained, on average, 
above US dollars 100 per barrel during the period from February 2011 to September 
2014.  
 Inflation Targeting as an Alternative: Lessons from Other Countries 
Therefore, without a formal announcement, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, similar to 
many other central banks in the world, has moved to a monetary policy framework 
governed  by  expectations  and  credibility,  rather  than  by  monetary  aggregates  or 
exchange rates.  
In the global economy, such a monetary policy framework that emphasised the role 
of expectations and credibility existed, and it was known as “inflation targeting” that 
I briefly referred to at the beginning. First adopted by New Zealand in 1990, inflation 
targeting  was  chosen  as  the  monetary  policy  framework  in  Canada,  the  United 
Kingdom, Australia, and Sweden in quick succession. Encouraged by the success of 
inflation  targeting,  a  number  of  other  advanced  economies  as  well  as  emerging 
market economies adopted this framework thereafter. These countries used inflation 
targeting either to bring  down inflation from stubbornly high levels or to maintain 
inflation at low and stable levels on a sustained basis.  
  17 
  Inflation  targeting  is  generally  characterised  by  an  announced  inflation  target;  an 
inflation  forecast,  which  facilitates  forward  looking  monetary  policy  decision 
making;  and  a  high  degree  of  transparency  and  accountability.  According  to  Lars 
Svensson,  the  Swedish  economist  who  later  served  as  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Riksbank,  this  policy  framework  encompasses  a  trinity  of  a  mandate  for  price 
stability,  independence,  and  accountability  for  the  central  bank,  which  enables 
anchoring of inflation expectations effectively.  
In  practice,  inflation  targeting  is  flexible  rather  than  strict.  According  to  Svensson, 
flexible  inflation  targeting  means  that  monetary  policy  aims  at  stabilising  both 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  the  real  economy,  whereas  strict  inflation 
targeting  aims  at  stabilising  inflation  only,  with  little  regard  to  the  stability  of  the 
real  economy.  A  strict  inflation  targeter  would  be  who  Mervyn  King,  the  former 
Governor of Bank of England, called an “inflation nutter”. Most of the central banks 
do  not  only  aim  at  stabilising  inflation  around  an  inflation  target,  but  also  put  an 
effort  into  stabilising  real  economic  variables.  This  effort  is  described  by  the  time 
 18 
horizon  in  achieving  the  inflation  target,  which  dampens  the  adverse  impact  of 
policies  on  the  real  economy.  Therefore,  an  important  feature  of  flexible  inflation 
targeting is that the inflation rate will be on average at target, but perhaps not every 
month. 
A  key  advantage  of  inflation  targeting  is  that  it  is  easier  for  the  general  public  to 
relate to. Since inflation is well understood by the public,  the inflation forecast will 
serve  as  an  ideal  anchor  and,  with  improved  communication,  will  help  bridge  the 
information  gap  between  the  central  bank  and  the  public.  Reference  to  such  a 
straightforward  target,  rather  than  to  an  elusive  monetary  target,  will  ensure 
increased  transparency  and  accountability while  enabling  the  public  to  understand 
policy shortcomings. 
Global  experience  has  also  shown  that  in  adopting  inflation  targeting,  a  country 
needs  to  fulfill  several  prerequisites,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  legal  and 
institutional  framework.  These  include  central  bank  independence  and  strong 
mandate  for  price  stability,  strong  fiscal  position  with  freedom  from  fiscal 
dominance,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  a  well-developed  financial  system,  a 
sound  technical  infrastructure  for  inflation  forecasting,  and  transparent  policies  to 
build accountability and credibility of the central bank. In particular, with regard to 
fiscal  dominance,  other  countries  had  developed  mechanisms  to  stop  monetary 
financing of fiscal deficits, particularly through subscribing to government securities 
auctions  and  the  provision  of  interest  free  funds  to  the  government  through  an 
advance  account  as  observed  in  Sri  Lanka.  Instead,  other  central  banks  would 
purchase  government  securities  from  the  secondary  market  to  influence  monetary 
conditions as and when necessary.  
 Road to Flexible Inflation Targeting: Where We Stand 
Considering  the  success  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  in  advanced  and  emerging 
markets, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka also considered this as the best framework to 
be adopted in the medium-term. A number of prerequisites for the new framework 
have already been fulfilled by the Central Bank and the government during the past 
 19 
few  years  with  the  view  of  moving  towards  flexible  inflation  targeting  in  the 
medium-term.  
At  present,  as  an  interim  arrangement,  the  Central  Bank  conducts  its  monetary 
policy  within  an  enhanced  framework  with  features  of  both  monetary  aggregate 
targeting and flexible inflation targeting frameworks. Under this enhanced monetary 
policy  framework,  the  Central  Bank  focuses  on  stabilising  inflation  in  mid-single 
digits over the medium-term, while supporting the growth objectives and flexibility 
in  exchange  rate  management.  Although  the  Central  Bank  does  not  announce  any 
monetary  targets  explicitly,  broad  money  aggregates  remain  a  key  indicative 
intermediate variable to guide the conduct of monetary policy. Moreover, instead of 
reserve  money,  the  Central  Bank  currently  uses  the  average  weighted  call  money 
rate  (AWCMR)  as  its  operating  target  and  increasingly  relies  on  its  market  based 
policy instruments, namely policy interest rates and OMO.  
As accurate forecasts of inflation and other key variables are essential for the success 
of  flexible  inflation  targeting,  macroeconomic  projection  capabilities  of  the  Central 
Bank  are  currently  being  strengthened.  As  an  important  step  toward  building 
technical  infrastructure  for  the  successful  implementation  of  flexible  inflation 
targeting,  a  Forecasting  and  Policy  Analysis  System  (FPAS)  using  short-term 
forecasting tools and medium-term dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) 
techniques,  has  been  developed  by  the  Central  Bank  with  the  assistance  of  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  This  system  is  currently  being  integrated  into 
the  monetary  policy  formulation  process  of  the  Central  Bank.  Following  the  best 
practices  among  inflation  targeters,  the  number  of  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC)  meetings  has  been  reduced  to  eight  meetings  per  year  in  order  to  provide 
technical staff sufficient time for deeper macroeconomic analysis. 
Several other recent policy changes will also support the implementation of flexible 
inflation targeting in the medium-term. The Central Bank has implemented a more 
market based exchange rate policy during recent times, with limited intervention in 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  There  has  been  a  build-up  of  international  reserves 
with  minimal  impact  on  the  exchange  rate.  In  tandem,  the  financial  system  has 
 20 
continued  to  expand  whilst  exhibiting  resilience  amidst  challenging  market 
conditions  both  globally  and  domestically.  The  implementation  of  the  Basel  III 
framework will further enhance the resilience of the financial system.  
A deeper and more liquid government securities market is also a prerequisite for a 
smoother  transmission  of  the  Central  Bank  policy  rate  signals  to  market  interest 
rates,  as  yields  on  government  securities  form  benchmark  medium  to  long-term 
interest rates. In this regard, the recently introduced system of rule based and more 
transparent Treasury bond auctions, has not only reduced sharp volatility in yields 
on  government  securities,  but  also  corrected  the  distortion  between  Central  Bank 
policy  rates  and  market  interest rates  that  existed  earlier.  This  mechanism  has  also 
helped reduce monetisation of the fiscal deficit through purchasing Treasury bills by 
the  Central  Bank  at  primary  auctions.  For  example,  the  Central  Bank  holdings  of 
Treasury  bills  have  declined  drastically  this  year  from  more  than  Rs  300  billion  at 
end  2016  to  around  Rs  30  billion  by  now,  as  the  new  system  ensures  full  market 
subscription  through  the  auction  system  without  creating  adverse  volatility  in 
interest rates. The proposed Liability Management Act allows the Treasury to create 
a buffer fund to meet the expenditure in the following year, eliminating the necessity 
for  the  Central  Bank  to  provide  advances  to  the  Treasury  at  the  beginning  of  each 
year as per the current provisions of the MLA. These two measures would, in future, 
insulate  monetary  policy  from  fiscal  dominance.  These  reforms  are  expected  to 
create a win-win situation for both the Central Bank and the Treasury, as they would 
facilitate  the  Treasury  to  raise  the  required  funds  at  the  least  possible  cost  from  a 
more sophisticated government securities market at competitive rates, while helping 
the Central Bank to achieve its primary objective of maintaining price stability.        
 Looking  towards  the  Future:  Flexible  Inflation  Targeting  as  the  New  Monetary 
Policy Framework 
In  the  “Road  Map:  Monetary  and  Financial  Sector  Policies  for  2017  and  Beyond” 
presented  in  January  2017,  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  reiterated  its  intention  to 
move to flexible inflation targeting in the medium-term as its new monetary policy 
 21 
framework.  The  government  has  endorsed  this  move  since  then,  and  stated  in  its 
recently released Vision 2025 policy document that “for medium to long-term price 
stability,  the  Central  Bank  will  move  towards  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime. 
They will aim at continuously maintaining low inflation while supporting economic 
activity  and  competitiveness.  The  government  will  implement  the  legislative  and 
operational changes necessary.” 
While it is heartening to note that the Central Bank and the government have agreed 
in  principle  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  is  the  way  forward  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  the  full  implementation  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  by  the  year 
2020 will require increased efforts to fulfil the remaining prerequisites for the success 
of inflation targeting.   
It  is  also  expected  that  comprehensive  amendments  will  be  made  to  the  MLA  to 
facilitate  the  transition  to  flexible  inflation  targeting,  to  redefine  monetary  policy 
objectives,  eliminate  monetary  financing  of  fiscal  deficits,  and  ensure  Central  Bank 
autonomy and public accountability. Amendments to the MLA are also expected to 
streamline the monetary policy decision making process.  
Within the Central Bank, the ongoing upgrade of technical forecasting and analytical 
capabilities  will  continue,  and  it  is  expected  that  by  2020,  the  Central  Bank  will 
commence the publication of comprehensive Inflation Reports. The Inflation Report 
will  explain  inflation  developments,  inflation  expectations,  projections  for  inflation 
and  other  key  macroeconomic  variables,  the  assumptions  behind  such  projections, 
reasons for any deviation of actual inflation developments from targeted levels, and 
remedial  actions  to  be  taken  in  the  case  of  deviations.  Such  transparency  and 
accountability is likely to enhance the credibility of the Central Bank and well anchor 
inflation expectations, resulting in increased economic stability and supporting high 
economic growth and increased international competitiveness of Sri Lanka. 
Meanwhile  continued  commitment  by  the  government  towards  greater  fiscal 
discipline  and  stronger  fiscal  position  remains  key  to  the  successful  adoption  of 
flexible  inflation  targeting.  Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  support 
government’s  efforts  to  reduce  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  to  70  per  cent  by  2020  and 
 22 
curtail budget deficits at 3.5 per cent of GDP from 2020. The government’s intention 
to strengthen the Fiscal Management (Responsibility) Act is very encouraging in this 
regard.  
In conclusion, I would like to take you back to the beginning of Central Banking in 
Sri Lanka.  In 1949,  John Exter, the founder of the  Central Bank of Sri Lanka, in his 
“Report on the Establishment of a Central Bank for Ceylon” stated as follows: 
“The decision of the government of Ceylon to establish a central bank was a decision 
with  far  reaching  implications  for  the  people  of  Ceylon.  One  implication  already 
stands out very clearly: in taking steps to establish an independent monetary system 
to  be  administered  by  a  central  bank  the  government  has  demonstrated 
unmistakably its intention to achieve genuine economic freedom as a corollary of the 
political freedom achieved a year and a half ago. It has been the endeavour  of this 
report to propose a type of central bank which, with proper skill and understanding 
in  its  management,  will  establish  monetary  conditions  in  Ceylon  that  may  make 
possible, as never before, the fuller use of the nation’s human and material resources 
and a rising standard of comfort for all.” 
History has judged us before! I will leave it up to you to judge us in future as well! 
 Bibliography 
Bernanke  Ben  S.  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds),  The  Inflation  Targeting  Debate.  Cambridge 
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Business Cycles, 2005. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  Thomas  Laubach,  Frederic  S.  Mishkin,  and  Adam  S.  Posen  (eds),  Inflation 
Targeting. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001. 
Blinder,  Alan,  Central  Banking  in  Theory  and  Practice,  Cambridge  Massachusetts:  The  MIT  Press, 
1996. 
Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  40th  Anniversary  Commemorative  Volume  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, 1950-1990. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990. 
Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  60th  Anniversary  Commemorative  Volume  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, 1950-2010. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 2011. 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Annual Report. Various Years. 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Road Map: Monetary and Financial Sector Policies, Various years. 
Colombage,  Sirimevan,  The  Political  Economy  of  Central  Banking  in  Sri  Lanka.  Prof.  H.  A.  de  S. 
Gunasekera Memorial Oration, University of Peradeniya, October 2017. 
 23 
Government  of  Ceylon,  Sessional  Paper  XIV:  Report  on  the  Establishment  of  a  Central  Bank  for 
Ceylon (Exter Report). 1949. 
Government of Sri Lanka, Vision 2025: A Country Enriched. 2017.  
Gunasekera,  H.A.  de  S.,  From  Dependent  Currency  to  Central  Banking  in  Ceylon:  An  Analysis  of 
Monetary Experience, 1825-1957. London: G. Bell and Sons, Ltd., 1962.  
Irwin, Neil, The Alchemists: Three Central Bankers and a World on Fire. New York: Penguin Group, 
2014. 
Ito,  Takatoshi,  and  Andrew  K.  Rose,  Monetary  Policy  under  Very  Low  Inflation  in  the  Pacific  Rim, 
NBER-EASE, Volume 15, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006. 
Karunatilake,  H.N.S.,  Fifty  Years  of  Central  Banking  in  Sri  Lanka:  1950-2000.  Colombo:  Centre  for 
Demographic and Socio Economic Studies, 2000 
King,  Mervyn  A.  Changes  in  UK  Monetary  Policy:  Rules  and  Discretion  in  Practice.  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 39(1), 81–97, 1997. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. Monetary Policy Strategy. Cambridge Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2009.  
Schaechter, Andrea, Mark R. Stone, and Mark Zelmer, Adopting Inflation Targeting: Practical Issues 
for Emerging Market Countries”, Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, 2000. 
Svensson, Lars E. O., Flexible Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the Financial Crisis, Speech made at 
the  Netherlands  Bank  workshop  “Towards  a  new  framework  for  monetary  policy?  Lessons 
from the crisis”, September 2009.  
Svensson, Lars E. O., Open-Economy Inflation Targeting. Journal of International Economics, 50, 155-
183, 2000. 
Weerasinghe,  P.  Nandalal,  The  Role  of  Central  Banks  in  in  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Stability: 
Global  and  Local  Perspectives.  Speech  made  at  the  Centre  of  Banking  Studies  in  Sri  Lanka, 
January 2013. 
Wijewardena, W.A., Central Banking: Challenges and Prospects. Colombo: BMS Publication, 2017. 
 24 
    Annexure 
 25 
       26 
   27 
