Eddie  Yue:  New  and  important  frontiers  of  financial  development
reached in 2017
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the Hong Kong-London Financial Services Forum 2017, Hong Kong, 18 December
2017.
Opening
 Richard, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
I would like to welcome you all to the Hong Kong-London Financial Services Forum 2017,
especially our guests travelling from London.  This is already the seventh Forum since the
first Hong Kong-London RMB Forum convened back in 2012.  The Forum has proved to be
an effective platform for the private sectors in the two places to collaborate and promote the
use  of  RMB  in  the  international  markets  as  well  as  to  grasp  the  associated  business
opportunities.
Last year, London and Hong Kong decided to broaden the scope of the Forum to cover not
only  RMB  business  but  also  other  new  and  important  frontiers  of  financial  development
including infrastructure financing, the Belt and Road (B&R) Initiative, green finance, as well
as Fintech.  Looking back, it was a good move.  As 2017 is drawing to a close, I think most
of  you  would  agree  that  B&R  and  fintech  are  the  two  hottest  buzzwords  in  the  financial
services sector this year. 
RMB Internationalisation
But that is not saying offshore RMB business has been all quiet in the past year.  On the
contrary,  2017  witnesses  important  milestones  in  Mainland  China’s  capital  account
liberalisation.    Since  the  start  of  the  year,  there  have  been  signs  of  stabilisation  in  the
offshore RMB liquidity pool in Hong Kong, now hovering at around RMB 600 billion.  On the
other hand, our RMB RTGS system continues to record a high volume of turnover of some
RMB  900  billion  per  day,  indicating  that  a  large  amount  of  RMB  financial  intermediation
activities have been taking place in Hong Kong. 
July  this  year,  the  HKMA  and  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  jointly  launched  the Bond
Connect.  It provides an additional channel for international investors to gain access to the
vast  bond  market  in  Mainland  China,  using  international  common  practice  in  securities
settlement  and  custody.    This  is  made  possible  thanks  to  new  infrastructure  linkages
between HKMA’s Central Moneymarkets Unit and relevant onshore institutions.  So far, over
200  investors  have  successfully  registered  as  Bond  Connect  investors,  holding  some
RMB80 billion Mainland bonds.  Daily turnover averaged RMB2 billion per day.  This is not
bad  in  four  months’  time,  but  we  foresee  considerable  headroom  to  grow  further.    The
investment  thesis  is  compelling  –  Mainland  China’s  solid  economic  fundamentals,  RMB
internationalisation, inclusion of RMB bonds in major indices, etc.  And from an investor’s
perspective,  the  nominal  yield  of  around  4%  on  10-year  government  credit  is  simply
attractive. 
The Stock Connect schemes have been running smoothly and next year, A-share will be
included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which is tracked by some US$1.6 trillion in
assets.  This will be a big boost to Stock Connect trading.  The RQFII investment quota for
Hong Kong has also been significantly increased to RMB500 billion July this year.  In short,
Hong Kong offers unparalleled access to Mainland markets and will continue to be the centre
of action for market participants seeking to capitalise on the Mainland China story.  
Another  exciting  development  is  the  Guangdong-Hong  Kong-Macao  Bay  Area.    It  is  an
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ambitious plan to build a cosmopolitan cluster covering Hong Kong, Macao, and nine other
coastal cities in the Pearl River Delta.  With a combined GDP of some US$1.3 trillion, it will
be  the  fifth  largest  economy  in  Asia,  just  after  South  Korea.    It  will  also  be  one  of  the
wealthiest regions in Mainland China.  I am sure this Greater Bay Area will provide a bigger
stage for financial institutions to launch and expand their business.  The planning is still at an
early stage and we expect more details will be available soon.
Belt & Road Initiative
On infrastructure financing, the high-level Belt & Road Forum for International Cooperation in
Beijing last May has added considerable momentum to infrastructure developments.  Hong
Kong has been positioning itself as the infrastructure hub to facilitate the related financial
activities.  A lot has been done through the Infrastructure Financing Facilitation Office, or
IFFO in short, set up under the HKMA in 2016.  A key mission of IFFO is to build and work
with a cluster of stakeholders in the infrastructure financing and investment space.  Closed
to 80 partners have joined the IFFO platform since its launch and today, I am pleased to
welcome the City of London as the newest partner to IFFO.  I believe City of London will
serve as the linkage to foster partnership between the financial institutions of London and
Hong  Kong  to  leverage  on  the  tremendous  opportunities  in  infrastructure  financing  and
investment.
Being an investor itself, the HKMA is aware of the challenges when it comes to infrastructure
investment.  I think there are currently two salient gaps on which IFFO is focusing its work. 
First is the funding gap.  According to an estimate, there would be a funding gap of over
US$5 trillion in the coming 15 years in infrastructure investment.  There is no way the public
sector  or  multilateral  development  banks  can  shoulder  this  funding  responsibility  alone. 
More  private  capital  is  needed.    Three  months  ago,  the  HKMA  signed  an  agreement  in
London with the International Finance Corporation under the World Bank Group, committing
US$1  billion  to  the  innovative  Managed  Co-Lending  Portfolio  Program,  which  is  a  debt
mobilisation  platform  for  emerging  markets.    Meanwhile,  we  are  working  with  some  like-
minded institutional investors to identify suitable opportunities. The aim of all these initiatives
is to create a demonstration effect to encourage more private investment in infrastructure. 
The second gap is what I would call a language gap. In considering infrastructure pipeline,
institutional  investors  talk  more  about  the  risks  and  how  they  can  be  mitigated,  whereas
project developers may be relatively more opportunity-driven.  To increase the chance that
project developers can attract private funding, they need to enhance their communication
with investors by understanding their risk concerns and speaking in their risk language.  This
is  how  we  can  make  projects  more  bankable.    On  this  front,  IFFO  has  developed  a
reference term sheet for infrastructure investments in Emerging Markets together with key
institutional investors last March. To further facilitate the use of this common language, IFFO
has also rolled out a number of capacity building initiatives the past year for all partners.
Fintech
Apart  from  infrastructure  financing,  fintech  counts  as  another  most  frequently  discussed
topics  in  industry  events  and  international  conferences  in  the  past  year.    But  like
infrastructure financing, we are not just talking about it, we are also doing something about
it.  HKMA announced September this year a series of measures to facilitate the financial
services  industry  to  grasp  the  opportunities  in  fintech,  covering  financial  infrastructure,
regulatory sandbox, research and talent development, etc.  I will leave this to my colleague,
Shu-pui, to share more with you in the panel on fintech later this afternoon.  But I wish to
highlight  one  point,  and  that  is,  fintech  is  borderless.    It  requires  collaboration  among
financial  centres  like  Hong  Kong  and  London.    A  fintech  solution  that  works  only  in  a
particular jurisdiction is of little value to clients and financial institutions that are often located
half-way across the globe.  This is particularly pertinent to the Distributed Ledger Technology
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
platform for trade finance that we are building with the industry.  This is why we have earlier
announced a collaborative initiative with Singapore in this area. And I am also very pleased to
note  that  HM  Treasury  and  the  HKMA  have  just  started  a  dialogue  to  explore  further
cooperation under this project.
Green Finance
If I am asked to predict what will be an emerging theme for the financial services sector in
2018, green finance looks like a safe bet.  Green finance is growing rapidly and Mainland
China has become one of the major markets for green bonds.  Hong Kong is also keen on
tapping into the green finance opportunities.  The Hong Kong Government plans to issue a
green bond for the first time next year.  There is much we can learn from and collaborate
with London, which has been a forerunner in this segment of the market.  One of the burning
issues is the divergence in various green bonds standards and assessments currently in the
market.  I hope today’s Seminar could shed some light on this and also the way forward for
green finance development.
Conclusion
The future is not all rosy though.  Challenges and uncertainties abound and this calls for
stronger cross-border collaboration.  The success of this Forum in the past six years shows
that London and Hong Kong can be an all-weather friend.  And I wish all of you a very fruitful
discussion today.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
