Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Forging partnerships in financial education
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Launch of the Financial Literacy Program for Schools and MOA
signing of the BSP, DepEd, and BDOF, Mandaluyong City, 28 May 2018.
 Department of Education Secretary  Leonor Magtolis Briones, Usec Tonisito Umali, Usec Victoria
Catibog,  BSP  colleagues,  BDO  Foundation  President  Mario  Derequito,  Nestor  Tan,  BDO
President and Foundation trustee, fellow advocates of financial inclusion and education, partners
from  the  private  sector  and  media,  and  our  educators  and  colleagues  from  DepEd,  good
afternoon.
  Financial  education  is  a  powerful  tool.    It  supports  not  just  individual  well-being,  but  also
economic growth. With the ability to understand, select, and use financial services, individuals
can take advantage of opportunities, and gain maximum benefit from participating in the formal
financial system.
In  the  BSP,  we  firmly  believe  that  a  financially-learned  citizenry  can  be  more  effective  in
productively contributing to economic growth. This is why the promotion of financial education
has been our flagship advocacy since 2010.
From experience, we realize that to effectively promote financial education, coordinated multi-
stakeholder action is needed. 
There is much to be done.  According to a World Bank study, on the average, Filipino adults can
answer only three (3) out of seven (7) financial literacy questions.  These questions span basic
numeracy,  computation  of  compounding  interest,  fundamentals  of  inflation,  and  investment
diversification.  Only  two  percent  (2%)  of  Filipino  adults  have  a  grasp  of  these  questions.  The
study also showed that Filipinos lack specific knowledge to make informed financial decisions,
particularly with respect saving and borrowing.
These figures suggest substantial gaps in financial education.  But they highlight clear areas of
opportunity.
We  must  take  hold  of  these  opportunities  as  those  who  develop  early  habit  of  saving  tend  to
outperform others in choosing financial products and services, in monitoring their expenses and
in planning for retirement.
How early should these skills be instilled?  The BSP believes that instilling financial management
skills in children will provide the most impact. 
We are convinced that  embedding  financial  education  into  the  formal  school  curriculum  is  an
effective approach.  As early as 2007, the BSP has worked with DepEd to integrate concepts on
money management, saving, and basic economics into the elementary curriculum. This is done
through the development of Teaching Guides.  We hope to continue this partnership in light of our
shift to the K to 12 curriculum.  We are also open to other opportunities for collaboration where
we can leverage on each other’s expertise and networks.
Realizing that support from relevant stakeholders is crucial, the National Strategy for Financial
Inclusion  (NSFI)  was  launched  to  provide  a  platform  for  the  private  sector  to  collaborate  with
government in promoting financial inclusion and education. 
We  welcome  and  thank  the  BDO  Foundation  for  engaging  with  us.    By  sharing  key  financial
literacy messages not necessarily linked to particular products or providers, a better informed
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumer base with the capacity to make appropriate choices and become responsible clients
is created. Our collective and concerted efforts will generate overall improvements in financial
inclusion.
In  closing,  we  encourage  the  educators  here  to  see  the  value  of  the  messages  we  are
communicating.  We urge you to apply them. In doing so, not only will you set credible examples
to the youth, but you will also positively shape your own personal financial circumstances.  The
narrative  would  be  most  effective  when  concepts  taught  in  class  are  consciously  upheld  and
exercised.   The results will attest and affirm the truth of the financial education messages.
With  DepEd  onboard,  the  commitment  of  our  educators,  and  private  sector  support,  we  can
collectively bring about healthy and wealthy financial futures for every child who goes through the
Philippine educational system.  What an exciting prospect!
The videos presented today, are creative, and relatable.  This matters a great deal as retention of
information and engagement relies on the effectiveness of chosen delivery mechanisms. We are
very excited to share them with you. 
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat.  Mabuhay ang ating mga kabataan at mga guro!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
