      RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  Welcome Remarks by the Reserve Bank of Fiji Governor and  
Chairman of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, Mr Ariff Ali 
2017 National Microfinance Awards, 28 May 2018, RBF, Suva 
  Salutations 
The Permanent Secretary for Industry & Trade and Tourism; 
Members of the Reserve Bank of Fiji Board; 
Members of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce; 
Sponsorship Partners; 
2017 National Microfinance Awards Finalists; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Welcome 
Bula Vinaka and a very good afternoon to you all. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to this function today, a special occasion where 
we  recognise  our  champions  in  the  micro  enterprise  sector.    Please  accept  our 
humble apologies for the deferment from the initial schedule to have it in the later 
part of last year. 
 I  wish  to  specifically  welcome  our  finalists  for  whom  this  occasion  is  all  about.  
Thank  you  for  your  determination  and  perseverance  to  make  your  goals  and 
dreams a reality in the different businesses that  you have established and are now 
operating.    For  a  developing  country  like  Fiji,  the  potential  for  the  micro 
 1 
      RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
enterprises sector to be a driver of economic growth cannot be underestimated, and 
we therefore truly appreciate how the businesses we are recognising today have led 
 the way in this regard. 
 I acknowledge, and would like to express our sincere gratitude to all our generous 
sponsors without whose support we would have not been able to organise, and give 
out today’s awards: the Gold Sponsors - ANZ Bank and Pacific Financial Inclusion 
Programme  (PFIP);  Silver  Sponsor  -  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  India  (LICI); 
and Bronze Sponsors - Bank South Pacific, Bank of Baroda and HFC Bank.  We 
welcome  you  to  this  afternoon’s  function  and  thank  you  very  much  for  your 
continuous support and partnership  in recognising the contributions of our  micro-
businesses. 
 Role of the Reserve Bank 
For  close  to  three  decades,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  worked  closely  with 
Government,  development  partners  and  the  private  sector  to  find  ways  of 
improving  the  SME  sector’s  access  to  finance  and  enhancing  the  sector’s 
contribution  to  the  economy.    In  1996,  the  RBF  in  collaboration  with  the  UNDP 
hosted  a  national  conference  on  microfinance  which  initially  led  to  the  set-up  of 
the  Microfinance  Unit  in  Government,  which  has grown  into the  National  Centre 
for Small and Micro Enterprises Development (NCSMED). 
 The Bank’s support to develop microfinance  in Fiji is not without challenge, as a 
third of our population, who are mostly women and rural dwellers, still do not have 
access  to  affordable  and  appropriate  financial  services.    To  complicate  matters, 
 2 
      RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
 there are times when our role in driving the country’s financial inclusion agenda is 
called  into  question  since  it  falls  outside  the  scope  of  traditional  central  banking 
responsibilities.    However,  I  am  pleased  to  provide  assurance  that  the  Reserve 
Bank  will  continue  to  contribute  and  support  initiatives  for  the  development  of 
MSMEs  as  they  greatly  complement  our  role  in  the  development  of  the  Fijian 
economy. 
 Contribution to Economic Growth 
I  read  in  a  speech  given  at  a  similar  occasion  that  “Governments  do  not  create 
jobs,  the  private  sector  does.    And  that  within  the  private  sector,  SMEs  are 
central  to  that  endeavour.”    As  a  leader  in  an  organisation  that  has  its  vision  of 
“Leading Fiji to Economic Success”, I cannot agree more with that statement. 
 We recognise the important role that MSMEs play in creating jobs as they provide 
the bulk of employment in the country, and in turn support economic growth.  The 
unprecedented  economic  growth  that  Fiji  has  achieved  in  the  last  8  consecutive 
years is also attributed to our growing micro and SME sectors. 
 In most countries, the SME sector accounts for almost 90 percent of all businesses.  
There  are  some  estimates  that  for  Fiji, MSMEs  account  for  around  60  percent  of 
employment  as  everyone  cannot  be  employed  in  the  formal  sector.    By  allowing 
people  to  help  and  create  employment  opportunities  for  themselves,  we  are 
effectively  contributing  towards  reducing  poverty  and  increasing  standards  of 
living.  As a result there is less reliance on Government in terms of receiving social 
welfare. 
 3 
      RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  However,  personally,  one  of  the  most  important  attributes  that  I  admire  about 
micro-businesses  is  their  ability  to  empower  people  to  determine  their  individual 
paths.  The MSME industry is very close to my heart because I  have experienced 
work in it first-hand. My father operated a micro enterprise in the fisheries sector 
employing  2-3  others  and  it  was  his  hard  work  and  sacrifices  that  paid  for  my 
school  fees  and  education.    My  family  is  still  engaged  in  micro  and  small 
enterprise  work  today.  When  I  hear  about  your  stories,  I  am  reminded  of  the 
struggles  and  challenges  that  my  father  and  our  family  had  to  endure,  especially 
because in those days there was little to no support from the Government and other 
stakeholders  specifically  for  MSMEs.    That  is  why  I  fully  support  this  initiative 
and  I  am  confident  that  it  will  enable  you  to  make  positive  changes  in  your  own 
lives. 
 Awards 
The  Microfinance  Awards  that  we  give  out  today  recognises  the  successes  of 
young and individual  micro-entrepreneurs,  micro-business partnerships and micro 
service  providers.    This  year  we  received  the  highest  number  of  submissions 
mainly from Viti Levu and a few from Vanua Levu, Taveuni, Lau and Gau. 
 The  submissions  have  been  assessed  by  a  panel  of  three  judges  representing  the 
Ministry  of Women,  Children  &  Poverty  Alleviation, the  University  of  the  South 
Pacific  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji.    The  Individual,  Partnership  and  Youth 
categories were assessed on business growth, use of local resources and creativity, 
 4 
      RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
adequate  book-keeping,  sustainability  and  compliance  with  government 
 regulations.  
 For  the  Institution  Category,  assessments  focused  on  outreach,  delivery  channels 
and use of innovative technology and client protection.  
 Closing 
I  wish  to  take  this  time  to  congratulate  all  our  finalists  that  have  joined  us  from 
around  the  country  today  despite  the  weather  conditions.    You  have  done  an 
incredible  job  to  get  to  where  you  are  today  and  should  be  proud  of  your 
achievements.    To  our  award  recipients,  we  trust  that  you  will  put  your  prizes  to 
good use in expanding your businesses and furthering your entrepreneurial dreams. 
 I  also  wish  to  acknowledge  and  thank  the  Government  for  its  continuous  support 
towards  our  work  and  initiatives  on  MSME  development,  particularly  MITT,  the 
Honourable Minister and our Chief Guest, the Permanent Secretary for taking time 
out from his busy schedule to attend tonight’s function.  
 Lastly  and  certainly  not  the  least,  I  wish  to  once  again  acknowledge  the  great 
support  of  all  our  sponsors –  thank  you  for  your  commitment. It  is our hope that 
the  success  stories  we  highlight  today  will  inspire  others  to  capitalise  on 
opportunities,  start  their  own  businesses  and  continue  to  support  the  micro 
enterprise sector. 
 Vinaka vakalevu, and I wish you all an enjoyable evening. 
 5 
