 Bank of Italy – The Global Foundation 
Rome Roundtable 2018 
Rome, 15 June 2018 
Dinner address of the Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Ignazio Visco 
 Your Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a pleasure to welcome you to the Bank of 
Italy. I would like to thank Steve Howard, Secretary General of The Global Foundation, for 
bringing together so many distinguished guests to discuss the state of the world and how it 
might be improved. I also thank Jock Murray, Chairman of The Global Foundation, for his 
kind introduction. I am honoured to set the stage for the keynote address by His Eminence 
Cardinal Pietro Parolin. 
Unfortunately, I could not attend the sessions of the first day of this meeting. I regret it 
very  much  because  you  have  been  addressing  themes  of  fundamental  importance  for  the 
global  economy.  These  themes  appear  remote  from  the  main  tasks  of  central  bankers, 
preserving price and financial stability, but at a deeper level all the issues are connected and 
we should not lose sight of the major changes that affect our societies and economies. 
In  January  2017,  Pope  Francis’  address  to  The  Global  Foundation  inspired  the  main 
theme  of  today’s  and  tomorrow’s  discussion.  He  stigmatized  “an  ideology  of  capitalism” 
that shows “little or no interest for the realities of marginalization, exploitation and human 
alienation,  a  lack  of  concern  for  the  great  numbers  of  people  still  living  in  conditions  of 
grave material and moral poverty, and a blind faith in the unbridled development of market 
forces  alone”  and  invited  us  “to  discern  just  ways  of  attaining  a  globalization  that  is 
‘cooperative’, and thus positive, as opposed to the globalization of indifference”. 
Obviously,  I  do  not  have  a  clear  and  short  answer  to  the  questions  posed  by  Pope 
Francis, but I do believe that the issue of labour is central. It relates to social integration and 
personal identity. At the economic level, it should not be seen solely as a cyclical problem: 
the economy’s growth depends on the quantity and quality of the labour force and on the 
capacity to provide adequate jobs in these ever-changing times. 
Therefore, in my remarks tonight I will first consider the main forces shaping our future 
and  the  challenges  they  pose;  then  I  will  hint  at  the  traps  that  –  as  policy  makers  –  we 
should avoid in order to move towards the “cooperative globalization” that we are invited to 
realize. 
1 
 Over the last decades, four overarching forces have been shaping the world economy: 
globalization, technological progress, demographic transition and climate change. 
For  the  most  part,  globalization  and  technological  progress  have  been  positive  and 
powerful engines of economic progress and social change. But given their heterogeneous, 
pervasive and differentiated effects, they have also been the object of fierce critiques and 
deep-seated fears, which policy makers should not neglect. 
Globalization is a complex, multidimensional phenomenon, consisting not only of the 
deeper integration of goods, services and capital markets, but also of the greatly increased 
mobility of people, information and ideas. The globalization we have experienced over the 
last quarter of a century could not have been achieved without the technological revolution 
that today is symbolized by the wide diffusion of computers, the internet, smartphones and 
robots. 
This  technological  revolution  is  inexorably  permeating  all  aspects  of  economic  and 
social life. It is radically changing people’s habits and firms’ activities, as well as our way 
of  working,  producing,  consuming,  exchanging  information  and  interacting  socially. 
Statistics concerning the digitalization of the economy tell a clear story: in 2016, about 95 
per cent of businesses in the OECD countries had a broadband Internet connection; more 
than 75 per cent had a web presence; half of the adult population had purchased goods or 
services  online,  compared  with  36  per  cent  in  2010.  These  numbers  suggest  that,  in  this 
digital era, financial, economic and even social inclusion are closely related to technological 
inclusion. 
The formidable achievements of globalization and technological progress are too often 
forgotten as the discussion turns to their shortcomings and risks: 
−  The  world  economy  is  today  six  times  larger  than  50  years  ago,  while  the  total 
population has increased little more than two-fold, so that average per capita GDP has 
more than doubled. 
−  Over the last 25 years or so more than 1 billion people have escaped extreme poverty 
(defined as an income below 1.9 dollars per day) while 2.2 billion have been added to 
the  world  population.  Therefore,  about  3.5  billion  people  have  never  entered  or  have 
escaped  this  condition.  The  target  of  halving  the  share  of  people  living  in  extreme 
poverty  has  thus  been  achieved  five  years  earlier  than  was  established  within  the 
Millennium Development Goals agreed in 2000 by the United Nations, notwithstanding 
the exceptional increase in the world population. 
−  The so-called emerging economies – once excluded from the global economy and hosts 
for the largest share of the poor – have substantially narrowed the gap with advanced 
countries and are today the main contributors to world growth. 
−  The mortality rate for children under the age of 5 was halved globally between 1990 and 
2015. 
 2 
−  Thanks  to  greater  labour  mobility,  today  about  260  million  people  live  in  a  foreign 
country, up from less than 80 million in 1970, and flows among developing countries 
now exceed those towards advanced economies. 
However, not everybody has benefited in the same way from the economic expansion 
provided by trade and innovation. Economic backwardness, poverty and high mortality rates 
are still dramatic problems in many developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Even in the more prosperous countries, many have been left behind. Inequality in the 
distribution of income has declined dramatically over the last three decades at a global level, 
mainly as a result of the fast growth of China and other emerging markets that has reduced 
their distance from the richer parts of the world. However, within most countries differences 
in income and wealth have risen to historically high levels. 
Finally, the rapid pace of technological progress and its unprecedented nature make it 
possible not only to replace physical labour but even to displace intellectual contributions in 
a variety of tasks once believed to be a prerogative of humans. This has raised fears of a 
new form of technological unemployment, to which the medium-skilled population is also 
vulnerable, and has helped to spread a sense of insecurity, raising the demand for protection. 
The  two  other  factors  shaping  our  present  and  future  conditions  –  demographic 
transition and climate change – are not independent from, and have actually been reinforced 
by, global economic integration and technological progress. 
Higher  living  standards  and  wider  access  to  better  healthcare  have  increased  life 
expectancy  across  the  globe.  For  the  first  time  in  our  history,  the  world  faces  not  only  a 
growing population – estimated to reach almost 10 billion in 2050, up from 7.5 billion today 
(and 2.5 billion in 1950) – but also an ageing one: there are almost 1 billion people aged 60 
or over in the world (13 per cent of the global population) and this age group is growing 
faster (at 3 per cent per year) than younger age groups. 
In most advanced countries, as well as in China, declining birth rates, with increased life 
expectancy, are pushing up the so-called old-age dependency ratio, the population over 64 
relative to the working-age population (aged 15 to 64). In Europe, ageing is progressing at a 
very fast rate: in Italy, the old age dependency ratio has risen from 12 per cent in 1950 to 
more than 35 today; in Germany, from 14 to 32 per cent. Demographic transition, however, 
is a global phenomenon: Japan has the oldest population in the world, while in China the 
dependency ratio has doubled since 1950 and is expected to reach 44 per cent by 2050, up 
from 13 today. 
This  demographic  transition  will  have  a  deep  and  long-lasting  economic  impact. 
However, the argument that this impact is inevitably negative rests on the assumption that 
old people are only unproductive consumers of government benefits. This is not necessarily 
the case: 
 3 
−  Ageing does not automatically imply being unproductive or sick. A 70 year old today is 
in many respects much “younger” than a person of the same age 50 years ago and we 
now have the  means to avoid the  marginalization of the elderly and to keep them an 
integral and productive part of society for longer. 
−  While in relative terms the old are outgrowing the young, the number of young people 
in the world is the largest in history in absolute terms, but it is not distributed evenly 
around the globe. Of the 2.2 billion people added to the world population since 1990, 
less than 1 in 10 live in advanced  countries. Africa, which hosts some of the poorest 
countries  in  the  world,  is  expected  to  have  the  fastest  population  increase  over  this 
century, reaching Asia in absolute terms. Only an integrated world economy and wise 
policies can help to spread the benefits of progress more evenly. This also requires that 
the flows of migration be properly managed. 
Climate change is linked to what we have been saying so far. The post-war exponential 
demographic acceleration – the “population explosion” – prompted discussion of the “limits 
to growth”. At the start of the 1970s, the Report of the Club of Rome, which centred on the 
predicted  depletion  of  natural  resources,  raised  alarm  about  the  survival  of  the  earth’s 
ecosystem  and  of  the  human  race.  These  projections  received  great  attention  from  the 
media,  but  they  were  greeted  sceptically  by  many  eminent  economists  of  the  time.  With 
some  reason,  the  critics  noted  that  the  Report  failed  to  account  for  two  major  stabilizing 
mechanisms:  the  ability  of  relative  prices  to  rebalance  supply  and  demand  and  the 
endogenous response of technology. 
Notwithstanding  the  power  of  these  two  mechanisms,  which  makes  any  long-term 
projection hazardous, the concern has not abated. The debate on sustainable development – 
i.e. development that can “meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs” – suggests that today it is impossible to ignore 
the  environmental  balance  of  the  planet  and  the  reciprocal  compatibility,  or  trade-offs, 
between economic, social and ecological objectives. 
Climate change is no longer a scientific curiosity, it is a fundamental theme of today’s 
public debate. A series of important international agreements (the Kyoto Treaty of 1997 and 
the  Paris  Climate  Agreement  of  2016)  have  made  it  clear  that  two  aspects  are  of  special 
importance:  1)  tackling  the  challenge  of  climate  change  at  a  global  level,  with  the 
cooperation of all the parties involved; and 2) devising incentives for the invention and use 
of new technologies to drastically curtail emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 
gases. 
Globalization,  technological  progress,  demographic  transition  and  climate  change 
present  us  with  formidable  challenges.  But  economic  integration,  scientific  progress  and 
improvements in education and health conditions provide great opportunities for forging a 
more prosperous, more equitable and more sustainable world economy. However, it must be 
clearly understood that attaining a “cooperative” globalization entails governing the world 
 4 
economy, as it would be illusory to rely solely upon unfettered market forces. As the global 
financial  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated,  effective  regulation,  adequately  funded 
international  financial  institutions  and  strong  cooperation  among  nations  are  necessary  to 
mitigate risk, grant stability and correct market excesses. 
Unfortunately,  we  live  in  unprecedented  bad  times  for  international  relations.  A 
retrenchment of policies towards narrowly defined national interests and short-termism in 
the definition of policy objectives, partly dictated by the continuous monitoring of popular 
approval and facilitated by the new digital technologies, are the most significant risks today. 
The US decision to back out of the Paris Climate Agreement and the recent failure to sign a 
shared Communiqué at the G7 Summit in Charlevoix are clear signs of the dangers to the 
liberal world order and global cooperation. 
The  trade  dispute  is  revelatory  of  the  difficulties  we  encounter  on  the  road  to 
cooperation. As is well known, the basic economic teaching on trade policy is that free trade 
is by far the best option as it grants full exploitation of comparative advantages to all parties 
involved.  Indeed,  the  current  trade  system  based  on  multilateral  agreements  underpinned 
economic  development  for  decades.  Obviously  we  should  not  ignore  the  potential 
complications arising from different levels of industrialization across nations and the risk of 
specializing in products that might lock in a country at a pre-industrial stage, as may have 
been  the  case  for  much  of  North-South  trade  during  the  colonial  period.  But  we  must 
consider that, in trade deals, the interests of producers and consumers are seldom aligned. 
Often  the  benefits  of a  given  tariff  or  import  quota  are  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  few 
well-organized  producers,  while  their  costs,  no  matter  how  great  in  absolute  terms,  are 
spread among a large  number of unaware  and  unorganized consumers. A similar conflict 
between concentrated and diffuse interests also arises in the case of climate change, where a 
further tension is added, the one between current and future generations. 
A  final  example  of  the  difficulties  we  encounter  on  the  road  to  cooperation  is  the 
reaction to migration. Of course, there are many reasons why migration is met with some 
resistance by receiving communities. While the concerns of the more vulnerable parts of the 
population must be addressed, we should recognize that international mobility is a positive 
force for economic and social development: if properly handled, it could help poor countries 
to  grow  by  alleviating  the  pressure  on  their  labour  markets,  and  it  could  ease  the 
consequences of ageing in richer economies, which need a young labour force to balance 
falling birth rates. 
But  we  should  not  ignore  the  conflicts  that  migration  may  generate.  A  first  one  is 
between  the  citizens  of  rich  countries,  who  enjoy  a  “citizenship  rent”  they  have  received 
without meriting it, and the citizens of poor countries, who try to escape a poverty for which 
they have no responsibility. A second one is between  young people today, who feel their 
jobs are threatened by migrants, and the same people tomorrow, as a young labour force is 
needed now to support their living standards in the future. 
 5 
These  are  formidable  problems  that  cannot  be  tackled  by  policies  constrained  by 
geographical  borders.  The  wide-ranging  integration  of  the  global  economy  has  brought  a 
corresponding  integration  of  global  problems.  It  would  be  short-sighted  –  actually 
counterproductive – to think that effective solutions can be found exclusively within one’s 
own territory, following “me first” national strategies. But this is the reality we face. 
By the same token, an effective solution to these problems requires a longer-term view, 
a  political  agenda  that  is  not  enslaved  by  short-termism,  since  the  needed  reforms  and 
policies have effects that are not immediate, but are distributed over a long-time horizon. 
We need to prepare the polity for this kind of intervention, which is now opposed by so 
many.  To  shape  public  opinion,  education  and  information  are  key.  We  need  to 
communicate in clear, accessible terms the long-term benefits of openness to trade, to new 
ideas  and  to  managed  migration,  while  addressing  the  needs  and  fears  of  the  most 
vulnerable parts of the population in advanced economies and in the world at large. 
 6 
