Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Lithuania's  pension  system  -  how  to  ensure
socially just and sustainable pensions?
Welcome remarks by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Governor of the Bank of Lithuania, at the Economics
conference of the Bank of Lithuania, Vilnius, 17 September 2018.
 Dear colleagues, like-minded guests and potential opponents,
Thank you for joining us at the second economics conference of the Bank of Lithuania. We are
delighted to have you here.
When we decided to organise these annual conferences, we set ourselves an ambitious goal:
what we seek is not only original insights and interesting discussions (although I make no secret
of the fact that we are hoping for these, too), but also tangible results. It would not surprise me,
then, if new and even unexpected ideas emerged from our sessions. At the same time, we aim
to assess experiences tested in real-life conditions. In short, we seek concrete conclusions and
proposals for resolving pressing economic problems.
It  is  this  urgent  need  that  dictates  our  choice  of  topics.  Accordingly,  last  year’s  conference
focused on the issues of income inequality. Following a thorough discussion and analysis, we
concluded that inequality of income and, consequently, of opportunities, stems largely from our
tax  and  pension  systems.  We  agreed  that  these  systems  required  an  immediate  and  radical
overhaul. Thus, today’s topic – the Lithuanian pension system – is a natural continuation of that
important discussion.
Since the ice has at last been broken, however, we can approach this crucial issue from a new
angle. The Government has undertaken to reform the pension system which, sooner or later, in
one way or another, will affect everything and everyone: everyday life as well as national public
finances  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Such  an  all-encompassing  topic  warrants  particular
attention from public institutions, the public and the media. The Bank of Lithuania took an active
part – and will be actively involved in the future – in expert discussions, commensurate with how
it perceives its institutional duty.
In short, the situation can be summarised as follows: a step in the right direction has been made.
However, only a step.
The work is far from complete since, first, it is important not only to design solutions but also to
implement them qualitatively.
And,  second,  it  is  already  clear  that  even  if  we  faultlessly  follow  through  with  what  has  been
initiated,  some  elements  of  the  Lithuanian  pension  system  will  still  need  to  be  improved.  In
particular,  what  I  have  in  mind  is  the  need  to  increase  transparency  of  the  first  pillar  and  to
strengthen  people’s  confidence  in  it.  These  issues  will  become  increasingly  important  in  the
future. They will have to be addressed – and the sooner, the better.
Thus, today, I suggest that we set our gaze slightly beyond the visible horizon. In other words, I
propose  that  in  today’s  discussions,  we  consider  the  future  of  our  pension  system  from  the
perspective of several decades rather than simply several years.
Let’s take a moment, however, to notice our starting position: the status quo of the Lithuanian
pension  system  and  its  envisaged  developments.  Let’s  briefly  review  the  Bank  of  Lithuania’s
assessment and several key proposals which might help us take further steps in the direction
outlined by the reform.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Colleagues,
We face two major problems: poor benefits now and the prospect of even poorer pensions in the
future.
About  the  present.  The  average  old-age  pension  is  close  to  the  poverty  line.  Speaking  about
residents receiving only a Sodra pension, the average replacement rate, that is, the ratio between
pre-retirement labour income and pension, is only about 35 per cent, whereas the EU average
comes close to 50 per cent. Approximately one in four senior citizens in Lithuania is exposed to
the risk of poverty – according to the European Commission, once again we are ranked in the
bottom three of EU countries. We find ourselves in this – third lowest – position quite often, and
we are even starting to come to terms with it. However, there is another important indicator – the
ratio between pension expenditure per pensioner and GDP per capita. Regrettably, this indicator
ranks us in an even lower position.
About the future. The International Monetary Fund estimates that, with no reform of the system
undertaken,  the  average  replacement  rate  for  residents  who  do  not  independently  save  for
retirement would further decrease and reach only 20 per cent over the coming decades. This
means  that,  in  the  absence  of  change,  in  a  couple  of  decades  pensions  –  calculated  at  the
present monetary value – will be almost one-quarter smaller than they are now.
Nowadays, there are a number of reasons for poor old-age benefits. One of them is a low level of
redistribution through the state budget. Last year, the amount of tax revenue in Lithuania was
below 30 per cent of GDP, while the EU average was almost 40 per cent. By comparison, had
we  collected  the  amount  of  tax  revenue  at  least  equivalent  to  the  EU  average,  our  budgetary
inflows would have been about 2 billion euros higher. Is this a lot or a little? That is almost as
much as the amount of total pension expenditure that year.
The  level  of  redistribution  (and  thus  budget  availability)  is  primarily  an  issue  of  the  equity  and
efficiency  of  tax  policy.  Nevertheless,  even  if  the  most  effective  changes  in  taxation  were
implemented,  they  would  not  be  enough  on  their  own  in  the  longer  term.  This  is  because
alongside redistribution problems we have another adverse factor, namely, a highly complicated
demographic situation. This leads to a worsening ratio between working-age and retirement-age
population, which implies a heavier burden on public finances.
Against this background, it has become crucial to create the right conditions and incentives for
income-generating residents to start accumulating their own financial reserves for old age. To
the best of our knowledge, however, so far about 800 thousand persons – more than half of the
working  population  –  rely  only  on  minimum  accumulation  or  refrain  from  acummulating
altogether. I do not want to sound too dramatic, but… this situation cannot be called anything
other than a ticking time bomb.
Our honourable speakers will shortly present a broader picture – the practices of other countries
and regions. We are likely to see that our challenges are not unique: most advanced economies
have faced, or are currently facing, similar problems. And although they all have specific national
characteristics and thus each seeks the most suitable solutions in its national context, all highly
regarded models share certain features. First of all, one finds a focus on long-term sustainability.
Second,  one  notes  transparency  and,  consequently,  a  high  level  of  confidence  among  the
population. These features contribute to the achievement of the core objective, namely, to ensure
more even consumption, that is, level of income, throughout the human life cycle.
The pension systems of our close neighbours, the Nordic countries, are considered among the
best-rated in the world and are characterised by all of these features. I am therefore pleased that
we  will  soon  have  the  opportunity  to  hear  professor  Edward  Palmer’s  presentation  on  the
Swedish experience in reforming their pension system and shifting towards a notional defined
contribution-based model.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Colleagues,
When  analysing  the  good  practices  of  foreign  countries,  we  note  that,  in  addition  to  the
aforementioned similarities, they have one more thing in common: none of the pension systems
in which people today have confidence was created in a single sweep. Quite to the contrary, they
were developed through protracted processes that called for consistency and patience.
The  Lithuanian  pension  system,  too,  has  for  some  time  been  on  the  path  of  review  and
transformation,  on  a  greater  or  smaller  scale.  And  even  though  one  might  argue  about  the
meaning  of  certain  “reconstructions”,  and  in  particular  their  consistency  and  completeness,  I
believe that the recent decisions may create the conditions for favourable change.
First, the system gains more integrity. Having changed the structure of contributions to second-
pillar pension funds (ceasing transfers of state social insurance contributions), there is no reason
for an artificial confrontation between the first and second pillars.
The second advantage is the likelihood of more people enrolling in second-pillar pension funds.
This would mean that more people would be better prepared for loss of labour income in the
future. At the national level, this would contribute to the sustainability of the pension system and
help mitigate the future demographic shock that awaits us.
The third point of particular importance for us is safer and more efficient saving. The Bank of
Lithuania  has  found  that,  at  present,  almost  two-thirds  of  persons  participating  in  the  second
pillar  save  in  funds  with  a  risk  profile  inappropriate  for  their  age.  This  inadequacy  is  a  major
obstacle to the efficient use of all opportunities that financial markets have to offer, preventing the
accumulation  of  the  maximum  possible  reserve  for  the  future,  with  an  optimum  level  of  risk
assumed. The decision to introduce so-called life-cycle pension funds in Lithuania is, therefore,
truly welcome. This would help end the practice of “one size fits all” (which really does not fit
anybody), and the investment risk of the assets accumulated correlate with the certain stage in
the accumulator’s life, i.e. his specific age.
Finally, the maintenance cost of the system. Centralised administration of annuities in Sodra, a
non-profit institution, would reduce their cost. On the other hand, limiting the maximum allowed
deductions by private pension funds would help residents to accumulate more for old age.
Will the proposed changes  be  enough  to  ensure  the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  Lithuanian
pension system and to better tailor it to the needs of the population?
Certainly  yes.  And,  at  the  same  time,  certainly  no.  If  these  ideas  are  put  into  practice  as
envisaged,  our  reformed  model  may  very  well  become  both  more  attractive  and  more  robust
than the present system. However, if we seek to align with international leaders, we must take
care not to get stuck with what has been designed so far.
Having said that, I hasten to assure everyone that we believe stability to be the greatest virtue of
the pension system. Still, the Lithuanian pension system will require three further improvements.
The  first  one  should  ensure  a  closer  and  definitely  more  obvious  connection  between
contributions  and  benefits.  This  is  an  essential  condition  both  for  achieving  pension-system
fairness and for strengthening incentives for residents to pay contributions.
The  second  aim  is  greater  transparency.  Having  strengthened  the  connection  between
contributions  and  benefits,  the  first  pension  pillar  should  shift  towards  a  model  based  on
individual accounts (notional defined contribution model) – like the one currently in operation in
Sweden, Norway, Poland and other European countries.
Such a system, ideally operating in real time, would clearly show the correlation between one’s
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
social  insurance  contributions  and  the  level  of  his  or  her  future  pension.  A  virtual  individual
account would demonstrate that unaccounted income reduces the accumulative pension in the
first pillar, thus encouraging the payment of contributions.
The third direction concerns information and education. Clear communication on the old-age
saving system is one of the most reliable means for managing risks of short-sighted choices.
And – let’s face it – there is such a threat if, after the entry into force of the approved changes of
the  pension  system,  people  decide  to  opt  for  slightly  higher  income  today,  rather  than  in  the
future.
Currently, these are the three missing pieces of the puzzle of the Lithuanian pension system.
Colleagues,
I do not wish to be a prophet of doom, but the risks facing the Lithuanian pension system are very
real. Unless we accomplish urgent work, we will soon face them – if not just round the corner,
then around another couple of turns.
In order to create a truly sustainable – and I insist sustainable in the long run – pension system
in  which  Lithuanians  will  have  trust,  we  must  strive  for  consensus,  consistency  and
determination for further steps. Today, we have the opportunity to talk about these issues boldly,
openly and in good faith.
I  wish  you  all  fruitful  discussions  and  valuable  insights,  which  may  contribute  to  future  policy
decisions.
Thank you.
   4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
