Olli Rehn: Empowering women in business leadership
Speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the International Women's
Day, Helsinki, 8 March 2018.
 Accompanying slides
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Many  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  give  the  opening  address  in  this  very  important  seminar  on
“empowering women in business leadership”. I find the subject of today’s seminar particularly
topical and pertinent for the International Women’s Day, and want to warmly thank the French
Embassy and EU Representation for organizing this event.
Let  me  start  with  some  personal  reflections  on  the  subject.  I  have  all  the  reasons  to  respect
competent women, especially as I had one very close by, at home. My mother Vuokko (1938–
2011)  was  the  first  gymnasium  (high  school)  graduate  and  the  first  university  student  of  her
extended family. She worked as English and Swedish teacher for many years, and was also a
‘school steward’ in the teachers’ trade union OAJ. Later on she became the marketing manager
of our company – and was elected a Member of Parliament in the mid-1990s. I am most grateful
to her for encouraging me to respect equal rights and value the importance of education.
Another reflection concerns Finland as a nation. One thing I am particularly proud of Finland is
gender  equality  and  women’s  rights.  We  were  the  country  which  first  gave  full  and  universal
political rights to women to vote and be a candidate in 1906. With the extension of education and
building up of social and family policy, we have made big strides over the past decades. But I am
not saying that everything is perfect or that we are in the goal already. No, we have still much
work to do, especially in the working life and business leadership.
The same goes for Europe, as well. As Commission Vice-President I was glad to sponsor in
2012 the proposal championed by my colleague Viviane Reding to break the glass ceiling that
bars female talent from top positions in Europe’s biggest companies. The Commission proposed
legislation  with  the  aim  of  attaining  a  40%  goal  of  the  underrepresented  sex  in  non-executive
board-member  positions  in  publicly  listed  companies,  with  the  exception  of  SMEs.  While  not
flying  as  such,  it  was  a  strong  call  for  action  to  bring  about  gender  equality  in  corporate
boardrooms and in economic decision-making.
 Let us next look at the current state of gender balance in the working and business life in Finland.
Income  differences,  measured  as  yearly  average  disposable  income,  between  genders  have
slightly  narrowed  during  the  past  25  years.  The  lifetime  income  of  women  is,  however,  still
smaller than that of men.
(See slide 2)
Position in the labour market is essentially associated with education. Unemployment rate of the
Finnish people with university degree tends to be significantly lower than that of people with only
basic education.
The level of education of young people increased trend-wise until the end-1970s. Especially the
high participation to education of women has increased the average education level of the whole
population.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In achieving a solid position in the labour market, high education is even more important factor for
women  than  what  it  is  for  men.  Participation  rates  of  women  with  only  basic  education,  in
particular, have been alarmingly low during the past few years. When the more highly educated
men and women are compared, however, the smaller becomes the difference in participation
rates. Education indeed matters.
The  two  recent  economic  recessions  in  Finland  have  treated  men  and  women  in  different
manner. Recession in the 1990s forced women in particular out of the labour market in Finland.
By contrast, the financial crisis in 2008–2009 and the resultant economic downturn appear to
have  impacted  more  on  male-dominated  sectors  and  thus  on  male  employment  and  labour
market participation.
(See slide 3)
Effects of the recession in the 1990s had, however, only temporary effect on average earnings
growth of the Finnish X-generation. X-generation generally refers to people born in the 1970s. (In
the figure, cohorts born in 1973–1975.) As the economy picked up towards the end of the 1990s,
X-generation reached the income level of the previous generations at the same age.
The  recession  after  the  financial  crisis  may  have  had  more  permanent  effects  to  the  income
growth of young men.  Earnings growth of ‘The Y-generation’ men, born in the mid 1980s still
seems to be slower than earnings growth of previous generations at the same age. The path of
earnings growth of Y-generation women, in contrast, has not significantly been affected by the
recession.
Evidence of slow income growth of people born in the 1980s and early 1990s has also been
found in many other developed countries.
 Let me conclude with a few words on the Eurozone reform. The European economy has been
on the path of recovery and growth for five years now. It is a good time to focus on reform.
Can we learn something from the euro crisis for the future reform? In my view it has provided a
wealth of lessons of general application that should not be ignored.
1.  Financial  stability  was  grossly  neglected  before  the  crisis,  and  this  should  now  be
corrected by completing the banking union.
Against  this  background,  too,  the  near-term  focus  in  euro-area  renewal  should  be  kept  on
finalisation of the banking union.
What we still need to do to complete the banking union is two things. First, to create a credible
fiscal backstop for the bank resolution fund. Second, to build a common European Deposit
Insurance Scheme. To be politically feasible, these remaining elements will require convincing
measures of risk reduction, and possibly some co-insurance features in their construction, at
least in the first phase.
2. In building the stability union, the main responsibility for economic policies should rest
with the member states, while this should be balanced with the insurance provided by
common structures, especially as regards ensuring financial stability.
Going forward, the next reform should aim at producing a synthesis between the principles of
“German”  economic  philosophy,  which  calls  for  proper  incentives  and  rules,  and  those  of
“French” economic philosophy, which emphasizes insurance and stabilization.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  found  the  recent  joint  policy  paper  of  leading  French  and  German  economists,  published  in
January, most relevant, with its call for a constructive rethinking of the inherited national positions
on the question of the future development of the EMU. Creating a European synthesis means
building a solid stability union that emphasizes each member state’s own responsibility, but also
recognizes the necessity of joint structures to preserve financial stability.
We  should  work  for  such  kind  of  Europe  that  combines  entrepreneurial  drive  and  a  stability
culture; for a Europe that seeks growth beyond its own borders through free-trade agreements
despite  headwinds;  for  a  Europe  where  citizens  and  businesses  can  benefit  from  a  genuine
single market; and for a Europe that guarantees civil rights in the digital age.
And we should build the kind of Europe that opens up our citizens’ opportunities to innovate and
create new businesses and therefore jobs. Ensuring equal rights and unleashing the potential of
women  at  workplace  in  the  business  life  is  an  essential  building  block  of  a  more  creative
productive Europe, France and Finland.
Let me wish you a successful conference and a Happy International Women’s Day!
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
