Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Having  the  foresight  to  future-ready  the
economy
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Management Association  of  the  Philippines’  (MAP)  Economic
Briefing 2018 and General Membership Meeting, Manila, 6 March 2018.
 President  Ramoncito  Fernandez;  MAP  officers  and  members;  special  guests;  ladies  and
gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I  am  grateful  to  be  here  at  the  Management  Association  of  the  Philippines’  First  Economic
Briefing  for  2018.    I  shall  give  this  message  in  two  parts.    First,  I  will  give  an  update  on  the
Philippine economy and then, I will share our exciting prospects. 
Updates on the Philippine Economy
We at the BSP are optimistic.  This optimism is shared.  According to the World Bank, “The
Philippines will continue to be the fastest-growing economy in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) [for 2018–2020], despite some stabilization of investment growth.”
Moreover,  growth  projections  from  third-party  assessors  are  not  far  from  the  national
government’s target of 7.0-8.0 percent growth in the next three years.
We  note  that  growth  achieved  over  the  past  several  years  is  broad-based  and  comes  from
various sources.
On the production side, the share of industry output (e.g., manufacturing and construction) has
been expanding and is a welcome transformation. On the demand side, growth is buoyed by
both robust private consumption and capital investments. 
Another  source  of  confidence  comes  from  sustained  investments  in  job-creating  industries. 
There  was  double-digit  year-on-year  expansion  of  approved  investments  for  the  first  three
quarters of 2017.
Moreover, the favorable inflation environment enables and promotes greater economic activity.
For six consecutive years (i.e., 2009–2014), as well as in 2017, headline inflation has been within
the national government’s inflation target range.
For February 2018, year-on-year headline inflation increased to 4.5 percent from 4.0 percent in
January using the 2006-based Consumer Price Index (CPI) series. Likewise, headline inflation
rose to 3.9 percent in February from 3.4 percent in the previous month using the 2012-based CPI
series. The uptick in headline inflation was traced mainly to higher prices of selected food and
non-food items. In particular, rice prices increased due to the end of the harvest season. At the
same time, inflation for transport, restaurant, and miscellaneous goods and services also went
up.
The  year-to-date  average  of  4.2  percent  using  the  2006-based  basket  was  slightly  above  the
Government’s announced inflation target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point for 2018
while  the  year-to-date  average  of  3.7  percent  using  the  2012-based  basket  remain  within  the
Government’s announced inflation target range.
The first round price effects of TRAIN are evolving more or less as expected. We continue to see
the  upward  inflationary  effects  as  transitory.  However,  we  are  carefully  assessing  next  round
effects  and  how  inflation  expectations  could  be  affected.  The  various  social  safety  nets
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
complementing the TRAIN are expected to temper these second round effects. Moreover, the
resulting  improvement  in  productivity  will  likely  moderate  inflation  pressures  over  the  medium
term.
Nevertheless,  the  BSP  will  remain  watchful  against  signs  of  higher  inflation  becoming  more
broad-based  and  persistent  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  remain  consistent  with  the
target. 
Domestic  liquidity  and  credit  dynamics  remain  accommodating  to  our  expanding  economy.
Credit expansion is accompanied by solid demand for loans across key economic sectors.
Further, the Philippine banking system capped 2017 with sustained growth in assets, deposits,
and capital.  This was accompanied by improved asset quality, firm liquidity position, and strong
capitalization.
Overall,  the  Philippine  banking  system  remains  sound  and  stable.  We  expect  these
improvements to continue. 
The Philippines’ external position also continues to be manageable amid global headwinds.  The
BOP deficit is a reflection of an economy that is growing rapidly in a way that is sustainable. The
current account balance also mirrors the saving and investment behaviour of the economy. Our
savings  investment  gap  has  stayed  positive  since  2003  (hence  the  CA  surpluses  during  this
period) but has started to converge in 2015 due mainly to the rise in investments and increase in
infrastructure  spending.  Over  time,  these  investment led  economic  activities  will  result  in  the
expansion of the economy’s potential capacity.
The robustness of the country’s external position is anchored by our large GIR and secondary
buffers such as sustained foreign direct investments, remittances and BPO receipts, along with
investment grade-rating that guarantees ready market access for any equity and debt financing
requirement.
Meanwhile,  the  peso  continues  to  flexibly  reflect  the  day-to-day  market  operations.  Exchange
rates act as automatic stabilizer if they move in a way that dampens the effects of shocks on
domestic output. In short, the disequilibrium gets corrected automatically with the change in the
exchange  rate.  There  will  be  volatility,  runs  and  corrections,  but  the  peso  is  not  expected  to
meltdown  because  the  underlying  economic  fundamentals  of  the  economy  are  healthy.    The
depreciation of the peso has mirrored the continued bullish sentiment on the economy’s growth
performance  and  prospects.  These  are  evident  in  the  (1)  strong  demand  for  imports,  (2)
residents’ increased direct and portfolio investments abroad, and (3) debt prepayments by both
the public and private sectors. All of these contributed to an increase in the demand for dollars
and dollar-denominated assets.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine economy enjoys a sustainable growth momentum.  Over
the medium term, the Philippine economy is expected to expand by above six percent annually in
the next three years.
But  this  does  not  warrant  complacency.  For  both  the  government  and  the  private  sector,
disruptive forces must keep us on our toes.
Prospects for the Philippine Economy
This brings me to the second part of my message as I share our prospects for the Philippine
economy.  I feel right at home and in my element as I engage in sharing our plans... In this era of
technological breakthroughs and radical innovation, MAP could not have chosen a more timely
and  relevant  theme  for  its  activities  this  year.  BSP’s  planned  game  changing  reforms  and
initiatives  align  with  your  theme.    “Competing  in  the  age  of  disruption.”    I  like  that.    It  shows
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
foresight. 
Foresight does not necessarily mean being able to predict the future.  Rather, I believe it means
having insight on relevant factors and to allow for flexibility and optionality as the future unfolds. 
And the future is already here.  It is unfolding.
Indeed,  the  way  governments  tackle  policymaking  and  the  way  businesses  operate  are  being
altered  by  megatrends.    These  include  a  rebalancing  of  the  world  economy,  changes  in
demographics, and the rise of disruptive technologies, to name a few.
These  trends  cannot  be  ignored.    Complexities  such  as  these  make  it  challenging  to  frame
economic policy. 
Acknowledging  this,  the  Bangko  Sentral  under  my  Governorship  has  set  its  sights  on  game-
changing financial sector reforms.  These initiatives aim to gear up the financial system to be
very efficient, flexible and market-driven so that it can be innovative, competitive, and ready to
adjust to the needs of customers.  Further, allowing markets to discover prices on their own and
encouraging self-correction mechanisms will make our economy more resilient and future ready.
First  -    the  BSP,  together  with  other  government  agencies,  industry  associations  and  market
participants,  have  rolled  out  initiatives  to  further  develop  the  local  currency  debt  and  foreign
exchange (FX) markets.   
The reform agenda on debt markets officially unfolded in November 2017 with the launch of the
Government  Securities  Repo  Program.  Last  February  19,  2018,  the  Bureau  of  the  Treasury
released the implementing guidelines for the enhanced Government Securities Eligible Dealers
(GSED)  Program.    This  program  aims  to  improve  the  primary  debt  market  and  increase  the
liquidity and depth of the secondary market.  We are looking forward to further enhancements in
the  market  infrastructure  and  the  issuance  of  improved  interest  rate  benchmark  guidelines
toward a more reliable yield curve.
We  are  also  undertaking  ambitious  FX  reforms  towards  a  deeper  and  better  organized  FX
market.  This includes further liberalizing FX rules to reduce cost of doing business and improve
data capture.  Last January 15, 2018, new rules that lifted prior BSP approval and streamlined
registration processes for purely private sector foreign currency loans took effect.  A window was
likewise opened for six months providing an amnesty period during which private sector loans
previously obtained without prior BSP approval can register and be eligible for servicing from the
banking system.  To date, the BSP has received 21 loan registration under this amnesty window
covering around USD489 million outstanding balances.  We expect captured data to increase
further  as  the  simplified  rules  gain  traction.    Currently,  we  are  finalizing  an  exposure  draft
amending FX rules on foreign investments. Further amendments to adopt similar measures on
trade and non-trade transactions shall likewise be undertaken. 
Over  the  medium  term,  we  plan  to  enhance  governance  and  FX  market  oversight  that  will
improve transparency, price discovery and market conduct.  Ultimately, we want to see a more
liquid FX market that supports a flexible and market-determined exchange rate.
Relatedly, last February 15, 2018, we announced yet another major and bold financial market
reform initiative...  We began phased reduction of our ultra-high reserve requirement regime to
allow  efficient  absorption  and  mobilization  of  liquidity.    The  Monetary  Board  approved  the
reduction  in  the  reserve  requirement  ratio  (RRR)  by  one  percentage  point  as  an  operational
adjustment to support the BSP’s shift towards a more market-based implementation of monetary
policy.  This took effect last March 2, 2018. 
There  is  a  calibrated  speed  and  a  purposeful  timing  in  carrying  these  reductions  out.    The
purpose is to promote a more efficient and level financial system which is less biased against
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
deposit-taking  financial  institutions.    The  purpose  is  to  lessen  market  distortions  which  create
inefficiencies.  The purpose is to shift to market-based monetary instruments for more effective
monetary policy transmission.
We have heavily relied on reserve requirements for a long time in a situation of underdeveloped
banking and financial markets and limited open market operation tools.  This is no longer the
case for the Philippines.  Our financial system is more sophisticated, disciplined, and resilient;
our economy is much stronger today.  Further, the BSP has attained sufficient progress since
the adoption of the interest rate corridor (IRC) framework in 2016 which provides us ample space
to mitigate potential liquidity impact of a phased reduction in reserve requirement via off-setting
auction-based monetary operations.
There is misconception that these phased reductions in the reserve requirement signal easing of
the  monetary  policy  stance.    This  is  certainly  not  the  case    —  and  I  cannot  emphasize  this
enough — this is an operational adjustment that is part of innovative financial sector reforms that
we  are  currently  implementing.   Any  ensuing  excess  liquidity  is  to  be  siphoned  off  by  BSP’s
dynamic open market operations and transactions with the national government.  Further, the
flexibility of the exchange rate provides additional adjustment mechanism....  Therefore, analysts’
fears that this will fuel more inflation is based on an incomplete analysis of the impact of this
operational adjustment. 
Moreover, to the extent that speculators use RRR reduction as a pretext for peso depreciation,
BSP  participates  in  the  market  to  manage  excessive  volatility.  We  believe  this  can  effectively
drain peso liquidity from the system.  There will be self-correction, which is how efficient markets
work.
Ultimately,  the  BSP  has  many  options  to  maintain  firm  monetary  control.    Shifts  in  monetary
policy stance will continue to be signalled through changes in the policy rates.  Thus, analyst
concerns of ensuing looser monetary policy is really unfounded.
Second -  Regulators like the BSP must foster an enabling ecosystem where competition and
responsible innovations are encouraged to thrive. 
We believe that regulations should not stand in the way of market developments.   At the BSP,
we  have  strategically  opened  up  the  banking  system  to  competition.    For  instance,  since  the
enactment of the Foreign Banks Liberalization Law in 2014, the Monetary Board has approved 12
foreign bank applications and 5 representative offices.  Similarly, our flexible approach to financial
innovation encourage competition from new players, including fintech companies.
Leveraging  on  safe,  innovative  and  affordable  financial  instruments  and  channels  also  drives
business and industry growth and serves as the gateway to greater financial inclusion.
Professor  Klaus  Schwab,  Founder  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  quipped,  “There  has  never
been a time of greater promise, or greater peril.” This given, the BSP seeks to continually build a
regulatory  environment  for  innovations  to  flourish,  yet  still  mindful  that  risks  to  stability  and
integrity – including from  cyber  attacks,  money  laundering,  and  terrorism  financing  –  must  be
effectively managed.
There are three principles that underpin our regulatory approach: First, regulation must be risk-
based, proportionate and fair. Second, there is need for active multi-stakeholder collaboration.
Third,  consumer  protection  must  be  upheld  and  innovation  must  work  for  the  benefit  of
consumers.
Our  “test  and  learn”  approach  remains  useful  as  we  continue  to  deal  with  increasing  digital
innovations in the market.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The BSP is also on constant surveillance mode for other fintech activities by emerging market
players. For example, we are monitoring industry developments on crowd-funding and peer-to-
peer lending, ready to take regulatory action when necessary. 
The  BSP  is  working  with  the  industry  in  implementing  the  National  Retail  Payment  System
(NRPS). 
Lastly,  the  BSP  is  currently  closely  coordinating  with  regulators  from  other  jurisdictions  for
possible  information  sharing  and  a  referral  system  focused  on  fintechs.    Under  the  proposed
agreements, authorities will facilitate the entry of potential fintech players from their respective
jurisdictions  to  minimize  any  duplication  of  efforts  and  further  promote  expansion  of  fintech
innovations in the region.
Ladies and gentlemen, with both challenges and opportunities brought about by rapid innovation
and technological disruption, economic players must adapt to changes, or else, one may find
itself adrift and lost.
Rest  assured  that  the  BSP  is  committed  to  continue  to  pursue  reforms  to  allow  digital
innovations to flourish as long as prudent standards are in place, and to ensure a level playing
field for all stakeholders concerned – be it the businesses, consumers, or the general public.
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the BSP, I wish MAP a productive and collaborative year
ahead. Thank you and good afternoon.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
