Gent Sejko: Commencement address - graduation ceremony
Commencement address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the graduation
ceremony of the students of the European University of Tirana, Tirana, 16 July 2018.
 Honourable President of the University,
Distinguished professors,
Dear students,
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to be at the European University of Tirana, a prominent
educational institution, with high academic and education values.
Today is one of the most special days in your life. After a long period of studies, you successfully
conclude an important stage of your life. For many years, step by step, the educational cycle has
come to an end, and now you deservingly feel proud for the many accomplishments that have
brought you to this day.
Personally, I think, this is one of the greatest achievements in your life. It is a battle gained, which
will essentially determine the shape and the content of success in your future career.
As you hit an important milestone in your life, you are joining now the great army of professionals.
I take this opportunity to exhort you – start this long journey with courage, desire and strong will.
As you try to build your career, try to settle for nothing less than the best for yourself.
Do  not  hesitate  to  show  the  best  values  of  your  young  character  and  age:  idealism,
profoundness and honesty. Remember to bring among us the energy, the enthusiasm of your
generation,  your  characteristic  sincerity  and  originality.  Fight  without  compromises  and  with
idealism to achieve your goals, stand up for what you believe and follow what inspires you in your
everyday life.
Support each other and those who care for you. Become messengers of contemporaneity and
innovation,  but  never  absent  yourselves  from  knowledge.  Your  relationship  with  knowledge,
literature,  and  the  scientific  novelties  does  not  end  today.  It  is  a  known  fact  that  it  shall
accompany you in every station of life. Such is the dynamic of our days.
Dear students,
Life  beyond  the  auditoriums  is  more  challenging.  In  everyday  life,  you  may  encounter  difficult
moments and complex challenges. But, difficulties should not discourage you; on the contrary,
you should become stronger and take up the emotional and psychological challenges.
The most important thing is to draw your lessons, on a case by case basis, sharing them with
friends and colleagues. Look forward, give others the reasons to believe in you, transmit positivity
and join every visionary project that inspires love, prosperity, integrity and human understanding.
This is Albania of different values a legacy to leave to the next generations. Start from today to
build it, based on your aspirations and our common European dream.
The Bank of Albania is always open to welcome talented students and devoted persons.
Congratulations and all the best in your future endeavours!
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
