Jens Weidmann: Dinner speech
Dinner speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  "350  years  of  Central
Banking:  The  Past,  the  Present  and  the  Future"  a  Sveriges  Riksbank  anniversary  conference
sponsored by the Riksbank and the Riksdag, Stockholm, 25 May 2018.
 1 Introduction
Your Royal Majesties
Mister Speaker Ahlin
Chairperson Eberstein
Governor Ingves, dear Stefan
Your Excellencies
Honourable guests
Dear colleagues
Thank you for inviting me to speak to such a distinguished audience at this extraordinary event. It
is a truly remarkable anniversary we are celebrating today. I, too, want to congratulate Stefan
Ingves and all of the Riksbank staff on 350 years of central bank history. This is an amazing
achievement.
Being  the  world’s  oldest  central  bank,  and  the  third-oldest  bank,  it  has  been  a  trailblazer  for
monetary institutions from the get-go. When we talk about the history of the Riksbank, we talk
about the history of central banking and money itself. And I would like to share some thoughts on
these two histories while I make you wait for the dessert.
The Austrian playwright Johann Nepomuk Nestroy once remarked: “The Phoenicians invented
money. But why so little of it?”
The question may sound unserious today. But the answer that presumably pops up immediately
in everyone’s head – to be of value, money has to be scarce – is there because history has
drummed it in over and over again, with some of the earliest chapters coming from the history of
the Riksbank.
In 1624, Sweden introduced the copper standard due to a shortage of silver and gold. The new
commodity  money  soon  proved  rather  impractical,  though,  with  the  largest  copper  coins
weighing more than 20 kilograms.
In  1660,  the  central  government  started  to  mint  new  coins  of  a  lower  weight.  But  depositors
called for the old, heavier coins, as they had a higher metal value. As customers frantically tried
to get hold of the heavier coins, a bank run ensued.
The Riksbank’s predecessor, Stockholms Banco, then issued deposit certificates, which were in
fact handed out as loans from the bank and could be exchanged for any purchase at will. This
marked the introduction of banknotes in Europe.
The banknotes proved initially a huge success, as they were obviously far more convenient than
the  large  and  heavy  copper  coins.  But  with  demand  for  the  new  banknotes  rising,  the  bank
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
started to print more and more of them. Soon, the inevitable happened: The notes lost value, the
public demanded that their notes be redeemed, and the bank came crashing down.
From the dust of Stockholms Banco, the Riksbank was founded by the government. And one of
its tasks was to “maintain the domestic coinage at its right and fair value"  – which, neglecting
the old-fashioned language, sounds like a policy objective that would still be useful today.
1
Money based on public trust can powerfully enhance welfare. This is what the experience of the
Riksbank has shown, throughout its trials and tribulations. But its experience has also shown that
the benefits only accrue if the public’s trust in the value of the currency is given policy priority.
2 The Riksbank and inflation targeting
Some of the challenges the Riksbank has encountered during its history have been mentioned
already. Let me fast-forward to one of the more recent policies that has certainly strengthened
trust  in  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  deliver  price  stability:  inflation  targeting.  The  Riksbank  has
been an early adopter of this policy, introducing a target of 2% inflation in 1993.
Inflation targeting greatly helped to moderate swings in inflation and output. In fact, it did so to
2
such a degree that economists like Nobel Prize winner Robert Lucas  had declared the central
problem of preventing large economic fluctuations to have been solved.
As we now know, inflation targeting has not spelled “The End of History” for monetary policy.
Rather, the “Great Moderation”, as these years of extreme economic stability came to be known,
ended in the “Great Recession”.
3 Leaning against the wind
As policymakers had to deal with tumbling banking systems and toxic assets in banks’ balance
sheets during the financial crisis, they could once again turn to the Nordic experience, this time
that of the early nineties.
In  a  1996  issue  of  the  Riksbank’s  Quarterly  Review,  a  certain  Stefan  Ingves  laid  out  the
management  of  this  episode  in  detail.  Later,  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision, Stefan would put his knowledge to excellent use and made an invaluable
contribution to sounder banking systems.
The repercussions of the financial crisis were not limited to regulatory policy, though.
The crisis has reignited the debate of whether central banks should “lean against the wind” and
use  monetary  policy  also  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  asset  price  bubbles.  This  debate  is  still
ongoing. And as usual, the Riksbank has been at the forefront of it, with regard to both policy
invention and implementation.
The  Riksbank  started  to  tighten  monetary  policy  in  2010.  Initially,  the  concern  was  rising
consumer  prices.  But  attention  soon  shifted  to  high  levels  of  household  debt,  which  were
perceived to present a vulnerability to the wider economy. To mitigate this weakness, monetary
policy continued to tighten.
This decision was not uncontroversial at the time. Then Deputy Governor Svensson argued that
it was the job of macroprudential policy, not monetary policy, to deal with debt vulnerabilities. He
voiced his concern that monetary policy was too blunt a tool for mitigating financial stability risks,
and that doing so would cause macroeconomic performance to suffer.
And  indeed:  while  household  debt  was  not  curbed  significantly,  inflation  dropped  below  target
levels and unemployment started to rise.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
What is the takeaway here? For me, it is first and foremost that moving monetary policy into
uncharted territory will trigger debate. In my opinion, this is something not to shy away from, but
to  welcome  and  embrace.  For  it  is  only  when  we  openly  and  constructively  debate  our
differences that progress is possible.
This episode thus speaks to the strength of the Riksbank as an institution. When it comes to
wider implications for monetary policy, it seems to me that the lessons are actually less clear
than what immediately meets the eye.
Yes:  When  it  comes  to  handling  financial  stability  risks,  monetary  policy  is  a  sledgehammer
rather than a scalpel. Macroprudential policy should be the preferred choice of tool, and getting it
ready for use has to be a political top priority.
However, the effectiveness of many instruments has not been confirmed in practice. And since
applying these instruments could mean, for example, that it becomes harder for some to qualify
for a mortgage, policymakers might be reluctant to use them.
In order for monetary policy to fulfil its mandate and to ensure clear accountability, it’s important
that price stability remains the primary objective of monetary policy.
But  that  is  not  to  say  that  when  it  comes  to  monetary  policy  and  price  stability  there  are  no
lessons  to  be  learned. As  we  have  recently  witnessed,  financial  crises  have  a  considerable
impact  on  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process,  and  monetary  policymakers’  ability  to
guarantee price stability and price developments as such.
Financial crises almost always originate in excessively loose bank lending.  The last crisis was
no exception.
3
Confining monetary policy to mopping up when the milk is already spilled creates an asymmetry.
In my opinion, a symmetrical monetary policy that takes into account money and credit growth
and that is oriented towards the medium term seems most conducive to price stability.
Just  to  be  clear:  I  am  not  arguing  in  favour  of  a  monetary  policy  that  strictly  targets  money
growth.  But  I  do  suggest  that  money  and  credit  developments  provide  valuable  information  to
monetary  policymakers.  In  principle,  this  is  already  the  basis  of  the  Eurosystem’s  two-pillar
strategy.
4 E-krona
Finally, a project where the Riksbank seems to be even more ahead of the pack is digital central
bank money. Developments in this field have been dizzying.
We have had to familiarise ourselves with new concepts, including at least the basic intuition of
the blockchain, and, not to forget, a host of buzzwords. And whereas minting coins in the 17th
century required quite a bit of metal, as I pointed out at the beginning, mining crypto token can
require quite a bit of energy — a single bitcoin transaction, for example, uses up to 900 kilowatt
hours  of  electricity  (in April  2018),  enough  to  power  a  four-person  household  for  two  months.
Separating hidden potentials of new technologies from the hype and excesses is challenging,
often arduous.
The  effects  of  digital  central  bank  money  on  the  payment  system  will  not  be  the  only
consideration for central banks, however. Depending on its concrete design, digital central bank
money would provide non-financial corporations and even households with access to the central
bank balance sheet. Evidently, cash allows this, too. But unlike cash, digital balances have no
noteworthy storage costs.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Allowing  the  public  to  hold  claims  on  the  central  bank  might  make  their  liquid  assets  safer,
because a central bank cannot become insolvent. This is a feature which will become relevant
especially in times of crisis – when there will be a strong incentive for money holders to switch
bank deposits into the official digital currency simply at the push of a button.
But  what  might  be  a  boon  for  savers  in  search  of  safety  might  be  a  bane  for  banks,  as  this
makes a bank run potentially even easier. In taking deposits away from banks, it also reduces
their ability to engage in maturity and liquidity transformation and make loans.
A new technology therefore reopens an old debate in economics: does maturity transformation
enhance welfare, or should banks be prevented from creating liquidity? Once again, the Riksbank
is spearheading the debate. And, I am sure, we will all be richer for it.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
I‘ll leave it at that, as we are now looking forward to the last course, the dessert – and maybe
even a piece of the by now famous birthday cake.
Some of you may have seen the video clip — after Stefan has been tasked by the Board with
organizing the cake, he bargains with the cake shop over the lettering. And as each letter costs
extra,  the  thrifty  Governor  has  the  text  cut  down  from  “Sveriges  Riksbank  350  years”  to
“Riksbank 350”. While this is certainly meant to illustrate the Riksbank‘s responsible use of public
money, the underlying self-irony also gives testament to the Riksbank’s vitality and youthfulness,
even at 350 years.
The aforementioned Johann Nepomuk Nestroy also said the following: “Everybody wants to live
long, but nobody wants to get old.” In my opinion, this sums up the Riksbank perfectly. It has lived
for 350 years, and it is going as strong and innovative as ever.
So, to the next 350 years!
1
2
3
Gunnar Wetterberg (2009), “Money and Power, From Stockholm's Banco 1656 to Sveriges Riksbank Today”
Robert Lucas (2003), Macroeconomic priorities, American Economic Review, 2003, Vol 93, issue 1, 1-14.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M Taylor. 2012. "Credit booms gone bust: monetary policy, leverage cycles, and
financial crises, 1870-2008." American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029-61.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
