Yves Mersch: "Rencontres du Club SEPA"
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the "Rencontres du Club SEPA", Paris, 15 February 2018.
 With the launch of instant payments in euro in November 2017, the European retail payments
market entered a new era. We are moving from a world where it is considered normal to wait a
day or more for a payment to arrive to a world where payments are delivered in real time. This is
overdue as I consider it anachronistic that services in an e-commerce transaction are delivered
in real time and even goods sometimes only take a few hours – while the settlement of payments
to  release  such  goods  and  services  would  take  a  full  business  day.  Now,  payments  will  be
delivered as fast as emails, instant messages and streamed content. I believe that – as was the
case  in  these  other  industries  –  end-users,  at  least  the  younger  and  technology-proficient
generation, will soon start to expect instant payments. Instant has the potential to become the
new normal, and we will wonder how we were ever satisfied with payments arriving only on the
next business day.
In order to support these demands and enhance customer experience, it is not sufficient to have
the infrastructures in place to process payments instantly; payment solutions that are tailored to
the specific needs of consumers and businesses are also required. In order to foster a dialogue
on such needs, the ECB hosted an event last week at which providers demonstrated the apps
they have created to support instant payments and exchanged views about the extent to which
they would meet customer needs.
This event reinforced my firm belief that instant payments will be the basis for innovative payment
solutions,  but  at  the  same  time,  it  is  only  in  combination  with  these  solutions  that  instant
payments will live up to their potential to become the new normal. This is why today I call on the
industry  to  take  the  next  step  and  develop  end-user  solutions  that  will  allow  consumers  and
businesses  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  instant  electronic  payments  in  any  payment  situation,  in
addition to cash, which is still popular.
Instant payments – a tool for innovation in payments
Until now, the focus has mainly been on the three basic layers of the instant payments pyramid:
the scheme, clearing and settlement layers. Great progress has been made in all three of these:
At the request of the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB), the European Payments Council
launched the SEPA Instant Credit Transfer (SCT Inst) scheme in November 2017, which
over 1,000 payment service providers have already joined, with many more set to follow.
Several automated clearing houses in Europe have started clearing SCT Inst transactions,
supported by an enhanced settlement module provided by the Eurosystem.
The TARGET instant payment settlement (TIPS) service is scheduled to go live in November
2018, ensuring the pan-European reach of instant payments – which has been one of the
main objectives of the ERPB in that context.
These layers form the basis on which new, user-friendly services could be built. However, for
instant payments to reach their full potential, a fourth layer is needed: the end-user solution layer.
Without  efficient,  user-friendly  end-user  solutions,  instant  payments  only  make  ordinary  credit
transfers faster – but instant payments can be much more than that: they can be a basis for
innovation.
We  have  recognised  the  importance  of  end-user  solutions  from  the  beginning.  That  is  why
person-to-person  (P2P)  mobile  payments  have  been  a  priority  for  the  Eurosystem  and  the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ERPB. A service that will allow people all around Europe to make mobile payments to others,
using  their  mobile  phone  number  as  an  identifier,  is  expected  to  be  available  by  October  this
year. When people can easily send and receive payments instantly via their mobile phone, the
advantages of instant payments will become evident. This makes P2P payments an important
first use case – but it should not remain the only one.
If  you  can  instantly  send  money  to  a  friend,  then  why  not  also  to  a  business?  Why  should
merchants have to wait days for funds to arrive, when the infrastructure to process payments
instantly is available?
Point of sale
Instant point-of-sale payments would provide merchants with immediate and final payment – not
a claim against the customer or a guarantee from a credit card company, but funds credited to
the merchant’s account with finality, like cash. This will improve merchants’ cash flow and allow
them to use the received funds immediately, for example to pay their suppliers. It is essential that
the “instant at the point of sale” solutions that need to be developed are pan-European in nature,
convenient for consumers and technically not too complex for merchants. I call on the payments
industry to start working in this direction.
E-commerce
In  e-commerce,  too,  instant  payments  can  be  an  enabler  for  innovation.  Building  on  what  I
mentioned earlier, customers must be able to easily initiate an instant payment from an online
shopping environment and the merchant must instantly receive confirmation that the payment
has been executed. The revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) provides a stable legislative
framework  for  such  services  and  aims  to  foster  innovation  and  competition  in  this  field.  The
ERPB, taking the revised PSD2 and the close-to-final regulatory technical standards as a basis,
has supported the industry in its endeavours to reach agreement on the necessary technical,
operational  and  business  elements  to  ensure  the  pan-European  provision  of  innovative  and
competitive payment initiation services. This work is well under way and will be concluded by
June this year. In parallel, the European Commission has encouraged a group of market actors
to evaluate Application Programming Interface (API) technical specifications to ensure that they
will meet market needs and will be fit for purpose when accessing customer accounts to initiate
payments.
Security
The PSD2 provides many opportunities for innovative services, including, but not limited to, e-
commerce payment solutions. Such solutions require standardised access to accounts, but also
security  throughout  the  payment  chain.  The  PSD2  regulatory  technical  standards  on  strong
customer  authentication  and  common  and  secure  communication  strike  a  good  balance
between  the  needs  of  consumers,  third-party  providers  and  banks.  They  will  probably  not  be
applicable  until  September  2019  at  the  earliest.  Since  the  main  provisions  of  the  PSD2  have
been in effect since last month, I call on payment service providers to fulfil the requirements of
the regulatory technical standards, even if they are not yet legally required to do so, during the
transition period until these standards enter into force. It is in their own interests to do so, as this
will guarantee the high security levels that are necessary to retain public trust in the payment
system and payment services.
Instant payments versus virtual currencies
Smart, pan-European instant payment solutions meet the needs of end-users in the digital age,
being fast and easy to use as well as safe and reliable. The SCT Inst scheme and the underlying
market infrastructure are subject to Eurosystem oversight, and settlement takes place in central
bank money. By contrast, so-called virtual currency schemes such as bitcoin, which have been
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
touted by some as the payment method of the future, cannot achieve that. First, bitcoin is not a
currency but simply a speculative digital asset. It tends to be processed inefficiently and – by
comparison  with  instant  payments  –  30  times  more  slowly,  and  is  about  10,000  times  more
expensive.  The  inefficient  processing  makes  transactions  costly  not  just  from  a  financial
perspective,  but  also  in  terms  of  the  environmental  impact.  Bitcoin  in  particular  has  a  large
carbon  footprint  due  to  the  electricity  consumption  required  for  its  creation  and  transfer.  In
addition, because virtual currencies do not have a trusted issuer behind them, they may become
worthless at any time. It is not surprising, then, that virtual currencies are not widely accepted as
a means of payment.
Conclusion
The future of payments is instant and most countries in the euro area are moving with the times.
This  is  a  natural  development,  following  the  rise  of  real-time  services  in  other  industries.  The
industry (with the support of the Eurosystem) has stepped up to the challenge and developed a
scheme  and  an  infrastructure  that  enable  such  services  to  become  the  new  normal  for  euro
payments.  Now  it  is  time  to  go  one  step  further  and  provide  efficient  and  innovative  end-user
solutions that allow consumers and businesses across Europe to make instant payments in any
payment situation, especially at the point of sale, where the majority of retail payments are made.
I encourage new and existing service providers to take the opportunity to develop pan-European
point-of-sale  solutions  based  on  instant  payments.  These  solutions  should  be  efficient,  user-
friendly and secure. As you are all aware, high security standards are essential to retain public
trust. I therefore reiterate my call to payment service providers to adhere to the PSD2 regulatory
technical standards on strong customer authentication and common and secure communication
as soon as possible, even before they are legally required to do so. By providing services that are
safe, as well as fast and convenient, the payments industry will succeed in meeting the needs of
a digitalised society.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
