Urjit R Patel: Financial system and the macroeconomy
Opening remarks by Dr Urjit R Patel, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Centre for
Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL) Conference on "Financial System and the
Macroeconomy", Mumbai, 7 December 2017.
 1. It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning to share some observations and thoughts.
The theme of this international conference: “Financial System and the Macroeconomy”, and the
papers that are slated for presentation touch upon a number of issues that the Reserve Bank
has been grappling with. (Needless to say, some of the conference participants who follow the
Indian  economy  closely  would  already  be  aware  of  what  I  am  about  to  briefly  enunciate,  but
others may not, and these remarks would, I hope, be helpful to them.)
2. For us in India, an eventful 2017 is drawing to a close with important transformations in place,
viz., a new monetary policy framework with decision making by a Monetary Policy Committee
(MPC); demonetisation of high value currency notes; introduction of a goods and services tax
(GST)  regime;  the  Insolvency  and  Bankruptcy  Code  (IBC);  promulgation  of  the  Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Act and a recapitalisation plan for government-owned banks. As these
key  changes  mould  India’s  financial  sector  landscape,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  briefly
explain how they will shape the outlook.
3. Entrenching macroeconomic stability:  Two  significant  developments  have  taken  place  in
the  recent  period.  First,  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  India  has  been  defined
explicitly “to maintain price stability while keeping in mind the objective of growth". Second, an
MPC has been constituted with the task of setting the benchmark policy rate in pursuit of this
goal  defined  in  the  amended  RBI Act  (2016).  The  new  monetary  policy  framework  has  been
playing an important role in shaping inflation expectations and outcomes. With some disinflation
underway,  inflation  expectations  are,  perhaps,  getting  re-anchored,  indicative,  in  part,  of  the
credibility  earned  by  the  new  framework;  but  these  are  early  days,  and  hence  considerable
caution and vigilance is warranted on the inflation front. Recent success in containing inflationary
pressures needs to be viewed in the broader context of entrenching macroeconomic stability in
1
which the Government has played a crucial part.
4. Alongside,  the  current  account  deficit  remains  within  sustainable  levels,  other  indicators  of
external viability such as the ratios of indebtedness to GDP and/or reserves are also reflecting a
healthy improvement. The Government has pursued the path of fiscal consolidation and the ratio
of public debt to GDP is gradually declining. International investors have warmed to where the
Indian economy is currently positioned and this is reflected in sizeable foreign investment inflows.
Meanwhile, domestic financial markets have shown resilience and stability in spite of escalation
of  global  geo-political  uncertainty  and  heightened  volatility  in  financial  markets.  These
developments have enabled the build-up of “buffers” against unforeseen shocks.
5. Taming the non-performing assets problem: A landmark development relating to resolution
of stressed assets is the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 2016. From the Reserve Bank’s
point  of  view,  a  great  enabler  in  this  context  has  been  the  Banking  Regulation  (Amendment)
Ordinance promulgated in May and subsequently enacted in August this year. By the authority it
conferred on the Reserve Bank to issue directions to banks to initiate resolution processes, it
scales up the ability of the Reserve Bank to deal decisively with stress in banks’ balance sheets
and unclog the flow of credit to grease the wheels of growth. In the year ahead, we must seize
this opportunity to overcome the debilitating problem of corporate loan delinquency and get our
banks  back  into  the  mainstream  of  financial  intermediation.  The  recently  chalked  out
recapitalisation  plan  of  the  Government  for  public  sector  banks  will  ensure  that  flows  to
productive  sectors  (and  credit-worthy  borrowers)  are  not  impeded  and  growth  impulses  are
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
nurtured. The Government has also proposed to take steps to improve the corporate governance
of  PSBs  by  strengthening  boards,  bringing  objectivity  into  management  appointments,  and
decentralising decisions to the professional board.
6.  The  risk-based  supervisory  process  of  the  Reserve  Bank  keeps  flagging  the  risks  in  the
balance  sheet  of  banks  which  are  taken  up  with  the  institutions  concerned  for  remedy.
Previously, effective enforcement action on the specific violations/breaches has been a gap in
implementation. The new Enforcement Department was established in April this year for this
function; viz., concentrate on its mandate to develop a rule based, consistent framework to deal
with breaches of law, rules and directions. Effective deterrence enforced through such actions is
expected to contribute to strengthening the credit culture overall.
7.  The  Indian  economy  is  at  an  important  juncture.  Our  recent  growth  numbers  may  have
disappointed some in the first quarter of this fiscal year, but the second quarter has recorded an
uptick  and  the  slowdown  may  well  be  bottoming  out.  If  one  sees  far,  structural  changes  that
come with temporary disruptions can be growth and efficiency-augmenting in the medium to long
term. This is what has happened, for instance, with the introduction of the GST. It should yield
gains that will mean better tax compliance and a more efficient tax system that in turn will impart
a permanent upward push to our growth. To add one more important reform to the list, there has
been  substantial  liberalisation  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  policy,  embraced  by  FDI
investors with record inflows to India.
8. Let us now turn outward and situate the Indian economy in an international backdrop. Today
we  are  living  in  a  world  of  ever  increasing  financial  globalisation.  The  absolute  size  of  capital
flows  today  is  large  and,  worryingly  for  policymakers,  also  volatile.  Globalisation  has  brought
about a rapid integration of markets across boundaries with swift and massive movements of
capital in search of returns (so called “alphas” and “betas” depending on the current fad!). In its
train have accrued tremendous gains in terms of global growth, trade and welfare, but it has also
amplified risks, and in particular, the vulnerability to financial crises of overwhelming magnitude
and speed. This begs the question: are we in an environment of excessive financialisation? Let
us reflect on a few numbers. Total global external liabilities have grown from 30 per cent to 190
per cent of global GDP between 1980 and 2015, far outpacing the growth in global trade (from 19
per cent to 28 per cent of GDP over the same period). The main vehicle of this new globalisation
has  been  cross-border  banking  flows,  which  constituted  a  third  of  global  capital  flows  in  the
decade prior to the financial crisis. In parallel, the global trade network has become increasingly
interconnected through supply chains that transcend national borders, and by the advent of new
players, especially from the developing world. Emerging market and developing countries taken
together contribute 37 per cent of global trade (up by about 15 percentage points since 2000).
India’s cross border gross financial flows (both inflows and outflows) have also increased: to 47
per cent of GDP by 2016–17 from 12 per cent of GDP in 1990–91. Along with stable form of
capital  flows  such  as  FDI  that  come  with  relatively  long-lasting  interest  in  domestic  entities,
foreign portfolio (both equity and debt) capital flows have also increased making the economy
(like that of other open emerging markets) susceptible to enhanced volatility and sudden stop
or reversal risks.
9.  Therefore,  as  India  –  like  other  emerging  markets  –  has  undoubtedly  benefited  from
globalisation, we are also more exposed than before to vulnerabilities that come in its wake. Our
increasing dependence on the external world is reflected in outstanding external liabilities (both
debt and non-debt), which increased from about 30 per cent of GDP in March 2005 to 41 per
cent of GDP in March 2017. India’s net international investment position (i.e., outstanding assets
minus liabilities) has moved over the period from about –7 per cent of GDP to –17 per cent of
GDP. This is consistent with a prolonged phase of running current account deficits which have
been financed by increasing net liabilities to the rest of the world. With easing of limits over the
years,  there  has  been  a  rise  in  foreign  portfolio  capital  flows.  (Of  course,  this  has  to  be
appreciated in the context of the obvious economic benefits from international financial flows into
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital scarce countries).
2
10. Movement of capital in and out of the country is often linked to policy cycles in other countries
which throw up the challenges of international policy spillovers. With every new tail event, the
churn becomes larger, the volatility ever higher, threatening to overwhelm the modest defences
that emerging markets are able to muster. How does one protect policy independence in such a
world?  Do  we  need  meaningful  and  deeper  international  policy  coordination?  Or, universal
financial safety nets rather than the asymmetric ones available at present only to a small
number  of  countries,  which  is  more reminiscent  of  apartheid  rather  than  universality.
Meanwhile,  emerging  markets  that  are  at  the  receiving  end  of  global  financial  turbulence,  are
systematically  denied  access  to  such  risk  sharing.  The  time  has  come  to  end  this  sectarian
approach  and  to  make  the  access  to  swap  lines  equally  available  rather  than  only  for  the
privileged.  While emerging markets have shown a degree of resilience to the turmoil of recent
years, they remain vulnerable to liquidity and bridge financing gaps that are debilitating even if
transitory.  Against this background, building up adequate buffers in the form of foreign exchange
reserves is a natural self-insurance to manage these risks better and thereby prevent the risks
from assuming systemic proportions, threatening financial stability. In the absence of a broader
swap network, the macroeconomic environment of each country will inform the choice of policy
instruments. In such a milieu, international financial stability is endangered when the inadequacy
of buffers precipitates a crisis in one country and assumes global proportions. Likewise, there
cannot be any common code or uniform approach to capital account liberalisation. Nimble capital
flows  management  needs  to  be  intellectually  mainstreamed  (as  also  in  practice)  as
a conventional matter-of-fact component of the macro-prudential toolkit. Indeed, any attempts to
discourage the use of foreign exchange reserves as a macro-prudential tool would necessitate
that  capital  flows  have  to  be  managed  more  actively.  Conference  deliberations  today  and
4
tomorrow could, perhaps, help shape the dialogue in this regard.
3
11. The conference may explore: How effective are such policies? Should we think of them as
short-term interventions or long-term policies?
12.  Financial  stability  is  also  endangered  by  asset  bubbles.  Yield  chasing  investors  –  both
domestic  and  foreign  –  can  catalyse  (contribute  to)  frothiness  in  asset  markets.  How  much
attention should central bankers be paying to such froth in asset markets in deciding monetary
policy?
13. The link between asset markets and the real economy is another area of continuing interest
for central banks. While the issue probably came to the fore during the global financial crisis, the
mechanisms  and  channels  which  link  them  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  are  of  fundamental
importance for monetary policy.
14. A related source of concern for policymakers is about managing inflation. There is growing
global  uncertainty  regarding  the  determining  factors  of  inflation,  especially  in  advanced
economies. Do we need to rethink the monetary transmission mechanism itself or is the recent
weakening of the traditional link between policy and inflation just a temporary phenomenon?
15. A number of the papers in this conference will address some of these subjects. I look forward
to fruitful discussions which will not just push the debate forward on these issues but, hopefully,
also provide some enlightening policy insights.
16. Thank you.
1
2
The Government has been, inter alia, active in managing price pressures in some of the key food items.
One aspect in this context which hasn’t received the requisite attention is that those economies/central banks
which are privileged members of this network are (implicitly and inadvertently) incentivised to be reckless or
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
follow policy that is sub-optimal from a global welfare perspective; in other words, is moral hazard perhaps
exacerbated?
Real economy implications on account of Hysteresis can be deep and durable.
There needs to be considerable rethinking around the practice of “naming and shaming” countries with terms
such as “currency manipulator”, especially since the economic logic behind this is doubtful.
3
4
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
