Jens Weidmann: The economic situation in Germany and the euro
area,  monetary  policy  and  the  longer-term  challenges  facing  the
euro area
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at a discussion with
the Association of the Foreign Press (VAP), Berlin, 23 August 2018.
1 The German economy
Ladies and gentlemen
 I am delighted to have this opportunity to exchange my views with you today. Allow me to first
make a few brief remarks about the economic situation in Germany and the euro area, monetary
policy and the longer-term challenges facing the euro area before I take your questions.
The  German  economy  is  flourishing:  indeed,  it  is  still  enjoying  a  period  of  economic  boom.
Economic output is outstripping pre-crisis levels by far. Unemployment is at its lowest level since
German reunification and employment remains on the up.
The upswing is likely to continue. It is broadly based across demand components: consumption,
investment  and  exports  are  all  increasing.  It  will  also  benefit  from  a  more  expansionary  fiscal
policy stance, especially next year.
However, it is unlikely that economic expansion will maintain the pace seen in 2017. In particular,
exports will probably increase at a more moderate rate. At home, the rising shortage of skilled
workers looks set to dampen employment growth.
This is also the result of high levels of aggregate capacity utilisation. Labour market tightness is
contributing to higher wage growth and to increasing domestic price pressures. So far, the wage
agreements concluded this year have been significantly higher than those concluded last year.
But  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook  for  the  economy  has  increased.  Global  economic
growth remains buoyant, primarily driven by the two biggest economies in the world – the United
States  and  China.  However,  political  risks  have  increased,  in  particular  –  notably  the  risk  of
international trade conflicts intensifying.
When tackling the global economic crisis of 2008–09, the G20 countries refrained from adopting
beggar-thy-neighbour  policies,  thereby  ensuring  that  they  did  not  repeat  the  mistakes  of  the
1930s. Back then, protectionist measures played a role in exacerbating the Great Depression.
Today, a major trade war could be severely detrimental to the global economy. 
Recently, risks for individual emerging market economies have gained greater prominence.
The developments in Turkey make it crystal-clear that the best way to stave off crises is to run
sound  and  responsible  economic  and  fiscal  policies  and  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary
policy geared towards price stability.
 
2  The euro area economy
It’s not just Germany – the euro area is also experiencing an economic upturn. This growth is
broadly based across member states. Measured since 1996, the differences between national
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth rates have never been as narrow as in recent times.
However, the pace of expansion in the euro area eased off in the first half of the year compared
with 2017.This is likely to be attributable to multiple factors: in particular, last year’s export growth
was  exceptionally  high  and  therefore  could  probably  not  have  been  maintained;  capacity
utilisation is going up; and last but not least, the oil price hike is probably weighing on private
consumption.
Nevertheless, the underlying forces driving economic activity remain intact: rising employment,
favourable  financing  conditions  and  global  economic  growth.  While  the  majority  of  sentiment
indicators were unable to maintain the very high levels that they had previously reached, they still
point towards continued economic expansion in the euro area.
 
3 Price developments and monetary policy
The  economic  upturn  contrasts  with  the  monetary  policy  stance  remaining  exceptionally
expansionary. Today, the stance of monetary policy is no less expansionary than it was at the
peak  of  the  crisis.  This  is  suggested  by  indicators  which,  among  other  things,  also  take  the
effects of the Eurosystem’s asset purchases into account.
However, the very expansionary monetary policy stance should be seen against the backdrop of
domestic price pressures remaining low. Overall euro area inflation hit 2.1% in July, but inflation
is currently being driven up by higher energy prices, in particular.
Domestic  price  pressures  are  still  distinctly  lower.  However,  they  are  likely  to  intensify  as
aggregate  capacity  utilisation  increases.  They  will  thus  counteract  waning  impetus  from  other
components of the inflation rate, such as energy prices.
In their June projections, Eurosystem experts predict that the annual inflation rate will come in at
1.7% until 2020. If you ask me, that is broadly consistent with our medium-term price stability
goal. For this reason, it’s also time to begin exiting the very expansionary monetary policy and the
non-standard measures, especially considering their possible side effects.
Thus, the ECB Governing Council’s June monetary policy decisions anticipated the end of the
net  asset  purchases.  The  Eurosystem’s  large  asset  holdings  are  to  remain  constant  for  an
extended period of time yet, as the proceeds of maturing bonds are reinvested.
The Governing Council also enhanced its communication on key interest rates in June, saying it
expects key ECB interest rates to remain at their present low levels “at least through the summer
of 2019” and in any case for as long as necessary.
On the whole, constant asset holdings, the low key interest rates and enhanced communication
will  keep  monetary  policy  on  a  very  accommodative  track  even  after  the  net  purchases  have
ended.
It should be noted here that the degree of monetary policy accommodation as measured by the
real short-term interest rate has risen again in recent months. This is the result of the higher
actual inflation rate reducing the rate of interest in real terms, given unchanged nominal interest
rates.
Ending the net asset purchases is therefore just a first step towards a necessary normalisation
of monetary policy in the euro area. The next steps will of course depend on developments in
economic activity and prices. However, this normalisation process will probably take place only
gradually over the next few years. That’s exactly why it has been so important to actually get the
ball rolling without undue delay.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
It’s  also  a  question  of  how  much  room  monetary  policy  has  to  manoeuvre.  If,  contrary  to  our
projections, the economy weakens, fiscal policy will have to do more than in the past to stabilise
the situation. With that in mind, it is important to create fiscal space now and to ensure sound
public finances.
 
4 Challenges facing the euro area
September will mark the tenth anniversary of the Lehman Brothers collapse, a decisive moment
in the financial crisis for many. In the euro area, the financial crisis later merged with a sovereign
debt crisis. We are still processing the fallout of the crisis and extracting the right lessons.
Our task in the euro area is to make its financial systems more resilient. It is crucial that we
strengthen the competitiveness and growth fundamentals of the various economies. The heavy
burden of public debt needs to be broken down. These are challenges that each member state
must face individually.
Furthermore, the regulatory framework of monetary union has to be rendered more crisis-proof.
This requires a better balance between individual responsibility for actions and liability. Only then
will misincentives be reduced.
That’s not to say that I’m ruling out greater risk-sharing between member states in general. But
those that are explicitly calling for more risk-sharing must also be prepared to relinquish more
sovereign rights to the European level. 
I now look forward to your questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
