   [INF*RES*AS] 
 MONETARY POLICY REPORT 
FINANCIAL STABILITY REPORT 
 PRESENTATION BEFORE THE FINANCE 
COMMITTEE OF THE 
HONORABLE SENATE OF THE REPUBLIC
   Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
4 December 2017 
                                                 
 Both the Monetary Policy Report of December 2017 and the Financial Stability Report of the second half of 
2017 can be seen at http://www.bcentral.cl.  
Introduction 
 
Mr.  President  of  the  Finance  Committee  of  the  Senate,  senator  Carlos  Montes,  senators 
members of this Committee, ladies, gentlemen,  
 
Thank you for your invitation to present the vision of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile 
(CBC)  about  the  latest  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments,  prospects  and 
implications for monetary and financial policy. This vision is detailed in our Monetary Policy 
Report (MP Report) of December 2017 and Financial Stability Report (FSR) of the second 
half 2017. 
 
I  would  like  to  start  by  noting  that  these  are  the  last  institutional  reports  presented  in  the 
format that has prevailed since the time of the severe Great Financial Crisis. As we explained 
to the Honorable Senate last September, as from January 1st, the CBC will begin to apply a 
new calendar and format for the Monetary Policy Meetings as well as for the presentation of 
our two Reports.  
 
In particular, the MP Report has been programmed for pre-established dates that will coincide 
with the monetary policy meetings of March, June, September and December of each year. 
Thus, the presentation to the Senate will no longer be an extensive description of the Report, 
to become an institutional appearance where the Bank's Board will deliver a synthesis of the 
messages  in  its  reports,  explain  the  reasons  behind  its  policy  decisions  and  answer  the 
questions  and  comments  that  may  arise.  This  will  be  a  challenge  for  both  parties.  At  the 
Board, we will try our best to be up to it. 
 
Another  element  of  change  is  that  this  is  the  last  presentation  to  this  Committee  with  the 
participation  of  Deputy  Governor  Sebastián  Claro.  It  has  been  ten  years  since  the  current 
President of the Republic appointed him in her first presidential term and was approved by 
this  Senate.  Since  then,  Sebastián  has  served  his  position  with  commitment,  capacity, 
accountability and team work, as I am sure you have observed. On behalf of the other Board 
members  and  the  staff  of  the  Bank,  I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  him  for  his 
enormous contribution to the Institution and the country. 
 
Alongside these elements of change, however, many more continue. As usual, we come to 
report on the recent macroeconomic developments and share with you our vision about future 
prospects  and  risks  facing  the  Chilean  economy.  This  institutional  continuity  is  important 
when we are only a few months away from a new Congress  and a new  Administration,  a 
transition that always involves challenges and in which it is important for the newcomers to 
be familiar with the prospects for the economy. 
 
In  the  past  few  months,  domestic  activity  has  evolved  as  expected.  The  stronger  external 
impulse has consolidated, with still favorable financial conditions, trading partners that, on 
average, are somewhat more dynamic and better terms of trade.  
 
Nonetheless, inflation has stayed below the forecasts of the September MP Report. Most of 
the difference is related to the more volatile items in the basket, as core inflation —which we 
measure with the so-called CPIEFE1— is near expected levels. The projections that I will 
present  to  you  in  a  moment  assume  that  the  convergence  of  inflation  will  take  somewhat 
longer than we anticipated in the last MP Report.  
 
This considers the effect of the recent surprises and the evolution of the exchange rate up to 
the Report’s statistical cutoff. It also assumes that activity growth will gradually speed up its 
pace, from its bounded present levels to above potential in the second half of 2018, yielding 
the  way  to  close  the  output  gap  that  will  help  inflation  to  converge  within  the  projection 
horizon. 
 
In any case, there are still significant risks surrounding the baseline scenario depicted in this 
MP Report. On the one hand, some sectors still lag behind in the recovery process, especially 
some relating to investment. On the other hand, a scenario in which the economy does not 
return to higher growth rates in the coming months, can affect the recovery of growth in the 
medium term. In particular, because even though expectations have improved in general, they 
have done so  by anticipating  a better future economic performance  rather than by  current 
results.  
 
In this context, we have held the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) at 2.5% since May and we 
expect that, if the baseline scenario comes true, we will keep the monetary impulse near its 
current levels, to begin withdrawing it only once the economy begins to close the activity 
gap. Anyway, it is important to carefully monitor any downward deviations of inflation in 
the short term, because in the context of a weak economy, low inflation and some measures 
of medium-term inflation expectations remaining somewhat below 3%, the convergence of 
inflation  could  be  affected,  in  which  case  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  the  already 
expansionary monetary policy more so. 
 
The financial conditions have helped to shape the macroeconomic scenario described above. 
Borrowing  remains  accessible  and  inexpensive,  in  line  with  the  orientation  of  monetary 
policy. The local financial market has seen no major disruptive events and the internal and 
external payment systems have functioned normally. Non-financial companies maintain their 
levels of profitability and indebtedness, while the increase in household debt is concentrated 
in mortgage credit, which covers long periods, at fixed rates and with a prudent loan-to-value 
ratio,  which  keeps  the  financial  burden  fairly  constant.  For  its  part,  in  the  residential  real 
estate sector, sales of new homes stabilized and prices continued to rise, albeit modestly. 
 
Nonetheless, some financial risks identified in past reports are still important. At the external 
level, the relevance of a long-term external rate rise scenario stands out. At home, the lost 
dynamism of recent years has reduced the financial strength of firms, eroding the quality of 
the  commercial  portfolio  in  certain  economic  sectors.  Stress  tests  for  the  banking  system 
show less capital leeway to confront adverse scenarios. 
 
Likewise,  issues  are  arising  that  should  be  considered  in  the  analysis  of  risks  threatening 
financial stability. A normalization of risk aversion in international markets could increase 
                                                 
1 Consumer Price Index excluding food and energy components. 
2 
 credit costs in emerging countries, including Chile. Locally, mitigating the deterioration of 
the  commercial  portfolio's  quality  by  demanding  greater  guarantees  rather  than  making 
provisions or capital aggravates the vulnerability to systemic events. 
 
These  risk  factors  make  it  possible  to  appreciate  the  importance  of  our  coherent 
macroeconomic policy framework, where fiscal  and monetary policy can operate counter-
cyclically and the exchange rate acts as a buffer against external shocks. The need to update 
banking  legislation  is  also  evident,  to  incorporate  modern  standards  of  capitalization  and 
mitigation of systemic and cyclical risks, as well as to have good systems of consolidated 
debt information, all of which are part of the legislative agenda now being discussed at the 
National Congress. 
 
The Monetary Policy Report 
 
Headline inflation has been more volatile in recent months, accumulating a negative surprise 
that placed it at 1.9% in October, close to 0.4 percentage points below the September forecast. 
The CPIEFE has evolved in line with projections although with significant ups and downs. 
As has been the trend of the last few quarters, its evolution has been closely related to the 
exchange  rate  (figure  1).  The  surprise  in  headline  inflation  came  mainly  from  foodstuffs 
(particularly  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables),  whose  prices  showed  atypical  behavior  for  the 
season, very different from historical patterns. As a reference, between August and October 
these prices —which  represent  2.9% of the CPI  basket— averaged  an annual  variation of 
around -9%, which compares with roughly +7% in the last ten years. 
 
The baseline scenario assumes that headline inflation will remain around 2% during the first 
half  of  2018,  and  will  return  to  3%  during  the  first  half  of  2019,  somewhat  later  than  we 
expected  in  September.  Core  inflation  will  also  remain  low  in  the  coming  quarters,  to 
converge to 3% in the second part of 2019, somewhat later than headline inflation (figure 2). 
The projected behavior of prices in the medium term is mainly based on a gradual closing of 
the activity gap, a process that is expected to begin during the second half of 2018. On this 
point, neither the recent data nor the projections of the baseline scenario have changed much 
from September.  
 
In  the  third  quarter,  non-mining  activity—used  to  estimate  the  gap—continued  to  show 
limited annual growth (which reached 1.7%), below the potential of the economy (which we 
continue to estimate around 2.5%) and aggregate GDP (2.2%). It is important to note that, as 
from  this  MP  Report,  for  the  purposes  of  the  conjunctural  analysis  of  activity  and  the 
measurement of the  gap, the concepts  of  “natural resources GDP”  and  “other GDP” have 
been replaced by “mining GDP” and “non-mining GDP”. A box in the Report explains the 
reasons behind this change. There we note that the sectors that we discounted from GDP until 
now (i.e. mining, fishery, and electricity, gas and water) are actually more volatile and less 
persistent. It is also shown that, in general, its relationship with the rest of the economy is 
limited. However, in line with the change that I have just commented, it is concluded that 
only the exclusion of mining activity has significant effects in the analysis of the dynamics 
of the aggregate economy, because of its important effects on the variance of growth. In such 
circumstances, and considering that broad measures are better to work with than narrow ones, 
3 
 we  adopted  the  distinction  between  mining  and  non-mining  GDP  to  substitute  for  natural 
resources GDP and other GDP. Moreover, this change allows the analysis in the MP Report 
to be aligned with the publication of the mining and non-mining Imacec2 that we introduced 
a few months ago. 
 
Returning to the recent evolution of activity and demand, the sectoral composition of non-
mining  GDP  shows  better  figures  for  sectors  linked  to  consumption  than  those  related  to 
investment,  particularly  construction.  On  the  demand  side,  while  private  consumption 
maintains annual increases of 2% to 3%, investment in construction and other works falls 
more than expected. The tradables-related expenditure lines, such as consumption of durable 
goods and investment in machinery and equipment, have strengthened further, supported by 
an  appreciating  peso  over  recent  quarters  and  financial  conditions  favoring  inventory 
restocking after several years of low growth (figure 3). 
 
Consumption has performed in line with its fundamentals. On one hand, annual growth in 
total employment has been steady at around 2% for several months, outperforming salaried 
employment  growth,  especially  in  the  private  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  real  wages  are 
growing in annual terms more than they did early in the year, mainly as a result of the low 
inflation (figure 4). This couples with interest rates remaining at record lows, a factor also 
put  forward  by  qualitative  sources  such  as  the  Banking  Credit  Survey  and  the  Business 
Perceptions  Report.  This,  despite  still  limited  annual  growth  in  credit  in  most  categories 
(figure 5). Finally, confidence indicators show sustained improvement, although based more 
on  the  perception  of  the  future  performance  of  the  economy  than  on  the  current  situation 
(figure 6). 
 
Over the course of the year, the better prospects for the world economy have consolidated. 
The developed economies, in general, are growing more than in previous years, as are several 
emerging ones (figure 7). Furthermore, global financial conditions are still favorable, partly 
because  the  main  central  banks  continue  to  carefully  and  gradually  withdraw  their  large 
monetary stimuli, helping to keep interest rates and term premiums low. In addition, capital 
has continued to flow to emerging markets and the prices of various assets are high.  
 
Commodity prices, in general, remained above the levels foreseen in September, especially 
copper  and  energy  sources  (figure  8).  The  copper  price  rose  3.5%  to  USD  3.2  per  pound 
during the period, to settle around USD 3.1 at the closing of this Report. This behavior is 
common to most metals, in a context of still high pressures coming from financial factors 
and  improvements  in  some  fundamentals.  Among  the  latter,  the  increase  in  demand  and 
perspectives  is  worth  noting,  something  that  has  occurred  thanks  to  increased  global 
industrial  production  and  the  performance  of  the  Chinese  economy.  This,  combined  with 
some stabilization in output, has gradually reduced inventories. Beyond recent movements, 
the weakening of the US dollar during the  year has also been sustaining the copper price. 
Thus, the baseline scenario in this Report adjusts it to USD 2.95 and USD 2.75 per pound on 
average for 2018 and 2019, respectively. Regarding oil, the prices of Brent and WTI rose a 
                                                 
2  An  abbreviation  from  its  Spanish  Indice  Mensual  de  Actividad  Económica,  literally  Economic 
Activity Monthly Index. 
4 
 significant 20% in the period, to near USD 63 and 56, respectively, explained largely by a 
somewhat  more  balanced  market.  Globally,  actual  and  expected  demand  have  increased, 
output has been contained and inventories have seen some depletion. The baseline scenario 
of this Report adjusts the projection for the average price of Brent and WTI upwards, placing 
it at around USD 59 and USD 56 per barrel in 2018 and 2019. 
 
The combined effect of higher copper and oil prices and adjustments in the prices of other 
exports and imports have led to an improvement in the terms of trade, particularly this year. 
Thus, considering the period 2017-2019, the terms of trade will accumulate an increase of 
around 10%, which compares with the 7% estimate of last September. 
 
Turning  to  our  activity  and  demand  projections,  the  baseline  scenario  assumes  no  major 
changes from September. This year, the economy will grow 1.4%, inside the range expected 
in September. For 2018, the growth projection in the 2.5% to 3.5% range is maintained. Part 
of the improvement with respect to 2017, particularly during the first half of the year, owes 
to the low comparison base of the mining sector. This same scenario assumes that non-mining 
GDP will have a more paced recovery. The gradual return to higher GDP expansion rates 
leans  on  a  favorable  external  scenario,  the  end  of  the  adjustment  of  mining  and  housing 
investment, the absence of significant macroeconomic imbalances and a clearly expansionary 
monetary policy stance. A working assumption is that in 2018 the economy will receive a 
fiscal  impulse in  accordance  with  the approved  budget.  Going forward, it  is  assumed that 
fiscal spending will follow a path of consolidation. 
 
On the expenditure side, as I just said, some salient characteristics of recent quarters have 
been  improved  consumption  and  weaker  investment,  which  have  led  to  revisions  to  our 
baseline  forecasts.  In  private  consumption,  the  better  numbers  so  far,  especially  the 
dynamism of durable consumption, translate into higher figures for this year and next. On 
the investment side, there is a clear difference between the behavior of the machinery and 
equipment and the construction and works components. The former, with a more favorable 
evolution,  has  responded  to  the  necessary  inventory  replenishment  after  several  years 
stagnant, and has benefited from the exchange rate appreciation  and low credit costs. The 
latter has continued to contract beyond expectations, primarily because of reduced spending 
on  building  and  engineering  works,  amplifying  the  drop  in  gross  fixed  capital  formation 
(GFCF) estimated in September for this year. In addition, we estimate that this expenditure 
component will take somewhat longer to recover. Towards 2018, it is still assumed that the 
adjustment cycle of mining investment will come to an end and that it will very gradually 
begin  to  reflect  the  effects  of the copper price  rise. Meanwhile, non-mining investment  is 
slightly revised down, mainly reflecting that the downsloping trend of housing investment 
has been longer than we thought before. With this, as a percentage of GDP, in 2018 the GFCF 
will reach 21.1% and 21.4% in real and nominal terms, respectively, compared with averages 
of 23% to 24% in 2013-2017. 
 
About our external scenario, incoming data show improved performance of exports across 
sectors  (figure  9).  Still,  examining  numbers  of  the  first  half,  we  foresee  that  the  export 
volumes  will  contract  during  the  year.  However,  by  2018  they  should  recover  thanks  to 
improvements in the world economy, which coupled with better prices increase our estimated 
5 
 trade  balance  for  next  year.  The  low  comparison  base  due  to  the  Escondida  mine  strike 
downtime early this year will also result in higher mining exports in 2018. Thus, in 2018, the 
current account deficit should be lower than we expected in September, close to 1% of GDP, 
similar to our 2017 projection. At trend prices, the current account deficit remains at 2.6% 
on average in 2017-2018 (table 1). 
 
Aside  from  the  scenario  I  have  just  described  for  domestic  activity  and  spending,  the 
convergence of inflation to the target also considers a mild depreciation of the real exchange 
rate that will cause it to converge from where it was at the closing of this Report to its long-
term equilibrium within the projection horizon. The baseline scenario also contemplates that 
the  prices  of  foods,  particularly  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables,  will  return  to  their  normal 
patterns, so their annual inflation will be rising over the course of 2018. 
 
About monetary policy, the Board estimates that in the baseline scenario the surprises that 
have  pulled  inflation  down  below  expectations  do  not  compromise  the  convergence  of 
inflation to the target. This, both because by their nature they should not propagate much, 
and because the arguments for the closure of the activity gap remain fully in force. In this 
context, as a working assumption, the baseline scenario does not alter the monetary impulse 
considered  in  the  September  MP  Report.  In  other  words,  that  the  policy  rate  will  remain 
stable and start rising towards neutrality only once the economy begins to close the activity 
gap. In any case, the Board recognizes that in the current scenario —with still limited activity 
growth, inflation staying near the lower bound of the tolerance range for several months and 
some  measures  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations  still  short  of  3%—  any  downward 
deviations of short-term inflation should be monitored with special care. The latter because 
the  convergence  of  inflation  could  be  affected,  in  which  case  it  may  call  for  even  more 
expansionary monetary policy action. 
 
As usual, there are risks to these projections, both internal and external. Abroad,  how and 
how fast the developed world will carry out the withdrawal of their monetary stimuli is still 
a  concern.  So  far  the  process  has  been  implemented  very  carefully  and  has  succeeded  in 
keeping financial markets calm. However, the discrepancies that still exist between market 
expectations  and  the  adjustment  trajectory  announced  by  the  Federal  Reserve  as  the  most 
likely scenario continues to be a source of significant tension. There is also the fact that in 
different markets, prices are high by historical standards, which could see abrupt reversals if 
global financial conditions tighten more than foreseen.  
 
Inflation  in  the  developed  world  continues  to  draw  our  attention,  as  it  has  remained  low 
despite stronger activity and higher energy prices. In addition, elements of uncertainty persist, 
in fiscal matters and commercial policy in the United States and political issues in Europe, 
compounded  by  growing  geopolitical  risks  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East.  In  any  case,  we 
cannot  rule  out  that,  given  the  results  of  recent  quarters,  greater  global  growth  may  be 
observed,  which  could  boost  trade  and  trigger  a  more  significant  increase  in  global 
investment. 
 
In  the  emerging  world,  like  in  recent  years,  the  main  source  of  risk  remains  the  Chinese 
economy. On one hand, it still needs to resolve many imbalances in several crucial markets. 
6 
 In  addition,  the nation recently began  a monetary adjustment that is  not  free of  risks, and 
there is uncertainty about the direction that the reform agenda will take after the Congress of 
the  Chinese  Communist  Party  and  its  impact  on  the  economy.  In  any  case,  its  growth 
deceleration has been somewhat milder than anticipated, so maybe its dynamism will hold 
longer. 
 
The  baseline  scenario  assumes  that  the  copper  price  will  decline  gradually  in  the  coming 
quarters. However, we do not rule out a sharper reduction because part of the recent increase 
may  be  related  to  financial  phenomena.  On  the  other  hand,  neither  can  we  rule  out  a 
strengthening of copper supply and demand factors that would allow prices to remain high 
for longer, according to some market analysts. 
 
Regarding domestic activity, we expect GDP to gradually regain faster growth. Several local 
factors  pose  risks  to  this  projection.  For  now,  the  lack  of  synchrony  between  different 
expenditure  components  persists,  with  sectors  (especially  investment-related)  that  still  lag 
behind  in  the recovery process.  Lower than expected short-term  dynamism  could  threaten 
the robustness and sustainability of the recovery of growth in the medium term. In particular, 
because the improvement in the consumer and business confidence indicators owes more to 
expectations of better conditions going forward than to the present situation, and because the 
financial  market,  within  a  generally  favorable  scenario,  contains  segments  of  greater 
vulnerability  in  consumer  and  commercial  credit.  In  contrast,  borrowing  costs  remain  at 
record lows and international conditions have been better than we anticipated, which could 
add momentum to investment and speed up its recovery. 
 
In  this  context,  the  Board  estimates  that  the  risk  balance  for  both  activity  and  inflation  is 
unbiased. However, it reiterates its intention to monitor any possible downward deviations 
of inflation in the short term that could jeopardize its convergence to the target within the 
forecast  horizon.  Accordingly,  the  Board  reaffirms  its  commitment  to  conduct  monetary 
policy with flexibility, so that projected inflation stands at 3% over the two-year horizon. 
 
The Financial Stability Report 
 
In  our  FSR,  we  communicate  every  June  and  December  the  recent  macroeconomic  and 
financial developments that may influence the financial stability of the Chilean economy. As 
opposed to the MP Report, the FSR is not articulated around a baseline scenario, but rather 
focuses on the most significant risks threatening the financial system. 
 
In  this FSR, we note that  in  the second half of this  year the Chilean financial system has 
suffered no major disruptive events and the data at hand indicates that the sector continues in 
a strong enough position to withstand the impact of stressful scenarios. We also observe that 
the internal and external payment systems have worked normally, while the traditional credit 
risk  indicators  have  remained  low  up  to  this  moment.  However,  some  alternative  risk 
measures  show  increases  in  certain  sectors.  As  we  warned  in  the  MP  Report,  if  the  local 
economy's slowdown of recent years is further prolonged, this situation could deepen. In the 
external scenario, as usual, the risks identified in the MP Report's baseline scenario that I just 
7 
 presented  are  very  similar  to  those  considered  in  the  FSR,  particularly  those  relating  to  a 
sharp increase in external interest rates and their impact on our local financial conditions.  
 
The  FSR  notes  that  the  good  financial  conditions  abroad  have  been  mirrored  locally. 
Likewise, we emphasize that the cost of short-term bank financing has remained coherent 
with the MPR and that the cost of issuing long-term debt for companies and banks has been 
compressed lately. Interest rates on local sovereign instruments have also remained below 
their  historical  averages.  However,  compared  with  the  previous  FSR,  there  has  been  an 
increase  owing,  to  a  large  extent,  to  lower  demand  for  local  sovereign  bonds  by  pension 
funds, as a consequence of affiliates migrating to higher-risk funds. Meanwhile, in the course 
of this year, non-resident investors doubled their share in the local market, although within 
relatively low ranges compared to other emerging economies.  
 
As  I  have  just  pointed  out,  steep  rises  in  external  interest  rates  are  still  a  risk  worth 
monitoring.  In  this  sense,  increases  in  the  benchmark  rate  and  the  reduction  in  developed 
central  banks'  balance  sheets  would  push  up  the  term  premiums,  triggering  a  rise  in  local 
long-term rates. According to our estimates, this increase could amount to as much as 80% 
of the change observed in the external benchmark. In this context, potential changes in the 
assets  managed  by  medium-  and  long-term  debt  mutual  funds  —the  FM3s—  are  one 
vulnerability to be watched closely. This could become more complex if other market players 
—such  as  pension  funds  and  non-resident  investors—  also  liquidate  their  fixed-income 
positions, which could imply temporary disruptions in local debt markets, amplifying interest 
rate movements.  
 
A normalization of risk aversion levels would have an impact on the cost of foreign credit to 
emerging countries, including Chile, above the possible increases in the base rate. In the face 
of such normalization, Chile's risk premium would tend to increase, affecting entities needing 
to  refinance  their  short-term  liabilities.  About  the  financial  situation  of  companies,  their 
aggregate debt decreased in recent quarters, to 113% of GDP as of the third quarter of this 
year  (figure  10).  In  one  year  it  diminished  0.9%  in  real  terms,  explained  mainly  by  the 
exchange rate effect in the valuation of the external component. This trajectory owes largely 
to the fact that the increases in corporate bond issuances observed since mid-2016 have not 
translated into more borrowing. On the contrary, the low cash flow assigned to investment 
suggests that these funds have been oriented to the refinancing of liabilities, consistently with 
the lower interest rates.  
 
On the other hand, delinquency indicators, while still low, show a marginal deterioration with 
respect to the previous FSR. In the case of services, this increase has concentrated in some 
real-estate  firms.  As  for  the  productive  sectors,  marginal  rises  are  observed  in  several 
industries such as construction, transport and telecommunications, and electricity, gas, and 
water. Meanwhile, in others such as mining, trade, and manufacturing, the declines identified 
in the last FSR continue. 
 
Residential market figures have shown more stability in recent quarters. After the adjustment 
process described in previous Reports, the sale of new homes in Santiago has remained stable 
for several quarters. At the same time, in the second quarter this year, the various home price 
8 
 indicators —in the Metropolitan Region and nationwide— show positive but modest growth. 
Residential  building  activity  remains  weak  and  different  sources  of  information  see  no 
recovery  anytime  soon.  Moreover,  the  adjustment  of  the  sector  must  be monitored  before 
Law 20,958 on Contributions to Public Space comes into effect, aimed at making real estate 
projects accountable for the impacts they have on local mobility. Regarding housing credit, 
the stock of mortgage loans showed a rebound in the last quarter (figure 11). The number of 
bank mortgage debtors with more than one housing loan continued to grow, reaching 29% at 
the statistical close of this FSR. A subset of such debtors are investors who buy properties 
for rent.  
 
Household financial indicators show no change in the risks identified in the last FSR, which 
are mostly  related to  the future evolution  of the labor market.  Since the last  Report, bank 
mortgage debt increased, while consumer debt with banks decelerated, and accelerated with 
other sources. Thus, as of the second quarter this year, the aggregate debt of the sector stood 
at  45%  of  GDP  (figure  12),  placing  Chile  in  the  upper  segment  of  a  sample  of  emerging 
countries  but  below  developed  economies.  However,  the  median  financial  burden  has 
remained stable at around 20% of income due to lower interest rates. In terms of financial 
gaps, there was a greater use of credit and rolling lines, reflecting tighter conditions in some 
households.  Non-compliance  indicators  have  remained  relatively  stable  at  low  levels  for 
mortgage loans and have risen for consumer loans. In particular, consumer credit write-offs 
and delayed repayment of retail lending have both increased (figure 13).  
 
Going  forward,  a  deteriorating  labor  market  would  affect  the  sector,  particularly  those 
households with less financial capacity to face an income shock. Meanwhile, a scenario of 
higher  rates  would  have  a  smaller  impact  on  households'  outstanding  debts  —as  they  are 
granted mostly at a fixed rate and long term— as opposed to new borrowing for buying a 
new home or refurbishing one. All in all, the aggregate impact of this scenario on the sector 
is greater if the macroeconomic effects of an in interest rate rise are factored in.  
 
The banking system's financial indicators remain healthy, although capitalization is lagging 
behind  international  standards  (figure  14).  Banking  stabilized  profitability  and  solvency 
indicators,  keeping  liquid  and  currency  mismatches  within  bounds,  and  without  making 
significant changes in its dividend policies. In terms of credit risk, quality has deteriorated in 
the individual evaluation of the commercial portfolio, which has been covered with increased 
collateral.  Although  this  strategy  allows  reducing  the  idiosyncratic  risk  of  each  bank 
individually,  it  causes  vulnerability  of  the  banking  industry  to  systemic  events  that 
simultaneously reduce the payment capacity of enterprises and erode collateral value. This is 
a risk factor that must be monitored considering that 45% of total bank lending belongs to 
this category.  
 
Stress tests indicate that an adverse scenario of a slight but prolonged fall in activity would 
pose a risk to banks comparable to one of a more severe scenario but with a faster recovery. 
Thus, in the adverse scenario described above, the fraction of banks that maintain their capital 
adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  above  10%  would  represent  57%  of  the  system's  assets.  Under  the 
severe scenario, the figure would be 50%. There is a contrast with 2012, when the fraction 
9 
 of banks with CARs over 10% accounted for 85% of the system's assets in the severe scenario 
(figure 15). 
 
All  this  points  to  the  need  to  enhance  the  sector’s  resilience  via  higher  capital  levels,  a 
situation  that  has  been  acknowledged  in  other  jurisdiction.  Along  these  lines,  the  bill  that 
modernizes banking legislation contributes to the strengthening of domestic banks’ capital 
requirements.  
 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  one  of  the  main  milestones  in  terms  of  financial  regulation  was  the 
sending  to  Congress  of  the  bill  that  modernizes  banking  legislation.  This  incorporates 
international  standards and expertise. One of its proposed tools is  the cushion  of counter-
cyclical  capital,  which  seeks  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  to  absorb 
potential losses and reduce the volatility of financial cycles. In this sense, it is essential to 
identify  local  financial  cycles,  taking  into  account  not  only  external  factors  but  also  the 
idiosyncrasy  of  the  Chilean  banking  system.  These  elements  are  addressed  in  a  special 
chapter of this FSR.  
 
Because the Central Bank of Chile will be in charge of implementing this policy, the Board 
will continue to focus its efforts on its proper application, taking into account both its benefits 
and the potential direct and indirect costs of this tool. However, these efforts depend on the 
approval of the bill. 
 
Institutional advances 
 
A year ago, when I presented these same reports before this Committee, I emphasized how 
important  it  is  for  a  central  bank  to  have  the  capacity  to  face  new  challenges.  On  that 
occasion, I stressed that the accumulated achievements of the Central Bank of Chile over the 
years did not suffice to take charge of the transformations that occur in the economy, markets, 
technology and society. Every central bank has the obligation and responsibility to anticipate 
these changes and respond to them in an organized, efficient and timely manner. 
 
Accordingly,  since  2004,  and  every  time  a  new  Governor  assumes,  the  Bank  prepares  a 
strategic plan that accompanies it throughout his term and culminates in the first year in office 
of his successor. Early this year we began preparing the strategic plan for the next five years. 
 
This time, we have sought to give our strategic plan a consultative, participatory and inclusive 
character. The aim is to reflect that the Bank is not an isolated entity, but works for the entire 
country and depends on the cohesive team of people that make it up. All this has translated 
into this new Strategic Plan being devised after completing more than 100 interviews with 
people from different areas that are external references for the Bank. Surveys were applied 
to regional and international reference groups and other central banks. Internal workshops 
were  held  where  our  staff  participated,  as  well  as  planning  workshops  with  the  active 
involvement  of  the  Bank's  board  members  and  chief  officers,  all  with  continuous 
communication of the progress and results of the process. 
 
10 
 This process was concluded a few days ago with the approval of the Strategic Plan 2018-
2022 by the Board. This plan, which is based on the Institution's strengths, recognizes future 
opportunities and risks and identifies a number of strategic initiatives to realize the Bank's 
vision  as  a  reliable  institution  due  to  its  technical  nature  and  excellence  in  achieving  the 
objectives that have been entrusted to it by law. 
 
In particular, our 2018-2022 Strategic Plan identifies five focal points: 
 
1) to strengthen the response capacity and the intellectual leadership of the Bank to comply 
with the institution’s objectives defined in its Constitutional Organic Law, incorporating the 
reality of an increasingly complex environment. 
 
2) to enhance understanding and dialogue of the Bank with its environment through strategic 
management of communications. 
 
3) to strengthen the Bank's corporate governance in order to balance out risk tolerance and 
business  process  efficiency,  thereby  speeding  up  decision-making  and  encouraging 
innovation. 
 
4) to improve the ability to understand, manage and incorporate technological changes to the 
Bank's integral work, both in the area of its own management and in the dimensions relating 
to its institutional objectives. 
 
5) to be an employer of excellence, offering valuable proposals that inspire people and teams 
to  deploy  and  develop  their  maximum  potential,  in  a  collaborative  environment,  with 
continuous  learning,  professionally  and  personally  challenging;  managing  to  attract  and 
engage the best talents, aligned with the strategic objectives and principles of the Bank. 
 
These  five  strategic  focuses  are  translated  into  21  lines  of  action  that  the  Bank  team  will 
develop  over  the  next  five-year  period.  Of  these,  I  would  like  to  single  out  some  that  are 
especially relevant for the Bank's relationship with its environment.  
 
In  regards  the  two  issues  that  bring  us  together  today  —monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability—  the  Bank  will  begin  to  apply  the  new  framework  adopted  recently  for  the 
formulation, adoption and communication of its decisions. 
 
In the case of monetary policy, beginning on January 1st, the new calendar and structure of 
the Monetary Policy Meetings will take effect, improving the instances of communication. 
The same is true of the calendar and structure of the MP Report and the FSR. This will couple 
with a deepening of the analytical work in the macroeconomic and financial fields that will 
be reflected in both Reports. It will involve developing a new stage of the economic modeling 
agenda,  applying  microdata  bases  and  developing  new  methodologies  for  financial  risk 
identification. 
 
 11 
The  Bank  will  complement  this  by  intensifying  its  dialogue  with  key  market  players  and 
observers, in order to strengthen its capacity to identify and interpret new developments that 
influence the behavior of the financial sector and the economy at large.  
 
Such dialogue with the outside world of both market players and regulators will also be part 
of  a  broader  and  more  transversal  effort  to  involve  the  technological  dimension  in  the 
different  areas  of  our  work.  Through  several  concrete  initiatives,  including  technological 
laboratories and an observatory, we will enhance our capacity to comprehend, analyze and 
formulate  hypotheses  about  the  impact  of  disruptive  technologies  on  the  Bank's  business 
model and financial intermediaries, adopting innovations that can help us maintain the quality 
and availability of the services provided by the Bank.  
 
We also aspire to perfect the regulatory framework in a timely manner in order to advance in 
those areas that offer an opportunity to strengthen the financial system and mitigate risks in 
the event that some of these disruptive technologies become accessible to everyone in the 
financial industry. 
 
Our  2018-2022  strategic  plan  also  includes  various  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  Bank's 
insertion  in  its  economic  and  institutional  environment.  I  can  mention  some  efforts  to 
simplify regulations, ensure environmental and financial sustainability, active transparency 
and financial education. With this we seek to reflect that the Central Bank of Chile, despite 
being an autonomous institution of an essentially technical nature, is recognized as part of 
the society in which it must lead by example as an organization. 
 
As we have said before, this Strategic Plan does not intend to reinvent the Bank or ignore its 
great  achievements,  but  to  recognize  that  the  prestige  gained  is  always  exposed  to  new 
challenges and demands and that must be conquered day after day. Likewise, this is neither 
an exhaustive plan nor a list of the only relevant topics for the Institution, but a select set of 
actions that are necessary  for achieving the  expected results in  the  five focal  points listed 
above. 
 
This  plan represents  a commitment that includes all  of us making up the Central  Bank of 
Chile, to enrich our main asset as a public institution: TRUST. Trust is a mirror against which 
we can be appraised with the eyes of the rest of the country. That trust, more than norms and 
laws, is precisely what sustains the legitimacy and autonomy of our Institution. 
 
Therefore, the new Congress and Administration that will assume their respective functions 
in March, will be met by a Central Bank that, using the competences and mechanisms granted 
by its Organic Law, will have updated its corporate agenda and will continue to be a crucial 
institutional  player  to  generate  the  conditions  of  macroeconomic  stability  on  which  the 
country's progress is based.  
 
Thank you. 
 
  12 
    13 
     14 
    15 
    16 
Source: Central Bank of Chile. 
 
   17 
     18 
     19 
     20 
