Gent Sejko: Albania's economic and financial developments in 2017
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual Report 2017
to the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 10 April 2018.
 Honourable Chair,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
Thank you for your invitation!
I have the pleasure of presenting today the work and the achievements of the Bank of Albania
over 2017.
I  would  like  to  start  my  presentation  emphasising  that  2017  was  marked  by  progress  in  the
Albanian  economy  and  the  financial  system. According  to  Instat  data:  the Albanian  economy
grew  by  3.8%  in  annual  terms  and  created  around  79  thousand  jobs  in  the  private  non-
agricultural sector, the unemployment rate and the current account deficit decreased, whereas
inflation has been trending up. In parallel to developments in the real sector, interest rates in the
financial  markets  remained  low  and  soundness  indicators  of  the  banking  system  have  been
improving. In particular, the ratio of non-performing loans fell to 13.2% at the end of the year,
down by around 5 percentage points from a year earlier. All these indicators show the cyclical
position  has  improved  and  provide  encouraging  signals  regarding  the  outlook  on  economic
growth.
The Bank of Albania provided its contribution to the improvement of the economic and financial
landscape. This contribution was materialised through:
Implementing  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  which  supported  economic
growth, increase in employment and wages, and rise in inflation;
Prudential  supervision  and  proactive  approach  to  banking  regulation,  contributing  to  the
improvement of banking sector indicators;
Enhancing the banking system security, by establishing specialised structures to administer
the necessary interventions and restructuring in banks facing solvency difficulties;
Promoting the development and efficient functioning of the payment system;
Promoting financial education;
Further fostering the institutional capacities of the central bank, through constant investment
in enhancing professional skills, independence, accountability and transparency, as well as
through cooperation and exchanging information and opinions with Albanian and international
partners.
Our  activity  in  2017  was  guided  by  the  Medium-term  Development  Strategy  2016–2018.  In
addition,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  paid  particular  attention  to  the  implementation  of  the
recommendations left by this Committee in the Resolution “On the assessment of the activity of
the Bank of Albania for 2016”.
Let me first present an overview of the activity of the Supervisory Council, the highest decision-
making body of the Bank of Albania.
1. Activity of the Supervisory Council and strengthening institutional governance
The Supervisory Council has conducted its activity in line with the provisions of the organic law
and the procedures established in the internal regulation on its organisation and functioning.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In 2017, the Supervisory Council held 15 meetings and took 82 decisions. In addition, it approved
29 regulations and 1 guideline for general application.
The highest body responsible for the Bank of Albania, the Supervisory Council has paid attention
not  only  to  complying  with  the  legal  obligations  of  the  Bank,  but  also  to  strengthening  the
institutional  governance,  as  an  essential  precondition  for  enhancing  its  credibility.  In  2017,  the
Medium-term  Development  Strategy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  together  with  the  medium-term
budget, was updated.
The Medium-term Development Strategy of the Bank of Albania sets out the main objectives for
the 2018–2020 period. It establishes the priorities in the main functions of the Bank of Albania and
development of auxiliary services. Thus, the Bank of Albania has adopted the model of a number
of  banks  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  which  have  a  twofold  strategic  planning
system: (i) a major planning process, once in 3-5 years; and (ii) a yearly update. The span of the
application ensures adequate planning support for the guiding medium-term budget of the Bank
of Albania for 2019 and 2020. For the first time, this year the capital expenditures and the projects
included in the budget were preliminary approved by the Capital Expenditure Committee, a body
established as a control measure over major expenditure and investments.
With a view to strengthening the internal audit process, the Audit Committee was established in
2015 and is composed of three members of the Supervisory Council. In 2017, this Committee
exercised its duties with a view to support the strengthening of internal and external control lines.
It met regularly, without the presence of the administrators, with the Inspector General. These
meetings enabled the members of the Committee to learn about the internal control systems and
risk  management  procedures.  Upon  the  proposal  of  the  Inspector  General,  and  following
consultations at the Audit Committee, the Supervisory Council approved, for the first time, the
level of tolerance to the operational risk at the Bank of Albania.
The  activity  of  the  Supervisory  Council  has  been  faithfully  published  in  our  periodic  press
releases.
2. Monetary Policy of the Bank of Albania
The monetary policy decision making is based on a comprehensive, consistent and transparent
set  of  macroeconomic  analyses  and  forecasts.  They  are  supported  by  the  whole  range  of
information  available  at  the  time  of  decision  making,  and  the  expertise  and  judgement  of  the
Bank’s experts on the trends of economic development and the monetary policy pass-through
mechanism.
I will elaborate on the underlying reasons of our decision making to maintain the accommodative
monetary  policy  stance  in  2017  and  the  assessment  of  its  effects  on  the  economy  in  the
following.
2.1 Economic developments and monetary policy in 2017
The Albanian economy performed positively throughout 2017. The volume of economic activity
trended  upward,  spare  capacities  in  the  labour  market  reduced,  while  the  main  indicators  of
economic and financial stability improved. Following are presented a few figures to illustrate it.
According to Instat statistics, the volume of economic activity grew 3.8% in 2017, registering
a positive dynamics compared to 2.2% and 3.4% growth in 2015 and 2016. The economic
activity expanded on a broad base. From the aggregate demand, it was driven by the growth
in consumption, investments and exports. The services, industry and construction sectors
mainly benefited from this expansion of aggregate demand. A notable development in 2017
was  the  positive  performance  in  tourism,  which  provided  a  positive  impetus  to  economic
growth. Together with the high levels of foreign direct investments, it contributed also to the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
increase in foreign currency inflows in the Albanian economy.
Employment  increased  by  3.3%  in  2017,  driven  largely  by  the  increase  in  the  services
sector. In parallel to the increase in employment, the unemployment rate fell, from 14.2% at
the end of 2016, to 13.4% at the end of 2017.
The decrease in the current account deficit averaged 6.9% of the GDP in 2017, against the
7.6% registered in the previous year. Its improvement reflected the increase in tourism and
other services of the business.
Fiscal  indicators  marked  consolidation,  reflecting  a  low  level  of  budget  deficit  and  the
maintained control over the public debt.
From  the  financial  aspect,  the  Albanian  banking  system  maintained  good  indicators  of
liquidity,  profitability  and  capitalisation.  The  financial  situation  of  enterprises  has  been
improving, as illustrated by their high liquidity levels and the progressive decline in the non-
performing loans ratio.
Lastly,  inflation  has  been  upward,  averaging  2.0%  from  1.3%  in  the  previous  year.  The
upward  inflation  reflected  the  improvement  of  economic  activity,  but  its  undershooting
continues to reflect the operation of the economy below the potential, the low level of inflation
in trading partner countries, as well as the strong exchange rate.
I would like to focus on the last item – the exchange rate. The appreciation of the Albanian lek
over  the  last  two  years  has  been  at  the  focus  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  as  a  result  of  a
comprehensive impact of this factor on the overall economic and financial indicators, including
inflation.  Our  analyses  show  that  the  appreciation  trend  of  the  exchange  rate  reflects  the
improvement of fundamental factors, such as narrowing of the trade deficit and of the current
account deficit, high levels of foreign currency inflows in the form of foreign direct investments,
and the improved confidence in the national currency in the domestic financial market. For as
long as such appreciation reflects the effect of stable economic and financial factors, it does not
lead to harmful consequences for the Albanian economy. However, its effects appear in the form
of reduced inflationary pressures in the domestic market. The appreciation of the Albanian lek is
estimated to have reduced the inflation rate for 2017 by 0.2-0.3 percentage point.
In the context of the not-yet-complete utilisation of production capacities and of low inflationary
pressures, the Bank of Albania maintained the direction and intensity of the monetary stimulus
unchanged over 2017. The policy rate maintained the low historical level at 1.25%, creating thus
the conditions for the reduction of the costs of financing for the real sector. Liquidity injection in
the interbank market increased in terms of average volume and duration, enabling thus a normal
functioning of the financial markets.
The accommodative monetary policy was successful in boosting domestic demand, which was
the main driver of economic growth. The effects of the monetary policy on the economy were
present in several aspects:
First, lower costs for financing consumption and investments. The cumulative reduction of
the policy rate by 5.0 percentage points since the beginning of 2009, has been accompanied
by the cumulative drop in interest rates on loans, 12-month Treasury bills, and deposits in
lek, by 6.9, 4.5 and 6.6 percentage points, respectively. Low interest rates have increased
demand for new loans, and decreased the cost of servicing the existing loans. In response
to them:
The volume of lek credit to the private sector increased by 7.2% in 2017, being the main
contributor to total credit growth. The growth rate of the latter was only 3.3%, in response to
the still sluggish credit demand and still conservative lending policies applied by banks.
The cost of servicing the existing loans was reduced. This financial saving creates scope for
increasing consumption and investments, through the use of own funds.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, reduction of uncertainties among economic agents. The forward guidance on the
monetary policy stance has guaranteed the private sector that the monetary stimulus will
remain present in the quarters ahead, promoting their orientation toward consumption and
investments.
Third,  mitigation  of  appreciation  pressures  of  the  exchange  rate,  contributing  to  the
improvement of the balance of trade exchanges and further growth of economic activity.
Fourth, strengthening of financial stability. The financial environment with low interest has
improved  the  financial  balances  of  borrowers,  through  bolstering  the  aggregate  demand,
easing the cost of debt servicing, as well as encouraging the restructuring of businesses
and of existing loans.
Our assessments on the monetary policy impact show that its contribution to economic growth
for 2015, 2016 and 2017 is around 0.2, 0.4 and 0.7 percentage point, respectively. In addition to
the  impact  on  growth  rates,  the  positive  contribution  of  the  monetary  policy  has  a  cumulative
impact on the level of economic activity. For 2017, the effect of the accommodative monetary
policy on the level of economic activity in Albania is estimated at around 1.3 percentage points.
Growth  in  aggregate  demand  has  led  to  higher  employment  and  improved  capacity  utilization
rates, boosting medium-term inflationary pressures; however, inflation remains below our target.
The persistence of low inflation has been at the focus of our analyses. The consensus of these
analyses  is  that  the  monetary  policy  has  been  and  remains  effective  for  boosting  aggregate
demand and guaranteeing price stability in the medium and long term.
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Albania remains confident that the return of the economy to its
potential and the fuller utilisation of production capacities will be accompanied by faster increase
in  wages  and  productions  costs.  Inflation  is,  therefore,  expected  to  return  to  the  target  within
2019.
This  forecast  is  conditional  to  maintaining  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  in  the
quarters ahead, and takes into account the continuation of the fiscal consolidation process. The
continuation of fiscal consolidation has enabled a better transmission of the monetary stimulus to
the economy and has helped reducing fiscal weaknesses and increasing the resilience of the
public sector against future challenges.
The  coordination  of  the  monetary  policy  with  the  fiscal  policy  is  vital  for  strengthening  the
macroeconomic  stability  and  ensuring  sustainable  growth.  We  deem  that  the  current
macroeconomic policy mix is adequate. On one hand, it maintains a stimulating resultant trend of
main economic policies and, on the other hand, it addresses the weaknesses deriving from the
relatively high level of public debt.
Honourable Committee members,
 In  response  to  your  recommendation  for  on-going  improvement  of  the  monetary  policy
transmission mechanism, let me share with your some obstacles we have identified as well as
our matrix with actions for addressing them.
2.2. Monetary policy and its transmission mechanism
In  our  judgment,  the  pass-through  of  the  monetary  policy  effect  to  financial  markets  and  the
economy, in other words the transmission mechanism, continues to suffer from three structural
obstacles.
The first obstacle is the relatively high level of the euroization in the Albanian financial
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets and economy. The high euroization renders the monetary policy pass-through more
difficult,  as  it  reduces  its  scope  and  exposes  the  private  agents  and  the  financial  system  to
exchange  rate  volatility. Aware  of  this  fact,  the  Bank  of Albania,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and
Economy  and  the  Albanian  Financial  Supervision  Authority  signed  a  Memorandum  of
Cooperation on increasing the use of the national currency (ALL) in the Albanian financial system
and economy. In this (published) document, in the framework of the de-euroization objective, all
the  signatory  institutions  commit  to  identifying  and  undertaking  actions  within  their  area  of
competence.
In  this  framework,  the  Bank  of  Albania  identified  a  package  of  measures  that  envisage  the
implementation  of  differentiated  rates  for  keeping  the  required  reserve  for  banks’  liabilities  in
foreign currency and in the national currency. This measure is aimed at encouraging financial
intermediation in lek through a relative reduction of its cost. Furthermore, banks will be required
to comply with higher liquidity requirements for liabilities held in foreign currency. To raise the
awareness of borrowers in foreign currency about the potential risks of this form of borrowing,
banks will be required to explain by concrete examples foreign currency credit risks and provide
borrowers with an alternative and comparable credit in lek.
The proposals for these measures are discussed with the banking industry and the necessary
amendments to the regulatory acts have been prepared.
The second obstacle is the still-low appetite of banks to expand lending. This behaviour
continues to reflect the effect of two factors: (i) deleveraging policies for reducing exposure in the
countries of the region, including Albania, implemented by parent banks from the euro area; and,
(ii) perception of credit risk at home. While banks’ balance sheets have improved and the credit
risk has diminished, the policies for reducing their exposure in countries outside the EU remain
conservative. Such policies reflect also EBA’s new supervisory rules on reducing the exposure of
European-based banking groups in South East Europe.
In  the  context  of  addressing  this  issue,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  signed  a  memorandum  of
cooperation with the European Banking Authority College in 2015, on exchanging information and
harmonising supervisory policies.
Regarding non-performing loans, the Bank of Albania continues to be committed to implementing
the measures set out in the national plan for reducing them. The reduction of the credit risk, in
parallel  with  the  improvement  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  economic  growth,  should  be
accompanied by more realistic lending policies by the banking system. This is a recurring appeal
I have made in my public appearances. The implementation of such policies would create the
conditions for fulfilling the needs of the economy for financing, which are expected to be upward
in the future.
The third obstacle is the development level of financial markets and the narrow range of
financial instruments. In 2017, the Bank of Albania, in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance
and  Economy  and  the  World  Bank  explored  options  for  developing  the  secondary  market  of
Government securities and improving the functioning of the primary market. This project will help
in the Government securities trading, increasing the investors’ base, and forming a yield curve
that  is  a  representative  one  for  the  economy.  Such  a  curve  enables  a  better  management  of
liquidity for all the financial agents, as well as a better monetary policy transmission to financial
markets. I would like, however, to underline that the development of markets is a long process,
which requires cooperation by all economic and financial agents in the economy.
 Turning to the contribution of the Bank of Albania in the overall improvement of the financial and
economic  context,  I  would  like  to  present  now  our  work  with  regard  to  safeguarding  and
promoting financial stability. The main aspects of our work consisted in strengthening the stability
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  the  banking  system,  enhancing  its  resilience  to  shocks  and  adoption  of  international
standards.
3. Financial stability and banking system performance
In  2017,  the  activity  of  the  banking  system  was  stable  and  supported  the  safeguarding  of  the
financial stability. As at the end of 2017, the share of its assets stood at 92.5% of the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). The main financial indicators of the banking sector activity improved,
and the net financial result of the banking sector grew considerably in 2017. The return on assets
(RoA) of the system increased at 1.54%, in December 2017, from 0.7% a year earlier, whereas
the return on equity (RoE) increased at 15.7%, from 7.2%. The capital adequacy ratio was 16.6%
at the end of 2017, up by around 0.2 percentage point from a year earlier.
The monitored indicators show a mitigation of risks to financial stability. In particular, credit risk
fell  considerably  during  2017,  as  shown  by  the  fall  in  non-performing  loans.  The  liquidity  risk
continues to be low, while the banking system’s exposure to market risks remains significant.
Notwithstanding  the  positive  developments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  to  work  for
improving its supervisory capacities and further strengthening the regulatory framework.
The macro-prudential policy strategy was compiled and approved in 2017. The implementation of
the macro-prudential policy was coordinated with a prudential and pro-active supervision. The
supervisory practice improved regarding the methodology for banks control, the approximation of
standards with Basel principles and the efforts to adopt the best international practices.
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  preparation  of  the  regulatory  framework  on  the  Internal  Capital
Adequacy Assessment Process. This framework was prepared in the light of Basel principles
and EU directives. The Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process is particularly important,
as its complements the supervisory perspective with the self-assessment dimension of banks.
Significant  changes  have  been  made  regarding  the  prevention  process  of  money  laundering,
through the revision of the relevant regulatory framework.
The  revision  of  the  supervisory  methodology  on  the  qualitative  assessment  of  the  corporate
governance in banks, of the functioning and independence of their committees, of the internal
audit structure in assessing the risks and their functioning continued during 2017. In this project,
we partnered with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Notwithstanding  the  progress  made  in  reducing  the  non-performing  loans,  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  achievement  of  banks’  annual  objectives  regarding  the  situation  of  non-performing
loans  and  the  compilation  of  the  Recovery  and  Resolution  Plans  for  larger  borrowers.  Banks
report regularly to the Bank of Albania on the level of their relationships with every borrower, as
well as the expectations and plans on future developments, in compliance with our requirements.
With  assistance  from  the  World  Bank  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  a  regulatory
framework,  aiming  to  encourage  the  collaboration  and  coordination  of  banks  for  addressing
common borrowers, is being compiled.
Special attention is being paid to the consolidating processes with the expected merger of two
banks in Albania and the strategic plans on the re-positioning in the market depending on the
dominant short and long-term factors.
In  parallel  with  the  work  to  improve  the  regulatory  framework  and  the  adoption  of  the  best
international  standards,  high  priority  has  been  given  to  on-site  examinations.  During  2017,
fourteen  full-scope  and  partial  examinations  were  performed  in  banks,  non-bank  financial
institutions, and savings and loan associations. The examinations showed that the performance
of  the  banking  sector  improved  in  terms  of:  the  quality  of  internal  policies  and  their
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
implementation;  the  establishment  of  adequate  risk  management  processes;  and,  the
implementation  of  the  supervisory  regulatory  framework.  Moreover,  the  non-bank  financial
institutions are assessed to have still space to ensure proper effectiveness, independence and
authority. Some of the savings and loan associations were examined for the first time after the
conclusion of the consolidation process and the separation from the respective unions.
The Law ‘'On the recovery and resolution of banks in the Republic of Albania” entered into force
in  2017.  This  Law  designates  the  Bank  of Albania  as  the  Resolution Authority  for  banks  and
branches  of  foreign  banks  that  conduct  their  activity  in Albania.  This  Law  is  another  step  in
adopting the European standards in the regulatory framework of the Bank of Albania. In its role as
the Resolution Authority, the Bank of Albania increases the security of the banking system.
In compliance with the legal requirements, the Resolution Fund was established to provide for
the implementation of resolution  tools.  The  Bank  of Albania  compiled  the  methodology  for  the
calculation of contributions that each bank should pay and the procedure of the payment. The
calculation methodology and fund management was the topic of informative meetings organised
with banks and the Albanian Association of Banks.
We deem that the implemented policies and the undertaken measures have served to promoting
monetary  and  financial  stability,  by  contributing  to  safeguarding  the  economic  and  financial
balances, necessary for sustainable economic growth.
 Following, I will briefly summarise the work of the Bank of Albania regarding the promotion and
development of the payment system.
4. Functioning of safe and efficient payment systems
In the framework of strengthening the payment systems and payment instruments oversight, the
Bank  of  Albania  has  worked  to  align  the  regulatory  base  to  the  international  standards  that
guarantee the security and promote the efficiency of payment systems.
A huge amount of work has been done to compile the draft-law on Payment Services, which
approximates  the  EU’s  Payment  Services  Directive.  The  implementation  of  this  directive  is
expected to considerably contribute to improving the security and efficiency of payment services
through  promoting  competitiveness,  strengthening  transparency  and  clearly  defining  the  rights
and obligations of these services’ providers and consumers. Also, it addresses the risks arising
from technological novelties (Fin-Tech) in payment services. Currently, the Bank of Albania is in
the  consulting  and  finalising  process  of  the  draft-law.  The  approval  of  this  draft-law  is  an
important step towards the implementation of the European Commission recommendations for
the free movement of capital and for the adherence to the Single Euro Payment Area (SEPA).
The Bank of Albania also has the role of payment systems’ reformer. In this framework, the Bank
of Albania continued to work on the consolidation of inter-institutional collaboration, through the
National  Payment  System  Committee  (NPSC),  which  it  chairs.  The  Committee  has  initiated
several  projects,  most  importantly  the  projects  on  the  compilation  and  implementation  of  the
draft-strategy for the reformation of the small value payments market, the increase of financial
inclusion and the assessment of remittances market.
The successful accomplishment of the main legal obligations is supported by a range of other
functions of the Bank of Albania. I will now briefly mention some of the improvements in these
activities.
5. Other activities of the Bank of Albania
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the field of statistics, the Bank of Albania has intensified its work to align the methodology on
statistics with the international standards and their harmonization with the acquis communitare.
In concrete terms, the methodologies on the preparation of financial soundness, interest rates,
financial  accounts  and  international  reserve  indicators  are  revised.  The  Statistics  Code  of
Practice at the Bank of Albania was adopted for the first time. This code ensures integrity, quality,
access  and  confidentiality  in  using  and  reporting  the  statistics,  according  to  the  international
standards. Also,  the  Bank  of Albania,  for  the  first  time,  published  the  policy  and  calendar  of
statistics review, which ensures full transparency related with the review of released statistics.
Since  June, Albania  implements  the  IMF‘s  Enhanced  General  Data  Dissemination  e-GDDS).
Some of the statistics are compiled by the Bank of Albania.
Regarding the international reserve management, regulatory amendments have been made
to clarify the function of international reserve management and the responsibilities of decision-
making structures, as well as to broaden the range of investment instruments in compliance with
the  adopted  policies.  As  at  end-2017,  the  international  reserve  was  around  EUR  3  billion,
sufficient  to  cover  6.7  months  of  imports  of  goods  and  services,  and  178%  of  the  short-term
external debt. The yield on its investment was slightly negative, due to the low interest rates of
euro in international markets.
The economic and financial analyses and the decisions of the Bank of Albania are based on a
broad research work within the institution. The Bank of Albania deems that the investment in
human resources and in research techniques is always rewarding, taking into account the rapid
structural  changes  in  the  economy  and  in  the  financial  markets.  The  monetary  policy
transmission, the safeguarding of financial stability, the banking supervision and the coordination
among these objectives were the main focus of working papers during 2017. The results are
shared with national and international experts in scientific panels and are published in working
papers. Also, the international experts have continued to assist to improve the macro-economic
and statistical models, which support Bank of Albania projections.
Public  communication  is  an  important  pillar  in  Bank  of  Albania’s  activity  for  enhancing  the
transparency and public confidence in the institution. The classic channels of communication are
supplemented with digital platforms, such as Twitter (information), YouTube (video) and Flicker
(photos).  The  Bank  of Albania  has  continued  the  practice  of  organising  scientific  conferences
and national and international forums to share opinions with national and international partners
and groups of interest.
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  committed  in expanding  financial  literacy,  for  an  informed  public
understands better and responds more adequately to the decisions of the central bank. Also, a
financially  literate  public  manages  better  its  personal  finances.  This  commitment  is  further
concretised with the establishment of the Museum of the Bank of Albania. During 2017, a range
of informing and educational activities were organised at the Museum of the Bank of Albania with
the  participation  of  academics  from  various  fields  to  share  their  knowledge  with  the  public  at
large.
The  Bank  of Albania  has  strengthened  the cooperation with the national and international
institutions, through  information  sharing,  and  consultation  and  joint  projects.  During  2017,  a
number of memoranda of cooperation were signed with national and international partners.
Good governance in terms of the performance of the work processes, the efficiency in using
the resources and risk management, is an element of the Bank of Albania’s accountability. In this
light, I would like to mention the main improvements that have taken place in terms of internal
audit systems.
The  internal  audit  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  an  independent  activity  from  the  management,
ensured through the Inspector General, appointed by the Parliament.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Internal audit
The  Operational  Risk  Management  function  was  consolidated  over  2017.  The  purpose  of  the
Operational  Risk  Management  is  to  manage  properly  the  uncertainties,  and  to  inform  the
decision-makers on the risks that may hamper the accomplishment of the Bank’s objectives, or
to  have  adverse  financial  and/or  reputational  effects.  The  maturity  level  of  operational  risk
management  activity  assessed  by  the  international  experts,  increased  at  ‘managed’,  thus
crossing the ‘basic’ level. This maturity level shows that the operational risk management policy
is guided by a risk matrix and a definite governing structure.
The  application  on  the  automated  management  of  audits  and  operational  risk  management
process  was  implemented  over  2017.  During  2018,  the  major  part  of  internal  audit  activity  is
expected to be realised and documented in the new system. The risk assessment automation
for audit purposes provides the planning of audits fully based on risks, in line with the international
practice.
Honourable Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 At the end of my presentation, I want to assure you that the Bank of Albania will continue to be
committed  to  following  its  legal  objectives,  and  to  implementing  the  institutional  tasks  and
commitments.
I am confident that the Albanian economy and financial system will continue to see in the Bank of
Albania a reliable, professional and transparent partner.
Thank you for your attention!
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
