Yves Mersch: Deepening EMU - political integration and economic
convergence
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the conference on "Economic and Monetary Union - Deepening and Convergence", Linz, 5 July
2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We could have known better.
 The  discussions  on  the  first  meaningful  blueprint  for  a  European  monetary  union  already
highlighted  challenges  that  we  have  not  yet  fully  overcome.  The  plan  to  establish  a  single
currency by 1980, drawn up in 1970 by a committee of experts chaired by the then Luxembourg
Prime  Minister  Pierre  Werner,  referred  to  the  need  for  economic  policy  coordination  amid
insufficient  economic  convergence  and  the  absence  of  fiscal  transfers  which  would  require  a
political union. Later proposals, including the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, failed to sufficiently tackle
the  inherent  tensions  of  a  currency  without  a  state. Although  Europe  has  recovered  from  the
most severe financial and economic crisis in a century, which threatened the very functioning of
our democracies, it is still suffering from these shortcomings.
As the euro is a shared currency, euro area countries with low productivity growth cannot resort
to exchange rate depreciation [currency devaluation]; and the more dynamic countries, whose
currencies would normally appreciate, end up with stubbornly low inflation rates. The only way
out is through internal devaluation, which entails lower wage costs and higher productivity, but
this encounters social resistance and fosters populism. Recent political propositions in Italy were
kept in check only by market pressures and the sanity of established institutions – national and
European alike.
But recognising the design flaws of the currency union cannot mean calling the whole project into
question. Too much financial, political and social capital has been invested, and the cost of a
break-up  would  be  prohibitively  high,  with  devastating  economic,  social  and  political
consequences.
The only viable option is to continue the deepening of our Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
through political and economic convergence. Both channels are indispensable for EMU.
Today, I will focus on three areas in which it is vital to make progress. First, we have to more
actively  pursue  fiscal  and  structural  reforms.  Second,  we  need  to  further  reduce  risks  and
fragmentation  in  the  financial  sector. And  third,  we  must  decisively  strengthen  the  institutional
architecture of EMU to weather the challenges of today and tomorrow.
Notwithstanding  robust  economic  expansion,  the  euro  area  remains  vulnerable  to  adverse
shocks. The risk of an external shock, albeit symmetrical at its origin, has come to the fore lately,
as  we  witness  a  global  environment  marked  by  heightened  uncertainty,  retrenchment  behind
national borders, and pressure on the multilateral system.
Fiscal policies and structural reforms
All  euro  area  countries  first  and  foremost  need  to  increase  their  resilience.  Strengthening
macroeconomic resilience is particularly important in the euro area. In the face of asymmetric
shocks beyond the control of national authorities, costs are more likely to be transmitted across
borders within Monetary Union in view of the strong trade and financial linkages. Even in the face
of a common shock, different degrees of resilience among countries will make the transmission
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the single monetary policy more challenging. Still, monetary policy cannot act to compensate
for national deficiencies.
It is therefore of vital importance to develop the flexible labour and product markets that reduce
the chance of crises and allow for quicker recoveries by enabling the factors of production to
1
move more quickly between sectors.
Research  from  the  IMF,  the  OECD  and  the  ECB  demonstrates  that  well-sequenced  and
packaged reforms in these areas can increase potential growth and resilience. In parallel, further
2 3
work to reinforce the soundness and effectiveness of domestic institutions will be critical.   
On the fiscal side, it is imperative that Member States use the ongoing expansion to build up
fiscal buffers and reduce debt levels, while those with fiscal space ought to address their public
investment  gaps.  Lower  debt  and  higher  buffers  increase  resilience  when  a  shock  hits.  By
complying  with  the  rules,  including  the  requirement  for  low  debt  levels,  states  undergoing  a
downturn  are  more  likely  to  retain  financial  market  confidence  in  their  solvency.  They  also
increase  their  ability  to  recover  from  the  shock.  Sizeable  buffers  create  the  fiscal  space  to
mitigate downturns, which minimises output losses and thus strengthens the underlying capacity
of a country to pay off the national debt.
It  is  ultimately  up  to  national  governments  to  pursue  sound  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  But
given the spillovers these policies can create, they are also a common concern for the union.
In  this  light,  there  is  a  need  for  greater  ownership  of  the  tools  we  already  have,  notably  the
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and the macroeconomic imbalance procedure (MIP). The fact
that euro area aggregate debt and deficit levels are now lower in the euro area than in any other
major economy demonstrates that our common fiscal rules are having some effect. Yet further
structural fiscal adjustment is necessary, particularly in the countries with the highest debt levels.
And while the MIP has proven very effective in identifying reform needs, implementation has been
sluggish.
In  parallel,  additional  instruments  could  be  developed  at  the  euro  area  level.  Proposals  here
essentially  come  in  two  flavours.  Either  they  focus  on  supporting  convergence  by  directly
strengthening  allocative  efficiency,  thus  moving  beyond  the  existing  structural  and  cohesion
funds in the EU budget. Or they focus on stabilisation at the euro area level. Although I will not
elaborate on this today, there are also proposals that blend the two approaches, for example by
supporting investment in downturns.
On  the  convergence  side,  the  European  Commission,  for  example,  suggests  supporting
structural  reforms  through  the  EU  budget.  In  principle,  such  a  tool  could  contribute  to  reform
implementation  by  way  of  positive  incentives.  However,  for  that  to  work  effectively,  the
Commission proposal needs to be significantly strengthened in three ways.
First,  reforms  should  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  implications  for  macroeconomic
prospects. Second, the funding should be distributed on the basis of a quality assessment rather
than  in  proportion  to  a  country’s  entitlement  to  a  “slice  of  the  pie”.  To  strengthen  such  an
assessment, the funds themselves should be linked to the packaging of reforms, reforms with
short-term fiscal costs or the funding of flanking policies . Pension reforms would be a suitable
example,  since  they  can  come  with  short-term  fiscal  costs .  Third,  proper  and  powerful
clawback mechanisms should be built in so that the funds could be recuperated if reforms are
reversed. While the Commission mentions such a mechanism, the identification of reversals is
left overly vague.
4
5
Both the Commission and the recent Franco-German paper also foresee additional instruments
for  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  Two  design  elements  are  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of
such  an  instrument.  First,  a  central  fiscal  capacity  should  be  designed  to  increase  the  euro
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
area’s  ability  to  counter  severe  area-wide  recessions,  thereby  supporting  monetary  policy.
Second,  any  fiscal  capacity  should  come  with  appropriate  incentives  for  sound  fiscal  and
economic policymaking.
On  both  counts,  the  proposals  made  so  far  fall  short.  They  fall  short  in  terms  of  their
effectiveness,  as  they  are  limited  in  size  and  seem  to  focus  on  asymmetric  rather  than
symmetric shocks, although existing Treaty provisions already allow for financial assistance to a
Member State threatened with severe difficulties caused by exceptional occurrences beyond its
control.   Moreover,  the  proposals  do  not  sufficiently  counteract  moral  hazard.  The  Franco-
German proposals did not mention any mechanisms to this effect.
6
Similarly, reliance on an unemployment trigger – as foreseen by the Commission – would not
enable  policymakers  to  distinguish  between  “bad  luck”  and  “bad  policies”.  Indeed,  it  might
potentially reward policy-induced increases in unemployment.
These examples illustrate that any introduction of a central fiscal capacity should be coupled with
an overhaul of the economic and fiscal governance framework. Moreover, agreement would be
more  likely  to  be  reached  if  proposals  did  not  repackage  tax  proposals  of  questionable  value
which have been rejected in the past.
Reducing risks and fragmentation in the financial sector
Let me now turn to the second set of challenges faced by the euro area: risks in the financial
sector.
However, I would first like to recall what has been achieved in making the euro area’s financial
sector more resilient. With the establishment of the banking union, Europe has translated some
of the key lessons of the crisis into a more solid framework.
The banking union rests on three pillars, two of which are already fully developed and one on
which political agreement is under way. Under the first pillar of the banking union, the euro area’s
largest  banks  are  supervised  by  the  ECB  on  the  basis  of  a  single  rulebook  that  harmonises
banking legislation and regulation. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) not only seeks to
ensure  a  uniform  approach  to  prudential  supervision  in  the  euro  area  in  line  with  the  highest
international standards, it also fosters a level playing field that promotes financial integration in
Europe.
The second pillar establishes a banking resolution framework for significant institutions aimed at
minimising the involvement of public funds in bank failures. The Single Resolution Mechanism
(SRM) is a logical complement to the system of single supervision in the euro area: large banks
are not only supervised at the Union level, their failure is also addressed centrally. The SRM is a
leap forward, as banks can now fail without disrupting the entire financial system. Moreover, the
smooth functioning of the SRM is supported through the establishment of a Single Resolution
Fund (SRF), which ensures that the financial industry, as a whole, finances the stabilisation of
the financial system by pooling contributions. But a solvency and liquidity backstop for the SRF,
docked at the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), needs to be established.
The steps that have been taken on the supervisory and resolution side should, in turn, pave the
way for political discussions on a European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS). And they should
make this discussion easier, as they significantly reduce the likelihood of EDIS ever needing to
be  used.  The  key  contribution  of  EDIS  is,  in  fact,  that  it  will  instil  confidence  in  the  financial
system as a whole without probably ever being used . That is the beauty of such backstops.
7
This, however, only holds if the discussions on EDIS remain fully incentive-compatible. In other
words,  EDIS  should  in  no  way  water  down  the  standards  on  MREL  and  TLAC  or  other  risk
reduction measures, such as moves to reduce the pile of sour loans and prevent the build-up of
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
new ones. But if these conditions are in place, any residual resistance to EDIS is based on a
misunderstanding of its nature as an insurance mechanism.
The banking union, and its enhanced regulatory and supervisory framework, has brought about
significant progress in reducing overall risk. The Common Equity Tier 1 ratios of significant banks
have increased from 9.7% in 2008 to over 14% today. Leverage ratios have risen from 3.7% to
5.8%. And banks have much more stable liquidity and funding. Further risk reduction is under
8
way as we speak .
We should not dwell on our achievements, however. The euro area’s financial sector remains
vulnerable  to  legacy  issues .  Moreover,  to  accelerate  further  risk-sharing,  milestones  are
necessary to ensure progress in areas of key importance for the optimal functioning of banking
union.
9
For  example,  focused  steps  need  to  be  taken  towards  harmonising  and  improving  certain
elements  of  national  insolvency  frameworks,  including  the  alignment  of  the  conditions  under
which a bank is deemed to be failing or likely to fail and the conditions for liquidation under the
national  laws  for  credit  institutions.  Progress  is  also  necessary  on  the  aforementioned  sour
loans, or non-performing loans – NPLs – as we call them, in particular swift implementation of
the  ECOFIN  action  plan.  Finally,  we  need  to  use  the  single  rulebook  to  further  reduce
fragmentation, removing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage, harmonising supervisory powers,
and  making  sure  that  large  cross-border  investment  firms  with  risks  akin  to  those  of  credit
institutions  are  supervised  like  banks  at  the  European  level.  All  of  these  policy  goals  are
commensurate with a more efficient operation of the SSM.
In addition, there remains a need for banks to be able to plan ahead and obtain liquidity, even if
they are deemed to be failing or likely to fail or if a resolution process has been activated. The
provision of central bank liquidity – be it through monetary policy credit operations or emergency
liquidity  assistance  –  should  however  by  no  means  be  automatically  assumed  in  resolution
planning. Resolution financing is foremost a government task, now complemented by the rules
and  procedures  applied  by  the  Single  Resolution  Board  and  the  national  resolution  authorities
within  the  framework  of  the  SRM.  Central  banks  provide  liquidity,  not  solvency  support. And
funding  gaps  that  cannot  be  addressed  by  the  industry  or  through  the  SRF  should  be  filled,
ultimately, by or on behalf of Member States or intergovernmental institutions.
Strengthening the institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union
The elements mentioned so far can be mutually reinforcing. In the fiscal and economic realms,
common instruments can bolster convergence, thus providing a shield against bad equilibria and
economic scarring in crises. And pursuing the right policies helps to create the policy space to
address  shocks  in  the  first  place.  In  the  financial  realm,  backstops  reduce  risk  across  the
system  by  containing  market  panics  when  a  crisis  hits.  And  a  strong  resolution  framework
ensures that very little public risk-sharing is actually needed when a crisis hits, as the costs are
primarily born by the private sector.
Nevertheless, it is a fact of economic life that the risk of significant downside economic shocks
can never be fully eliminated. This is why an effective crisis management framework remains
indispensable.  There  is  thus  merit  in  strengthening  the  role  of  the  ESM  in  managing  crises,
provided that governance arrangements are duly reviewed with a view to integrating them into the
federal  set-up  of  the  EU.  Should  the  ESM  remain  outside  the  EU  legal  order  as  an
intergovernmental body, any future discussion of the tasks that could be conferred on the ESM in
the field of economic governance must respect the existing competences conferred on the EU
and its institutions under EU law.
Market  incentives  that  appropriately  support  prudent  fiscal  policies  and  reduce  risks  on  bank
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
balance sheets may usefully support the implementation of the existing rules-based framework.
To  reinforce  the  credibility  of  the  no  bailout  clause,  and  better  anticipate  debt  sustainability
problems,  the  ESM  needs  to  be  able  to  distinguish  early  on  between  liquidity  and  solvency
problems.
 More clarity in our policy frameworks would allow us to pick up the can at an early
stage rather than kicking it down the road.
10
Similarly,  to  definitively  break  the  bank-sovereign  nexus,  we  have  to  continue  to  reflect  on
regulatory instruments to curb the excessive accumulation of sovereign risks on bank balance
sheets  without  triggering  market  disruptions.  In  that  sense,  ensuring  the  adequate  regulatory
treatment of sovereign risk and facilitating orderly debt restructurings are two sides of the same
coin, reflecting the reality that public debt is no longer risk-free. Still, we have to be mindful that
Europe might be walking this path alone.
At the same time, we should be aware that market-imposed discipline often comes suddenly,
creates  cliff-edge  effects  and  can  have  negative  consequences  for  financial  stability.  For  this
reason,  the  recent  Franco-German  proposal  to  introduce  single-limb  collective  action  clauses
and  moves  to  align  the  roles  of  the  ESM  and  the  IMF  in  debt  restructuring  negotiations  are
sensible first steps towards building a more predictable framework for the orderly resolution of
11
debt crises .
Let me now turn to my final point, which is that institutional arrangements and democratic control
need to evolve in lock-step with progress in the economic, fiscal and financial unions to meet the
test of constitutionality.
As  European  policies  assume  a  stronger  role  over  time,  confusion  over  the  assignment  of
responsibilities and accountability arrangements threatens efficiency and legitimacy. But greater
control at EU level is important for two reasons. First, it would be a true reflection of a functioning
democracy  where  sovereignty  either  has  been  fully  transferred  to  EU  level  (in  the  case  of
monetary  policy,  for  example)  or  it  involves  both  national  and  EU  levels  (as  with  prudential
policies, for instance). And second, liability and control need to be aligned – he who pays the
piper calls the tune. When taxpayers’ money is involved at European level, a European control
function is called for.
Economic and Monetary Union is unique in this regard. The distinction between the euro area
and  the  EU  means  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  fully  tailor  accountability  to  euro  area  tasks.  In
particular, the European Parliament does not sit in euro area composition when discussing euro
area matters, even though it would be common sense for it to do so.
Accountability  and  sovereignty  also  need  to  be  proportionate  in  areas  that  are  not  exclusively
dealt with at EU or euro area level but are areas of shared competence. This holds true for the
ESM and for fiscal policies, where the situation is somewhat more complex and blurred.
The  ESM,  for  example,  was  created  on  the  basis  of  intergovernmental  arrangements  and  for
tasks where the EU only has a coordination role, and where the European Parliament is not yet a
counterpart  in  terms  of  accountability.  So  we  need  to  strike  a  balance.  On  the  one  hand,
accountability should be assigned to national parliaments for decisions that are fully in the hands
of national authorities. On the other hand, the ESM needs to be equipped with swift and credible
decision-making procedures. This will never be fully possible in an intergovernmental setting that
is hampered by national vetoes and operates outside the constitutional safeguards of the acquis.
Against this backdrop, the ESM should be turned into a body that is governed by EU law and is
accountable to the European Parliament. This would ensure that the ESM is better placed to act
in the sole interest of the euro area and thus in line with its functional mandate of ensuring the
stability of Economic and Monetary Union as a whole.
A similar logic must be applied in any further discussions regarding a euro area fiscal capacity,
the possible centralisation of EU investment schemes or the powers that a European finance
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
minister might have.
Fiscal  instruments  need  to  be  complemented  by  institutional  arrangements  and  democratic
control at the corresponding level. If a euro area budget is established, it should be part of an
ongoing debate on a euro area finance ministry and a euro area composition of the European
Parliament, as well as its role on both the revenue and expenditure side.
While  the  creation  of  new  umbrella  funds,  such  as  the  InvestEU  Programme,  may  pursue
laudable  public  policy  objectives,  we  should  avoid  undermining  established  Union  methods.
Indeed, we should not succumb to the appeal of relying on secondary legislation in areas where
primary law is unambiguous.
Concluding remarks
As we take further steps to complete EMU, we should keep in mind two principles that are at the
heart of effective policy in a democratic society: namely, the effective alignment of liability and
control,  and  the  discharge  of  democratic  control  or  accountability  at  the  level  at  which  policy
decisions are taken. Upholding these two principles is a necessary condition in the continuing
efforts  to  foster  economic  convergence  and  further  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Given  the
experience of the past 20 years, there can be no doubt that the progress achieved so far has laid
the groundwork for further steps to be taken for a “currency beyond a state” – a fact that the early
intellectual architects of Monetary Union were already aware of. In other words, to quote the then
Commission President Jacques Delors: “Europe is like a bicycle. It has to move forward. If it
stops, it will fall over”.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Sondermann (2018), “Towards more resilient economies”, Journal of Policy Modeling, 40(1), pp. 97–117.
Dellis, K., Sondermann, D., and Vansteenkiste, I. (2017), “Determinants of FDI inflows in advanced economies:
Does the quality of economic structures matter?”, Working Paper Series, No 2066, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, May.
Masuch, Mooshammer and Pierluigi (2016), “Institutions and Growth in Europe”, CEPS  Working  Paper, April
2016.
Duval, R., (2008), “Is there a role for macroeconomic policy in fostering structural reforms? Panel evidence from
OECD countries over the past two decades”, European Journal of Political Economy, 24 (2): 491–502.
European Central Bank (2015b), “The short-term fiscal implications of structural reforms”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 7: 52–70.
“Where a Member State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused by natural
disasters or exceptional occurrences beyond its control, the Council, on a proposal from the Commission, may
grant, under certain conditions, Union financial assistance to the Member State concerned. […]” Article 122.2,
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
See Carmassi, J. et al. (2018), “Completing the Banking Union with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme:
who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, Occasional Paper Series, No 208, ECB.
See Draghi, M. “Risk reducing and risk sharing in the euro area”, speech at the European University Institute,
Florence, 11 May 2018.
Andrews, D. and Petroulakis, F. (2017), “Breaking the shackles: zombie firms, weak banks and depressed
restructuring in Europe”, OECD working papers, No 1433.
See Y. Mersch (2016), “Reflections on the feasibility of a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism in the euro
area”, ESCB Legal Conference 2016.
See  Benassy-Quere  et  al.,  “Reconciling  Risk  Sharing  with  Market  Discipline”,  CEPR  Policy  Insight, No  91,
Centre for Economic Policy Research.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
