Boris Vujčić, Governor of the Croatian National Bank 
Convergence: is it here to stay? 
Dinner speech at the 7th Annual National Bank of Poland Conference on the Future of the European 
Economy, Warsaw 20 October 
 Thank  you  for  this  opportunity,  it  is  always  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  Warsaw  at  a  NBP 
conference. I feel at home here, because it is not the first time I am here. But tonight this is even 
more so, after listening to Croatian songs in this beautiful castle. That really completes the 'feels 
like home' atmosphere for me.  
Now, I'm the last one to speak at this year's conference, on the topic of the role of the CEE in 
Europe, and, some people would compare that feeling to how the seventh and the last husband 
of Elisabeth Taylor, Lary Fortensky felt coming back home, poor guy wondering what can I 
can do here that has not been done before?  
Most of what I planned to say about the convergence of CEE has already been said, but let me 
try to put additional flavour to what has been said without keeping it too long.  
The CEE has not been in focus so much, after the start of the crisis, as for the last few years 
most of the EU countries have been preoccupied with problems of either public finances, or the 
financial sector, or both. Rightfully so, as these issues have been threatening the very existence 
of the euro area and maybe even the future of the EU. While we are still not entirely out of the 
woods,  great  progress  has  been  achieved  in  these  areas.  Government  deficits  have  been 
substantially reduced and in most of the EU Member States public debt has been put on a 
downward path. Equally important, as Guntram was saying this morning, we now have the 
mechanisms  in  place  to  try  to  prevent  or  to  deal  with  the  next  crisis  more  efficiently.  The 
 1 
Stability and Growth Pact has been strengthened, the SSM and the SRM as the first two pillars 
of the banking union are now in place and ESM has been established and financially loaded. 
With a number of other institutions (EBA, ESRB, ...) that creates ramifications of what he 
labelled EMU2.0  
Somewhere along the way when these big issues have been resolved people have noticed that 
the convergence of CEE countries towards the income levels of their Western peers has, on 
average, slowed down. The question is why, and what can be done about that. Potential rates of 
growth  are  lower  and  with  ageing  populations,  significant  emigration  and  decreasing 
investment rates, focus has turned to structural reforms and institutional quality. Labour and 
product  market  liberalisation,  or  business  friendly  environments  almost  became  mantras  of 
central bankers in their communication with governments and the broader public. European 
institutions have started to stress the importance of the quality of the institutions. And not only 
their quality, of course. Yesterday morning I spoke in Croatia about the need to improve the 
efficiency of the judicial system. 
It is fair to say that many reforms have already been undertaken across Europe and that many 
countries are now seeing the benefits of such policies. For the last couple of quarters, every new 
GDP data release by Eurostat has been a positive surprise, while forecasters have been raising 
their GDP forecast for the EA and the EU. However, while growth has resumed in all countries, 
medium-term  growth  potential  in the  region  is  insufficient  to  ensure  pre-crisis  pace  of  real 
convergence. Namely, for convergence to be sustainable, long-term potential per capita growth 
must be consistent with an expansion of demand. In other words, GDP growth that results from 
strong capital inflow, foreign demand shock, or fall in interest rates due to perhaps euro area 
enlargement process, could prove to be unsustainable.  
So, the question is, did we take convergence for granted? Was one of the great features of the 
European integration process only a temporary and unsustainable phenomenon related to the 
2 
 initial 'low-hanging fruit' reforms that corrected vast resource misallocation problems, followed 
by a huge inflow of foreign capital before the crisis? Will convergence return back to a faster 
speed, will it continue at a slower speed, or maybe even stop or reverse? 
Is convergence still here and, even more importantly, is it here to stay? 
Well, as it has been shown already at this conference, convergence is still present but it has 
slowed down compared to the pre-crisis period. Of course, having said that, we have to keep in 
mind that CEE has come a long way since the beginning of the transition. Our progress has 
been tremendous. If we go back to 1995, the average level of income per capita in CESEE 
countries was below 40% of the old Europe’s income (in PPS terms). By 2008 it increased by 
a half and reached 60% of the EU15 level of income. And in some regions, like the Baltics, 
developments  were  even  more  spectacular  with  relative  income  per  capita  doubling  in  this 
relatively short period of time. It almost seemed that such developments were in line with so 
called absolute or unconditional convergence where lower-income economies grow faster than 
higher-income  economies,  simply  because  the  marginal  productivity  of  capital  in  those 
countries is higher.  
However, today no one actually believes in absolute convergence theory which builds on the 
assumption that across all countries, the level of technical knowledge (and its change), the rate 
of savings, the rate of population growth, and the rate of depreciation are all the same. This 
notion is clearly rejected by the data: countries differ in many, if not all, of these features. And 
this is the case also for our group of countries in the CESEE region with relatively similar 
backgrounds. Therefore, concluding that real income developments before the onset of the crisis 
were in line with unconditional convergence theory would simply be spurious.  
Since the onset of the crisis positive income convergence trends were first reversed in many of 
the countries in the region and, when convergence reappeared, its pace was significantly slower 
 3 
than at the beginning of the 2000s. At the current pace of convergence, most countries in the 
region would need decades to reach German, Austrian or Swedish levels of income, countries 
that are often referred to as the benchmark for the CEE region. Which, in a way, brings us to 
the notion of conditional convergence. The theory of conditional convergence implies that if 
there are persistent differences across countries in preferences and other institutional features, 
divergence is possible in terms of both levels of income and growth rates. And the last crisis 
has reminded us of this quite roughly. Just take a look at the countries of Europe's periphery. 
The average level of income of Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal in 2016 was only at around 
67% of the German income, compared to 80% at the beginning of the millennium. Similarly, 
in Croatia, Slovenia or, to a lesser extent, also the Czech Republic, the relative level of income 
in 2016 was lower than in 2008. Therefore, growth and convergence can be held back for a 
protracted period of time before they reappear, or forces can even work in an opposite direction, 
leading to divergence. The South of the EU has actually not been converging towards the North 
for more than two decades. 
Therefore, the convergence of standards of living is not a sure thing, and should not be taken 
for granted. And we all know the notion of keeping up with the Joneses, or in a more modern 
version – keeping up with the Kardashians, a notion that is apparently even more important 
today  in  a  highly  globalised  world  with  a  free  flow  of  information.  If  the  Joneses  or  the 
Kardashians  are  getting  a  new  Mercedes,  people  are  bound  to  like  something  similar  even 
though just two decades ago they were driving Ladas or Trabants or Polski Fiat. So despite the 
progress achieved so far, citizens will continue to want more. And why shouldn't they?  
Converging to what? 
Since the EU stopped converging, and actually diverged, from the US in mid 1990s the question 
is should the goal be to converge towards the EU style labour, product and financial markets, 
 4 
or  maybe  more  efficient  ones?  Converging  towards  the  structures  that  are  themselves 
underperforming might not be a right choice.  
For example, integration of the CEE banking markets with the West European ones through 
entry  of  banks  into  the  CEE  region  at  an  early  stage  of  the  transition  has  certainly  being 
beneficial in bringing better technology and banking culture, as well as facilitating the transfer 
of capital. However, today, when it is clear that bank-based systems are inferior to more capital 
market-based ones, and when loan-to-deposit ratios are close to one, the goal should probably 
be to turn towards developing more efficient structures of the financial markets.   
How should we, as policymakers, react to this? What are the next steps that we have to take? 
How much do we know? 
Well, we know that when it comes to standards of living, in the long-run it is all about labour 
productivity. And labour productivity, in turn, depends on the amount of capital per unit of 
labour and something that we call total factor productivity (TFP) or multifactor productivity. 
The problem is that both of these components are hard, or impossible, to measure, so we have 
to estimate them, and that is by no means an easy task. Much has been said about the TFP 
growth  in  the  context  of  the  discussions  on  the  slowdown  in  the  productivity  growth,  or 
discussions of the convergence in Europe. However, if you try to decompose the data that are 
used in these discussions, I believe that you'll come to realise that there are serious measurement 
issues. For example, it is hard to believe that there has been almost no increase in capital stock 
per worker in Romania and at the same time, the country managed to increase its TFP by far 
the fastest rate compared to any other country in the region, or to believe that an almost similar 
situation was seen in Slovakia. In terms of data, however, this is the best we have at the moment. 
So,  notwithstanding  substantial  data  issues,  the  question  is  how  can  we,  as  policymakers, 
influence these unobservables?  
 5 
While we can expect a re-launch of capital investment growth, I am quite certain that growth 
rate that we have witnessed in the 2000s, with strong inflow of FDIs and real estate bubbles in 
some countries will not be seen again in the near future. That is why so much focus is on the 
total factor productivity, ultimately seen as the only source of long-term growth. Of course, the 
TFP is an unobservable variable, usually measured by the Solow residual. What drives the TFP 
growth is a much trickier question. Is it innovations, technology advances? For us as policy 
makers, understanding the determinants of technology adoption, the TFP growth, is key, as this 
gives us the channel to act through. There is an increasing number of theory and empirical 
papers linking development and the adoption of technologies to the role of institutions defined 
in a very broad way. And data seem to be supportive of the link – there is a strong positive 
relationship between the quality of institutions and human capital on one side, and growth on 
the other.  
But then, when it comes to the quality of institutions, or human capital, there has been little or 
no convergence of the CEE. If quality of institutions is proxied by the World Bank's Worldwide 
Governance  Indicator  (which  includes  six  broad  dimensions  of  governance:  Government 
Effectiveness,  Regulatory  Quality,  Rule  of  Law,  Control  of  Corruption,  Voice  and 
Accountability, and Political Stability and Absence of Violence/Terrorism), there has hardly 
been any convergence of the CEE region towards Germany. Notable exception are the Baltic 
countries where we have seen positive developments also in the aftermath of the global financial 
crisis. A very similar conclusion can be drawn when looking at the human capital quality, not 
only that the CESEE countries lag substantially behind the EU countries that achieve the best 
results in PISA tests in Math and Science (Finland, Sweden, Austria, and Germany), but the 
developments  over  time  are  also  not  encouraging  as  in  many  countries  the  results  actually 
worsened  during  the  last  decade.  So,  one  can  raise  the  question  of  how  did  we  manage  to 
 6 
converge at a relatively high pace before the crisis, or why convergence continues, with such 
institutions and human capital?  
On one side, such developments are worrisome, but, on the other, they give us the opportunity 
to  streamline  reforms.  Gains  from  reforms  can  be  substantial.  The  European  Commission 
estimated that structural reforms that close only half the gap with best performers in different 
areas  (market  competition  and  regulation,  R&D  expenditure,  skill  structure,  tax  structure, 
labour  market  participation,  unemployment  benefit  ‘generosity’  and  active  labour  market 
policies), which is not overambitious, could have significant macroeconomic effects. The level 
of GDP in 10 years after the reform would be around 7% higher in the CESEE countries and 
around 12% after 20 years compared to the "no reform" scenario, and effects on employment 
are of similar magnitude. The OECD, or the IMF also point to significant benefits of structural 
reforms in terms of TFP improvements. Even given the uncertainty around these estimates, 
welfare advances would most probably be substantial.  
 But the billion(s) dollar question is, how to get structural reforms right? There are, in general, 
two dimensions of structural reforms. First, and in principle the easier one, are the reforms that 
bring us closer to the efficiency frontier. That said, it is possible that easy productivity gains 
from sectoral reallocation and imports of foreign technology have been exhausted. The second 
are the reforms that expand the frontier. But there is so many different policies that are on the 
table here: Product market reforms, Competition policy, Labour market reforms, Public finance 
and taxation (including Social security system), Human capital development, Innovation policy, 
etc.  Can  we,  and  should  we,  act  on  all,  or  most  of  these  different  fronts  simultaneously? 
Probably  yes.  Do  we  as  economists  and  policymakers  truly  understand  all  the  synergies, 
complementarities  and  marginal  effects  of  different  reforms?  Do  we  understand  political 
economy of moving individually or in parallel on all these fronts? Probably not. 
 7 
 The bottom line is – there are no guarantees. There are no guaranties that levels of income in 
the CESEE countries are going to converge towards those of the developed Western economies. 
No  guarantees  that  these  countries  are  not  going  to  form  one,  or  more,  of  the  so-called 
convergence clubs at a lower level of per capita income compared to their developed peers. 
However, it is our job to dare to introduce reforms even if we are not a 100 percent sure about 
the timing and the scale of the effects, as these are often not under our direct control. But if 
history teaches us anything, and if we follow the best practices from around the world, not only 
the EU, then the path we have to follow becomes much clearer. And the closest thing to a recipe 
for reducing the probability of being caught in the middle income trap (of low growth and slow 
or no convergence) would be to dare to reform. Be it the education system with an aim to 
increase the quality of human capital, be it liberalising product and labour markets controls, be 
it the reform of justice or public administrations systems, or anything else that is proven to 
enhance the business environment in the country. It is as simple or as difficult as that.  
 But, and this is my final thought – we have to keep in mind the political economy dimension of 
the process, and there things do not look encouraging. 
 We need to ensure broad support for the reform agenda especially since there might be some 
short-term  costs  of  certain  reforms.  However,  according  to  the  EBRD  data  not  only  is  the 
difference in the percentage of people who support market economy approximately twice lower 
in our region than in Germany, but it has actually declined in the last ten years, diverged, and 
the  same  applies  to  the  support  of  democracy  as  a  political  system.  This  is  where  policy 
transparency and communication will play a tremendously important role. And clearly, not 
everything we do will always get full support from the broad public, especially in the case of 
 8 
structural reforms with long-term gains and short-term costs, but boldness is often rewarded 
beyond our expectations.  
 Thank you. 
   9 
