Stephen  S  Poloz:  The  fourth  industrial  revolution  and  central
banking
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  “Changing  Market
Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy”, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24 August 2018.
 Our discussions here in Jackson Hole have been wide-ranging, but a common theme throughout
has  been  digital  disruption.  Just  about  everything  is  being  disrupted—from  production,  to
consumption, to financial intermediation. We are in the early stages of what many are calling the
fourth industrial revolution. That is because the deployment of digital technologies will alter the
economy  as  fundamentally  as  did  the  steam  engine,  the  internal  combustion  engine  and  the
computer chip. I will use my time today to offer some preliminary thoughts on what all this might
mean for monetary policy.  
Let  us  begin  with  the  obvious.  The  deployment  of  digital  technologies  will  be  very  positive  for
economic  progress.  Over  time,  these  new  technologies  will  find  their  way  into  everything—
transforming existing firms and creating new ones. This will lead to new types of jobs in entirely
new industries. Where firms are successful, productivity will rise, and economic growth will be
more concentrated in those sectors. The positive spillovers will spread throughout the economy.
Holistically, this is a predictable process, but the details are of course quite unpredictable.
It  is  worth  reflecting  on  an  insight  on  economic  growth  offered  by Arnold  Harberger  some  20
years ago. He argued that economic growth has always been more like mushrooms than yeast.
In other words, economic growth is uneven, popping up here and there. This metaphor aligns
well with Joseph Schumpeter’s notion of creative destruction.
This insight is important in today’s context. As Peter Howitt has argued, it means that economic
growth is naturally contentious, which introduces politics into the equation. If growth were evenly
spread, in the way yeast causes dough to rise, everyone would be a winner. But because it is like
mushrooms, the associated disruption means that some will lose out while others win. In certain
conditions, the winners can even become superstars; hence, the term “winner takes most,” as
described in John Van Reenen’s paper here.
It is human nature to focus on the negative. In the process of creative destruction, destruction
gets more headlines than creation does. This is because the threats to individuals are concrete
and  easily  identifiable—whether  manufacturing  workers,  call  centre  workers,  truck  drivers,
investment  advisors  or  radiologists.  Modern  social  media  enable  grievances  to  be  amplified
many  times  over.  By  contrast,  the  opportunities  being  created  by  the  application  of  new
technologies—and the broad, positive spillover benefits to the rest of the economy—are much
harder to identify and measure.
This brings me to my first policy implication: it falls to policy-makers to explain the process, and
offer concrete evidence that it is unfolding as usual. We need to demonstrate that beyond the
initial  negatives  are  many  positives,  which  are  likely  to  dominate  over  time.  We  need  to
acknowledge  that  real  people  and  businesses  are  being  disrupted  and  require  policy  support.
And we need to point to the new and different jobs that are being created and explain that the new
incomes are being spent in a wide array of traditional economic sectors. In other words, when
mushrooms  grow,  they  have  yeast-like  second-round  effects  as  the  growers  spend  their
incomes.
We can do this now because the narrative around technological disruption is not much different
from the disruption associated with globalization, which has been with us for some 20 years. But
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
beyond explaining and documenting these complex dynamics, we also need to be attentive to
potential  pitfalls,  such  as  those  connected  with  the  rise  of  so-called  superstar  firms,  as  we
discussed earlier here.
These  and  other  legitimate  public  policy  concerns  make  it  imperative  that  policy-makers
reallocate  some  of  the  benefits  of  growth  to  cushion  the  impact  on  those  who  are  directly
affected by disruption, and help them adjust.
All that being said, let us consider the possibility that we are living in a profound, global, positive
expansion of aggregate supply—the product of digital disruption. As with all major supply shocks
in the past, it could take a long time for us to truly understand that it is happening. Still, we must
conduct monetary policy in the meantime.
We can start by measuring growth in the digital economy itself. One rough proxy for the digital
economy—the computer system design and related services sector—accounts for close to 2
per cent of Canadian gross domestic product today and has been growing by about 7.5 per cent
annually for the past five years.
But  that  growth  is  likely  to  be  only  the  tip  of  the  iceberg—what  we  need  to  know  is  how  it  is
spreading through other sectors and affecting aggregate supply. For example, in the automobile
industry,  advances  in  computer  technology  are  driving  improvements  in  quality  and  represent
significant value added from one model year to the next. Another example would be the financial
services industry, where fintech is driving gains in productivity.
Statistical agencies are hard at work on this. As discussed in the paper by Crouzet and Eberly,
digitalization has led statistical agencies to underestimate investment, particularly in intangibles.
A consequence is that central banks are working with estimates of potential output today that
may be revised up in the future. The recent historical revisions to US GDP data, which improved
the  measurement  of  investment  in  intangibles  such  as  software,  indicate  that  this  could  be
important. A similar exercise in Canada has delivered a large upward revision in investment, and,
hence, potential output, beginning in 2014. This makes one wonder about what revisions may be
forthcoming for 2015, 2016 and, of course, today.
The  spread  of  digital  technologies  may  also  help  explain  the  slow,  measured  growth  of
international  trade.  We  know  that  cross-border  supply  chains  have  complicated  the  task  of
gathering  accurate  data  on  trade.  Digital  technologies  are  making  it  even  easier  to  fragment
production globally. And digital ordering, payments and service delivery are making it easier for
transactions to occur that fall below customs reporting thresholds or are missed altogether.
The  point  is  that  our  ability  to  measure  the  impact  of  digital  technology  is  continually  playing
catch-up  with  the  technology. At  the  same  time,  the  diffusion  of  digital  technologies  to  other
sectors  is  itself  a  gradual  process.  We  have  seen  a  similar  scenario  before—it  was  several
years before we could measure the rise in aggregate productivity that followed the increase in
spending on information and communications technology in the 1990s.
Positive revisions to the history of potential output could help explain the underperformance of
inflation  over  the  past  five  years.  This  underperformance  has  occurred  in  a  wide  swath  of
economies,  both  advanced  and  emerging.  These  countries  have,  on  average,  a  high  level  of
Internet penetration—a possible proxy for the pace of adoption of digital technologies. Related to
this, empirical evidence of the so-called Amazon effect on inflation, like the Walmart effect of
20  years  ago,  has  so  far  been  limited.  But  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  that  this  work  relies  on
estimates of potential output that may be revised up in the future.
Of course, it would be considered risky to conduct monetary policy based on an assumption
that  we  were  enjoying  a  pickup  in  aggregate  supply.  Central  bankers  would  generally  require
empirical evidence of the phenomenon before embracing it, because the consequences of being
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
wrong could be significant. However, that does not prevent us from treating digital disruption as a
risk to the inflation outlook like any other.
Arguably, this has already been happening in practice. Our economies have begun to return to
normal  after  the  trauma  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  But  the  process  of  interest  rate
normalization has been much more gradual than traditional models with embedded Taylor rules
would advocate. Taking a gradual, data-dependent approach to policy is an obvious form of risk
management in the face of augmented uncertainty.
Importantly,  this  approach  does  not  mean  keeping  interest  rates  unchanged  until  inflation
pressures  emerge.  That  would  virtually  guarantee  falling  behind  the  inflation  curve.  Rather,  it
means following a more gradual approach to normalizing interest rates than traditional models
would advocate, thereby balancing the risks around future inflation. The central risks that affect
that balance are, on the one hand, the possibility that inflation could accelerate as we approach
full capacity and, on the other hand, the possibility that digitalization of the economy is boosting
aggregate supply and holding inflation pressures at bay.
The bottom line is that digital technologies are disrupting central banking along with everything
else. Digital disruption is likely to be a major preoccupation of central bankers for the foreseeable
future.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
