Simon M Potter: The supply of money-like assets
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  for  the  American  Economic  Association  Panel  Session  "The
Balance Sheets of Central Banks and the Shortage of Safe Assets", Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
6 January 2018.
 Today, I will discuss some of the differences between safe and money-like assets, with a focus
on the central bank’s unique ability to produce money-like assets. I will highlight the risks that can
accompany  the  private  provision  of  money-like  assets  and  describe  how  regulation  and
supervision  can  mitigate  many  of  these  risks.  I  will  then  examine  how  the  central  bank  could
complement regulation and supervision in mitigating these risks by providing overnight money-
like  assets,  with  a  focus  on  changes  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  liabilities  in  recent  years. As
always, the views presented here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
1
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Money-like assets versus safe assets
2
Money-likeness  and  safety,  although  closely  related,  are  not  completely  overlapping
concepts.  Safety refers to an asset’s lack of actual and perceived exposure to risk, including
credit  risk,  counterparty  risk,  interest-rate  risk,  and  market  risk.   Money-likeness  refers  to  an
asset’s  lack  of  information  sensitivity,  such  that,  when  it  is  used  in  transactions,  economic
agents need not worry about its future value, at least in the short term and in most states of the
world.  Because of this, money-like assets are usually short-term, liquid assets with no credit or
5
counterparty risk, promising a fixed payment in nominal terms.
3
4
In normal states of the world, investors tend not to distinguish too carefully between and among
money-like and safe assets. However, in non-normal states of the world, where investors have
heightened perceptions of risk—partly because of underlying credit or counterparty issues, but
also critically because of uncertainty about the actions of other investors—investors tend to view
directly-held liabilities of the official sector as substantially safer than those of the private sector.
6
In these non-normal states of the world, central banks have the unique ability to quickly produce
large quantities of assets that are both safe and money-like. Central banks can provide liquidity to
the private sector and reduce systemic risk in the economy by providing credit that is secured by
less-liquid  assets.   This  “lender  of  last  resort”  capacity  is  particularly  important  when  the
precautionary demand for liquidity increases substantially, because it is precisely at these times
that private provision of liquidity declines. The financial crisis of 2008 provides a striking example
of this ability. As shown in Figure 1, the Federal Reserve doubled the size of its balance sheet in
a matter of weeks in September 2008 to meet the extraordinary demand for liquidity as private
sources of liquidity dried up.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the increase in liquidity was matched
by  increases  in  bank  reserves  and  Treasury  deposits  through  this  extraordinary  period.   The
Treasury deposits were funded by an increase in bill issuance, hence the amount of officially-
produced, safe and money-like assets in the financial system increased by around $1 trillion in a
8
few weeks.
7
Of course, since investors are aware of the central bank’s unique ability to quickly supply safe
and money-like assets in non-normal times, their incentives to monitor risks in normal times may
be reduced. The moral hazard raised by this awareness may be addressed through regulation
and  supervision.  Further,  the  central  bank  needs  to  take  care  that  its  provision  of  money-like
assets  in  normal  times  does  not  crowd  out  the  private  financial  system  or  exacerbate  run
9
behavior in stressful times.
Private provision of money-like assets
The private sector plays an important role in the provision of money-like assets. For instance,
banks create money-like assets in the form of bank deposits.Similarly, nonbank institutions, such
as money market funds (MMFs), can also provide money-like assets.
However, private provision of money-like assets can increase the risk of financial instability. In
order to provide money-like assets, financial institutions generally engage in maturity and liquidity
transformation, transforming longer term assets into callable liabilities that are runnable.
 Thus,
although in normal times investors may perceive these privately produced assets as safe and
liquid, a sudden shift in investor perceptions can amplify instability in periods of market stress. To
the extent that the private sector does not incorporate the social cost of runs on private callable
liabilities, too much private money can be created in normal times, generating a role for public
sector intervention.
10
The  main  way  the  public  sector  can  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  the  excessive  private
supply  of  money-like  assets  is  through  regulation  and  supervision.  By  reducing  the  fragility  of
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  institutions,  regulation  reduces  the  run  externalities  associated  with  private  money
creation.  Effective  capital  regulation  and  supervision  are  the  main  tools  for  reducing  investor
concerns  about  the  banking  system’s  solvency  in  stressful  times.  In  addition,  FDIC  deposit
insurance complements strong capital by reducing depositors’ incentives to run on banks.
Following the financial crisis, the regulatory and supervisory framework has been extended to
more directly reduce risks from swings in the supply of liquidity within the financial system. In
particular, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) reduces the likelihood of runs by forcing banks to
hold highly liquid assets against expected future cash outflows.
Example of money fund reform
11,12
Runs can also occur on nonbanks. One particularly spectacular run during the financial crisis
followed  Lehman’s  bankruptcy  and  the  Reserve  Fund’s  “breaking  the  buck”  as  investors  fled
prime  money  market  funds.  This  run  was  stopped  dramatically  by  a  government  guarantee.
Recent work by some New York Fed colleagues provides a real-world example of how, in normal
times,  new  regulation  can  induce  investors  to  distinguish  between  safe  and  money-like
assets.
 They used the Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) recent implementation
of measures to reform the MMF industry as a quasi-natural experiment to characterize investors’
preferences for money-like assets.
13
14
In 2014, the SEC approved a new set of rules aimed at mitigating the fragility of prime MMFs. As
of  October  2016,  prime  funds  have  been  required  under  certain  conditions  to  impose  liquidity
fees  on  redemptions  or  gates  halting  the  redemption  of  shares.
  Additionally,  prime  funds
offering  shares  to  institutional  investors  may  no  longer  price  such  shares  with  fixed  NAVs;
instead, they must price their shares at the market value of the underlying securities, much like
standard mutual funds. By requiring prime MMFs to adopt a system of gates and fees, the reform
made them less money-like; floating NAVs reduced the money-likeness of the institutional sub-
segment even further.
16,17
15
The differential impact of the SEC’s MMF reforms—which made prime MMFs less money-like yet
not riskier—can be used to distinguish between investors’ preferences for money-likeness and
safety in normal states of the world. Figure 2 shows the industry’s aggregate assets around the
implementation of the new rules. In anticipation of implementation, more than $1 trillion flowed
from the prime MMF sector into the government MMF sector.
18
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moreover,  the  absence  of  other  changes  in  investors’  behavior  suggests  that  MMF  investors
were  driven  by  a  narrow  desire  to  preserve  the  money-likeness  of  their  investments.  When
moving  from  prime  to  government  MMFs,  investors  largely  remained  in  the  same  fund
family.  Figure  3  illustrates  this  observation  using  a  scatter  plot  of  outflows  from  prime  funds
versus inflows into government funds at the family level. Additionally, investors shifted into funds
that invest primarily in agency debt, the sub-segment of the government MMF industry with a risk-
return profile most similar to that of prime MMFs.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
This response to MMF reform differs significantly from what happened in 2008. Although during
the 2008 MMF run, investors also fled from prime to government MMFs, the characteristics of the
run differed substantially: outflows were large but quickly reverted following the guarantee; they
largely occurred across—and not within—fund families as investors became wary of particular
counterparties; and investors moved to the safest sub-segment of the government MMF industry,
that is, funds investing only in Treasuries and Treasury-backed repos.
 These contrasts further
illustrate a difference between investors’ demand for money-like assets in normal times, when
regulation changes, and their demand for safety in non-normal times.
Public sector provision of money-like assets
19
There  is  a  view  that  regulation  and  supervision  alone  are  not  sufficient  to  fully  mitigate  the
financial stability risks associated with private maturity and liquidity transformation, and thus, the
official sector should consider providing more money-like assets.
 The argument is that when
the official sector increases its supply of money-like assets, it reduces the convenience yield on
very short-term securities, thereby weakening the private sector’s incentives to create short-term
runnable  securities.
  Some  recent  market  pricing  helps  to  illustrate  this  characteristic.  As
shown in Figure 4, an increased supply of bills issued by the U.S. Treasury in late 2017 was
accompanied  by  a  tightening  of  the  spread  between  rates  on  3-month  T-bills  and  overnight
indexed  swaps  (OIS)—a  spread  between  two  risk-free  instruments  that  can  be  thought  as
reflecting the premium associated with bills’ money-like characteristics in normal times.
20
21
22
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
While this is an area worthy of further research, I personally am not compelled by the notion that
the public sector can calibrate its supply of money-like assets at the short-end of the curve to
exactly  remove  any  remaining  externalities  from  the  private  creation  of  money-like  assets.  In
particular, for the last few years in the U.S., because of the various large-scale asset purchase
programs, the provision of overnight money-like assets from the Federal Reserve has likely been
in  excess  of  investor  demand;  however,  spreads  between  rates  on  money-like  assets  have
remained, and in some cases become more variable and larger. This suggests that other forces
are  in  play.  One  such  force  is  the  adjustment  of  the  financial  industry  to  the  new  regulatory
landscape. It is important that the private sector make this adjustment to better align incentives.
The  role  of  the  central  bank’s  provision  of  money-like  assets  is  to  ease  and  support  this
adjustment, not substitute for it. This is especially true given that private-sector balance sheets
are now less elastic in the short-run with respect to fluctuations in the demand and supply of
money-like assets.
Federal reserve provision of overnight money-like assets
23
Even without expressly pursuing a financial stability objective, a central bank’s balance sheet can
provide  safe  and  money-like  assets  to  a  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  in  normal
times.
 The October 2008 introduction of the Federal Reserve’s ability to pay interest on reserve
balances  and  the  2013  development  of  an  overnight  reverse  repo  (ON  RRP)  facility  provided
critical  tools  that  allow  the  Federal  Reserve  to  maintain  control  of  overnight  interest  rates
regardless of the size of its balance sheet.
 This ability is important because, before the crisis,
the Federal Reserve could not increase the supply of its money-like liabilities in normal times
without compromising monetary policy objectives.
24
25
Figure  5  shows  the  size  of  selected  liabilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve  before  the  crisis,  in
December 2017, and market participants’ estimates for average 2025 levels.
 Before the crisis,
the  Federal  Reserve’s  provision  of  money-like  liabilities  other  than  currency  was  negligible  to
ensure control of overnight rates in the operating system used at that time. Reserves were kept
scarce in the banking system, and other liabilities—such as the Treasury’s account at the Fed
and  overnight  investments  by  foreign  central  banks—were  kept  very  limited,  with  tight  control
26
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
around  their  daily  variation.  In  the  current  operating  system,  Federal  Reserve’s  non-currency
overnight liabilities are substantial and allowed to vary considerably to accommodate supply and
demand shocks in the private sector.
27
Currently, reserves in the banking system are abundant, with possible benefits for the efficiency
and safety of the wholesale payment system.
 The estimates for 2025 indicate an expectation
that reserves will decline substantially, but still remain many orders of magnitude above their pre-
crisis  level.  Market  contacts  focus  on  the  demand  for  reserves  produced  by  the  LCR  as  an
important  driver  of  this  change.  Banks  that  satisfy  their  LCR  requirements  with  large  reserve
balances free up other high-quality liquid assets for the rest of the private sector.
28
Overnight reverse repos with foreign central banks—who seek safe and money-like dollar assets
to  maintain  liquid  dollar  foreign  currency  reserves—have  grown  substantially  in  the  last  few
years.  Part  of  this  increase  was  likely  a  reflection  of  latent  demand  that  was  relieved  as
restrictions on these investments were relaxed,
 but part of it also represents new regulations
that make it more expensive for the private sector to hold large deposits that are callable at any
time.
29
A new category of liability is the ON RRP facility, which is available to nonbanks.
 In addition to
supporting interest rate control, this facility helps the private sector adjust smoothly to various
new  regulations.  For  example,  during  the  money  fund  reform  period,  as  money  flowed  from
prime to government funds, prime funds used the facility to become more liquid in advance of
redemptions and government funds used it to temporarily absorb new investments.
31
30
Finally, the Treasury General Account (TGA) has grown substantially in recent years as the U.S.
Treasury  has  decided  to  hold  a  precautionary  buffer  of  cash  generally  sufficient  to  cover  five
business  days  of  outflows,  subject  to  a  minimum  balance  of  $150  billion.  Given  the  daily
variability of TGA balances, this type of account would be also expensive for the private sector to
offer under new regulations. Further, as the buffer has been funded mainly through increased bill
issuance, it has increased the supply of money-like assets to the private sector.
Conclusion
Central banks are uniquely able to produce money-like assets that are viewed as safe during
non-normal times. In more normal times, regulation and supervision are the best tools to mitigate
risks from the private creation of money-like assets, but there is a role for the central bank to use
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
its balance sheet to smooth fluctuations in the supply and demand for money-like assets.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
  I  would  like  to  thank  Marco  Cipriani,  Gabriele  La  Spada,  Deborah  Leonard,  and Antoine  Martin  for  their
assistance in preparing these remarks.
For  instance,  a  long-term  U.S.  government  bond  can  be  a  safe  investment  for  a  life  insurance  company
(because the security carries no credit risk and matches the duration of the life insurance company’s liabilities),
but it is not money.
See,  for  instance,  Thomas  Eisenbach  and  Sebastian  Infante,  “What  Makes  a  Safe Asset  Safe?,”  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (blog), November 27, 2017.
See Benjamin Lester, Andrew Postlewaite, and Randall Wright, “Information and Liquidity,”  Journal of Money,
Credit  and  Banking  43  (s2),  October  2011  and  “Information,  Liquidity,  Asset  Prices,  and  Monetary
Policy,” Review of Economic Studies 79 (3), 2012; and Bengt Holmstrom, “Understanding the Role of Debt in the
Financial System,” Bank for International Settlements Working Papers no. 479, January 2015.
For the purpose of these remarks, I assume that, as is largely the case in developed economies, the monetary
authority is able to keep prices stable; I therefore disregard the difference between nominal and real future
payoffs.
Assets accepted as collateral are assigned a lendable value deemed appropriate by the central bank, taking
into  account  a  haircut  that  reflects  an  assessment  of  credit  risk,  historical  volatility,  and  market  liquidity.
However, the assets (and associated risks) remain on the balance sheet of the borrower.
Previously, the Federal Reserve had sterilized its liquidity provision by running down its Treasury portfolio.
Some of the current conversation about a shortage of safe assets appears not to treat bank reserves or other
central  bank  liabilities  as  safe  assets.  This  view  comes  up  particularly  with  regard  to  quantitative  easing
programs, where the claim is made that central bank purchases of sovereign debt reduce the supply of safe
assets. This claim is incorrect because the growth of central bank liabilities that fund these purchases are safe
assets themselves. I explore these points more deeply in my “Discussion of ‘The Safety Trap’ by Ricardo J.
Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi,” remarks at the Bank of Korea International Conference, June 2-3, 2014.
In  some  cases,  it  may  be  possible  to  design  instruments  with  features  that  help  to  mitigate  any  such
undesirable effects. For example, the Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP)
facility has a cap on individual use of $30 billion, and from September 22, 2014, through December 16, 2015,
ON RRP operations were subject to an overall size limit of $300 billion. These issues are discussed in Joshua
Frost,  Lorie  Logan, Antoine  Martin,  Patrick  McCabe,  Fabio  Natalucci,  and  Julie  Remache,  “Overnight  RRP
Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Reports, no. 712, February 2015.
Financial  firms  can  also  issue  very  short-term  commercial  paper  or  certificates  of  deposit,  but  these
instruments can also create stability concerns.
Importantly, in considering the stability of a bank’s deposits, the LCR distinguishes between operational and
non-operational deposits. Banks must hold up to 25 percent of the value of operational deposits in high-quality
liquid assets, in order to withstand a 30-day stress environment. The liquidity requirement for non-operational
deposits is less favorable—up to 100 percent—making it more expensive for banks to hold such deposits.
12 The Federal Reserve has also increased its supervisory focus on the liquidity of large banks in particular with
the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review.
See  Marco  Cipriani,  Gabriele  La  Spada,  and  Philip  Mulder,  “Investors’ Appetite  for  Money-Like Assets:  The
Money  Market  Fund  Industry  after  the  2014  Regulatory  Reform,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York Staff
Reports, no. 816, June 2017.
MMFs are open-ended mutual funds that invest in money market instruments. Unlike other mutual funds, MMFs
have traditionally allowed their investors to redeem shares at a fixed net asset value (NAV) of $1 per share under
most circumstances. This characteristic makes MMF shares very similar to bank deposits (although they are not
insured). MMFs are regulated by the Investment Company Act of 1940, which restricts their holdings to short-
term, high-quality debt. The industry can be divided into two main segments: i) government MMFs invest in
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Treasuries and agency debt and can only lend to the private sector through repos collateralized by Treasuries or
agency  debt;  ii)  prime  MMFs  can  also  invest  in  private  unsecured  debt.  Tax-exempt  funds  represent  an
additional, smaller segment, which invest mainly in municipal and local authorities’ debt. Tax-exempt funds are
regulated in the same way as prime funds, and they have largely behaved similarly to prime funds following
MMF reform. In these remarks, “prime” refers to both prime and tax-exempt funds.
In particular, when a fund’s weekly liquidity falls below 30 percent, its board has the discretion to introduce a fee
of up to 2 percent, to impose gates for a maximum of ten business days, or both; when a fund’s weekly liquidity
falls below 10 percent, its board is required to introduce a fee of 1 percent unless the board decides to introduce
a fee that is higher (up to 2 percent) or lower, or no fee at all, whichever is in the fund’s best interest. Gating is
always discretionary.
MMF reform did not make prime MMFs less safe by standard definitions; indeed, by requiring prime MMFs to
adopt a system of gates and fees and a floating NAV, the SEC’s intention was to make them safer.
Indeed, both regulatory changes increase the information sensitivity of investments in prime MMFs by increasing
the set of states of the world that are material to the payoff (and therefore, on which agents can have asymmetric
information).
This  shift  appears  to  be  persistent;  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the  regulation  has  altered  the  money-like
characteristics of prime funds, outflows from prime to government funds have not reverted.
Similar behavior was observed during the 2011 “slow-motion run” on prime MMFs that occurred during the
European  debt  crisis,  when  investors  reacted  to  the  increased  risk  associated  with  MMFs’  exposure  to
European banks. See Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam, “Frictions in Shadow Banking: Evidence from the
Lending Behavior of Money Market Mutual Funds,” Review of Financial Studies 27, no. 6, June 2014.
Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein make this argument in “A Comparative Advantage
Approach to Government Debt Maturity,” Journal of Finance 70, no. 4, July 2015 and in “The Federal Reserve’s
Balance Sheet as a Financial-Stability Tool,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Economic
Symposium  Conference  Proceedings, August  2016.  They  additionally  argue  that  the  central  bank  is  better
positioned  than  the  Treasury  to  provide  such  assets  because  the  central  bank  does  not  face  auction  and
rollover risks and because it can better adjust the supply of money-like assets to high-frequency shocks. This is
related to but distinct from my discussion here on the provision of overnight liabilities since I focus on the
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet shifting in response to supply and demand shocks in the
private sector.
For example, Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen have documented a significant convenience
yield for Treasury bills, stemming from their liquidity, and related its size to the supply of Treasuries. See “The
Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 120, no. 2, April 2012.
The shrinking of the spread around July 2017 is related to concerns in the bill markets about the impending
debt limit. Again, this is an example of a change in the perceived money-like characteristics of a particular asset
(in this case, Treasury securities maturing in the so-called “red zone”) changing the asset’s price.
The minutes  to  the  November  2016  FOMC  meeting  report  on  a  Committee  discussion  about  its  long-run
operating framework. At that meeting most participants did not indicate support for using the balance sheet as
an active tool for financial stability purposes, although a few expressed support for undertaking further study of
this possibility.
More details on the current operating system can be found in the New York Fed’s annual reports on domestic
open market operations for 2015 and 2016.
Since, prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve did not remunerate reserves, it needed to maintain tight control on
the supply of reserves and other liabilities to achieve its interest rate target. For a discussion of the benefits of
separating interest control from the supply of money-like assets, see Todd Keister, Antoine Martin, and James
McAndrews,  “Divorcing  Money  from  Monetary  Policy,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York Economic  Policy
Review 14, no. 1, September 2008.
Primary dealers  and market participants were asked to estimate the average level of the Federal Reserve’s
liabilities in 2025 under the assumption of no return to the zero lower bound between now and then. This
condition captures expectations for the demand for these liabilities in normal times.
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
27
28
29
30
31
My colleague, Lorie Logan, illustrated this variability in “Implementing Monetary Policy: Perspective from the
Open Market Trading Desk,” remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York City, May
18, 2017.
See  Morten  Bech,  Antoine  Martin,  and  Jamie  McAndrews,  “Settlement  Liquidity  and  Monetary  Policy
Implementation—Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York Economic  Policy
Review 18, no. 1, March 2012. The authors find that the increased amount of reserves in the U.S. banking
system during and since the crisis resulted in a substantial decrease in daylight overdrafts extended by the
Federal Reserve and significantly earlier settlement of payments on Fedwire, the Federal Reserve’s large-value
payment system. The reduction in overdrafts lowered the Federal Reserve’s credit risk while earlier settlements
suggested significant efficiency gains and diminished operational risks—outcomes that support the objectives
of  changes  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Payment  System  Risk  policy  in  2008.  Of  course,  there  are  other
approaches to providing intraday liquidity, such as collateralized overdrafts.
Central banks exhibit a strong preference for the safety, confidential and reliability of accounts with fellow central
banks, discussed further in my “Keynote Remarks for the Commemoration of the Centennial of the Federal
Reserve’s U.S. Dollar Account Services to the Global Official Sector,” December 20, 2017.
A list of reverse repo counterparties can be found here.
Reverse repos with the Federal Reserve use Treasury securities held in the Federal Reserve’s System Open
Market Account as collateral, but they do not directly increase the amount of Treasury collateral available for use
in the financial system. This is because nearly all of the counterparties in the Federal Reserve’s reverse repo
transactions are unable to rehypothecate the collateral. However, by reducing these counterparties’ demand for
collateral in the private market, the Federal Reserve’s reverse repos increase the amount of collateral available
to  other  market  participants.  Primary  dealers,  who  have  access  to  both  the  ON  RRP  facility  and  securities
lending  facility  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  do  rehypothecate  collateral  and  thus  can  directly  add  to  collateral
available in the private market.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
