“Post-MoU Greece: Five proposals” 
Speech by Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras  
Bank of Greece Deputy Governor 
Former Deputy Finance Minister 
at the 2nd International Conference organised by the Economic Chamber 
of Greece at the Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center 
Athens, 31 May 2018 
indeed 
the  situation 
 
Your Excellency, Mr. President of the Hellenic Republic, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Introduction 
 
After 8 years of hardship and thanks, on the one hand,  to the big sacrifices of 
the  Greek  people  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  solidarity  of  our  European 
partners  as  this  is  manifested  by  the  unprecedented  amount  of  loans  given  to 
our  country  on  truly  concessional  terms  (very  low  rates  and  long  maturities), 
Greece  is  finally  coming  out  of  the  tunnel  with  optimism.  Although  the 
international  economic  environment  and 
in  our 
neighbourhood  is  pretty  unstable  right  now,  I  believe  the  Greek  case  is 
manageable  for  an  exit  from  the  MoUs  in  late  August  without  a  precautionary 
credit line – which would be effectively a mini-fourth MoU. Such an exit, after all, 
would  be  similar  to  the  cases  of  Portugal,  Ireland  and  Cyprus.  I  will  seize  the 
opportunity of this conference organised by the Economic Chamber of Greece, 
thriving  under  the  leadership  of  Konstantinos  Kollias,  taking  place  in  this 
magnificent  masterpiece  of  world  architecture  named  after  a  global  business 
leader,  Stavros  Niarchos,  to  make  4  new  proposals,  and  repeat  an  old  one, 
towards  achieving  this  sort  of  exit  and  beyond,  and  the  emphasis  is  on  the 
“beyond”. Then I will briefly ask what went wrong in the case of Greece. I have 
written extensively on this subject during the period 2010-2014 with my previous 
hats, including the professorial one. The important thing is to look forward, but 
history  matters  and  the  lessons  drawn  with  regard  to  member  countries  of 
monetary  unions  are  of  paramount  importance.  And  finally  I  will  look  at  the 
significant  role  that  the  ECB  played  in  the  adjustment  programmes  in  the  four 
countries  and,  more  generally,  in  the  South  of  Europe  (including  Spain  and 
Italy),  among  other  things  in  providing  liquidity  and  effectively  saving  the  euro, 
because, as you know, that was at stake in the end. 
 
Before  coming  to  the  main  topic  of  my  speech,  five  proposals  on  post-MoU 
Greece, a digression may be in order on Italy. 
  1 
Italy 
What’s  happening  in  Italy  right  now  is  not  a  surprise  for  some.  For  a  lot  of 
analysts it has the potential to trigger the next global financial crisis after 2008, 
markets’  first  reaction  was  really  dramatic,  although  the  following  days  they 
seem to be calming down a bit. US and European equity markets fell by around 
2% on the very first day, the Italian 2-year government bond rose by 230 basis 
points, the Italian 10-year government bond rose by 70 basis points, a trend not 
seen  since  the  euro  area  crisis  in  2012  and  dragging  down  all  other 
europeriphery  government  bonds.  The  unstable  political  situation  caused  by 
populists,  which  has  left  the  country  without  a  government  since  March,  goes 
back to two major root causes. First of all, it may be attributed to the failure of 
globalisation  to  reach  some  segments  of  the  population,  which  have  been  left 
behind  in  terms  of  its  economic  benefits,  for  instance  through  chronic 
unemployment of around 11%, with youth unemployment at a devastating 35%. 
Italy’s  per  capita  income  is  lower  today  than  on  the  eve  of  the  country’s  euro 
adoption  in  1999  and  over  the  past  decade,  the  country  has  experienced  a 
triple-dip recession. It is expected to be at the bottom of the euro area’s growth 
league this year. It is no wonder that the 5 Star movement won more than 50% 
of votes in the troubled south, where poverty rates have increased by half since 
the crisis.Secondly, increased migration flows in the last three years, triggered a 
strong anti-European sentiment and broader support for populist forces. 
 
Italy is too big to ignore. Its GDP is 10 times bigger than the Greek one. Italy is 
the  eurozone’s  third-largest  economy  and  it  has  systemic  importance  to  the 
world  economy.  Italy  has  the  world’s  third  largest  sovereign  debt  market,  after 
the US and Japan, with total public debt of more than €2.3 trillion, of which more 
than 36% is held by foreigners, so contagion is really an issue here. It also has 
the worst public debt-to-GDP ratio (133%) in the eurozone after Greece and a 
weak banking system, poorly capitalised, troubled also by the high level of non-
performing  loans  (more  than  €250  billion,  15%  of  the  total).  No  matter  what 
happens  with  the  current  political  and  constitutional  crisis  in  Italy,  the  problem 
with Italy was there: life after QE, namely what happens with the end of QE this 
year  when  the  ECB  will  stop  its  large-scale  purchases  of  Italian  government 
bonds. I don’t want to think what would be happening if political developments 
were to lead Italy to lose its investment grade (currently at BBB). 
A. Greece today and beyond  
A.1 The real economy: positive short and medium-term outlook 
Greece’s  economic  recovery  is  finally  gaining  traction  after  an  unprecedented 
depression.  Real  GDP  in  2017  increased  by  1.4%  with  positive  contributions 
from exports of goods and services (2 percentage points contribution) and gross 
fixed  capital  formation  (1.2  percentage  points  contribution)  (see  Chart  1).  This 
positive outcome creates a strong carryover effect of +0.5% for GDP growth in 
2018, which supports the outlook for a GDP growth rate of around 2% and 2.5% 
in 2018 and 2019, respectively. 
 2 
 
Figure 1 Growth has resumed 
 
Positive developments are not only reflected in economic activity indicators, but 
also  in  soft  data  such  as  the  manufacturing  PMI  which  has  been  in 
expansionary  territory  for  the  last  ten  months,  by  far  the  longest  period  since 
2007.  Economic  sentiment  has  been  on  an  upward  trend  since  mid-2015, 
reached a 3-year high in 2017 and further improved in the first quarter of 2018. 
Industrial  production  has  been  expanding  at  healthy  rates  since  mid-2015 and 
performed exceptionally well in 2017. 
 The  unemployment  rate  dropped  to  21%  in  2017,  falling  by  around  6 
percentage  points  from  its  peak  in  2013.  This  trend  continued  in  the  first  four 
months  of  2018,  which  supports  the  outlook  for  an  unemployment  rate  of 
around 19% and 18% in 2018 and 2019 respectively. Employment increased by 
2.2% in 2017, and the number of unemployed declined by 9.2%, while the youth 
unemployment  rate  (in  the  20-29  age  category)  declined  to  35%  in  2017  from 
38%  in  2016,  and  long-term  unemployment  also  dropped  by  3  percentage 
points (see Figure 2).  
 
 
  3 
Figure  2  Total,  youth  unemployment  rate  and  share  of  the  long-term 
unemployed (in percentages) 
Source: ELSTAT, Labour Force Survey. 
 
The Greek banking sector is strengthening 
 Turning  now  to  the  Greek  banking  sector,  first  allow  me  to  make  some 
comments  in  the  wake  of  the  stress  test  results.  All  four  systemic  banks 
successfully concluded the 2018 stress test conducted by the ECB, pointing to 
no  capital  shortfall.  Therefore,  for  the  first  time  since  2010  and  after  three 
rounds of capital injections in the last five years, the Greek banks will not need 
additional  capital  in  the  near  future.  More  analytically,  the  tests  revealed  a  9 
percentage  point  impact  on  banks  CET1  ratio  under  the  adverse  scenario, 
equivalent to €15.5 billion, but left all banks’ CET1 higher than the 5.5% implicit 
hurdle  (although  one  bank  is  relatively  close  and  is  expected  to  continue  its 
current capital plan).  
 
Moreover,  the  continued  improvement  in  the  banking  sector  can  also  be  seen 
on  their  reduced  reliance  on  the  central  bank  funding,  which  is  diminishing 
steadily and is now below the levels of end-2014 (see Figure 3).  
   4 
Figure 3 Bank deposits and reliance on central bank funding  (Q1 2008 to 
end-February 2018) 
 
Banks’ dependence on the ELA emergency lifeline has declined significantly to 
around €8.6 billion during this month, from €70 billion at the end of 2015 and is 
expected  to  be  terminated  before  the  end  of  the  year.  Another  visible 
improvement in the Greek banking sector was the increase of the total deposits 
between  end-June  2015  and  March  2018  by  €13  billion  (or  8.0%)  to  €143 
billion.  
 Last but not least, a major pending issue is the tackling of the problem posed by 
the high stock of non-performing loans, the ‘Achilles heel’ of the Greek banking 
system.  
On  a  positive  note,  for  the  first  time  since  2014,  net  NPEs  follow  a  downward 
trend.  However,  the  NPE  ratio  of  42%  in  Greece  remains  the  highest  across 
euro area countries, against 14% in Portugal and 10% in Italy and Ireland (see 
Figure  4),  while  before  the  crisis  the NPL  ratio  in  Greece  was  4.5%  (in  2007), 
against 3% for the euro area average. 
   5 
Figure  4  Ratio  of  non-performing  exposures  (NPE  ratio)  in  the  euro  area 
(December 2017) 
 Source: European Banking Authority (2018), “Risk Dashboard, data as of Q4 2017”. 
 
A.2 Post-MoU Greece: the way forward 
 
First of all, as shown in the following table, Greece has outperformed – with the 
exception of NPEs and public debt, in terms of all other macroeconomic indices 
– i.e. in terms of growth, primary and fiscal surplus, current account surplus, the 
spread of Greek bonds vs. the German Bund – the other 3 countries during the 
corresponding exit periods. This is obviously comforting to both our lenders and 
the markets for the future of Greece after the MoUs.  
 
Table 1 
Source: Bank of Greece. 
  6 
 
I  intend  to  skip  here  the  latest  heated  debate  on  cash  buffers  vs.  a 
precautionary  credit  line,  for  2  reasons.  Firstly,  they  are  both  short-term 
solutions,  maximum  one  plus  one  year,  but  the  real  question  remains  what 
comes next after the first post MoU-year. This is the question I propose to focus 
on,  namely:  what  needs  to  be  done  in  order  for  the  country  to  achieve  a 
permanent sustainable return to the capital markets, like the pre-2008 status. It 
will be the sequel question to either cash buffer or precautionary credit line the 
country  will  inevitably  have  to  face  in  a  year  or  so.  I  want  to  open  this  debate 
from here today by making a number of proposals that will make such a return 
feasible  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Secondly,  this  economic  debate  has  turned 
into  a  saga,  it’s  a  politically  controversial  issue,  as  it  is  quite  often  the  case  in 
Greece,  some  have  called  it  ‘sour  grapes’  –  and  I  don’t  want  to  go  into  that 
territory.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is  that  we  have  in  our  hands  a  Eurogroup 
decision of 15 June 2017, which is an agreement between the government and 
our lenders in view of the ending of the current programme in August 2018 and I 
quote: “Europe commits to provide support for Greece’s return to the market …” 
and  “to  further  build  up  cash  buffers  to  support  investors’  confidence  and 
facilitate market access”. 
 
Right now we have this agreement. If this changes, we are here to discuss it.  
Before coming to my proposals, let me list a number of undeniable facts about 
post-MoU Greece: 
1.  The fourth and final programme review has been concluded  successfully 
last week. So the last disbursement from the ESM is only a matter of time 
and,  as  of  today,  there  will  be  no  extension  of  the  third  adjustment 
programme, which ends on 20 August later this year. 
2.  Any prior actions left will be dealt with during the post-MoU period, known 
as the Post-Programme Surveillance (PPS). We know the name, but not 
what it will entail. This is the big known-unknown today, be patient and we 
will know all about it in a few weeks’ time.  
3.  What  is  clear,  however,  have  no  doubt  about  it,  is  that  Greece  will  be 
exiting the 3rd MoU, but will be entering something new, not a 4th MoU, but 
something  hybrid  with  conditionality  since  debt  relief,  according  to  all 
evidence, will be given in tranches.  
4.  Finally, it seems that austerity will stay with us at least for another 4 years 
as primary surpluses of 3.5% are required until 2022.  
 
Before  turning  to  my  own  proposals  for  Greece,  one  word  about  the  IMF.  It  is 
not clear yet what role the IMF holds for itself. Any IMF decision about its future 
role  will  be  fully  respected.  There  is  a  proposal  already,  which  I  endorse,  that 
Greece’s  remaining  loan  obligation  to  the  IMF  of  €10  billion  which  comes  at  a 
gross  interest  rate  of  3.8%,  much  higher  than  European  loans  interest  rate  of 
about  1%,  should  be  repaid  immediately  (the  money  can  be  found).  Such  an 
early  repayment  of  the  IMF  loan  would  contribute  to  an  improvement  of  the 
 7 
sustainability  of  public  debt,  making  also  possible  a  more  balanced 
management of payments. 
 
Figure 5 Greece public sector outstanding debt (in billion euro) 
 Sources: HSBC and Greek Public Debt Management Authority (PDMA), January 2018. 
 
Then all past grave mistakes by the IMF (e.g. on the value of fiscal multipliers, 
assumed at 0.5, when the correct value was 1.5), the over-optimistic forecasts 
about  growth  and  fiscal  surpluses  under  the  1st  MoU,  turned  into  over-
pessimistic forecasts under the 3rd MoU, etc. and the most recent ones, like e.g. 
that the Greek banks will need at least €10 billion capital injection as a result of 
the 2018 stress tests, will be “all forgiven and forgotten”, as they say. 
 Of  course,  a  key  prerequisite  for  a  permanent  return  to  the  capital  markets  is 
the sustainable recovery of the Greek economy with growth levels of above 2%. 
On top of that and from my point of view, the following four proposals are also 
required: 
 
Proposal #1: Further increasing the cash buffer  
The  government’s  strategy  -  agreed  with  our  lenders  -  makes  sense:  to  fully 
cover the country’s financing needs for the first post-MoU period. This is after all 
what all the other three countries did. For instance, in the case of Ireland, it was 
a cash buffer of €25 billion, in Portugal it was around €20 billion, in both cases 
around  13%  of  their  GDP.  Greece’s  gross  financing  needs  for  the  next  two 
years amount to €45 billion, of which €18 billion will be covered by the primary 
surplus  and  the  privatisation  agenda,  and  there  is  an  existing  cash  buffer 
already from the 2018 debt issues and from repos.  
My personal view is that due to:  
a) adverse capital market conditions globally, the return of volatility and higher 
oil prices, inverted US yield curves as a result of monetary policy tightening, the 
widening  Libor-OIS  spreads,  which  exert  pressure  on  the  US  dollar  money 
market,  the  recent  US  dollar  strength  vis-à-vis  other  main  currencies.  All  the 
above  might  have  a  greater  impact  on  vulnerable  countries  with  low  credit 
ratings and weaker economies. 
Name  it,  Italy  as  described  above  or  Trump’s  trade  war  with  China  and  other 
major economies, the fog of uncertainty has thickened.  
8 
 b) Also due to political developments in Greece as next year will be the year of 
European elections and also national and regional elections. Plus there are also 
geopolitical risks in our neighbourhood (our unpredictable eastern neighbour in 
connection with the drilling of gas in the Aegean and Cyprus).  
All the above make a strong case for increasing the buffer as much as possible 
for shielding the economy. Large cash buffers boosted investor confidence and 
have  aided  market  re-entry  in  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Cyprus.  The  extra  money 
could come from either the bank recapitalisation amount remaining from the 3rd 
programme,  or  from  new  issues  in  the  markets  over  the  next  3  months, 
provided that the dust in capital markets settles down.  
 
If things turn nasty in Italy and the europeriphery, in the next few weeks, there is 
plenty  of  time  for  the  Greek  government  to  negotiate  with  our  European 
partners, a negotiation which I would suggest to be made at the highest level, at 
Prime  Minister  level,  for Greece  to  exhaust  all  the  remaining  amount,  which  is 
more  than  €25  billion,  from  the  €86  billion  of  the  3rd  programme,  leaving  not 
even a single euro in the account. This amount has already been approved by 
the  national  parliaments  in  eurozone  countries,  if  we  face  an  extraordinary 
situation due to external factors, it is only prudent for Greece and our lenders to 
secure  the  maximum  reserve  amount  for  a  rainy  day  in  order  to  shield  the 
country. There is still plenty of time for the government to look at this. Just keep 
a cool head! 
 
Proposal  #2:    From  debt  sustainability…  to  obtaining  the  investment 
grade for Greek public debt 
 
We  have  every  confidence  that  our  lenders  will  keep  their  word  on  providing 
Greece with further debt relief - pacta sunt servanda applies to both lenders and 
borrowers - and deliver on what they promised since November 2012. The debt 
relief measures described in the Eurogroup statement of 15 June 2017 need to 
be  clarified  and  specified  with  a  clear  timetable  to  be  considered  credible  by 
investors. It will be along the lines of the 1st package of short-run measures, i.e. 
extending  maturities  and  lowering  interest  rates  which,  given  the  new  debt 
metric  “gross  financing  needs  below  15%  of  GDP  for  the  medium  term  and 
below  20%  of  GDP  thereafter”  would  make  sure  that  the  Greek  public  debt  is 
sustainable.  The  new  debt  metric  that  focuses  on  gross  financing  needs 
(GFNS)  –  rather  than  the  old  one  of  nominal  debt-to-GDP  ratio  –  captures 
adequately  the  concessional  terms  of  loans  to  Greece  by  the  EFSF  and  the 
ESM  (more  than  €180  billion  with  maturities  up  to  32.5  years  and  a  fixed  rate 
close  to  2%  directly  or  indirectly  taking  as  a  basis  a  near-zero  borrowing  rate 
from  the  markets  by  the  ESM).  Reducing  public  debt  in  present  value  terms 
puts the profile of Greek debt in an advantageous position among two thirds of 
eurozone countries and four fifths of EU countries.  
 
With  the  end  of  the  programme  in  August  and  the  specification  of  debt  relief 
measures  in  June  or  July  Eurogroup  meetings,  and  a  positive  DSA  report  –  I 
 9 
open brackets here (recalling that “the one who pays the piper calls the tune”, 
the ESM from which we borrowed more than €180 billion as of today  naturally 
prepares  a  debt  sustainability  analysis  (DSA),  which  will  most  likely  be  signed 
by  Dr.  Strauch,  Chief  Economist  of  the  ESM,  whom  we  have  the  pleasure  to 
have with us today – close brackets) one should normally expect at least a two-
notch improvement in the country’s credit ratings by the relevant agencies. This 
would still be far from the investment grade of BBB-, but, here is my proposal: a 
new advisory Task Force with senior figures from the Public Debt Management 
Agency  (PDMA),  the  General  Accounting  Office  and  the  Bank  of  Greece, 
headed  by  an  established  figure  with  an  international  reputation,  would  join 
forces  to  help  obtain  the  investment  grade  asap  by  lobbying  the  analysts, 
making  roadshows  abroad  to  investors,  etc.  Clearly,  with  the  permanent 
removal  of  the  capital  controls  (I’ll  say  more  on  this  in  a  minute)  and  the 
elimination of ELA at the end of the year for our commercial banks, that would 
give  another  notch  up  in  ratings,  plus  perhaps  an  overshooting  of  the  target 
primary surplus - first evidence from Q1 suggest that this may reach 5% of GDP 
this  year  (from  a  target  of  3.5%)  and/or  a  better-than-expected  growth 
performance  due  say  to  another  record  of  tourist  arrivals,  etc.  Then,  the 
investment grade may be within reach during the next 12 months or so. I dare 
say this: For the country to move forward and avoid setbacks in the future, the 
importance  of  getting  the  investment  grade  in  a  reasonable  time  ahead  is  as 
important as meeting the Maastricht nominal criteria  was in the 1990s, prior to 
Greece’s entry in the eurozone. We managed to do so then with a delay of two 
years. It may sound a bit optimistic today, but my  motivation is to open up the 
discussion on this and  make it  a  central  part  of  the  policy  debate  in  post-MoU 
Greece. I believe it is feasible, and it is only fair for the country. 
 
Proposal  #3:  Greece’s  participation  in  the  ECB’s  QE  programme  during 
the re-investment period 
 
With  3-4  notches  up  in  the  next  8  to  12  months  and  the  investment  grade  for 
Greece  within  reach,  the  ECB  may  potentially  examine  the  purchase of  Greek 
government  bonds  under  its  public  sector  purchase  programme  during  the 
reinvestment period, which will last for at least two years (end-2020).  
 
Even though the potential purchase volumes of Greek debt today (around €3-4 
billion)  under  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme  cannot  be  compared  with 
those  of  Portugal,  currently  around  €33  billion  or  Ireland’s  €27  billion,  yet, 
Greece’s  inclusion  in  the  ECB’s  QE  programme  would  yield  a  major  boost  in 
terms  of  confidence  and  send  a  positive  signal  to  investors  that  Greece  is  not 
anymore  an  outlier,  it  is  included  in  President  Draghi’s  umbrella  with  clear 
benefits  in  terms  of  the  cost  of  borrowing  of  both  sovereign  and  bank  and 
corporate debt, as it was the case for post-MoU Ireland and Portugal. Note that 
if,  as  part  of  the  upcoming  debt  relief  measures,  there  will  be  a  buy-out  of 
ANFAs  and  SMP  bonds  by  the  ESM,  releasing  a  total  amount  of  €13  billion, 
then  the  volume  potentially  to  be  purchased  under  the  QE  programme  could 
 10 
increase  to  €16  billion,  which  is  more  than  one  third  of  marketable  debt, 
triggering a drop of even 150 basis points in the secondary market. We bought 
at  the  Bank  of  Greece  -  more  than  €50  billion  -  as  part  of  QE,  mainly 
supranational, hopefully the time of buying also GGBs is also near. 
 
Proposal #4: Towards a permanent lifting of capital controls 
 
No  return  to  the  markets  can  be  permanent  and  hence  credible  with  capital 
controls still imposed on the economy. The government, in cooperation with the 
Bank of Greece would have sooner than later, and definitely close to the end of 
the  programme,  publish  a  roadmap  detailing  the  specific  measures  and  set 
dates  for  the  full  lifting  of  capital  controls,  signalling  also  the  end-date.  This 
would be the catalyst for the full recovery of trust of depositors and the return of 
around  €20  billion  hoarded  in  mattresses  and  safety  deposits,  but  also  boost 
investor confidence in the prospects of the economy.  
 
B. What went wrong in Greece? 
 
Let  me  now  turn  briefly  to  the  four  adjustment  programmes  that  took  place  in 
the  eurozone,  by  focusing  on  the  question  “what  went  wrong  in  Greece”.  The 
distinguished  panellists  of  the  previous  session  have  debated  at  length  and 
elaborated  on  the  very  significant  question  of  their  countries’  experiences  with 
adjustment  programmes.  The  Table  below  summarises  a  number  of 
characteristics of these programmes in the europeriphery (see Table 2). 
 
Table  2  Overview  of  the  Financial  Assistance  Programmes  in  Greece, 
Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus 
Source: Bank of Greece. 
 
With a naked eye, one can see in the following table that Greece has received 
about  €240  billion  from  all  three  programmes  up  to  now,  while  the  other 
countries  have  received  much  lower  amounts,  Ireland  €67.5  billion,  Portugal 
  11 
€76.8  billion  and  Cyprus  €7.3  billion.  While  it  is  widely  believed  that  the  euro 
area crisis started from Greece, incidentally the first sign of crisis within the euro 
area  appeared  in  Ireland  after  Bear  Sterns  was  rescued  in  March  2008, 
whereby  Irish  sovereign  spreads  started  to  diverge  noticeably.  Nine  months 
later, in December 2009, there was heightened pressure on GGBs. Greece was 
the  first  country  though  within  the  euro  area  to  sign  a  financial  assistance 
programme, and unfortunately the last one to exit from such a programme. 
 
Figure  6  Ten-year  government  bond  yields  in  euro  area  crisis  countries 
vis-à-vis  German  Bund  yields  (September  2008-December  2014, 
in 
percentage points) 
 Source: Haver Analytics. 
 
During  this  period,  Greece  experienced  a  dramatic  fall  in  output  (more  than 
25%), the unemployment ratio almost tripled from 9% in 208 to 26% in 2015, a 
huge fall in the standards of living and valuations of assets (real and financial) 
and another mountain of private debt had been built up (around €220 billion in 7 
years). So, what went wrong in Greece? There are several reasons for this, let 
me name just a few: the starting-point argument (a huge deficit that required a 
bold adjustment effort); errors in the design of the programme that include the 
mix  of  adjustment  measures  (a  greater  reliance  on  tax  increases  than  public 
spending cuts), the value of fiscal multipliers that we show above, etc., the slow 
pace  of  implementation  of  structural  reforms  (due  to  a  lack  of  programme 
ownership  on  behalf  of  Greek  authorities);  the  fact  that  Greece  is  a  relatively 
closed economy and, hence, internal devaluation may contribute negatively, in 
net  terms,  to  economic  activity,  the  fact  that  debt  restructuring  in  2012  should 
have  occurred  much  sooner,  i.e.  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  MoU  in  2010,  a 
directionless  economic  governance  in  the  first  half  of  2015  and  the  ensuing 
huge cost of the economy’s backtracking, we lost valuable time then, which led 
to the imposition of capital controls, a severe distortion upon the economy; the 
wrong  sequencing  of  reforms:  product  market  reforms  should  come  first, 
followed  by  labour  market  reforms,  the  exact  opposite  took  place  in  Greece 
(Hardouvelis). 
 
On  top  of  the  above  reasons  which  are  more  or  less  commonly  accepted,  I 
would  add  a  couple  of  other  -  rather  technical  and  more  subtle  -  reasons  and 
 12 
fiscal  stabilisers,  provided 
this  is  my  contribution  to  the  relevant  debate.  Firstly,  as  we  know,  fiscal 
consolidation  took  place  through  the  targeting  of  a  nominal  variable,  i.e.  the 
overall  fiscal  deficit  which  is  cyclical.  Taking  permanent  austerity  measures  to 
reduce  the  cyclical  deficit  only  deepens  and  prolongs  a  recession,  it  results  in 
excessive  austerity  and  overtaxation  which  is  self-defeating  (it  raises  less 
government revenues). Instead, the structural deficit should be the appropriate 
target  variable,  and  the  cyclical  deficit  would  correct  itself  through  the 
economy’s  automatic 
that  growth-enhancing 
measures  supplement  fiscal  consolidation  (Mourmouras,  FT,  2012).  Secondly, 
there is a certain misperception in the MoUs about how reforms would work in 
the economy. I identify two grey areas here: (i) reforms take time to unlock their 
growth  potential  and  their  results  are  also  country-specific.  A  recent  study  by 
the OECD (2014) indicates that the above time period may extend to five years 
or more; (ii) structural reforms work better and quicker when there is investment 
to capitalise on them and, more generally, demand in the economy because the 
more  the  recession  lingers  on,  the  harder  it  is  to  achieve  positive  results  by 
implementing  structural  reforms.  Such a  demand  element  can  be  incorporated 
into  an  adjustment  programme  in  monetary  unions  through  the  adoption  of  a 
broader concept of conditionality, namely that of investment conditionality, along 
with fiscal and structural conditionalities (Mourmouras, WSJ, 2012). 
 
These  are  important  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  Greek  experience,  and 
hopefully  this  will  be  taken  into  account  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
future adjustment programmes in monetary unions. 
 
Truly, in the last year or so, we have witnessed a revival of the Greek economy 
through  the  stabilisation  of  expectations  and  the  gradual  restoration  of 
confidence.  Looking  forward  now,  we  all  agree  that  given  the  prolonged  fiscal 
consolidation  and private  disinvestment  that  took  place  (2007:  investment  was 
27% of GDP, today it is 11% of GDP, the lowest level since 1960), the country 
needs an investment shock. Reviving domestic and foreign investment is crucial 
to  supporting  the  economic  recovery.  That  is  why  it  is  important  for  the 
government  to  speed  up  the  privatisation  agenda,  not  so  much  as  a  revenue 
exercise,  but  as  a  great  opportunity  to  attract  FDI  in  key  sectors  of  the 
economy, such as transport, energy, logistics and tourism. 
 
In  this  respect,  let  me  come  back  to  an  old  proposal  of  mine,  as  my  fifth 
proposal  today,  made  back  in  the  summer  of  2014,  before  joining  the  Central 
Bank (see Mourmouras, The Double Crisis – Volume 2, Chapter 18: first of all, 
we  should  all  agree  on  the  limits  of  overtaxation.  For  instance,  with  regard  to 
corporate taxation in Greece, 29% corporate tax (plus a 10% tax on dividends), 
tax  competition  from  other  countries  is  very  intense,  e.g.  from  the  Iberian 
peninsula  with  an  average  tax  rate  of  20%  (Spain  and  Portugal),  the  Baltic 
countries  with  an  average  tax  rate  of  15%  (Lithuania,  Latvia,  Estonia)  and  the 
Balkans  with  an  average  of  10%  (Turkey  20%,  Romania  20%,  Albania  15%, 
Cyprus 12.5%, Bulgaria 10% and FYROM 10%). Hence, there is a strong case 
 13 
to be made in Greece in favour of a drastic  gradual reduction of corporate tax 
rates starting in 2020, but to be announced fairly soon, ultimately reaching a flat 
tax rate of 15% and remain locked at the same level for another five years. The 
drastic  reduction  in  corporate  tax  rates  and  the  commitment  to  leave  them 
unchanged for a period of five years will be the best signal to Greek and foreign 
investors  that  the  Greek  authorities  are  now  seeking  to  change  the  country’s 
growth  paradigm  and  move  towards  a  dynamic  economy  based  on  private 
investment and exports. 
 
This  drop  in  taxes  could  be  financed  by  the  fiscal  space  achieved  through  a 
decrease  in  primary  surpluses,  say,  to  2.5%  from  2020  onwards,  bringing 
effectively  forward  a  year  or  two  the  agreed-with-our-lenders  lower  primary 
surpluses, or from a persistent overshooting of agreed surplus targets  of 3.5% 
of GDP until 2022. 
 
Much to my delight, the above proposal that links lower corporate taxes to lower 
primary surpluses has been adopted by the Bank of Greece in May 2016 and by 
the main opposition leader at DETH in Thessaloniki in September 2016. 
 
C. The role of the ECB in countries under adjustment programmes  
As  the  euro  area  crisis  was  triggered  by  either  a  weak  fiscal  position  in  some 
cases or a weak banking system in others, it led to the “negative feedback loop” 
between banks and sovereigns, which the ECB emerged as the institution best 
equipped to tackle. It has used all the appropriate instruments at its disposal in 
order to ensure its primary priorities: price and financial stability across the euro 
area. 
 C.1 The role of the ECB on price stability 
1.  Reducing base rates 
First of all, and since the emerging of the financial crisis in 2008, the ECB has 
reduced  its  main  refinancing  rate  from  4.25%  to  0%,  the  largest  cut  ever 
decided over such a short period in Europe, and also brought the interest rate 
paid  on  banks’  deposits  of  excess  reserves  with  the  Eurosystem  to  negative 
territory, -0.40% today. 
 
2.  SMP programme 
Furthermore,  as  sovereign  bond  markets  in  some  euro  area  jurisdictions  were 
becoming  increasingly  dysfunctional,  in  May  2010  the  ECB  approved  the 
Securities  Market Programme  (SMP)  worth  €210  billion.  Its  main  effect  was  to 
cut  refinancing  costs  for  countries  whose  bonds  were  sold  at  unsustainable 
interest  rates  on  international  markets,  leaving  at  the  same  time  the  money 
supply unchanged through sterilisation. 
 
 
 
 14 
3.  LTROs and TLTROs 
In  December  2011,  the  ECB  revived  the  longer-term  refinancing  instrument 
making  the  central  bank  liquidity  available  to  banks  for  up  to  three  years  at  a 
fixed  annual  interest  rate  of  about  1%.  The  total  allotted  amount  to  the  euro 
area  banks  was  €1  trillion.  In  2014,  the  ECB  announced  two  more  series  of 
targeted long-term refinancing operations with a maturity of up to four years with 
practically  zero  interest  rate,  amounting  to  more  than  €700  billion,  affecting 
directly borrowing conditions of enterprises in the euro area. 
 
4.  Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) 
As the crisis progressed and became more intensive at the beginning of 2012, 
spreads  in  the  euro  area  government  bond  markets  continued  to  widen,  i.e. 
Spain’s 10-year government bond rose from 5% in March 2012 to 7.6% in July 
2012.  In  the  summer  of  2012,  President  Draghi  in  his  speech  in  London 
declared that the ECB, within its mandate, was prepared to do whatever it takes 
in  order  to  preserve  the  euro,  repeating  the  irreversibility  of  the  euro  currency, 
the  three  famous  words  “whatever  it  takes”  that  made  him  the  second  most 
influential  Roman  ever,  after  Julius  Caesar  with  his  three  famous  words  “veni, 
vidi, vici”! Following that speech, the ECB developed a more structured policy of 
the  sovereign  bonds  market  announcing  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
programme (OMT). How much money the ECB spent for this OMT programme 
so far? Zero euro!!! It is the powerful impact of credible policy announcements. 
 
5.  Quantitative Easing (QE) 
Due  to  the  headwinds  coming  primarily  from  the  international  economy,  the 
inflation  outlook  in  the  euro  area  continued  to  deteriorate  in  the  summer  and 
autumn  of  2014  something  that  threatened  to  destabilise  long-term  inflation 
expectations, putting the forbidden letter “D”, “D” for deflation, in the mouths of 
international investors. 
 
As  a  result,  in  January  2015  the  Governing  Council  announced  the  expanded 
asset  purchase  programme  (APP),  which  included  a  large-scale  purchase 
programme  targeting  government  securities  (PSPP)  of  €60  billion  each  month 
until September 2016. Currently, the Eurosystem holdings under the expanded 
asset purchase programme amount to around €2.4 trillion or 20% of euro area 
GDP (PSPP is worth almost €2 trillion, the remaining amount concerns covered 
bonds and asset-backed securities).  
 
The  positive  effects  of  QE  are  mostly  reflected  in  sovereign  bond  yields,  the 
growth rate of loans and bank lending rates, and of course avoiding deflation in 
the  euro  area  (see  Mourmouras,  Speeches  on  Monetary  Policy  and  Global 
Capital Markets, 2017, Chapter 4). 
 
6.  Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) 
Also,  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA)  has  been  provided  by  national 
central  banks  in  order  to  help  domestic  banks  with  liquidity  shortages  and 
 15 
prevent  a  domino  effect.  Hence,  between  2010  and  2014,  ELA  had  been 
extended  to  banks  in  Ireland,  Greece,  Cyprus,  and  Portugal,  with  the 
Eurosystem borrowing to these countries through ELA, surpassing €200 billion. 
In  Greece,  ELA  has  been  provided  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  over  the  last  eight 
years and reached its peak of €120 billion in March 2012. 
7.  The Eurosystem Resolution Liquidity (ERL) tool 
Last  but  not  least,  the  ECB  is  considering  now  a  new  policy  tool,  the 
Eurosystem Resolution Liquidity (ERL) tool that would allow it to inject cash into 
banks under resolution, in other words, when are being rescued from the threat 
of insolvency. The ERL should be seen as a monetary policy tool, ensuring the 
banking system can transmit official interest rates to the real economy. 
 
C.2 The role of the ECB on financial stability  
framework  for  banks’  supervision 
On June 2012, the European Council reached an agreement about the creation 
of  the  European 
through  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  which  forms  the  first  pillar  of  the  Banking 
Union. The ECB has been assigned specific tasks to be carried out through the 
SSM  like  for  instance,  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  European 
banking  system,  increase  financial  integration  and  stability  and  ensure 
consistent  supervision.  Currently, 
is  directly  supervising  118 
“systemically  significant  banks”,  representing  almost  82%  of  total  banking 
assets  in  the  euro  area  and  indirectly  supervises  less  significant  banks  in  the 
participating countries, which number approximately 3,500 in the euro area! 
the  ECB 
It’s the same SSM, chaired by Danièle Nouy, which conducted the latest stress 
tests in Greek banks, the results of which came out last month. Two weeks ago, 
during her recent visit at the Bank of Greece, Chair Nouy emphasised to us that 
Greek banks need to do more to reduce their very high stock of non-performing 
loans  (NPLs),  highlighting  that  this  is  the  biggest  challenge  facing the  banking 
sector in the country exiting its third bailout programme in August. 
 
D. Concluding remarks 
 
Instead of an epilogue, I would like to close my speech with a question from the 
future,  “back  to  the  future”:  So  with  all  the  above  crisis-management  tools 
available,  is the euro area today  in  a better position  vis-à-vis 2008 to tackle the 
next  crisis,  which,  by  the  way,  may  be  just  around  the  corner?  I  already  talked 
about Italy in my introduction. 
 
With monetary policy reaching its limits, namely, negative rates (in 2008, the base 
rate was +4%, today it is negative) and the trillions bought by the ECB through its 
QE  programme,  and  the  scarcity  issue  which  naturally  arises,  clearly,  monetary 
policy can’t be the  “only game in town” during the next crisis. In that eventuality, 
there will be hopefully a more active role for fiscal policy with more fiscal backstops 
 16 
to be implemented, moving also towards more risk-sharing in the euro area. Many 
people,  including  myself,  feel  that  we  need  to  strike  a  balance  in  the  classic 
struggle  between  solidarity  and  national  responsibility,  or  the  ‘new  wine  in  the 
same  old  bottle’,  namely  risk-sharing (namely mutualisation of costs) versus risk 
reduction.  Especially  in  the  South  of  Europe,  there  is  a  strong  feeling  that  this 
balance  is  unstable  and  in  order  to  make  it  more  stable  and  more  symmetrical, 
what  is  needed  are  stronger  European  institutions,  for  instance,  a  full-blown 
Banking Union and the ESM being turned into a proper European Monetary Fund. 
It  is  important  to  bring  forward  the  date  of  the  establishment  of  the  European 
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS),  the  Banking  Union’s  third  pillar,  which  is 
scheduled for 2025, providing stronger and more uniform deposit insurance cover. 
Even the announcement of the entry into full operation of EDIS will have a strong 
confidence-building  effect  on  depositors,  in  the  sense  of  avoiding  risks  of  self-
fulfilling prophecies on bank runs.  
 
The Jean Monnet principle is inter-temporal and applies at all times: “Europe is the 
sum of the solutions adopted to address the crises it is faced with.” The European 
clock  is  ticking  down  and  the  EU  must  take  action  at  the  June  Council  in  two 
weeks’  time  or  at  the  latest  at  the  December  Summit,  otherwise  the  European 
electorate will punish its politicians for their slow reflexes at the European elections 
in  a  year’s  time,  leading  to  a  generalised  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  European 
Union. Over its long history, Europe has traditionally managed to find consensus 
on the burning issues facing it, even at the very last minute. As a true European 
myself, I only hope that this time will not be different! 
 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 17 
