    
 
How Monetary Policy Affects Your GDP  
 
Speech given by 
 Andrew G Haldane 
Chief Economist 
Bank of England 
   Finch Lecture, University of Melbourne  
10 April 2018 
  The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy 
Committee.  I would like to thank Phil Bunn, Shiv Chowla, Fergus Cumming, Alice Pugh and  
Chris Yeates for their help in preparing the text.  I would like to thank James Benford, Tom Belsham, 
Ben Broadbent, David Halpern, Michael Hallsworth, Clare Macallan and Michael Saunders for their 
comments.  
 
 1 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
   I am honoured to be here at the University of Melbourne to deliver this year’s Finch Lecture.   
 Colin David Finch built his brilliant academic and professional career on nurturing international co-operation 
on economic and financial matters:  in his studies here at the University of Melbourne and at the London 
School of Economics;  in his long and distinguished time at the International Monetary Fund;  and, in later 
life, at the Institute for International Economics in Washington DC. 
 Citizens of the UK owe Finch a particular debt of gratitude.  He led the IMF rescue mission to the UK in 1976.  
That, in many respects, marked the turning point in the UK’s economic fortunes.  It heralded the start of a 
long period of liberalisation and integration of markets in goods, services, people and money.  The world 
economy broadly mirrored those trends towards increased international liberalisation and integration.   
 The benefits the world economy has reaped from having pursued that path are now only too clear.  Global 
integration and co-operation has boosted dramatically flows of goods, services, people and monies.  Each is 
at levels never previously seen.  This, in turn, has helped deliver higher living standards and lower levels of 
poverty in pretty much every country on the planet.1  Finch would have wholeheartedly approved.   
 Looking to the future, however, this wind is at risk of changing direction.  The global financial crisis has left 
lasting scars.  That has created pressure to place speedbumps, or in some cases roadblocks, on flows of 
goods, services, people and monies.  One of the key policy challenges ahead will be to prevent the hard-won 
gains from global integration and co-operation being lost.  The stakes could scarcely be higher.       
 Tonight, I want to discuss a different policy challenge facing policymakers, specifically central banks.  It too 
has risen in prominence since the global financial crisis.  It too has posed big questions about the existing 
policy order.  And it too needs, I believe, to be tackled transparently and comprehensively if stability and trust 
in the international monetary system is to be preserved.    
 Just before the 2016 referendum on EU membership, Professor Anand Menon of King’s College London was 
explaining to an audience in Newcastle that, in the view of most economists, leaving the EU would be bad for 
their economic health.  GDP was likely to fall.  A woman rose from the audience and, with finger pointed, 
uttered the memorable line:  “That’s your bloody GDP, not ours!”  There was no right of reply.   
 Issues of inequality have loomed large in many public debates, not just Brexit, over the past decade or so.  
Recent books on the rising tide of inequality by Thomas Piketty, Tony Atkinson, Joe Stiglitz and Branko 
Milanovic have, somewhat surprisingly, become best-sellers.2  So too have books by Martin Ford and  
Eric Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee discussing how the rise of the robots may further worsen these 
inequality problems.3 
                                                      
1  See, for example, Carney (2016) and World Bank Group (2016).  
2  Piketty (2014), Atkinson (2015), Stiglitz (2013), Milanovic (2016). 
3  Ford (2016), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  At around the same time, monetary policy in a number of countries became more expansionary than at any 
time in recent history.  Interest rates in a number of advanced economies fell to their lowest-ever levels 
during the financial crisis.  In some countries, additional stimulus was provided through asset purchases – 
so-called Quantitative Easing or QE.  Those asset purchases are currently running at around a cumulative 
15% of annual global GDP.4   
 Given the increased interest in distributional issues, and the increasingly activist role of monetary policy, it is 
perhaps no surprise that there has been increasing public interest in the fusion of the two – that is to say, the 
distributional impact of monetary policy itself, which is what I’m going to talk about today.  Chart 1 shows a 
simple metric of that increased public interest since the financial crisis based on that most scientific of 
metrics, the Google search.   
 Interest in these issues has sometimes spilt over into sharp criticism of central banks’ actions.  Surveys of 
the general public have suggested that a large proportion may believe lower interest rates have actually 
made them worse off.5  Meanwhile, QE is held by some to have increased inequalities between rich and poor 
and to have harmed pension funds and the companies sponsoring them.6 
 Some have gone further, suggesting that QE may have caused central banks to cross the thin line between 
monetary and fiscal policy, between economic policy and political economy.7  Others still have suggested 
that these unconventional monetary measures may have called into question central banks’ operational 
independence from government in the setting of monetary policy.8   
 My aim in this lecture is not to resolve these questions, one way or the other.  Rather, it is to provide a 
framework for assessing the first claim – that recent monetary policy actions have had a significant 
distributional impact.  The answer to this question clearly has an important bearing on the broader normative 
questions some have posed about the role of central banks.   
 I begin by explaining why I think distributional issues are relevant to central bankers and to policymakers 
generally.  This is not always agreed territory.  I will then set out a framework for assessing the quantitative 
impact of monetary policy on different cohorts of society.  This is done in both standard units of 
measurement (money amounts and percentages) and in non-standard units (welfare and well-being).   
 This framework is calibrated using as a case study the loosening of UK monetary policy after the global 
financial crisis.  The main results are easily summarised.  There is nothing to suggest monetary policy has 
had significant effects on either income or wealth inequality in the UK over recent years.  Indeed, the 
                                                      
4  QE calculated with reference to combined purchases by US, UK, euro-area and Japanese central banks between start-2007 and  
end-2017. 
5  Bank of England and NMG survey (2017). 
6  For example, Lysenko et al (2016) and Altmann (2009). 
7  For example, Buiter (2014). 
8  See Bank of England ‘Independence 20 Years On’ conference:  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/events/2017/september/20-years-
on 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  loosening of monetary policy after the crisis appears to have delivered significant financial and welfare 
benefits to almost all cohorts of the UK economy, albeit often through different channels.    
 I conclude with thoughts on the implications of this analysis for policymakers.  My view is that there is a 
strong case for making, on a periodic basis, comprehensive and transparent assessments of the 
distributional impact of monetary policy.  This would help people understand the purpose and impact of 
monetary policy, both on the economy in general and on them as individuals, on “their GDP”.   
 I give some illustrative examples of a “Monetary Policy Scorecard” summarising the impact of monetary 
actions on particular cohorts.  Greater transparency of this type would not, by itself, reduce any distributional 
effects of policy.  But it could help in explaining the impact of these actions, in a localised and personalised 
way, as a means of improving understanding and trust in central banks.  Both have been a casualty of the 
crisis. 
 Why Distributions Matter 
 Let me start with a bald statement:  all public policy is distributional, be it monetary, fiscal, structural or social.  
The reason I know this is because redistribution is the way public policy works;  it is what policy does for a 
living.  Some policies redistribute resources between agents at a point in time.  Others redistribute resources 
between agents over time.  If policy is not working through one of these channels, it is not working. 
 If all policy is distributional, it does not take much of a leap of imagination to see that policymakers may wish 
to understand and explain its distributional impact.  In some policy settings, that already happens – in fiscal 
policy, social policy, climate change policy, pension policy.  Published assessments of policy impact can 
improve public understanding of, and debate about, often difficult distributional choices.9 
 When it comes to monetary policy, the position until recently has been rather different.  There has been no 
particular clamour for published assessments of the distributional impact of monetary policy.  Why?  Because 
monetary policy has benefitted from, not one, but two “Get Out of Jail” cards.  Both have their origin in Milton 
Friedman’s 1968 Presidential Address to the American Economic Association, half a century ago.10  
 
The first follows from the neutrality of monetary policy with respect to real variables over the longer run.11  
Typically, this neutrality is associated with the total level of resources in the economy, such as employment 
or output – the vertical long-run Phillips curve.  But neutrality applies, with no less force, to the distribution of 
resources in the economy, whether between sectors or regions.  In theory, monetary policy ought also to be 
neutral in its longer-run impact on economic inequality. 
                                                       
9  For example, Ball et al (2013) and Büchs et al (2011). 
10  Friedman (1968).   
11  Patinkin (1987) traces the history of thought relating to the neutrality of money. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 4 
 
4 
 The second Friedman point is that the monetary policy tools of the trade should be simple and singular – for 
example, the money supply or short-term interest rate.  These instruments are levied at an economy-wide 
level.  Central banks simply cannot set different interest rates for different sectors or individuals or regions.  
Monetary policy tools are thus too blunt an instrument to offset distributional differences.   
 So whether viewed from an objectives or instruments perspective, the case for monetary policy needing to 
take much account of its distributional impact is weaker than for the other arms of public policy, such as fiscal 
and social policy.  The latter have objectives which are often explicitly distributional and their instruments are 
better-equipped to achieve such redistribution.  This much is relatively well-accepted in academic circles.12 
 It does not follow from that, however, that distributional effects are irrelevant in the setting of monetary policy.  
Both in theory and in practice, there are several reasons why distributional effects might still matter to 
monetary policy and to monetary policymakers and hence why understanding and explaining these effects 
might be important public policy-wise.13   
 First, even though it may be neutral over the longer-run, monetary policy can and does have potent effects 
on the economy over the shorter-term, including potentially on the distribution of resources.  This should not 
be a bone of contention.  We know this is likely to be the case because this is the very reason monetary 
policy is non-neutral in the first place.  Monetary policy, like all policy, relies on redistribution for its efficacy. 
 For example, changes in interest rates redistribute interest payments between savers and borrowers at any 
point in time.  They also affect, over time, the balance between saving and borrowing in the economy.  
Central bank asset purchases potentially affect differently those with assets and those with debt, as well as 
affecting the balance between asset and debt-holding over time.  This is how monetary policy works. 
 When it comes to understanding how (indeed, whether) monetary policy is working, then, it is important to 
understand and monitor these distributional moving parts.  Distributional analysis provides a window on the 
monetary policy engine at work.  For example, when interest rates change it is important to gauge not only 
how cash flow switches between savers and borrowers, but whether it is being saved or spent.14   
 Second, explaining the distributional impact of monetary policy is potentially important for building and 
maintaining understanding and trust among the general public in these policies.  It can help preserve that  
all-important social contract between policymakers and citizens.15  Doing so effectively may call for 
explaining the impact of policy on the general public, not just at an aggregate level but on a disaggregated 
basis. 
                                                       
12  For example, Lipton (2014) and Cœuré (2012). 
13  For example, Haldane (2016) and Carney (2016).  
14  Bunn et al (2015). 
15  Haldane (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  Third, the ultimate yardstick of policy success is its impact on people’s well-being.  That is affected 
importantly by how the effects of policy are distributed across society.  A rise in aggregate GDP in an 
economy need not necessarily mean higher welfare for all its citizens or regions, as the lady in the audience 
made clear.  The more uneven the distribution of winners and losers, and the greater the skew in gains, the 
less likely it is aggregate social welfare will have risen. 
 When it comes to evidence on the distributional impact of monetary policy, there are wide gaps in 
understanding and even wider gaps in perception.  Even among policymakers and academics, work in this 
area remains embryonic and the results are often ambiguous.16  If I were summarising this research 
evidence, I would say it suggests monetary policy can and has affected inequality, but that these effects 
have probably been modest quantitatively.   
 There are a number of reasons why existing research may not have been clear-cut in its conclusions.  
Studies have used different measures of monetary impulse (interest rates versus QE) and different 
methodologies (macro versus micro).  Perhaps most importantly, these studies have tended to focus on 
different monetary policy transmission channels.  Doing so can give quite different perspectives on the 
impact of monetary policy on overall inequality. 
 The general public probably suffers from a particularly acute version of this problem.  When asked to assess 
the impact of changes in monetary policy, they tend to focus on those channels which have an observable 
and immediate impact on their finances.  These are likely to include the cash flow effects of interest rate 
changes on interest payments and receipts and the effects of asset prices on wealth portfolios.   
 For example, when asked about whether lower interest rates have benefitted them, around a third of the UK 
public – and more than half of those aged over 50 – suggest not.17  Within that group, a large majority – 
around 80% – focus only on the negative effects of lower rates on their savings income.  This is only one of 
the channels through which monetary policy works, albeit the most immediate and observable.    
 It is far harder for the public to take account of the other channels, many of them neither immediate nor 
observable, through which a relaxation of monetary policy might benefit them.  This includes the effects of 
looser policy in boosting wages and jobs.  Not taking account of these channels can give a distorted lens on 
the impact of policy on the economy at large, on inequality and on individuals’ personal finances.  
 To gauge fully the distributional impact of monetary policy, then, we need to capture as many as possible of 
its transmission channels, direct and indirect, immediate and slower-moving.  It is only by considering all of 
these channels in combination that we can then properly evaluate the impact of monetary policy on the 
income, wealth and welfare of people and the distribution of these effects.  It is to those we now turn. 
                                                      
16  Recent summaries of the literature are contained in Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) and Monnin (2017).  The Bank of England working 
paper on this topic (Bunn, Pugh and Yeates (2018) on which this speech draws) contains a good survey of the recent literature. 
17  April 2017 NMG Consulting survey of households, as discussed in Bunn et al (2018). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  Assessing the Quantitative Impact of Monetary Policy 
 We develop a quantitative framework to measure the impact of monetary policy on the economy as a whole 
and on different cohorts within it.  We use the UK as a case study.  The framework draws heavily on recent 
research by Bank of England staff, Phil Bunn, Alice Pugh and Chris Yeates.  Their working paper contains 
full details of the exercise, which involves three broad steps.18  As with any quantitative analysis, there are of 
course uncertainties and confidence intervals around the results.  As such, the broad qualitative conclusions 
are probably worth emphasising more than any precise figures. 
 Step One:  Starting Distributions 
 The starting point is an initial set of distributions for the variables of interest, looking across a representative 
sample of households.  For this exercise, data are taken primarily from the Wealth and Asset Survey (WAS), 
a biennial survey of UK households’ assets and debts.19  Specifically, we focus on a fixed panel of 10,000 
households across 4 waves of this survey between 2006-08 and 2012-14.   
 The survey design and sampling means these households are broadly representative of the UK population 
as a whole.20  It is well-known, however, that household surveys tend to under-sample the tails of the income 
and wealth distribution, in particular the upper tail.21  In the analysis, we focus on the Gini coefficient and the 
ratio of the 90th to the 10th percentile of the distribution (“90/10 ratio”) as measures of inequality. 
 
Charts 2 and 3 plot the distribution of income and net wealth across UK households just prior to the crisis.22  
This is the starting date for the exercise, after which UK monetary policy was loosened materially.  As is  
well-known, these distributions are extremely uneven.  For example, in 2007 the richest 10% of households 
accounted for around a quarter of total income and over 40% of wealth. 
 At the other end of the distribution, the whole bottom half of households by income accounted for only 
around a quarter of income in the economy and only around 10% of net wealth.  Around 50% of households 
earned less than £20,000 in income each year and around 40% had fewer than £90,000 in net wealth.    
 Age is an important factor shaping these distributions, as life-cycle theory would suggest.  Chart 4 plots the 
net wealth distribution by age.  Those over 50 account for around 80% of aggregate net wealth and those 
over 70 for around a quarter.  By contrast, those under 30 account for less than 5% of wealth.  In general, 
the young are borrowers with a stock of debt, the old are savers with a pool of assets. 
                                                      
18  Bunn et al (2018). 
19  We also use the Family Resources Survey (FRS) for household incomes. 
20  See 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinances/debt/methodologies/wealthandassetssurveyqmi 
21  As discussed in Vermeulen (2016), for example.  The ONS Wealth and Asset Survey is probably the UK household survey with the 
best coverage of the tails of the distribution. 
22  The measure of wealth used is net total wealth, comprising financial, property, physical and pension assets, net of debt.  There is a 
question about how much households are aware of pension wealth, and therefore value it.  The distributions are not especially sensitive 
to whether pension wealth is included.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  If we overlay the income and wealth distributions in 2007 and 2013 (the end-date for our exercise), these are 
pretty-much identically-shaped (Charts 5 and 6).  On that basis alone, there has not been any clear shift in 
income or wealth inequality since the crisis.  Standard summary measures of inequality, such as the Gini 
coefficient, confirm that conclusion:  for both income and wealth, the Gini is largely unchanged.23  
 On the face of it, then, this does not strongly suggest that the relaxation of monetary policy since the crisis 
has significantly worsened inequality.  Unless, that is, other factors have more than counterbalanced the 
effect of monetary policy.  To assess that, we need to identify the distinct impact of monetary policy on the 
economy, both in aggregate and looking across the household distribution. 
 Step Two:  Calibrating the Impact of Monetary Policy 
 The policy episode we consider is the relaxation of UK monetary policy after the global financial crisis.  
These actions by the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) comprised:  first, the reduction of short-term 
interest rates by 5 percentage points (from 5.5% to 0.5%) between February 2008 and March 2009;  and 
second, the purchase of £375 billion of government securities between March 2009 and mid-2012.  
 In combination, these measures represented a very significant relaxation of UK monetary policy, perhaps the 
largest in the Bank of England’s history.  We consider their combined effects, as interest rates and QE were 
part of a single monetary policy strategy by the MPC.  Nonetheless, given their potentially different 
distributional consequences, we also consider the effects of QE and interest rates separately.   
 To trace out the impact of these monetary interventions on the economy and on households, we use a 
macro-to-micro simulation approach.  This involves two mappings.  The first is from the monetary impulse to 
a small set of macro-economic aggregates (interest rates, employment, wages, equity and house prices and 
consumer prices).  This is done using the Bank of England’s macro-economic model. 
 Charts 7-9 show the effects of the combined monetary stimulus on aggregate GDP, unemployment and CPI 
inflation.24  Without the monetary stimulus, GDP in the UK would have been around 8% lower, 
unemployment 4 percentage points higher and the level of consumer prices 20% lower.  Although there are 
significant uncertainties around these estimates, especially at crisis time, these effects are clearly large. 
 The second mapping is from these macro-economic aggregates to the balance sheets of households.  This 
mapping focusses on four main channels of transmission:  (a) cash flow channel (the direct effects on 
households’ interest payments and receipts);  (b) labour income channel (the effect on household wages and 
                                                      
23  The same is true of other measures of inequality, such as the 90/10 ratio.  Sampling issues mean caution is needed when 
interpreting in particular the wealth-based measures of inequality. 
24   See Carney (2016) and Haldane (2016) for more details.  Lower interest rates and QE operate through slightly different transmission 
channels.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
  employment);  (c) wealth channel (the effect on households’ financial, housing and pension wealth);  and (d) 
inflation channel (the effect of prices on real household deposits and debt).25    
 The key point is that these multiple channels of monetary transmission are fully recognised and calibrated.  
Some of these channels are direct and immediate, such as cash flow.  Others are indirect and slower-acting, 
such as labour income.   By combining them, we can calibrate the general equilibrium consequences of the 
UK’s monetary relaxation on the economy, in aggregate and across cohorts.   
 As we would expect, the potency of these channels varies across households depending on their 
characteristics.  For example, the strength of the cash flow effect depends on individuals’ stock of  
interest-bearing assets and liabilities. The labour income channel depends on the skills and age of the 
household.  And the wealth channel depends on the size and composition of their wealth portfolio.     
 Step Three:  Final Distributions 
 With these mappings, we can calculate the impact of the MPC’s monetary loosening on different household 
cohorts.  Charts 10 and 11 plot this effect on household income, looking across the income distribution.  This 
impact is shown on both a “money amount” and “percentage of income” basis. 26  These effects are also split 
between the “cash flow” and “labour income” channels.   
 The average household has gained in income terms by around £1,500 each year, or close to £9,000 
cumulatively, from the MPC’s monetary loosening.  Put differently, the average household would have been 
around 5% worse off each year had monetary policy not been loosened in response to the financial crisis.  
The lion’s share of this boost resulted from the positive impact of looser policy on jobs and wages.  This is a 
slower-moving, harder to observe, channel by which monetary policy benefits households, but clearly a 
quantitatively important one. 
 Looking at the distribution of these income gains across deciles, these are reasonably evenly spread as a 
percentage of income.  The percentage gains are slightly lower among lower income households and are 
slightly negative for the lowest income decile.  Nonetheless, if we calculate a Gini coefficient or 90/10 ratio 
based on these distributions, they are largely unaffected by the monetary policy loosening.27  
 If we look at money amounts, rather than percentages, the balance of benefits is significantly more uneven.  
Around half the total income gain accrues to the top two income deciles.  But this reflects the highly uneven 
distribution of income prior to the crisis, rather than telling us anything about the effects of monetary policy.  
These monetary gains may, nonetheless, have had a bearing on public perceptions of monetary policy.    
                                                       
25  Bunn et al (2018) provide details on these mappings and the assumptions they make in arriving at them. 
26  The ‘money amount’ numbers that follow in this section refer to real income, defined in 2013 prices. 
27  Bunn et al (2018) provide more details. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 9 
 
9 
 Turning to wealth, Charts 12 and 13 do the equivalent analysis looking along the wealth distribution.  As with 
income, the average UK household has benefitted significantly in net wealth terms from looser monetary 
policy, by on average almost £90,000 or 20% of net wealth.  All asset classes have benefitted – financial, 
housing and pension.  These gains arise from the boost to asset prices from looser monetary policy.  
 As with income, in percentage terms these gains are evenly spread across the distribution.  Every wealth 
decile has gained from looser policy.  Also as with income, the net effect of monetary policy on measures of 
wealth inequality is negligible.  The unequal prior distribution means, however, that monetary gains are 
heavily skewed, with the top two deciles accounting for 60% of total net wealth gains. 
 Charts 14-17 look at the effect of monetary policy on income and wealth looking across the age distribution.  
They show some notable generational differences.  In percentage terms, the income gains from looser 
monetary policy have been largest among the young, largely due to improved employment prospects.28  
Recessions typically generate sharper rises in unemployment among those who are less educated or less 
skilled, so it is also worth noting that the loosening in monetary policy during the crisis played an important 
role in limiting that effect.  Older cohorts, by contrast, lost out in income terms due to lower interest receipts 
on their savings.   
 By contrast, wealth gains have been evenly spread across the age distribution in percentage terms, with 
every cohort gaining.  In money terms, the largest beneficiaries have been older age groups, the value of 
whose pensions and houses have been boosted by the policy-induced rise in asset prices.  Looking at the 
oldest age group, this boost to wealth has exceeded their income losses by a factor of around 10.   
 Looking at the effects of monetary policy by region, the benefits of monetary policy on incomes have been 
evenly spread in percentage terms (Charts 18 and 19).  Monetary policy has not caused any significant 
widening in regional inequality.  Given the unequal starting position, however, the distribution of monetary 
gains for both income and net wealth is heavily skewed, with a quarter centred in London and the  
South-East.   
 Charts 20 and 21 look separately at the effects of lower interest rates and QE, respectively, on the income 
distribution.  Although part of the same strategy, these two instruments clearly operate through different 
channels and have different distributional effects.  The effects of QE are predictably slanted towards financial 
wealth effects, while the effects of Bank Rate operate more through net interest income and house price 
channels.   
 This analysis suggests that, with few exceptions, the impact of looser monetary policy on different cohorts of 
society has been positive and significant in income and wealth terms.  Another way of making this point is to 
                                                      
28  Though a notable feature of the UK’s recovery has been that, notwithstanding the positive effects of monetary policy, the real income 
of younger people has fallen further and recovered more slowly than older age groups (Haldane (2016)). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
  ask what fraction of households are likely to have been made worse off from the loosening of UK monetary 
policy.  Taking income and wealth effects together, only 4% of households were made £500 or more worse 
off.29 
 At the same time, this analysis has made clear that there are often large differences in the nature and scale 
of impact across cohorts.  Some households will have seen these benefits through higher employment, 
others through lower debt payments, others still through higher wealth.  Even if people observed and 
understood all of these channels, their lived experience would have been quite different.   
 In practice, we know people’s understanding of these channels is partial and imperfect.  Some channels are 
hard to observe or take time to take effect, such as the quantitatively important effect of monetary policy in 
boosting jobs and hence household labour income.  It will have been difficult for households to tie the effects 
of looser monetary policy to their improved job prospects, given the long lags in transmission.  
 People’s subjective sense of well-being might also be influenced by more than their percentage gains.  How 
people’s gains, in money terms, compare with others’ monetary gains might also matter.  In experimental 
and real-world settings, these relativities often matter to people’s sense of fairness and hence well-being.30 
With that in mind, we now turn to a fully-fledged welfare analysis of the impact of monetary policy.  
 Assessing the Welfare Impact of Monetary Policy 
 Assessing the impact of monetary policy on the welfare of different cohorts is interesting for several reasons.   
 First, it is the sum of individuals’ subjective well-being – that is, social welfare – that ought ultimately to 
matter for policymakers, even though policymakers’ legal mandates are typically cast in terms of a set of 
more objective macro-economic measures, such as inflation and employment.31   
 Second, translating estimates of financial gain into welfare terms can help when deciding how best to 
aggregate across different channels to gauge their general equilibrium impact.  For example, how do we 
appropriately aggregate changes to income and wealth in their impact on well-being?  And should we focus 
on percentage or money changes when judging the impact on people’s welfare?   
                                                         
29  Carney (2016) notes that just 2% of households have deposit holdings in excess of £5,000, few other financial assets, and do not 
own a home.  Therefore, “the vast majority of savers who might have lost some interest income from lower policy rates have stood to 
gain from increases in asset prices, particularly the recovery in house prices.” 
30  As discussed in Ball and Chernova (2008) and Clark, Frijters and Shields (2007), for example. 
31  Taking the sum of individuals’ utility is consistent with a Benthamite utilitarian concept of social welfare, but other specifications are 
possible.  A Rawlsian specification, for example, would define social welfare as the wellbeing of the worst off member of society. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
  In principle, a welfare-based analysis allows us to answer those questions.  Doing so is not, however, simple.  
In algebraic terms, consider a utility function of the general form: 
 𝑈 =  ∅(𝛼(𝑦), 𝛽(𝑤), 𝛾(𝑋)) 
 Let’s call this Equation (1).  𝑈 is utility, 𝑦 is income and 𝑤 is wealth.  To turn our quantitative estimates into 
welfare-equivalent measures, three empirical uncertainties loom large.  First, calibrating the weights on 
current and permanent income (wealth), 𝛼 and 𝛽;   second, determining which variables other than income 
and wealth affect well-being, 𝑋, and with what weight, 𝛾;  and, third, calibrating the curvature of the utility 
function with respect to its arguments, ∅. 
 That is a lot of free parameters.  One approach to pinning down these parameters would be to calibrate them 
using past studies.  This might be a decent approximation but is not ideal if past behaviour might be a poor 
guide to behaviour in today’s very different environment.  This factor is likely to be relevant at times of 
financial crisis and exceptional movements in monetary policy, for which there is no precedent. 
 While no approach can fully get around these problems, we use an approach that places fewer arbitrary 
restrictions on people’s preferences.  Instead these preferences are revealed, courtesy of empirical 
estimation, and then used to parameterise a social welfare function.  This involves direct estimation of the 
parameters in Equation (1) using our sample of households.32   
 Estimating (1) requires a measure of household well-being.  The Wealth and Asset Survey began asking 
households about their well-being or “happiness” from 2010-12.  Specifically, households are asked to rate 
their well-being on a scale of 1-10, based on four questions based around satisfaction, happiness and 
anxiety.  We use an average of some of these well-being scores when estimating (1).33 
 We tested a variety of specifications of Equation (1) to see which fit best, using different set of factors and 
different functional specifications for the utility function.  Some of these specifications are shown in Table 1.  
Our preferred specification is shown in Column 5.  Its key features are: 
   Both current income and wealth (permanent income) affect household well-being, as we would 
expect in a standard utility function, in a statistically significant way.   
   Our preferred specification includes a variety of separate measures of gross wealth and gross debt.  
The different components of wealth have a different likelihood of being spent and hence have a 
different impact on well-being.  For example, the coefficient on deposit wealth is eight times larger  
                                                       
32  See, for example, Layard, Nickell, Mayraz (2008).   
33  The results are not sensitive to using subsets of the answers. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 12 
 
12 
  than the coefficient on pension wealth, consistent with the former being more accessible than the 
latter and, therefore, more likely to be spent.  Debt is bad for household well-being, as others have 
found.34   
   The functional specification which best fits the happiness regression is a logarithmic one.  This 
implies that there is diminishing marginal utility of income, as we would expect and as other studies 
have found.  It also implies that changes in happiness that arise as a result of changes in income 
and wealth are appropriately captured in percentage, rather than in money, terms.35 
   Various previous studies have found that employment and financial security can have an important 
effect on people’s happiness, over and above their impact on income and wealth.36  For example, it 
is well-established that having a job improves significantly people’s confidence and self-esteem, over 
and above any effect on pay.  Those conclusions are borne out here.  We find there is a statistically 
significant role for unemployment and arrears in explaining household well-being, over and above 
the effects from income and wealth.   
   The effects of unemployment and arrears on well-being are quantitatively large.  To gauge that, we 
can translate them into income-equivalent terms using our welfare regression.  The effects of having 
a job are, in well-being terms, equivalent to around 3 months’ extra income on average, across all 
households. 37  This is consistent with powerful effects of work and financial security on happiness.38 
Using this framework, our earlier quantitative estimates of the impact of looser monetary policy can be 
translated into welfare terms.  Charts 22 and 23 show these welfare benefits, broken down into their 
component parts (income, wealth, unemployment), looking across the age and income distribution.  A few 
key points stand out. 
 First, the effects of monetary policy in lowering the probability of unemployment have a very material impact 
on household well-being.  These effects often account for more than half of the total welfare gain for 
households across all cohorts.  This means that, if we looked only at the boost to income and wealth from 
looser monetary policy, this would significantly understate the well-being benefits to households from the 
MPC’s monetary actions, by a factor of at least two.   
                                                       
34  For example, Jacoby (2002). 
35  Both are shown in Table 1.  Log utility is the best fit for happiness across households, but it is also common to use this functional 
form at the individual level.  We also experimented with a variety of other specifications, with higher order terms to capture greater 
curvature in the utility function, but these were generally not statistically significant.  Note that our regressions are based on a pooled 
cross section of households and so are not pure estimates of the impact on happiness of changes in income and wealth over time.  
36  For example, Winkelmann and Winkelmann (1998) and Di Tella et al (2003). 
37  There are various ways to calculate the income-equivalence of the lower probability of unemployment, and these numbers would vary 
depending on the assumptions made.  For simplicity, we exploit the results from our analysis, which show the effect on welfare from the 
lower probability of unemployment on the average household to be around six times larger than the welfare boost from higher labour 
income.   
38  For example, Clark and Oswald (1994). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
  Second, these gains from higher employment are felt particularly strongly by younger people who gain most 
from having a job.  In welfare terms, the biggest gainers from the MPC’s monetary loosening have been the 
young, though every age cohort benefits overall.  The same is true looking along the income distribution, 
where every cohort gains in welfare terms, even though the same was not true of purely financial gains.     
 Policy Implications 
 Where does this leave us?  Let me summarise the key empirical conclusions before turning to policy lessons.  
I take the key empirical conclusions to be: 
  The material loosening of UK monetary policy after 2007 has had a significantly positive effect on 
employment, income and wealth, without which average living standards in the UK would be 
materially lower. 
   These gains have been shared right across the distribution of income and wealth, age and region, 
though the precise scale and nature of these benefits does differ across cohorts.  Very few 
households across the UK are likely to have been net losers in financial terms from the MPC’s 
monetary loosening, once all of its effects are take into account. 
   This conclusion is reinforced if we consider the impact of monetary loosening on people’s well-being.  
In addition to the financial gains from higher income and wealth, many people have benefitted 
significantly from greater job security and reduced financial anxiety.  In welfare terms, these benefits 
may have been as large as the financial gains. The number of households who have lost out in 
welfare terms from looser monetary policy is only 12%.    
   These quantitative results differ sharply from public perceptions of the impact of monetary policy.  To 
illustrate, Charts 23 and 24 compare the welfare impact of lower interest rates among different age 
cohorts with people’s self-reported survey impact.  These differ not just in scale but sign.  It suggests 
the public perception gap around monetary policy is large.  This is symptomatic of a deficit of public 
understanding, and is likely to have contributed to a deficit of public trust, on the public’s part. 
   These deficits may not be that surprising.  It is very difficult for people to identify, much less quantify, 
the channels through which monetary policy affects their lives, directly and indirectly.  For most 
people, this information is simply not to hand.  If it were, in a simple and personal form, this might 
contribute to closing the gaps in public trust and understanding about monetary policy.   
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
  That takes me naturally to practical ways of closing the twin deficits.  Inequality issues are likely to continue 
to loom large in public debate in the years ahead, not least due to the impact of technology on jobs and 
skills.39   
 It seems perfectly reasonable that policymakers should periodically explain the impact of their actions on 
both aggregate outcomes and its distribution.  Indeed, doing so consistently and transparently could I think 
deliver important benefits, helping close the public perception gap and those twin deficits of trust and 
understanding about monetary policy.  But how is that best done?  
 Other domains of public policy have developed mechanisms for improving transparency about the impact of 
policy.  These often involve “framing” the effects of policy in ways which increase the public’s interest, 
understanding and hence trust in policy.40  This can be done on either an aggregate or disaggregated basis.   
 One approach, “social good framing”, emphasises the aggregate or societal benefits of policy.  For example, 
tax payments by an individual can be allocated to the uses of taxpayer funds to support public or social 
goods, such as improved hospitals, schools and roads.  In experiments, this approach has been shown to 
improve both understanding of, and compliance with, tax policies.41 
 As an example of this approach, in 2014 the UK authorities began issuing taxpayers with annual tax 
summaries, breaking down the tax paid into the uses to which it was put.  This was prompted, in part, by the 
large perception gap between the public’s view of how taxes were being spent and their true destination – a 
perception gap similar, but smaller, than for monetary policy.  There is evidence these tax summaries 
improved the public’s understanding of government spending and use of taxpayer money.42  
 What would be the monetary policy equivalent?  There are estimates to hand on the social or public good 
benefits of monetary policy.  For example, without the post-crisis loosening of monetary policy, UK GDP 
would have been around 8% lower and unemployment 4 percentage points higher.  Greater awareness of 
these public goods might help, at least a little, in closing the public perception gap. 
 A more promising approach is “personalised framing”.  This links a policy intervention to the specific 
circumstances of an individual or set of individuals.  For example, experimental trials suggest people are 
more likely to pay taxes or donate to charity if they are told about the local or personal impact of doing so. 43  
Personalising a message in this way increases the changes of it being heard, understood and acted on. 
 What would be the monetary policy equivalent?  Imagine a personal monetary policy scorecard, similar in 
spirit to a personal tax scorecard, tailored to an individual’s characteristics – assets and liabilities, housing 
                                                      
39  For example, Ford (2016). 
40  The Behavioural Insights Team are specialists in this area, see Halpern (2015) for a discussion of their methodologies. 
41  For example, Hallsworth et al (2014). 
42  Barnes et al (forthcoming) and Sheffield Political Economy Research Institute (2015). 
43  Agerström et al (2016), Service et al (2014). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
  tenure, age, employment status etc.  This would identify the channels and the amounts by which a significant 
change in monetary policy affected people’s finances (income, wealth) and wider well-being (employment 
and financial security). 
 Now stop imagining.  Figure 1 shows such a scorecard for the contribution of monetary policy since the crisis 
for the average UK household.  In the upper part, it quantifies the annual impact on the average household’s 
finances.  For example, the MPC’s monetary loosening added around £260 per year to the average 
household’s net interest income, £1,200 to their labour income and £14,000 to their net wealth.  
 The lower part of Figure 1 looks at the effects of non-financial channels on well-being, namely the reduction 
in the probability of unemployment, translated into income-equivalent units.44  The increased probability of 
being in a job adds in excess of £7,000 each year for the average household.  All in, this gives a boost to 
welfare for the average UK household of close to £23,000.  This is large relative to annual household income 
of £32,000. 
 As a memo item, and point of comparison, Figure 1 also shows an estimate of the annual cost of undertaking 
monetary policy, using data from the Bank of England’s accounts.45  On a broad estimate, this annual cost 
amounts to around £2.80 per household per year.  This “servicing charge” for monetary policy is clearly a 
very small fraction of the annual benefit to households from looser monetary policy over the period. 
 The disaggregated analysis set out means that, in principle, a monetary policy scorecard like this could be 
fitted to any individual’s circumstances.  As an illustration, Figures 2-4 show scorecards for three different 
hypothetical households:   a renter under the age of 30;  a 30-50 year old mortgagor;  and a 50-plus  
home-owning household.   
 As we might expect, there are large differences in both the channels and scale of impact across these three 
cohorts, though in each case the net effect is strongly positive.  As a point of comparison, Figure 5 gives a 
scorecard for the relatively small set of households for whom the net effects have been negative – a retired 
household renting a property whose wealth is held mainly in deposits.   
 In principle, this sort of personalised monetary policy scorecard could be drawn up at any level of 
disaggregation and for any monetary intervention, past or present.  Clearly, the results and methodology 
underpinning any scorecard-type approach need to be treated with caution.  For example, there are wide 
confidence intervals around the estimates presented here. 
                                                       
44  There are various ways to calculate the income-equivalence of the lower probability of unemployment, and these numbers would vary 
depending on the assumptions made.  For simplicity, we exploit the results from our analysis, which show the effect on welfare from the 
lower probability of unemployment on the average household to be around six times larger than the welfare boost from higher labour 
income.  This ratio is then applied to the boost to labour income experienced by different cohorts in Figures 1-5. 
45  The cost of monetary policy, broadly defined, was £77mn in 2017, and there are around 27.2mn households in the UK.  The cost of 
monetary policy includes the Bank’s monetary analysis area and the relevant share of other business areas’ (research, statistics, 
markets, banking, HR, technology etc.) expenses toward monetary policy.  This should probably be considered an upper bound.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
16 
 
16 
  These sorts of evaluation also have greatest value when conducted at times of significant change in the 
monetary policy stance or when this change is not expected.  That is to say, they are probably best 
undertaken periodically rather than regularly. 
 One important point is that the interpretation of these evaluations depends greatly on the reasons monetary 
policy is changing in the first place.  For example, the loosening of monetary policy in the case study was 
positive for most households.  But that does not imply a tightening of monetary policy would thus be negative 
for household finances and welfare.  For example, if this tightening came in response to a stronger economy, 
and helped avoid inflation overshooting its target requiring higher-still interest rates, its effects are likely to be 
positive too.  This suggests these scorecard exercises are likely to be context-specific and hence are best 
done periodically at times of significant change to the monetary stance.  
 Reporting its effects in a disaggregated way should not call into question the purpose of monetary policy 
which, as set in statute, is to stabilise aggregate economic activity and prices.  Nor does it imply monetary 
tools should be used to meet distributional ends.  Rather, its purpose would be to improve public 
understanding of the effects of monetary policy.  This would hopefully help close the public perception gap 
about the effects of monetary policy and the trust deficit facing monetary policymakers.46   
 Conclusion 
 A detailed, disaggregated analysis of household balance sheets suggests the material loosening in UK 
monetary policy after the financial crisis did not have significant adverse distributional consequences.  To the 
contrary, a detailed household-level analysis suggests that the majority of cohorts across the economy were 
significant gainers from this loosening, in financial and welfare terms. 
 The channels through which monetary policy has affected people’s lives are often neither easy to observe 
nor well-understood, giving rise to a large perception gap on the part of the public about the true impact of 
monetary policy on them.  This is not a failing on the part of the public.  Nor is it a failing in the effectiveness 
of policy.  Rather it reflects the difficulty of capturing the often subtle ways in which monetary policy affects 
people, in a way that is clear and relevant to them. 
 While difficult, this is not an impossible objective, as other domains of public policy have demonstrated.  A 
disaggregated analysis can be used to help decompose the ways and means and amounts by which 
different sets of households have been affected by monetary policy.  Some illustrative and tentative 
examples of these personal “monetary policy scorecards” have been shown. 
                                                       
46  As discussed in Haldane (2017), the Bank already has various initiatives in train to support an increase in public understanding of the 
economy, such as layered communication, outreach initiatives and educational materials for schools. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
  Producing something along these lines would be a new departure for macro-economic policy, if not for some 
of the other arms of policy.  Analyses of monetary policy have tended to emphasise the economy-wide 
effects, measured in terms of macroeconomic outcomes like GDP, unemployment and inflation.  This still 
makes sense as a means of explaining the social good monetary policy is offering.  
 But messages often land most effectively when they are personalised.  Monetary policy has an important 
personalised impact on most people’s lives.  Some scorecard-like device could, at times of significant 
change in the monetary policy stance, help explain, in simple terms, the personal as well as societal benefits 
monetary policy confers.  It would seek better to explain how monetary policy is affecting your job, your cost 
of living, your GDP.   
 This should help make monetary policy relevant to people’s everyday lives.  At a time of diminished trust, 
and some scepticism, it could potentially make a contribution towards improving public understanding of, and 
trust in, monetary policy.  It would mean the next time someone shouts from the audience “That’s your 
bloody GDP”, we would have right of reply:  “Oh no it’s not; it’s yours too.” 
             
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
18 
 
18 
  References 
 
Agerström, J, Carlsson, R, Nicklasson, L and Guntell, L (2016), ‘Using descriptive social norms to 
increase charitable giving:  The power of local norms’, Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 52,  
pp. 147-153. 
 
Altmann, R (2009), ‘Why quantitative easing is a disaster for pensions’, article in The Telegraph. 
 
Atkinson, A (2015), Inequality, Harvard University Press. 
 
Ball, L, Furceri, D, Leigh, D and Loungani, P (2013), ‘The Distributional Effects of Fiscal Consolidation’, 
IMF Working Paper, No. 13/151. 
 
Ball, R and Chernova, K (2008), ‘Absolute Income, Relative Income, and Happiness’, Social Indicators 
Research, Vol. 88, No. 3, pp. 497-529. 
 
Barnes, L, Feller, A, Haselswerdt, J and Porter, E (forthcoming), ‘Information, Knowledge and Attitudes:  
An Evaluation of the Taxpayer Receipt’, Journal of Politics. 
 
Brynjolfsson, E and McAfee, A (2016), The Second Machine Age – Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company. 
 
Büchs, M, Bardsley, N and Duwe, S (2011), ‘Who bears the brunt?  Distributional effects of climate change 
mitigation’, Critical Social Policy, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 285-307. 
 
Buiter, W (2014), ‘Central banks:  Powerful, political and unaccountable?’, Journal of the British Academy, 
Vol. 2, pp. 269-303. 
 
Bunn, P, Drapper, L, Rowe, J and Shah, S (2015), ‘The potential impact of higher interest rates and further 
fiscal consolidation on households:  evidence from the 2015 NMG Consulting survey’, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin, 2015 Q4, pp. 357-368. 
 
Bunn, P, Pugh, A and Yeates, C (2018), ‘The distributional impact of monetary policy easing in the UK 
between 2008 and 2014’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 720. 
 
Carney, M (2016), ‘The Spectre of Monetarism’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/the-spectre-of-monetarism 
 
Clark, A, Frijters, P and Shields, M (2007), ‘Relative Income, Happiness and Utility:  An Explanation for the 
Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles’, IZA Discussion Paper Series, No. 2840. 
 
Clark, A and Oswald, A (1994), ‘Unhappiness and unemployment’, The Economic Journal, Vol. 104,  
No. 424, pp. 648-659. 
 
Cœuré, B (2012), ‘What can monetary policy do about inequality?’, speech at the European Parliament. 
 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), ‘Distributional effects of monetary policy’, Deutsche Bundesbank Monetary 
Report, September 2016. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
19 
 
19 
  Di Tella, R, MacCulloch, R and Oswald, A (2003), ‘The Macroeconomics of Happiness’, Review of 
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 85, No. 4, pp. 809-827. 
 
Ford, M (2016), The Rise of the Robots:  Technology and the Threat of Mass Unemployment, Oneworld 
Publications. 
 
Friedman, M (1968), ‘The Role of Monetary Policy’, American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 1-17. 
 
Haldane, A (2016), ‘Whose recovery?’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/whose-recovery 
 
Haldane, A (2017), ‘Everyday Economics’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/andy-haldane-speech-during-regional-visit 
 
Halpern, D (2015), Inside the Nudge Unit:  How small changes can make a big difference, WH Allen. 
 
Hallsworth, M, List, J, Metcalfe, R and Vlaev, I (2014), ‘The Behavioralist As Tax Collector:  Using Natural 
Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance’, NBER Working Paper, No. 20007. 
 
Jacoby, M (2002), ‘Does Indebtedness Influence Health?  A Preliminary Inquiry’, Journal of Law, Medicine 
and Ethics, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 560-571. 
 
Layard, R, Nickell, S and Mayraz, G (2008), ‘The marginal utility of income’, Journal of Public Economics, 
Vol. 92, pp. 1846-1857. 
 
Lipton, D (2014), ‘Fiscal Policy and Income Inequality’, speech at the Peterson Institute for International 
Economics. 
 
Lysenko, T, Glass, B and Six, J-M (2016), ‘QE And Economic Inequality:  The U.K. Experience’, Standard 
& Poors Economic Research. 
 
Milanovic, B (2016), Global Inequality:  A New Approach for the Age of Globalisation, Harvard University 
Press. 
 
Monnin, P (2017), ‘Monetary Policy, Macroprudential Regulation and Inequality’, Council on Economic 
Policies Discussion Note. 
 
Patinkin, D (1987), ‘Neutrality of Money’, in Eatwell, J, Milgate, M and Newman, P (eds), The New Palgrave 
Dictionary of Economics, Macmillan Press Ltd. 
 
Piketty, T (2014), Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Harvard University Press. 
 
Service, O et al (2014), ‘EAST – Four simple ways to apply behavioural insights’, Behavioural Insights 
Team.  
 
Sheffield Political Economy Research Institute (2015), ‘The UK’s ‘annual tax summaries’’, SPERI British 
Political Economy Brief, No. 16. 
 
Stiglitz, J (2013), The Price of Inequality, Penguin.  
 
Vermeulen, P (2016), ‘Estimating the top tail of the wealth distribution’, ECB Working Paper, No. 1907. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
20 
 
20 
   
Winkelmann, L and Winkelmann, R (1998), ‘Why Are the Unemployed So Unhappy?  Evidence from Panel 
Data’, Economica, Vol. 65, No. 257, pp. 1-15. 
 
World Bank Group (2016), ‘Development Goals in an Era of Demographic Change’, Global Monitoring 
Report, 2015/2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
21 
 
21 
  Annex 
 
Chart 1:  Google searches for “QE” and 
“Inequality” 
Index, peak search rate = 100 
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
QE
Inequality
Sources:  Google Trends and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
Chart 3:  2006-08 distribution of net wealth 
Chart 2: 2007 distribution of income 
Average income per household (£) 
 
2007
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
 Income decile 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 4:  2012-14 distribution of net wealth by 
age  
Average net wealth per household (£) 
 
2006-08
1600000
1400000
1200000
1000000
800000
600000
400000
200000
0
Average net wealth per household (£, thousands) 
 
Gross financial wealth
Gross property wealth
Mortgage debt
Pension wealth
Physical wealth
Unsecured debt
Total
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
-100
-200
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
25-29
35-39
45-49
55-59
65-69
75-79
 Head of household age 
group 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Net wealth decile 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
22 
 
22 
  Chart 5:  2007 and 2013 distributions of income 
Chart 6:  2006-08 and 2012-14 distributions of net 
wealth 
Average income per household (£, 2013 prices) 
 
2007
2013
90000
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
Average net wealth per household (£, 2013 prices) 
 
2006-08
2012-14
2500000
2000000
1500000
1000000
500000
0
-500000
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
Income decile 
  Net wealth decile 
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 8:  Impact of tighter monetary policy on 
unemployment (counterfactual) 
Per cent 
Scenario without policy loosening
Data
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
Chart 7:  Impact of tighter monetary policy on 
GDP (counterfactual) 
Index, 2007 = 100 
Scenario without policy loosening
Data
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
23 
 
23 
  Chart 9:  Impact of tighter monetary policy on 
annual CPI inflation (counterfactual) 
Chart 10:  Impact of monetary policy on income, 
across the income distribution (£) 
Per cent 
Scenario without policy loosening
Data
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
Chart 11:  Impact of monetary policy on income, 
across the income distribution (%) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (£, 2013 prices) 
Interest receipts/payments
Macro effects on labour incomes
Total
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
-5000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 All
 Income decile in 2012-14 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 in pounds, using 2013 prices. 
 
 
Chart 12:  Impact of monetary policy on wealth, 
across the wealth distribution (£) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of annual income) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (£, 2013 prices) 
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
 Financial asset prices
Inflation effects
House prices
Pensions
Total
400000
350000
300000
250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
0
-50000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 All
Net wealth decile in 2012-14 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 in pounds, using 2013 prices. 
Interest receipts/payments
Macro effects on labour incomes
Total
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 All
Income decile in 2012-14 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of annual 
income. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
24 
 
24 
  Chart 13:  Impact of monetary policy on wealth, 
across the wealth distribution (%) 
Chart 14:  Impact of monetary policy on 
income, across the age distribution (£) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of net wealth) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (£, 2013 prices) 
Financial asset prices
Inflation effects
House prices
Pensions
Total
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 All
Net wealth decile in 2012-14 
 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of net wealth. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 15:  Impact of monetary policy on income, 
across the age distribution (%) 
Interest receipts/payments
Macro effects on labour
income
Total
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
-5000
-10000
25-29
35-39
45-49
55-59
65-69
75-79
All
Head of household age in 2012-14 
  
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 in pounds, using 2013 
prices. 
 
Chart 16:  Impact of monetary policy on wealth, 
across the age distribution (£) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of annual income) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (£, 2013 prices) 
Interest receipts/payments
Macro effects on labour income
Total
Financial asset prices
Inflation effects
House prices
Pensions
Total
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
180000
160000
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
-20000
25-29
35-39
45-49
55-59
65-69
75-79
All
25-29 35-39 45-49 55-59 65-69 75-79
All
Head of household age in 2012-14 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of annual 
income. 
 
 
 
 
 Head of household age in 2012-14 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 in pounds, using 2013 
prices. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
25 
 
25 
  Chart 17:  Impact of monetary policy on wealth, 
across the age distribution (%) 
Chart 18:  Impact of monetary policy on income, 
across different UK regions (%) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of net wealth) 
Impact as 2012-14 (% of annual income) 
Financial asset prices
Inflation effects
House prices
Pensions
Total
25-29
35-39
45-49
55-59
65-69
75-79
All
Head of household age in 2012-14 
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of net wealth. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 19:  Impact of monetary policy on wealth, 
across different UK regions (%) 
Macro effects on labour income
Net interest reciepts/payments
Total
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
NE NW Y&H EM WM E LON SE SW WALSCO All
Region in 2012-14 
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of annual 
income. 
 
Chart 20:  Impact of Bank Rate, across the 
income distribution (%) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of net wealth) 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of annual income) 
Financial asset prices
Inflation effects
House prices
Pensions
Total
House prices
Inflation effects
Financial asset prices
Interest receipts/payments
Macro effects on labour income
Total
25
20
15
10
5
0
NE NW Y&H EM WM E LON SE SW WALSCO All
Region in 2012-14 
1
2
3
 5
4
9
Income decile in 2012-14 
6
7
8
50
40
30
20
10
0
10 All
-10
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of policy 
changes since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of net wealth. 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of changes in 
Bank Rate since 2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of annual 
income. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
26 
 
26 
  Chart 21:  Impact of QE, across the income 
distribution 
Chart 22:  Impact of monetary policy on welfare, 
across the income distribution 
Impact as of 2012-14 (% of annual income) 
Utility 
Total income
Total wealth
Unemployment effect
Total
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 All
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Income decile in 2012-14 
  Chart 24:  Perceived impact of monetary policy on 
welfare, across the age distribution 
House prices
Inflation effects
Financial asset prices
Macro effects on labour income
Total
1
2
3
5
4
9
Income decile in 2012-14 
6
7
8
50
40
30
20
10
0
10 All
-10
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
Note:  Chart shows average cumulative real impact of QE since 
2007 as of 2012-14 as a percentage of annual income. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 23:  Impact of monetary policy on 
welfare, across the age distribution 
Utility 
Total income
Total wealth
Unemployment effect
Total
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 All
2012-14 age group 
 Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sources:  NMG Consulting and Bank calculations 
 27 
 
27 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  Table 1 – Regression results 
 “ihs" refers to inverse hyperbolic sine – this is a similar to a log transformation but can be applied to numbers which are zero or negative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
28 
 
28 
  Average UK household 
264 
1,217 
1,059 
6,495 
6,653 
Figure 1: Monetary policy scorecard – average household (mean) 
Average annual contribution of monetary policy to income and wealth over 2008-14 (£): 
 
Net interest income 
Labour income 
Financial wealth 
Pension wealth 
Housing wealth 
Reduced probability of 
unemployment (income-equivalent 
effect on well-being) 
 
Memo items: 
Average annual income (2012-14) 
Average level of net wealth (2012-14) 
Cost of monetary policy per 
household (2017) 
 
Figure 2-4: Monetary policy scorecard – different cohorts by age and housing tenure 
Average annual contribution of monetary policy to income and wealth over 2008-14 (£): 
 
Aged under 30, renter 
32,261 
432,871 
7,300 
3 
 168 
1,247 
92 
132 
281 
2,262 
2,478 
940 
4,690 
8,658 
Net interest income 
Labour income 
Financial wealth 
Pension wealth 
Housing wealth 
Reduced probability of 
unemployment (income-equivalent 
effect on well-being) 
 
Memo items: 
Average annual income (2012-14) 
Average level of net wealth (2012-14) 
Cost of monetary policy per 
household (2017) 
 
Figure 5: Monetary policy scorecard – negatively-affected cohort 
Average annual contribution of monetary policy to income and wealth over 2008-14 (£): 
 
43,072 
348,420 
22,935 
20,701 
14,870 
7,480 
3 
3 
 owner 
-1,308 
571 
2,010 
11,608 
10,473 
3,425 
31,250 
794,642 
3 
Aged 30-50, 
mortgagor 
Aged over 50, outright 
Retired, with more than £5k in deposits, but less than £5k in other gross 
Net interest income 
Labour income 
Financial wealth 
Pension wealth 
Housing wealth 
Reduced probability of 
unemployment (income-equivalent 
effect on well-being) 
 
Memo items: 
Average annual income (2012-14) 
Average level of net wealth (2012-14) 
Cost of monetary policy per 
household (2017) 
 
 
 wealth (excl. deposits) 
-192 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10,253 
13,058 
3 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
29 
 
29 
 