  September  3,  2018 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Post-crisis Futures Markets 
Keynote speech at the symposium commemorating               
the 30th anniversary of stock index futures 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  this  symposium  commemorating  the  30th 
anniversary of stock index futures in Japan. 
 A  decade  has  passed  since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  which  triggered  the  global 
financial crisis. During the last 10 years since that time, global financial markets have faced 
and  have  been  affected  by  various  negative  political  and  economic  shocks  such  as  the 
European  debt  problem  in  the  first  half  of  the  2010s.  Japanese  stock  and  futures  markets 
have  not  been  immune  and  the  turnover  of  cash  stocks  and  the  trading  volume  of  stock 
futures  were  sluggish  for  some  time  after  the  global  financial  crisis  (Chart  1).  Thereafter, 
however, against the background of the recovery of the global economy and solid corporate 
performance, global financial markets have rebounded to pre-crisis levels. 
 This  year  also  marks  the  5th  anniversary  of  the  business  integration  of  the  Tokyo  Stock 
Exchange  Group  and  the  Osaka  Securities  Exchange.  Even  following  the  global  financial 
crisis, various initiatives aimed at enhancing user-friendliness have been taken to meet the 
diverse needs of investors and firms including the introduction of new products, extension 
of  trading  hours,  and  IT  system  reform.  Those  initiatives  have  been  vital  for  maintaining 
and enhancing the functions of the Japanese exchanges since the crisis, and I would like to 
pay tribute to all of those who have worked so hard to carry out those initiatives. 
 Moving on, as it has been 30 years since stock index futures first appeared in Japan, let us 
take this opportunity to return to the basics and re-clarify the function of futures contracts; 
futures  contracts,  in  principle,  are  used  to  "transfer  risks,"  namely  to  hedge  risks  or 
speculate  on  price  changes  by  trading  assets  on  a  future  date  at  a  predetermined  price.  In 
this  regard,  derivatives  contracts  such  as  forwards  also  have  the  same  function.  However, 
the  two  contracts  differ  in  that  forwards  are  derivatives  contracts  based  on  bilateral 
agreements  between  two  parties,  while  futures  are  derivatives  contracts  that  are  traded  on 
"exchanges," including clearing houses. 
 Futures  contracts  traded  on  exchanges  are  standardized  and  offer  the  benefits  of  low 
transaction  costs,  fair  and  transparent  price  formation,  risk  management  measures  such  as 
 1 
margin requirements and the marking to market of assets, and safe central clearing; thanks 
to  these  features,  futures  contracts  are  expected  to  attract  more  market  participants  and 
thereby  realize  enhanced  market  liquidity.  Such  enhanced  market  liquidity  is  in  turn 
expected to strengthen the basic function of futures contracts, which, as I just mentioned, is 
to "transfer risks." 
 Skepticism  about  the  function  of  futures  contracts  sometimes  emerges,  especially  when 
markets experience significant asset price fluctuations in the wake of a financial crisis. The 
typical assertion is that the existence of futures contracts amplifies spot price changes in the 
underlying  assets.  However,  as  long  as  futures  markets  offer  enhanced  market  liquidity 
supported  by  the  functions  of  exchanges,  it  is  expected  that  the  price  discovery  function 
inherent  in  futures  would  remain  somewhat  resilient  even  during  a  crisis,  and  this  will 
thereby  help  the  spot  market  to  swiftly  return  to  a  price  formation  process  that  properly 
reflects the supply and demand conditions of the underlying assets and market participants' 
views. 
 Given the role of exchanges and  their relation to market liquidity, it is  impressive that the 
world's  first  organized  futures  contracts  --  which  are  similar  to  those  currently  traded  on 
exchanges  --  were  already  established in  the  18th century  at  the  Dojima Rice  Exchange  in 
Osaka. The fact that futures contracts in their long history have supported the development 
of  the  market  economy  and  have  overcome  numerous  crises  by  undergoing  appropriate 
changes shows just how valuable they are. 
 Also, it should be noted that various ongoing changes in the market environment since the 
global  financial  crisis  have  necessitated  futures  markets  such  as  stock  futures  and 
commodity  futures  to  undergo  new  transformations.  Let  me  elaborate  on  new  trends  in 
futures markets and the challenges brought about by those trends. 
 Post-crisis Trends in Futures Markets 
 Tightening of Financial Regulations 
First,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  effects  of  the  tightening  of  financial  regulations.  The 
 2 
global financial crisis following the collapse of Lehman Brothers adversely affected market 
liquidity  in  various  financial  transactions.  The  decline  in  market  liquidity  was  particularly 
evident  in  bilateral  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives.  Before  the  financial  crisis,  OTC 
derivatives were very popular among customers seeking higher profits because the bilateral 
flexibility  of  OTC  derivatives  enabled  various  customized  structures  to  achieve  higher 
yields.  However,  once  the  financial  crisis  occurred,  there  was  suddenly  a  great  deal  of 
concern  about  the  counterparty  credit  risks  of  financial  institutions,  particularly  in  the 
United States and Europe, and the flexible but complex structures of OTC derivatives made 
it  difficult  to  pinpoint  and  specify  the  size  of  those  risks.  As  a  result,  market  liquidity  of 
OTC  derivatives  declined  significantly  in  a  short  period  and  there  was  a  run  on  OTC 
derivatives markets, including a rapid reversal of investment positions. 
 On  the  other  hand,  futures  contracts  traded  on  exchanges  were  processed  in  a  generally 
stable  manner  even  amid  the  financial  crisis,  as  the  risk  management  of  exchanges  and 
clearing through central counterparties (CCPs) proved somewhat effective. 
 Thus,  the  functions  of  exchanges  fostered  over  many  years  contributed  to  avoiding 
disruption of futures markets during the global financial crisis. It was therefore decided to 
incorporate the essence of those functions in the plan for OTC market reform. Specifically, 
in  order  to  improve  the  transparency  and  robustness  of  contracts,  standardized  OTC 
derivatives contracts were obliged to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, 
and  cleared  through  CCPs.1  Furthermore,  the  exchange  of  margins  based  on  associated 
risks became mandatory for non-centrally cleared tailor-made OTC derivatives contracts. In 
view of those regulatory trends, there has been an increase overseas in the "futurization of 
OTC  derivatives,"  which  refers  to  the  clearing  of  transactions  through  CCPs  by  listing 
futures  contracts  on  exchanges  in  advance,  mirroring  the  contractual  conditions  of  OTC 
derivatives deals made with a certain frequency. 
                                                   
1  In autumn 2009, the following agreements were reached at the Group of Twenty (G-20) Pittsburgh 
Summit: (1) all standardized OTC derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic 
trading platforms and (2) cleared through CCPs; (3) OTC derivatives contracts should be reported to 
trade  repositories;  and  (4)  non-centrally  cleared  contracts  should  be  subject  to  higher  capital 
requirements. 
 3 
Accordingly, many OTC derivatives contracts have shifted to exchange trades and clearing 
through CCPs (Chart 2). However, this could give rise to several issues. For example, there 
are concerns that this change might increase moral hazard among market participants given 
that  they  do  not  directly  bear  counterparty  credit  risks  and  have  less  incentive  to  monitor 
credit  risks.  What  is  more,  and  perhaps  the  most  crucial  point,  is  that  exchanges  and 
clearing houses would face concentrated risks as they accommodate more OTC derivatives 
contracts  reflecting  the  needs  of  market  participants  to  mitigate  counterparty  credit  risks. 
Accordingly, exchanges and clearing houses must appropriately manage and mitigate those 
concentrated  risks  so  that  futures  and  derivatives  contracts  traded  on  exchanges  would  be 
processed in a stable manner if there is another global financial crisis. To this end, it is also 
important for exchanges and clearing houses to ensure that they have appropriate levels of 
loss-absorbing capacity through assessments based on stress testing.2 
 Technological Innovation 
Second, I would like to mention the effects of innovation in the field of financial technology. 
The  remarkable  development  in  information  technology  in  recent  years  has  dramatically 
accelerated  order  processing.  For  example,  in  the  stock  market  of  the  Tokyo  Stock 
Exchange,  the  new  "Arrowhead"  trading  system,  which  launched  in  January  2010,  has 
enabled orders to be processed in milliseconds -- a speed which could never be matched by 
human  ability.  Against  the  background  of  this  technological  innovation,  there  has  been  a 
growing  presence  in  financial  markets  of  so-called  high-frequency  trading  (HFT)  players, 
who use automated algorithms to repeatedly execute small orders at extremely high speed 
and  frequency.  The  prevalence  of  HFT  might  differ  somewhat  geographically,  but  for 
example,  there  is  a  view  that  the  share  of  HFT  in  stock  markets  has  reached  around  50 
percent in the United States and around 40 percent in Europe. That share has also increased 
in  Japan,  and  the  number  of  contracts  executed  from  the  co-location  areas  of  the  stock 
                                                   
2  For  details  on  global  discussions  regarding  concentrated  risks  in  financial  market  infrastructures 
due to the tightening of financial regulations, see "Seisankikan wo meguru global na taiou ni tsuite 
(Global Approach to Central Counterparties)," Payment and Settlement Systems Report Annex Series, 
August 2017 (available in Japanese only). 
 4 
market  of  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  has  reached  around  40  percent  (Chart  3).3  Equally, 
there is a view that the share of HFT in Japanese stock futures has reached a somewhat high 
level due to the introduction of IT systems designed for high-speed order processing. 
 Positive assessments of HFT can be summarized as follows. First, there is a view that HFT 
has  improved  market liquidity  as  HFT  players  engage  in "passive  market making"  against 
other investors by simultaneously placing a vast amount of "buy" and "sell" orders in order 
to exploit arbitrage opportunities on bid-ask spreads. Second, HFT in theory is expected to 
constrain  stock  price  fluctuations  and  thereby  reduce  volatility  as  sell  orders  are  placed 
when prices rise even slightly and buy orders are placed when prices decline. In fact, some 
empirical analyses have verified such an improvement in market liquidity and a decline in 
volatility.4 
 At  the  same  time,  some  argue  that  HFT  could  reduce  market  liquidity  and  contribute  to 
volatility  in  the  event  of  a  sudden  shock  that  has  a  greater  impact  than  forecasted  by  its 
algorithms.5  Some also voice concern over the risk that a large volume of irrational orders 
could be placed as a result of human error unintentionally embedded in an algorithm.6 
                                                    
3  It is believed that HFT players, who require faster access for transactions in milliseconds, usually 
place  orders  from  co-location  areas  (special  areas  in  the  same  building  that  hosts  the  primary 
systems of the exchanges where market participants can install their own servers containing trading 
algorithms). 
4  See, for example, "Kabushiki shijyou ni okeru kousoku kouhindo torihiki he no eikyou (Effects of 
High  Speed  and  Frequency  Trading  on  the  Stock  Market),"  Bank  of  Japan  Review,  No.  13-J-2, 
January  2013  (available  in  Japanese  only),  which  provides  a  theoretical  summary  of  HFT  and 
analysis of the effects on the Japanese stock market. 
5  In spite of the popular view at one time that attributed the "flash crash" in the U.S. stock market in 
May  2010  to  HFT,  a  joint  report  by  the  U.S.  Securities  and Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  and  the 
U.S.  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC)  concluded  that  the  crash  was  not  directly 
caused by HFT, but rather by a complex combination of factors. However, the report also pointed out 
that  HFT  players  accelerated  price  fluctuations  by  rapidly  withdrawing  liquidity  during  the 
propagation of market turmoil. 
6  In August 2012, many stocks on the New York Stock Exchange experienced a "mini flash crash" 
due to a massive number of erroneous orders. The erroneous orders have been attributed to system 
issues caused by human error. 
 5 
As  I  mentioned,  assessments  of  HFT  have  not  been  entirely  positive.  It  is  therefore 
important to consider measures and initiatives to ensure that the growing presence of HFT 
players  contribute  to  enhancing  market  efficiency  and  liquidity  through  appropriate 
arbitrage  and  market-making  activities  and  does  not  result  only  in  transaction  speed 
competition. For example, if the risks of high speed and frequency trading amplifying price 
changes  due  to  one-sided  algorithmic  trades  or a  malfunction  in  programs and  servers  are 
left  unattended,  they  might  impair  financial  market  stability,  and  in  turn  weaken  the  risk 
transfer  and  price  discovery  functions  of  futures  markets.  Tackling  those  issues  is  by  no 
means an easy task, but it is critical to properly consider measures to prevent them. 
 The  specific  measures  to  deal  with  those  issues  are  not  to  be  implemented  by  exchanges 
alone  because  they  also  rest  on  regulations  on  HFT  and  other  factors.  That  said,  with  the 
advent  of  HFT  and  the  growing  presence  of  HFT  players  in  financial  markets,  various 
self-imposed  requirements  for  exchange  trades  associated  with  financial  technological 
innovation  and  the  role  of  exchanges  in  risk  management  and  monitoring  are  becoming 
increasingly important. 
 Increased Use of Futures for Asset Management 
Third,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  on  the  effects  of  the  widespread  movement  to  use 
futures for asset management. Participants in futures markets are broadly divided into three 
classical  categories:  (1)  hedgers,  who  hedge  against  price  risks  in  underlying  assets;  (2) 
speculators, who take on such price risks; and (3) arbitrageurs, who seek arbitrage between 
spot and futures markets. However, during the last 10 years since the global financial crisis, 
futures  markets  have  witnessed  the  growing  presence  of  new  investment  players  that  take 
long positions in the medium to long term, such as investment trusts and exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs). 
 The increased use of futures for asset management, in addition to hedging and speculation, 
can  be  viewed  favorably  because  it  provides  households  with  more  options  for  portfolio 
selection.  Furthermore,  the  growing  presence  of  new  buyers  with  medium-  to  long-term 
investment horizons could increase the market depth of futures markets. It can be expected 
that  this  would  enhance  market  liquidity,  and  thereby  improve  the  risk  transfer  and  price 
 6 
discovery functions of futures markets.   
 However, if the diversity of market participants is impaired due to the growing presence of 
a  particular  investor  type,  prices  might  cease  to  appropriately  reflect  the  fundamentals 
behind  the  transactions  because  they  might  be  excessively  affected  by  trading  strategies 
employed by those investors. 
 In fact, the growing share of investment trusts and ETFs in futures markets has affected the 
correlation between different asset types. A typical example is the effects observed in price 
formation of overseas commodity futures such as crude oil. Since the global financial crisis, 
a large amount of investment funds has flowed to commodity futures markets in pursuit of 
higher  yield  against  the  background  of  global  monetary  relaxation.  In  this  process, 
commodities became embedded in the global portfolios of large investors extending across 
multiple regions and assets. In general, in the event of an exogenous shock, global portfolio 
rebalancing  moves  multiple  risky  asset  prices  in  the  same  direction.  In  this  regard,  for 
example, returns on commodity index futures showed little sign of correlation with those on 
global  stock  indices  at  least  until  the  middle  of  the  2000s.  However,  as  a  wide  range  of 
investors have started to incorporate commodities in their asset portfolios since the financial 
crisis,  the  correlation  between  returns  on  commodity  index  futures  and  those  on  stock 
indices  has  structurally  increased  (Chart  4).  In  the  long  run,  the  impact  on  futures  prices 
stemming  from  price  fluctuations  in  other  asset  classes,  in  addition  to  the  correlation 
between futures prices and the prices of underlying assets, could affect the risk transfer and 
price discovery functions of futures markets. In this sense as well, it is important to not only 
increase the number of market players but also gather a diverse set of investors with various 
investing  styles  and  investment  horizons.  I  hope  an  increasingly  wider  range  of  investors 
and greater investor diversity would continue to be observed. 
 Concluding Remarks 
I  have  so  far  elaborated  on  new  trends  in  futures  markets  brought  about  by  significant 
environmental changes since the global financial crisis and the challenges brought by those 
trends,  focusing  on  three  perspectives:  (1)  tightening  of  financial  regulations;  (2) 
technological  innovation;  and  (3)  increased  use  of  futures  for  asset  management.  None  of 
 7 
the challenges I mentioned today would be easy to tackle, but I believe that the functions of 
futures  markets,  which  have  offered  benefits  to  financial  markets  for  many  years,  would 
develop and be maintained if market participants take on these challenges and adapt to the 
new environment, just as they have done over the last 30 years. The Bank of Japan obtains 
information from futures markets  that is valuable  in understanding the markets' views and 
sentiment toward the economy and corporate performance. The Bank, as the central bank of 
Japan,  would  provide  support  through  research  studies  and  participation  in  discussions  at 
home  and  abroad  so  that  Japanese  futures  markets  would  develop  in  a  more  efficient  and 
stable manner. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 8 
