Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Mutualism and the "win-win" dynamic
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2018  Awards  Ceremony  and  Appreciation  Lunch  for  BSP
Stakeholders, Manila, 10 July 2018.
 Speaker: Ms  Maria Almasara Cyd N. Tuaño-Amador (Deputy Governor)
A very good morning to everyone. I have the pleasant task of delivering this message on behalf of
the Chairman of the Monetary Board and BSP Governor Nestor A. Espenilla, Jr.
His message is as follows:
 It is interesting how organizations operating in an economy are similar to organisms thriving in an
ecosystem. There is one particular type of inter-relationship that I believe characterizes ours. 
This is mutualism. Unlike parasitism or predation, mutualism represents a win-win for all parties
concerned.  It is a relationship of “plus-plusses.” This is the type of interaction we seek. This is
the type of interaction we enjoy.
When I became BSP Governor a year ago in July 2017, I coined the phrase, “Continuity Plus-
Plus.” This phrase encapsulates the BSP’s strategic direction. It articulates the importance of
sustaining our policy thrust as well as the need for further strategic financial sector reforms.
To implement this strategic direction, there is a need to sustain a “win-win” dynamic synergy
between  the  BSP  and  you,  our  partners.    It  is  only  when  we  collaborate  and  cooperate  that
together  we  can  achieve  a  balanced,  sustainable,  and  inclusive  growth  of  the  Philippine
economy.
Through your contributions of comprehensive information and advocacy support, the BSP is able
to better formulate monetary and financial policies consistent with our mandates of maintaining
price stability, promoting financial stability, and fostering a safe and efficient payments system.
We  continue  to  see  the  positive  results  of  these  partnerships.  The  growth  of  the  Philippine
economy continues to be robust and resilient.  In 2017, the economy grew by 6.7 percent, an
expansion of more than 6.0 percent over the past five years. We are the third-fastest growing
economy in Asia, next to China and Vietnam. We achieved this despite global uncertainties and
challenges. 
Headline  inflation  averaged  3.2  percent  in  2017,  well  within  the  Government’s  inflation  target
range for the year. Meanwhile, the January to June 2018 inflation  readings have averaged 4.3
percent.
1
Our  external  payments  position  remains  manageable.  The  Balance  of  Payments  deficit  of
US$863 million in 2017 speaks of an economy needing more capital goods and raw materials to
sustain its growth momentum. Favorable external developments enabled residents to diversify
asset  portfolios  and  prepay  foreign  obligations.  The  continued  stream  of  Overseas  Filipino
remittances supported by a steady demand for skilled Filipinos abroad and robust receipts from
the business process outsourcing sector continue to support economic growth.
Net inflows of foreign direct investments reached a record high of US$ 10 billion in 2017.  The
country’s external debt remained comfortable in 2017 at 23.3 percent of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Meanwhile, Gross International Reserves (GIR) stood at US$77.7 billion as of end-June
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2018, representing an ample external liquidity buffer equivalent to 7.5 months’ worth of imports of
goods and payments of services and primary income.
Moreover,  the  Philippine  financial  system  continues  to  operate  in  a  position  of  strength.    It  is
supported by strong macroeconomic fundamentals and sustained implementation of proactive
reforms. Asset quality improved as banks’ non-performing loan (NPL) and non-performing asset
(NPA)  ratios  remained  at  record  lows.  Meanwhile,  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  (CAR)
remained well-above regulatory standards.
We  are  very  mindful  that  the  growth  narrative  of  the  Philippine  economy  is  not  the  BSP’s
responsibility  alone.  It  belongs  to  all  of  us  and  is  attributed  to  our  collaborative  and  collective
efforts. In particular, your response to the BSP’s various surveys, your provision of information to
support  monetary  policy,  and  your  participation  in  our  diverse  programs,  advocacies  and
initiatives, assist us in pursuing our mandates, in formulating sensible and responsible policies,
and in performing our auxiliary functions.
On behalf of the BSP community, it is my privilege to express our gratitude to each one of you.
We  are  therefore  quite  pleased  to  announce  that  the  BSP  will  recognize  163  outstanding
partners this year.
Through the Information Support Awards, we will recognize outstanding survey respondents and
information partners who have assisted the BSP in formulating data-driven monetary policy. The
Advocacy Support Award will recognize the BSP’s exemplary partners in reinforcing the three
pillars of central banking through significant contributions in:  financial inclusion and education;
consumer  protection;  payments  and  settlements;  overseas  Filipino  remittances;  coin
recirculation; clean note policy; demonetization of old notes and coins; and asset disposal.
We  also  recognize  noteworthy  partners  in  specialized  BSP  Programs  through  the  Special
Recognition Awards. For the second year, we will honor partners who have received the same
award for three consecutive years with the Gold Hall of Fame Award.
We are also pleased to announce a new award category – the Award for Outstanding Regional
Knowledge  Resource  Network  (KRN)  Partner.    This  award  recognizes  the  support  of  notable
KRN  partners  that  have  exhibited  excellent  communication,  reporting,  management,  and
allocation of the BSP’s collections of information reading materials.
Today, we are also launching a special citation on Accessibility, to recognize the support and
willingness of banks to improve their facilities and establishments to meet the needs of persons
with disabilities.
The BSP as well as the organizations, and institutions that you lead thrive in an ecosystem that
is ever-changing and is becoming even more interconnected. 
Theoretical physicist Geoffrey West  acknowledges that relationships play an important role in a
dynamically evolving system.  He states and I quote:
2
We need to understand how the dynamics of innovation, technological advances, urbanization,
financial markets, social networks, and population dynamics are interconnected and how their
evolving  interrelationships  fuel  growth  and  societal  change—and,  as  manifestations  of  human
endeavors, how they are all integrated into a holistic interacting systemic framework.
We follow his advice today and we will continue to do so moving forward.  Our most heartfelt
thanks and congratulations to all our BSP stakeholders!
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
1
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
2012 based prices
West, Geoffrey (2017). “Scale: The Universal Laws of Growth, Innovation, Sustainability, and the Pace of Life in
Organisms, Cities, Economies, and Companies”.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
