Andreas Dombret: Five theses on the future of Europe
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the ESMT Open Lecture, European School for Management and Technology (ESMT), Berlin,
14 February 2018.
 Dear Jörg Rocholl
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  the  ESMT  Open  Lecture.  During  my  last  visit  to  this
university, I had the gratifying opportunity to moderate a speech delivered by Christine Lagarde.
My talk today will be about the future of Europe, and of the euro area in particular. Currently, the
euro area is witnessing a fully-fledged economic upswing. At year-end 2017, GDP had climbed
by 2.4% overall. And the outlook is looking positive as well. Many have upgraded their growth
expectations – Eurosystem staff projections for 2018 are at 2.3% for 2018. Sentiment levels are
at  long-term  highs.  All  these  indicators  suggest  that  momentum  is  strong  in  the  euro  area
economy. What seems equally important is that the upswing is broadly based, meaning it has
reached many countries and many regions.
But of course, we cannot speak of synchronous developments, as countries still differ in terms of
infrastructure,  institutions,  and  political  and  economic  philosophies  –  and  for  that  matter,
economic developments, too.
Apart from that, the current upswing should not distract from existing issues. Banks in several
member  states  are  still  saddled  with  huge  volumes  of  non-performing  loans.  Across  the
European Union, they amount to about € 950 bn. At the same time, some member states are still
vulnerable due to high levels of public debt.
Furthermore,  indicators  such  as  banks’  holdings  of  sovereign  debt  issued  by  their  domestic
government  suggest  that  the  strong  connection  between  a  country’s  government  and  banks
domiciled there – the “sovereign-bank nexus", as it is known and which had played an important
role during the euro crisis – continues to exist.
Finally, less than a year ago, populist movements which strongly opposed the euro area and the
EU were perceived as a significant threat. While their political influence turned out to be rather
low, risks do remain.
All in all, there are a number of good reasons to reflect on the future of Europe. I would like to use
this ESMT Open Lecture to discuss the following five theses.
1. First things first for the euro area financial architecture
The financial architecture in the euro area still has its weaknesses today, even following years of
recovery and after various far-reaching reforms – think of the banking union, for example. Among
politicians and central bankers, this is common knowledge, so to speak. Lately, discussions on
how to proceed have picked up pace again. As far as the banking union is concerned, this debate
has centred around the European deposit insurance scheme, or EDIS for short, which should be
its third and final pillar.
I’d  like  to  refute  any  suggestion  that  Europe  is  facing  a  standstill  in  discussions  because  the
proponents and critics of further reforms are allegedly refusing to shift from their positions. If we
want  to  pave  the  way  for  a  more  resilient  union,  “wait  and  see”  is  not  an  option,  given  that
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  architecture  improvements  are  not  just  “nice  to  have”  for  the  euro  area.  In  fact,  the
Bundesbank  generally  backs  the  idea  of  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme,  provided  all
preconditions are met. And as far as fiscal and macroeconomic safeguards are concerned, we
endorse several concrete reform options such as adding surveillance of national public budgets
to the powers of the European Stability Mechanism, or ESM for short.
The point I’m making has more to do with the sequence of reforms than whether or not to reform.
My thesis is: first things first.
To illustrate my point, let us take a look again at the sovereign-bank nexus, which has been at the
epicentre  of  the  euro  area  crisis.  As  we  have  witnessed  during  the  crisis,  the  unhealthy
relationship  between  euro  area  member  states  and  their  domestic  banks  can  trigger  what  is
known as a “doom loop” – a downward spiral which comprises banks, the government, and the
entire national economy.
When thinking about making further reforms to the euro area financial architecture, it is important
to bear in mind that this “doom loop” may be caused both ways. One cause is struggling banks.
They  induce  their  government  to  come  to  their  rescue  if  no  reliable  and  credible  resolution
mechanism is in place for banks. All of us here in this room will recall government rescues in
several countries of the euro area – Germany being one of them. With these gloomy episodes in
mind, it is entirely conceivable that in severe cases, bank rescues can overburden a country’s
fiscal capacities.
We have already reached several milestones on the road towards eliminating this channel of the
sovereign-bank nexus. I am referring here specifically to the European resolution regime. At this
point of the journey, the next milestones concern realigning the European resolution framework
and  its  national  counterparts,  and  banks  building  up  bail-in-able  capital  in  order  to  meet  their
MREL targets. Once these tasks have been completed, the rules will do their part to reduce the
sovereign-bank nexus.
But as I indicated, there is also the other direction of causation, namely fiscally overburdened
states  possibly  infecting  their  own  banking  system  and  triggering  a  solvency  crisis  at  banks.
Again, this is more than merely an academic thought experiment: today, banks still have large
undiversified stocks of sovereign bonds on their balance sheet. That means that we have good
reason to be concerned. And unlike the first contagion channel I mentioned, this problem has not
been dealt with from a regulatory point of view. Quite the opposite, there is a regulatory privilege
that  encourages  banks  to  buy  government  bonds:  at  present,  sovereign  bonds  from  member
states  of  the  euro  area  have  a  zero  risk  weight  under  the  capital  requirements  regime  –  this
means, essentially, that the positive economic risk attached to sovereign debt is not reflected in
capital requirements. Nor is there any upper limit for exposures to specific sovereigns. Remedies
aren’t  hard  to  find:  they  consist  of  non-zero  risk  weights  as  well  as  concentration  limits  for
sovereign exposures.
Addressing sovereign concentration risks on banks’ balance sheets should be a top priority in
further reforming the euro area financial architecture.
So in this context, how should we evaluate reform options such as a European deposit insurance
scheme?
Looking at struggling banks and their potential negative impact on financial stability, confidence
plays an important role. In this context, EDIS  is seen as an additional safety net alongside the
earlier lines of defence, such as capital buffers and MREL. Its purpose is to maintain depositors’
confidence in their banks and to prevent a potential bank run. Now, I could spend a lot of time
discussing the difficulties involved in constructing a European deposit insurance scheme of that
kind, and reflect on existing national schemes, which already have to fulfil Europe-wide minimum
standards today.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Here I would like to focus on the connection between EDIS and the sovereign-bank-nexus. Given
that  core  structural  weaknesses  brought  about  by  a  sovereign-bank  nexus  continue  to  exist,
additional safety nets are not only less effective, but may even turn out to be counterproductive.
And there are two reasons for that: 
1.  Given  that  the  sovereign-bank  nexus  works  in  two  directions,  any  argument  about  all-
European  responsibility  for  deposits  is  off  the  mark.  How  is  the  euro  area  community,
represented by European supervisors, supposed to assume responsibility for bank failure
and give access to funds if they did not have an instrument in place to address sovereign
risk beforehand?
2.  With additional safety nets in place, incentives to act prudently and responsibly decline. Also,
these safety nets will make reforms of high-priority issues less pressing. This argument is
valid not only for EDIS, but also for reforms of other mechanisms functioning as safety nets
in order to stabilise the financial sector or the economy, like the ESM.
Maintaining  reform  pressure  and  reducing  risks  before  establishing  a  common  safety  net
certainly extends beyond eliminating current privileges for sovereign bonds in banking regulation.
It  pertains  to  all  excessive  risks  currently  identified  in  national  banking  systems. Allow  me  to
comment on one of these risk categories later in my speech, namely on large amounts of non-
performing-loans in banks in several member states. 
These  remarks  do  not  mean  that  I  am  dead  set  against  a  reform  of  deposit  insurance.  I  am
talking about putting the reforms in the right sequence. So my first point is that if we want to
improve the structural design of the euro area, we need to address the sovereign-bank nexus –
amongst other things – before we create a European deposit insurance scheme. In other words:
let’s do first things first.
2. No painless way out
My second proposition is this: however we seek to rectify an imperfect financial architecture, it
won’t be painless.
Overhauling the less-than-ideal statics of a financial construction isn’t a simple task, as you see;
it won’t happen soon, and it will involve stress. But there is no easy alternative to it.
This can be seen if you take a look at discussions surrounding what are known as sovereign
bond-backed securities, or SBBS for short. There is no question that this financial instrument is
interesting from an academic point of view.
But  are  they  interesting  as  a  policy  option  given  the  weaknesses  of  our  current  financial
architecture? Some proponents have argued that SBBS could serve as a helpful financing tool,
for example because they could automatically diversify sovereign risk and at the same time –
supposedly – involve no collective risks whatsoever for the European community (even in times
of financial stress), I am not convinced, however.
In  order  for  SBBS  to  function  properly,  quite  a  number  of  factors  have  to  be  considered.  For
example, collective risks which might emerge due to bridge financing or also guarantees need to
be precluded. But I won’t go into all the constructional details.
Let me jump straight to the key argument with respect to the sovereign-bank-nexus: SBBS will
not function without the aforementioned reforms of sovereign exposures in the regulatory rules
for banks. So this is a necessary precondition. Given the current privileges for sovereign bonds in
capital  requirements  calculations  of  banks,  they  have  strong  incentives  to  buy  these  bonds
directly.  For  SBBS,  there  would  not  be  any  such  regulatory  privileges  and  thus  a  market  for
SBBS would not emerge.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now some have called for a comparable privilege of SBBS in banking regulation. But this is no
option,  either:  if  we  want  regulation  to  be  risk-adequate  –  which  means  it  needs  to  take  into
account the non-zero risk of government default – this has to pertain to any financing instrument
for  sovereigns,  including  SBBS.  Otherwise  we  would  have  merely  relocated  financial  stability
risks. These securities, then, do not offer an easy way out.
3. More than rules: rigorously target high-priority risks
Sometimes  it  seems  that  all  that  representatives  from  German  institutions  have  to  say  about
Europe is that it needs to adhere to a strong set of rules, and that rules need to ensure that those
who are in control of risks and opportunities also bear the consequences.
I have two things to say about this.
To start out with: I am a strong proponent of these ideas. As abstract as they may sound in a
speech, a lot of empirical evidence and day-to-day wisdom went into them.
The second is: Europe’s future does indeed require more than a well-balanced architecture. In
the following, I will concentrate on those other fields.
First and foremost, we have to rigorously target the risks we are already aware of. And those
who are familiar with SSM supervisory priorities will know that I am about to speak on the issue of
non-performing loans, or NPLs for short.
My point here is this. The European supervisors should, in my view, not hesitate to vigorously
pursue this issue and to address it as soon as possible. Not only because it remains a threat to
the  stability  of  the  banking  system  in  the  euro  area,  even  though  capital  cushions  have
significantly improved at banks across the common currency area. Not only because we need to
address these legacy risks before moving on with reforms that incorporate risk sharing across
the euro area.
But – importantly – because NPLs actually impede the recovery of individual banks and national
economies.  NPLs  consume  a  lot  of  time  and  attention  in  credit  institutions,  and  we  have
experienced that banks preoccupied with large amounts of NPLs are very hesitant in terms of
new business. This creates bad long-term prospects not only for the individual banks, but also
for regional economic recovery, which may be slowed down significantly. Against this backdrop, I
also acknowledge the considerable progress made by individual SSM banks in cleaning up their
balance sheets in 2017 – not only because mounting supervisory pressure forced them to do so.
But  also  because  the  improvement  of  asset  quality  creates  long-term  value  for  their
stakeholders. 
In that vein, let us not dwell on supposed European conflicts of interest surrounding the treatment
of  NPLs.  I  propose  that  we  see  this  as  a  conflict  between  short-term  and  long-term  regional
interests. Therefore, I strongly support the take of European supervisors on this matter.
4. Resilience is not a state, but a process
My fourth point is: resilience is not a state, but a process. To make this point, there is no better
example than cyber risks. Here at the ESMT, where the “T” stands for technology, I don’t have to
convince  anyone  that  if  you  want  to  get  the  full  picture  of  where  the  economic  and  financial
systems are headed, you have to take a close look at IT topics and IT solutions.
From the viewpoint of a banking supervisor, even though a lot of our daily work is centred around
capital requirements – which some have called the magic bullet of banking regulation –, cyber
risks  and  other  IT-related  risks  are  quite  special,  for  even  in  adequately  capitalised  banking
systems,  this  doesn’t  prevent  IT-related  financial  stability  issues  from  occurring,  such  as
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
downtimes in payment systems (or massive manipulation of financial ownership). Thus, financial
supervisors  need  to  target  those  risks  in  a  direct  way,  pushing  the  financial  sector  to  make
incidents less likely and emergency responses as effective as possible.
So what is the European dimension here? Well, it is all too easy: in cyber space, there are no
borders, hence the ease with which cyber risks transgress national boundaries. We have to be
sure to target all the weak links. This especially refers to infrastructure prone to cyber attacks.
And Europe has acted already, albeit largely unnoticed by the public. The Directive on security of
network  and  information  systems,  or  NIS  Directive,  which  was  adopted  by  the  European
Parliament  in  the  middle  of  2016,  obliges  member  states  to  be  adequately  equipped  and  to
establish  minimum  standards  for  important  infrastructure.  It  also  fosters  cooperation  among
member states in cybersecurity measures. And I can say that this European stimulus has even
reached the realm of national banking supervision: we are currently working on aligning various
supervisory standards with the requirements for critical infrastructure.
Also,  Europe  offers  opportunities  to  join  forces  in  combatting  cybercrime. As  attack  methods
constantly  evolve,  and  given  that  there  is  no  once-and-for-all  cure  for  cyber  threats,  our  best
response  is  to  evolve  as  well.  Mutual  learning  is  generally  a  good  thing,  but  in  a  digital
environment it is hugely important, because we cannot build on a long history of best practices,
and it is a setting where small mistakes might be very costly. And I am happy to say that, for
banking supervisors, interaction with colleagues from other countries is already part of our day-
to-day business.
5. Europe’s problems have to be understood
So far, I have presented you with four rather bureaucratic propositions. But is this really all there
is to Europe’s future – a bunch of good recipes developed by experts?
Technocrats will have to concede that while we may alter rules and change incentives, this will
not resolve discussions about Europe altogether. We have witnessed a surge in nationalism and
populism  in  several  member  states. And  since  the  Brexit  referendum,  we  know  full  well  that
criticism and doubts about the European project (however well founded) won’t just come and go
every so often. 
Now  I  am  well  aware  that  perceptions  about  Europe  are  of  a  very  complex  and  multifaceted
nature – and I cannot and will not run an in-depth analysis here. 
But there is one issue which most perceptions about Europe share and which I am quite familiar
with – because we happen to encounter it in our own educational work at the Bundesbank. It is
the sheer complexity and high level of abstraction of European economic matters. In discussions
on Europe, economic topics such as the financial crisis or the euro area crisis play an important
role. And for the general public, these matters are not at all easy to comprehend. In fact, you
yourself  can  only  grasp  the  speech  you  are  listening  to  in  this  very  moment  because  of  your
knowledge of this field.
At the Bundesbank, we are ourselves engaged in economic education. After all, monetary policy
reasoning can only be successfully communicated if the general public have a basic grasp of
terms such as inflation or interest. One major takeaway from our work – be it in schools or at
educational  events  offered  for  the  general  public  –  is:  nothing  happens  by  itself.  We  need  to
foster an understanding of the economic and financial topics in Europe and in the euro area. At
times  when  populists  come  up  with  supposedly  simple  solutions,  this  is  becoming  more
important than ever.
My point concerns not just economic education – it goes for political education as well. It is the
task of political education to adequately communicate European ideas and values, especially to
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
younger generations. It is about highlighting the advantages of European cooperation. It is about
providing citizens with the tools they need to understand and classify issues around Europe.
Thank you for your attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
