Yves Mersch: Innovation and digitalisation in payment services
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Second Annual Conference on "Fintech and Digital Innovation: Regulation at the European
level and beyond", Brussels, 27 February 2018.
 The  payments  industry  is  currently  experiencing  considerable  transformation  driven  by
innovation. I welcome such innovation as it will increase both efficiency and competitiveness, and
this will ultimately benefit society. We are seeing the emergence of new players, new channels to
access payment services and new means of payment, all of which will significantly change the
payments market. These developments are largely driven by digitalisation and the opportunities it
brings. But there are also challenges, some of which I will explore here today.
Opportunities
One of the objectives of the revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) is to foster innovation
and enhance competition. We are already seeing numerous innovative solutions that make use
of  the  opportunities  created  by  PSD2,  including  services  such  as  payment  initiation  services
(PIS) or account information services (AIS). These were initially provided by new entrants to the
market or fintech companies, but I understand that some banks are also preparing to provide
these  services  and  become  third-party  providers  (TPPs)  themselves.  There  are  opportunities
here  for  all  players;  each  institution  must  find  the  right  business  model  and  strategy  to  be
competitive in providing these services, an approach which will benefit their customers.
In order to provide PIS and AIS, a third-party provider will need access to the relevant information
from banks, and this will need to be communicated securely, via an adapted customer interface
or via a dedicated interface. While access via the former is possible in principle, it would create
fragmentation, as providers would have to develop and maintain a huge number of connections
to  all  the  different  banks  they  communicate  with.  The  plethora  of  technical  solutions  required
would  be  an  obstacle  for  new  entrants.  I  therefore  reiterate  that  only  a  dedicated  and
standardised technical interface – an application programming interface, or API – constitutes an
efficient access solution that serves the needs of an integrated European payments market. I
also believe that there should only be one – or at most a few – technical API specifications so
that competition takes place at the service level and not at the technical specification level. We
need  to  ensure  that  innovative  services  are  built  on  harmonised  and  standardised  technical
foundations so that they can be made available across Europe.
Let  me  add  some  more  general  remarks  in  this  context.  We  are  in  the  process  of  building
Europe’s  financial  market  infrastructure  for  tomorrow.  Building  it  on  individual  or  national
solutions  is  anachronistic  as  these  will  no  longer  meet  the  needs  of  the  market.  Europeans
demand services that are safe and efficient and give them pan-European access. We therefore
need to apply common standards that work on a pan-European basis. The same principle was
agreed when we built the Single Euro Payments Area – SEPA – and that is why SEPA uses the
global standard ISO 20022.  The  Eurosystem  also  uses  this  standard  for  the  infrastructures  it
operates  –  be  it  T2S   or  TIPS ,  as  well  as  upgrades  to  TARGET2  or  its  new  collateral
management system. Looking at the digital transformation and innovation under way, I urge all
market participants to plan their investments based on common and future-oriented standards
that ensure pan-European accessibility.
The regulatory level playing field
1
2
In  order  to  increase  competition  in  the  area  of  payments,  EU  legislators  introduced  “payment
institutions”,  a  new  category  of  payment  service  providers,  in  the  first  Payment  Services
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Directive. These institutions are allowed to provide payment services, and PSD2 states that PIS
and AIS fall under the definition of payment services. Providers of such services have to be duly
authorised and supervised.
I heard from some bankers occasionally that there was an issue of level playing field between
new TPP entrants and incumbent banks. TPPs, they claim, face a lighter regulatory regime than
do banks. In this context, let me just say that PSD2 as well as banking legislation govern the
respective activities and that an institutional licence is required to conduct them, which implies
that the entities will be supervised in line with the risks involved. Payment institutions are only
allowed to provide a limited set of services, i.e. payment services. They are not allowed to take
deposits and are only allowed to hold funds for the provision of payments. Credit institutions, by
contrast, have a much wider scope of activities than payment institutions; they can engage in the
whole spectrum of banking activities, including the holding of deposits and the granting of loans.
Thus,  while  banks  and  payment  institutions  are  indeed  subject  to  different  authorisation  and
supervisory criteria, this does not per se mean that there is an unlevel playing field. I have the
feeling  that  those  bankers  who  complain  about  the  playing  field  forget  that  some  of  their
colleagues in the bank perform activities that go far beyond the provision of payment services. So
I  believe  that  there  is  indeed  a  level  playing  field  and  that  the  legislator  has  taken  into
consideration a risk-based approach.
Another  request  I  sometimes  hear  is  for  regulatory  sandboxes  for  fintechs.  This  is  an  area
where, I would suggest, we exercise caution. It raises a lot of questions – where to start and
where to stop, who to involve (or not) and which activities to include – to name just a few of the
challenges. I’m not sure we have the right answers yet, but this is ultimately a matter for the
legislators.
Challenges
Before concluding, I would like to mention cyber risks and the challenges of digitalisation. A virtue
of central bankers is that they are, by nature, worried about risks and security. And one concern
that  is  very  closely  linked  to  innovation  and  digitalisation  is  that  of  cyber  risks.  Increasing
digitalisation  exposes  the  entire  ecosystem  to  increased  cyber  risks  because  of  a  greater
reliance on the internet and thus a broader attack surface, which can be exploited by hackers
using  increasingly  sophisticated  techniques.  As  a  result,  financial  market  actors  and
infrastructures  become  susceptible  to  cyberattacks.  Central  banks  and  other  authorities  have
identified those risks and issued guidance in that respect. The G7 published its “Fundamental
elements of cybersecurity for the financial sector” and the CPMI/IOSCO issued its “Guidance on
cyber  resilience  for  financial  market  infrastructures”  –  to  name  just  the  most  important
publications. I strongly encourage all market players to consider cyber risks as critical to their
institution and to draw up a fully fledged cyber strategy and response plan.
Conclusion
Innovation and digitalisation in payment services will significantly change the payments market.
They  offer  opportunities  for  efficiency  gains  and  improve  the  competitiveness  of  actors  that
embrace them. The legislative framework established by PSD2 supports such innovation and
enhances competition. It offers a legislative basis for a level playing field between new entrant
TPPs (fintechs) and incumbent banks. Regulatory requirements for TPPs and banks obviously
differ  but  so  does  the  spectrum  of  services  that  they  provide  and  the  level  of  risk  that  they
encounter and need to protect against. I welcome if both fintech TPPs and banks were to make
use  of  the  opportunities  granted  by  law  and  to  compete  for  the  most  innovative  and  efficient
provision of payment initiation services and account information services. They should build their
services on common technical standards with a pan-European reach to benefit their customers
and the Europen citizens in general. But they should pay careful attention to the cyber risks that
accompany digitalisation and prepare their cyber strategies thoroughly.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
TARGET2-Securities.
TARGET instant payment settlement service.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
