Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, and Ms Carolyn
Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press conference following the
release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 7 June 2018.
Governor Poloz:
 Good morning, and thank you for being here today. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are
pleased  to  be  with  you  to  talk  about  the  latest  issue  of  the  Bank’s Financial  System  Review
(FSR), which we published today.
Let me quickly remind everyone about the purpose of the FSR—to identify key vulnerabilities in
the  financial  system,  which  can  interact  with  and  magnify  economic  shocks.  We  monitor  the
evolution of these vulnerabilities, and then apply a set of risk scenarios to look at the potential
implications for the financial system and economy if a significant shock were to occur.
The main vulnerabilities that we see today are the same as those in the last FSR in November. I
will  begin  with  a  few  words  about  two  of  these:  elevated  household  debt  and  imbalances  in
housing markets. These vulnerabilities are expected to persist for some time, although we have
seen continued signs of easing.
Several  factors  are  helping  to  lessen  the  vulnerability  related  to  household  indebtedness.
Importantly, there has been a series of changes to mortgage lending guidelines. We have also
seen a slowdown in credit growth along with higher interest rates. As well, a solid expansion in
the Canadian economy is leading to strong growth in employment and income and, over time,
this will support Canadians’ ability to manage their debt, even at a time of rising interest rates.
The changes to mortgage lending guidelines are driving a steady improvement in the quality of
new loans. We have seen a decline in the share of mortgages that have a loan-to-income ratio
above 450 per cent. In fact, the share of new insured mortgages that have a ratio above this
threshold  has  been  cut  in  half  since  the  middle  of  2016.  This  is  an  important  improvement,
because we know that households with this level of debt are more vulnerable to an economic
shock, such as a recession.
However, I will point out two reasons for continued vigilance. First, because the total amount of
debt carried by Canadian households is so large, we know that it will be with us for a long time.
Second, it is still too soon to fully assess the impact of the newest changes to mortgage lending
guidelines.  These  guidelines,  which  came  into  effect  at  the  start  of  the  year,  were  aimed  at
tightening  standards  for  uninsured  mortgages.  It  is  not  yet  clear  whether  the  guidelines  are
driving  a  significant  amount  of  activity  away  from  federally  regulated  institutions  and  toward
private lenders and credit unions, who may not follow the federal guidelines.
This is an issue that we will monitor. We are looking forward to lending data from the second
quarter, as well as the latest information from the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation
about mortgage underwriting practices, which we will receive later this year.
In terms of housing market imbalances, we have also seen some lessening in this vulnerability,
though it remains elevated. The annual rate of house price growth peaked in April 2017, at just
under 20 per cent on a national basis, and is now below 2 per cent. This slowdown is due to the
declining  affordability  of  housing  in  some  markets,  as  well  as  the  combined  impact  of  higher
interest  rates,  macroeconomic  policies  such  as  the  new  mortgage  lending  guidelines,  and
housing policy measures taken by various provincial governments.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Of  course,  that  figure  is  a  national  average.  Outside  of  Toronto,  national  house  price  growth
remains above 5 per cent. A decline in prices for single-family homes in Toronto is a major factor
pulling down this national average. In contrast, prices for condominiums are still growing rapidly,
particularly in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas. This is a reverse of the dynamics that
we saw until early 2017, when price growth for condos trailed the pace for single-family homes. It
is possible that the guidelines are having an impact here by limiting the amount some buyers can
borrow and increasing the demand for condos relative to single-family homes. It is also possible
that speculative activity is helping to push prices higher.
The third main vulnerability we are watching is the possibility of a major successful cyber attack
on a financial institution or market infrastructure, such as the payment systems that we all rely on
every day. Given how interconnected our financial system is, there is concern that a successful
attack on one institution could have wide-ranging effects. The Bank has been working with major
banks  and  Payments  Canada  to  make  sure  our  country’s  key  payment  systems  can  recover
quickly from a successful cyber attack.
Overall, when we look at the three vulnerabilities and our risk scenarios, we judge that the overall
level of risk is roughly unchanged from November, and our financial system remains resilient.
I also want to point out that in this FSR, we report the results of a survey we conducted with
financial  system  participants.  Respondents  identified  the  threat  of  a  cyber  attack,  geopolitical
events and a pronounced decline in property prices as among the most important risks facing
their firms’ own activities and the broader financial system.
Before we answer your questions, I will turn it over to Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins, who will
say a few words about the Bank’s plans for communications on financial system issues.
Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins:
Thank you, Governor.
As many of you know, for over a decade, the biannual Financial System Review has been our
main vehicle for communicating our analysis and research on developments related to stability of
the financial system. The financial crisis taught us, the hard way, just how important it is to keep
on top of financial system risks. That’s as true today as it was then.
I am pleased to tell you about some changes we are making to improve the accessibility and
timeliness  of  our  work  in  this  area.  The  first  is  that  this  autumn,  we  will  launch  the  Bank  of
Canada’s financial system hub on our website. The hub will offer up-to-date analysis and articles
on financial system issues, presented in an engaging way and aimed at a broad audience. The
goal is to help more Canadians better understand developments in the financial system without
having to wait for publication of the full FSR.
The second change is that we will publish the FSR once a year, in June. This recognizes that the
main vulnerabilities facing the financial system tend to evolve very slowly. As the Governor said,
the top three vulnerabilities in our financial system are unchanged from the previous report, as is
the overall level of risk.
The third change is that we will introduce a speech each autumn by a member of Governing
Council that will give an update on the Bank’s views about the evolution of the main vulnerabilities
and risks to the financial system. This speech will draw from the analysis that is published on the
hub.  The  concept  is  similar  to  the  regular  economic  progress  report  speeches  that  we  have
begun doing.
We  will  also  use  our  quarterly Monetary  Policy  Reports  to  discuss  relevant  financial  system
issues when they have a bearing on the outlook for economic growth and inflation. The bottom
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
line is that we are modernizing our financial system communications, to be more nimble and to
give these issues the greater visibility that they deserve.
With that, Governor Poloz and I would be happy to answer your questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
