Yves Mersch: Reflections on monetary policy in the euro area
Speaking points by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Eurofi conference, Sofia, 27 April 2018.
 While the recent flow  of  data  points  towards  some  moderation  in  the  on-going  economic
expansion, growth is still expected to remain solid and broad based.
Monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 have been instrumental in supporting euro
area growth and employment.
Underlying  inflation  continues  to  be  subdued  and  have  yet  to  show  convincing  signs  of  a
sustained  upward  trend.  At  the  same  time,  wages  continue  to  edge  higher  and  should
contribute to price pressures.
Overall,  the  underlying  strength  in  the  euro  area  economy  continues  to  support  our
confidence that inflation will converge towards our aim over the medium term. Yet, inflation
convergence  will  likely  proceed  only  gradually,  and  remains  contingent  on  a  highly
accommodative monetary policy stance.
Looking ahead, the evolution of monetary policy will be firmly guided by the outlook for price
stability. The transition towards policy normalisation will begin once the Governing Council
assesses there has been sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
This assessment will be based on three criteria: convergence, confidence, and resilience
Convergence: looking into the medium term, headline inflation should be well on track
toward reaching levels below, but close to, 2%
Confidence: Governing Council will need to have confidence that the convergence path
is likely to materialise sustainably
Resilience: sustained adjustment in the path of inflation will be maintained even without
additional net asset purchases
There is growing confidence that these criteria will be attained, yet patience, persistence and
prudence are necessary:
Patience: as it takes time for underlying price pressures to build up
Persistence: the pick-up in inflation still needs support from the monetary policy stance
Prudence:  global  and  domestic  uncertainties  counsel  prudence  in  the  adjustment  of
the monetary policy parameters
Once the Governing Council decides that sustained adjustment is taking place, net asset
purchases will end in line with our forward guidance.
Thereafter, monetary support for inflation convergence will be provided by
Reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time
Policy rates remaining at present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases
The path of policy normalisation will remain conditional on the outlook for price stability.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
