Guy Debelle: Interest rate benchmark reform
Keynote speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
ISDA (International Swaps and Derivatives Association) Forum (appearance via video link), Hong
Kong, 15 May 2018.
 Good morning and thanks to ISDA for the opportunity to speak here today.
Reform  of  interest  rate  benchmarks  has  been  a  key  focus  of  central  banks  and  financial
regulators over recent years.   These  benchmarks  are  referenced  in  a  wide  range  of  financial
contracts, including derivatives, loans and securities. In light of the issues around LIBOR (the
London Inter-Bank Offered Rate) and other benchmarks that have arisen over the past decade,
substantial effort has gone in to reforming these benchmarks to support the smooth functioning
of the financial system.
1
Today I will provide an update on the work underway to strengthen interest rate benchmarks. I'll
focus  on  the  developments  since  last  year's  announcement  by  the  UK  Financial  Conduct
Authority (FCA) on the future of LIBOR. In particular, I will highlight the important role for ‘risk-free’
interest  rates  as  an  alternative  to  credit-based  benchmarks  such  as  LIBOR.  I  will  then
summarise  the  work  underway  to  ensure  that  the  major  interest  rate  benchmark  for  the
Australian dollar, the bank bill swap rate (BBSW), remains robust for the long term. I will also
discuss how some credit-based benchmarks, such as BBSW, can coexist with risk-free rates in
a post-LIBOR world.
Global benchmark reform and the future of LIBOR
Central  banks  and  financial  regulators  have  been  working  with  the  industry  to  address  the
shortcomings in the major interest rate benchmarks, the ‘interbank offered rates’ (IBORs). For
several years, the Financial Stability Board's (FSB's) Official Sector Steering Group (OSSG) has
been monitoring progress on three work streams:
1.  to  strengthen  the  IBORs  by  anchoring  them  to  a  greater  number  of  transactions,  and
improve benchmark governance
2.  to  identify  robust  alternative  risk-free  rates  and  encourage  derivatives  to  be  referenced  to
them instead of the IBORs
3.  to ensure that contracts referencing IBORs include robust fall-back provisions to reduce the
risk of financial instability if an IBOR were to be discontinued.
LIBOR is the key interest rate benchmark for several major currencies, including the US dollar
and British pound. In July last year, Andrew Bailey, who heads the FCA, raised some serious
questions about the sustainability of LIBOR. The key problem he identified is that there are not
enough  transactions  in  the  short-term  interbank  funding  market  to  reliably  calculate  the
benchmark. The banks that make the submissions used to calculate LIBOR are uncomfortable
about continuing to do this, as they have to rely mainly on their ‘expert judgment’ in determining
where  LIBOR  should  be  rather  than  on  actual  transactions.  To  prevent  LIBOR  from  abruptly
ceasing to exist, the FCA has received assurances from the current banks on the LIBOR panel
that  they  will  continue  to  submit  their  estimates  to  sustain  LIBOR  until  the  end  of  2021.  But
beyond  that  point,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  LIBOR  will  continue  to  exist.  The  FCA  will  not
compel banks to provide submissions and the panel banks may not voluntarily continue to do so.
Let me be clear, LIBOR is not under threat because of the regulators. Rather it has been kept
going to date because of the actions of regulators, but that is not going to occur beyond 2021.
Then it comes down to whether the submitting banks are willing to maintain LIBOR in its current
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
form, and there is no guarantee at all that will be the case.
Andrew Bailey has made this announcement to give market participants enough time to transition
away from LIBOR. The process is not straightforward. LIBOR is referenced in around US$350
trillion worth of contracts globally. A large share of these contracts have short durations, often
three months or less, so these will roll off well ahead of 2021, but they should not continue to be
replaced with another short-dated contract referencing LIBOR. A very sizeable number of current
contracts  would  extend  beyond  2021,  with  some  lasting  as  long  as  100  years.  Market
participants that use LIBOR need to work on transitioning their contracts to alternative reference
rates. The transition will involve a substantial amount of work for users of LIBOR, both to amend
contracts and update systems.
Given how hard it has been to sustain LIBOR, regulators around the world have been working
closely with the industry to identify alternative risk-free rates that can be used instead of LIBOR.
These  alternative  rates  are  based  on  overnight  funding  markets  since  there  are  plenty  of
transactions in these markets to calculate robust benchmarks. Last month, the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York  began  publishing  the  Secured  Overnight  Financing  Rate  (SOFR)  as  the
recommended alternative to US dollar LIBOR. For the British pound, SONIA has been identified
as the alternative risk-free rate, and the Bank of England has recently put in place reforms to
ensure that it remains a robust benchmark.
One issue is that the chosen risk-free rates are overnight rates, while the LIBOR benchmarks
are term rates. Some market participants would prefer for the LIBOR replacements to also be
term rates. While the development of term risk-free rates is on the long-term agenda for some
currencies, they are unlikely to be available anytime soon. This reflects that there are currently
not enough transactions in markets for term risk-free rates – such as overnight indexed swaps
(OIS) – to support robust benchmarks. Given this reality, it is very important that users of LIBOR
are  planning  their  transition  to  the  overnight  risk-free  benchmarks  that  are  available,  such  as
SOFR for the US dollar and SONIA for the British pound.
For  the  risk-free  rates  to  provide  an  alternative  to  LIBOR,  the  next  challenge  is  to  generate
sufficient  liquidity  in  derivative  products  that  reference  the  risk-free  rates.  This  will  take  some
time,  particularly  for  the  US  dollar,  where  SOFR  only  recently  started  being  published.
Nevertheless, progress is being made, with the first futures contracts referencing SOFR recently
being launched.
Market  participants  also  need  to  be  prepared  for  a  scenario  where  the  LIBOR  benchmarks
abruptly  cease  to  be  published.  In  such  an  event,  users  would  have  to  rely  on  the  fall-back
provisions in their contracts. However, for many products the existing fall-back provisions would
be cumbersome to apply and could generate significant market disruption. For instance, some
existing fall-backs involve calling reference banks and asking them to quote a rate. To address
this  risk,  the  FSB  has  encouraged  ISDA  to  work  with  market  participants  to  develop  a  more
suitable fall-back methodology, using the risk-free rates that have been identified. But LIBOR is
very different from an overnight risk-free rate as it includes bank credit risk and is a term rate. So
the key challenge is to agree on a standard methodology for calculating credit and term spreads
that  can  be  added  to  the  risk-free  rate  to  construct  a  fall-back  for  LIBOR.  This  needs  to  be
resolved as soon as possible, and we encourage users of LIBOR to engage with ISDA on this
important work.
Interest rate benchmarks for the Australian dollar
The  key  IBOR  benchmark  for  the  Australian  dollar  is  BBSW.  The  RBA  and  the  Australian
Securities  and  Investments  Commission  (ASIC)  have  been  working  closely  with  industry  to
ensure that it remains robust.
The critical difference between BBSW and LIBOR is that there are enough transactions in the
 2 / 5
2
BIS central bankers' speeches
local bank bill market each day to calculate a robust benchmark.  Australia has an active bank
bill market, where the major banks issue bills as a regular source of funding, and a wide range of
wholesale investors purchase bills as a liquid cash management product.
2
For several years, BBSW has been calculated from the best executable bids and offers for the
bills  issued  by  the  major  banks.  This  method  is  referred  to  as  National  Best  Bid  and  Offer
(NBBO). Until recently, a significant concern had been the low trading volumes in the interbank
market at the time of day that BBSW was being measured (around 10.00 am). While there are
enough transactions over the course of the day, there were nowhere near enough occurring in
the (small) rate set window. We consulted with market participants on why there was a lack of
trading during the rate set, and they gave us a couple of reasons:
1.  They faced a potential conflict of interest when they participated in the market underpinning
the  benchmark  and  the  derivatives  market  that  references  it.  They  stated  that  they  were
uncertain about how regulators expected them to manage these conflicts.
2.  Managers of investment funds were reluctant to trade at outright yields. They preferred to
transact at the yet-to-be-determined BBSW since this minimised tracking error against their
performance benchmarks.
To address these challenges, two key steps are being taken to support BBSW. First, the BBSW
methodology is being strengthened to enable the benchmark to be calculated directly from the
wider set of market transactions that occur each day. Second, a new regulatory framework for
financial benchmarks is being introduced.
The  work  on  implementing  the  new  BBSW  methodology  is  progressing  well.  The  new
methodology  will  involve  calculating  BBSW  as  the  volume-weighted  average  price  (VWAP)  of
bank bill transactions.
The  new  methodology  has  broadened  the  BBSW  rate  set  to  include  transactions  outside  the
interbank market during a longer trading window. This reflects that bank holdings of bills have
declined  over  recent  years  to  around  a  tenth  of  total  issuance.  Holdings  by  investment  funds
have  increased  to  over  half  of  total  issuance.  Previously,  these  investors  had  purchased  bills
outside the rate set, agreeing to the transaction at the yet-to-be-determined BBSW rate. Since
late last year, banks and investors have been expected to trade bills at outright yields during the
rate set window. This change in market practice has been successfully implemented, enabling
these transactions to be used to calculate BBSW. The new arrangements are also improving the
infrastructure in the bank bill market, encouraging more electronic trading and straight-through
processing of transactions.
The Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) (the administrator of BBSW) has been conducting a
parallel run of the new VWAP methodology over recent weeks and the results are promising. On
average, there are around $1.5 billion in transactions during the rate set each day, with a wide
range  of  institutions  participating.  On  most  days,  it  has  been  possible  to  calculate  the  key  3-
month and 6-month rates using the VWAP method. In addition, the difference between the rate
calculated  using  VWAP  and  the  existing  NBBO  method  is  very  close  to  zero.  Given  these
results, there should be a seamless transition to the new BBSW methodology, which is due to
go live shortly.
The VWAP parallel run has confirmed that the most robust tenors are 3- and 6-month BBSW,
which are the tenors most frequently referenced in derivatives. Despite this, there are still many
contracts that reference 1-month BBSW. The liquidity of 1-month BBSW is lower than it once
was, mainly in response to the introduction of liquidity standards that have reduced the incentive
for  banks  to  issue  very  short-term  paper.  Given  this,  users  of  products  referencing  1-month
BBSW should consider referencing 3- or 6-month BBSW going forward.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  VWAP  method  will  be  at  the  top  of  a  robust  calculation  waterfall  for  BBSW,  so  the
benchmark can continue to be published as conditions change in the bank bill market. If there are
not enough transactions on a day, BBSW will instead be calculated using NBBO (which is the
current method), and if quotes are unavailable, there are algorithms that can be used to calculate
the benchmark for a time.
To rebuild confidence in trading during the rate set window, the ASX worked closely with market
participants  to  develop  a  new  set  of  trading  guidelines  for  BBSW.  These  guidelines  are  an
important part of the new BBSW methodology, as they provide guidance on the trading of bank
bills during the rate set window. ASIC and the RBA have made it clear that they expect all bank
bill market participants – including the banks that issue the bank bills, as well as the participants
that buy them – to adhere to the guidelines and support the new BBSW methodology. This has
helped to address the concerns that some market participants had about trading during the rate
set.
3
Turning  to  the  second  key  step  to  help  ensure  that  BBSW  remains  a  robust  benchmark,  the
Australian  Government  has  recently  introduced  a  new  regulatory  framework  for  financial
benchmarks.  The legislation empowers ASIC to set the rules for and license administrators of
significant benchmarks such as BBSW. ASIC will also have the power to compel submissions to
a significant benchmark in the rare circumstances where the benchmark would otherwise cease
to be published. Finally, the legislation makes it an offence to manipulate financial benchmarks.
This  new  regulatory  framework  has  helped  to  address  the  uncertainty  that  institutions  were
facing when participating in the BBSW rate setting process. It should also support the continued
use of BBSW in the European Union (EU), where new regulations require benchmarks used in
the EU to be subject to a robust regulatory framework.
Finding the balance between credit-based and risk-free benchmarks
While  we  expect  that  BBSW  will  remain  a  robust  benchmark,  it  is  important  for  market
participants  to  ask  whether  BBSW  is  the  most  appropriate  benchmark  for  their  financial
contracts. This is particularly worth considering in the light of the transition that is taking place
away from LIBOR towards risk-free rates.
For some financial products, it can make sense to reference a risk-free rate instead of a credit-
based benchmark. For instance, floating rate notes (FRNs) issued by governments, non-financial
corporations and securitisation trusts, which are currently priced at a spread to BBSW, could
instead tie their coupon payments to the cash rate.
As  the  RBA's  operational  target  for  monetary  policy  and  the  reference  rate  for  OIS  and  other
financial contracts, the cash rate is the risk-free interest rate benchmark for the Australian dollar.
The  RBA  measures  the  cash  rate  directly  from  transactions  in  the  interbank  overnight  cash
market,  and  we  have  ensured  that  our  methodology  is  in  line  with  the  IOSCO  benchmark
principles.   However,  consistent  with  the  challenges  faced  by  users  of  LIBOR  looking  to
transition to alternative risk-free rates, the cash rate is not a perfect substitute for BBSW, as it is
an overnight rate rather than a term rate, and doesn't incorporate a significant bank credit risk
premium.
4
We think that BBSW can continue to exist even if credit-based benchmarks, such as LIBOR, are
discontinued  in  other  jurisdictions.  For  many  financial  products,  it  will  still  make  sense  to
reference a credit-based benchmark that measures banks' short-term wholesale funding costs.
This is particularly the case for products issued by banks, such as FRNs and corporate loans.
The counterparties to these products would still need derivatives that reference BBSW so that
they can hedge their interest rate exposures. In the event that LIBOR was to be discontinued,
with contracts transitioning to risk-free rates, there may be some corresponding migration away
from BBSW towards the cash rate. This will depend on how international markets for products
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
such as derivatives and syndicated loans end up adapting in a post-LIBOR world.
The infrastructure is already in place for BBSW and the cash rate to coexist as the key interest
rate benchmarks for the Australian dollar. The OIS market is linked to the cash rate and has been
operating for almost 20 years. It already has good liquidity at the short end, and the infrastructure
is there for longer term OIS. A functioning derivatives market for trading the basis between the
benchmarks is important for BBSW and the cash rate to smoothly coexist. Such a basis swap
market is also in place, allowing market participants to exchange the cash flows under these
benchmarks.
Conclusion
There are three main points I would like to leave you with concerning interest rate benchmarks.
First, the longevity of LIBOR cannot be assumed. You should be considering today what that
might mean for any contracts you have that reference LIBOR. Please do not hope that if you wait
long enough, all the problems will go away. Users of LIBOR should pay close attention to the
work being undertaken by ISDA to establish more robust fall-back provisions on contracts.
Second,  in  Australia,  in  contrast  to  other  markets,  the  changes  to  enhance  the  longevity  of
BBSW  are  well  advanced,  and  it  has  been  possible  to  anchor  the  benchmark  to  a  greater
number of transactions.
Third,  users  should  consider  whether  risk-free  benchmarks  are  more  appropriate  for  financial
contracts than credit-based benchmarks.
There is still a place for robust credit-based benchmarks in the financial infrastructure, and we
expect  that  BBSW  and  the  cash  rate  will  be  able  to  coexist  as  the  key  benchmarks  for  the
Australian dollar.
1
2
3
4
I have talked about this issue previously: Debelle G (2017). ‘Interest  Rate  Benchmarks’,  Speech  at  FINSIA
Signature Event: The Regulators, Sydney, 8 September; Debelle G (2016), ‘Interest Rate Benchmarks’, Speech
at  KangaNews  Debt  Capital  Markets  Summit  2016,  Sydney  22  February;  Debelle  G  (2015).  ‘Benchmarks’,
Speech at Bloomberg Summit, Sydney, 18 November.
The instruments traded in the bank bill market are typically negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs).
See <www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_Legislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=r5962>.
For  more  details  about 
rate,  see  <www.rba.gov.au/mkt-
operations/resources/cash-rate-methodology/>. The RBA has also conducted a self-assessment against the
IOSCO 
<www.rba.gov.au/mkt-operations/resources/cash-rate-
methodology/compliance.html>.
the  methodology 
benchmark 
the  cash 
principles: 
for 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
