Jens Weidmann: Reforms for a stable monetary union
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  annual  reception  of  the
Minister President of the German state of Hesse, Brussels, 5 June 2018.
 1 Introductory remarks
Minister President Bouffier
Thank you for your kind words.
I am delighted to see such a large number of guests and would like to greet the representatives
of  the  diplomatic  corps,  the  members  of  Parliament,  the  representatives  of  the  European
Commission,  the  Council  and  other  EU  institutions,  the  members  of  the  state  government  of
Hesse, and all the other members of our audience today.
I have lived and worked in Hesse for many years now – in the beautiful Rheingau region and in
the buzzing metropolis of Frankfurt, to be precise – and have long since come to feel at home
there. Hesse is not only in the middle of Germany, it is also at the heart of Europe.
The political cabaret artist Matthias Beltz once said: “The people of Hesse are surrounded by
masses of Germans. They have no access to the sea, the Alps or foreign countries, so they
have no direct contact with freedom.” But luckily, freedom comes to us. Hesse, and especially
the  area  around  Frankfurt,  has  an  international  character,  and  the  region’s  cosmopolitan
atmosphere makes it an easy and enjoyable place to live.
At  the  same  time,  Hesse  is  home  to  several  EU  institutions.  One  of  these  is  the  European
Central  Bank  (ECB),  which  turned  twenty  a  few  days  ago.  It  commenced  its  tasks  on
1  June  1998  in  Frankfurt,  a  few  months  before  the  start  of  the  third  stage  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union.
2 20 years of the euro
In the two decades since it was introduced, the euro has proven a success. The original promise
of a stable currency has been kept – the euro is stable both internally and externally. At 1.7 % on
average over the last 20 years, the rate of inflation is lower than many people expected.
It is therefore no surprise that support for the euro among the general public is high. According to
the latest Eurobarometer survey, three-quarters (74 %) of respondents in the euro area are in
favour of the single currency, while only one in five (21 %) is against (the idea of) the euro. In
some countries, Germany included, the approval rating is higher than 80 %, even.
However,  these  positive  survey  results  should  not  obscure  the  fact  that  the  euro’s  second
decade was rife with crises and problems: a financial crisis, an economic crisis, a European
debt  crisis,  a  banking  crisis,  a  double  recession  and  high  levels  of  unemployment.  Several
countries experienced a prolonged period of economic weakness and the necessary adjustment
measures brought with them social hardship.
Figuratively  speaking,  you  could  say  that  the  euro  had  an  easy  childhood  but  a  difficult
adolescence.
Over the last few years, the Eurosystem’s central banks have faced unfamiliar challenges, and
not just in their core area of responsibility, which is that of ensuring price stability. During the
crisis, they were to some extent forced to act as crisis response units, taking them to the outer
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
edge of their mandate for a while.
In an interview last week, Otmar Issing warned: “Politicians have it easy. They rely on the ECB to
sort everything out. But that isn’t going to work in the long term.”
The dialogue between member states has also taken on a harsher tone at times. But monetary
union  was  actually  a  project  intended  to  encourage  European  integration  and  ultimately  even
bring about deeper international friendship.
All the same, I would like to stress that, in many ways, the euro area is in better shape today than
it  was  before  the  crisis.  This  is  thanks  to  measures  taken  by  its  member  states  as  well  as
changes to the structure of the monetary union, both of which I will now focus on briefly.
3 Reforms in the euro area
3.1 Adjustment progress in the member states
The crisis brought home to all of us what being part of a monetary union means and involves.
And the way the countries that were hit the hardest by the crisis have tackled the roots of the
problems and have regained their competitiveness, for example, is truly remarkable and receives
too little recognition.
In Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Cyprus, for instance, average unit labour cost growth was
above the euro-area average in the pre-crisis period (1999–2007). This was a contributing factor
to these countries’ loss of competitiveness.
Since the crisis, unit labour costs in all five of these countries have grown more slowly than the
euro area average. This has made their economies more competitive.
The structural reforms already undertaken are also beginning to bear fruit and have contributed to
the upturn. Take structural unemployment, for instance, which has gone down by just over one
percentage  point  in  the  euro  area,  by  slightly  more  in  Spain,  and  by  as  much  as  5  and
7 percentage points respectively in Portugal and Ireland, thus showing that there is more at work
here than just the upbeat state of the economy.
Current account deficits, some of which were very high, have also been balanced or even turned
into surpluses.
It  would  be  tragic  if,  given  all  this,  reforms  were  to  be  rolled  back  or  consolidation  gains
squandered. Instead, we should build on the successes that have been achieved.
Incidentally, this also goes for countries such as Germany, which weathered the crisis fairly well.
3.2 Changes to the governance framework to date
But it’s not just in the member states that much has happened as a result of the crisis. In the
euro area, much has changed for the better in institutional terms as well.
One  positive  development  is  the  ESM  –  a  permanent  euro  rescue  facility  that  can  grant
conditional financial aid to member states in the event of a crisis and can thus prevent a national
crisis from jeopardising the stability of the entire euro area financial system.
The creation of the banking union is also a welcome development. Thus far, the banking union
encompasses a single supervisory mechanism, a single resolution mechanism, and harmonised
national deposit guarantee schemes.
These  reforms  remedied  weaknesses  in  the  structure  of  the  monetary  union  that  were  either
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
ignored or overlooked when the euro was founded.
The most experienced among you may remember that the idea of a joint financial supervisory
system was actually discussed by the Delors Committee back at the end of the 1980s, but was
ultimately dismissed.
The crisis set in motion a learning process in this field, too, in which old beliefs were called into
question, and not only in the member states. This, by the way, also applies to the Bundesbank,
which, for example, had long been sceptical of a common financial supervision.
The ESM and the banking union, together with stricter financial regulation, have doubtless made
the  monetary  union  more  stable.  If  there  were  new  upheavals  in  the  financial  system  or  in
individual member states, we would be considerably better prepared to deal with them today than
we were in 2010, when the Greek debt crisis caught the euro area off guard.
4 Further reforms
4.1 Guidelines
Much  has  been  achieved  in  the  member  states  and  at  the  European  level.  But  this  still  isn’t
enough to crisis-proof the euro area once and for all. The financial market turbulence last week
with regard to Italy is a case in point.
The consensus is that the previous reforms have been insufficient to put the euro area on as
sound a footing as we would all like. Meanwhile, the economic environment at the moment is still
exceptionally favourable overall, and we should be taking advantage of this.
So I am concerned by the fact that enthusiasm for consolidation in the euro area appears to have
waned. Whilst almost all euro area countries reduced their structural deficit by half a percent of
GDP or more in 2012, not a single one is set to improve its structural budget balance in 2018. It
seems that the reformed fiscal rules are having just as weak an impact as the old rules.
Furthermore,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  emphasised  again  and  again  that  the
implementation of structural reforms in the euro area needs to be significantly intensified now in
particular,  in  view  of  the  current  favourable  economic  environment,  in  order  for  economies  to
become  more  resilient  and  structural  unemployment  to  fall  further  should  they  face  stronger
headwinds – and by structural unemployment I mean the unemployment that remains even when
the economy is doing well. This also needs to be the case if we want productivity and potential
growth in the euro area to rise.
At around 1½ %, potential growth in the euro area has recovered since the crisis, but it is still
considerably lower than its pre-crisis level of about 2 %.
In this context, there is currently passionate debate about national sovereignty in some member
states.  In  fact,  it  is  national  economic  policymakers  who  are  responsible  for  improving  the
conditions  required  for  growth,  employment  and  social  cohesion  –  through  a  good  education
system,  efficient  public  administration,  growth-friendly  and  fair  taxation,  and  an  appropriate
infrastructure, to name but a few examples.
This is in the countries’ own national interests and, at the same time, is the best way in which
each  individual  country  can  contribute  to  the  stability  of  Europe.  Europe  needs  to  take
responsibility  as  a  community  –  only  then  will  we  truly  be  able  to  make  progress  with  the
European project and also show the citizens of Europe that it creates prosperity.
So while there are many pressing issues to be discussed and decided upon at the national level,
an  intensive  reform  discussion  is  also  taking  place  with  regard  to  the  future  structure  of  the
monetary union and the EU. This topic, as you all know, is also on the agenda of the EU summit
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
at the end of this month here in Brussels.
The ideas voiced by the French president Emmanuel Macron, which have been greeted with a
mix of goodwill and scepticism in Germany, have provided important impetus for the European
debate. Furthermore – and this is, I believe, a great achievement – he has created a convincing,
lively narrative for the joint European project that citizens can buy into and even be enthusiastic
about.
It seems clear to me that there will only be progress in this debate if Germany and France work
in concert and move in the same direction.
The Bundesbank has also been providing proposals of its own in this debate for a long time now,
and it is within this debate that the agenda for the stability of the single currency is being set.
From my perspective, three guidelines form the basis of these proposals.
1.  The European Union should focus more of its attention and spending on tasks that create
added value for the citizens of Europe.
2.  The institutional and economic conditions of the monetary union need to be set up in such a
way that the Eurosystem can properly fulfil its mandate and does not have to intervene on a
regular basis as a crisis response unit.
3.  A  stable  monetary  union  requires  both  solidarity  and  solidity,  and  it  is  essential  that  the
alignment of actions and liability be maintained.
Allow me, if you will, to delve slightly deeper into this last point in particular.
The alignment of actions and liability means that the authority to make decisions needs to be
linked to the responsibility for the consequences of such decisions. Or, in other words, only he
who has the power to influence decisions is also prepared to bear the risks that these decisions
entail.
When  it  was  decided  in  Maastricht  to  create  an  economic  and  monetary  union,  the  member
states  agreed  to  pool  their  sovereignty  in  monetary  matters  at  the  European  level.  However,
under the existing regulatory framework, responsibility for fiscal policy – as for general economic
policy – lies with the individual member states, as I have already mentioned.
From  the  outset,  there  have  been  measures  in  place  designed  to  prevent  unsound  public
finances from jeopardising the stability of the single currency. Rules on debt have been laid down
in the Stability and Growth Pact; it is prohibited to simply print more money as a way of financing
the public sector; and countries cannot take on each other’s liabilities – the famous no bail-out
clause.
In  principle,  though,  the  member  states  remain  sovereign  in  fiscal  matters. And  indeed,  this
sovereignty  is  something  that  they  have  always  confidently  championed  and  defended.  In  this
vein, I recall Matteo Renzi, the former Italian Prime Minister once asserting that “It’s up to us to
decide what taxes we cut, not some Eurocrat sitting in Brussels”.
If monetary union reforms were to include a far greater degree of fiscal risk-sharing, actions and
liability  would  only  remain  aligned  if  certain  sovereignty  rights  were  to  be  transferred  to  the
European level. Otherwise we would end up with imbalances and dubious incentives.
But ceding a significant portion of their sovereignty to Brussels is precisely what the euro area
member states are not prepared to do – to give a European finance minister the right to intervene
in national budgetary planning if they fail to comply with the fiscal rules, for instance.
It seems to me that it’s already hard enough at times to ensure that the Commission’s existing
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
powers are enforced and respected. And that’s why I’m convinced that any reform steps need to
fit within the existing Maastricht framework.
4.2 Risk sharing and provisioning
But complying with the Maastricht framework doesn’t necessarily rule out an expansion of mutual
liability. If actions are properly aligned with liability, risk sharing can make a lot of sense.
In  principle,  there  are  justifiable  arguments  in  favour  of  having  the  collective  resources  of  the
ESM  function  as  a  fiscal  safety  net  for  the  European  Single  Resolution  Fund,  as  per  the
Commission’s suggestion. After all, we already have banking supervision at the European level,
meaning that we share the responsibility for supervisory decisions.
For similar reasons, the Bundesbank isn’t opposed to a common European deposit insurance
scheme per se. Quite the contrary. Such a scheme would, without doubt, contribute to a more
stable  financial  system,  as  it  would  reduce  the  risk  of  bank  runs.  And  shared  supervisory
responsibility makes a good case for joint liability here, too.
But  to  protect  the  link  between  actions  and  liability,  risks  that  have  arisen  under  national
responsibility must be reduced before a common deposit insurance scheme is created. What’s
more,  the  impact  of  national  policy  decisions  on  the  quality  of  bank  balance  sheets  must  be
limited.
The stocks of non-performing loans on countries’ bank balance sheets – some of which are very
high – are an example of this kind of legacy risk. The average non-performing loan ratio has fallen
by around one-third in Europe since 2014. But in some countries it remains very high and well
above pre-crisis levels.
The large holdings of government bonds on bank balance sheets are also problematic. Owing to
a  regulatory  loophole,  government  bonds  are  backed  by  little  to  no  capital. And  –  unlike  with
private borrowers – there is no cap on individual banks’ exposures to sovereign debtors.
Before  a  deposit  insurance  scheme  can  be  created,  these  sovereign  default  risks  on  banks’
balance sheets would need to be reduced in the long term, as would stocks of non-performing
loans. Otherwise the insurance scheme would find itself assuming liability for them.
My colleague on the ECB Governing Council, Benoît Cœuré, rightly pointed out the other day that
“A deposit insurance scheme should be seen as an insurance against economic risks, just as
you take out liability insurance to protect yourself against the risk of an accident.” But as you all
know,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  can  only  take  out  a  liability  insurance  policy  to  cover  future
accidents, and not if the damage has already been done.
Following  the  logic  of  an  insurance  scheme,  and  given  that  member  states  will  still  have  a
bearing on the health of their banks in future, the concept of a permanent national risk retention
requirement also seems worth considering. Think, for example, of insolvency law and how it is
legally enforced.
If we look further afield, beyond the banking union, a rainy day fund modelled on the type in place
in several US states is certainly worthy of consideration. Many states put aside budget surpluses
for hard times. But new scope for borrowing and fund transfers between states are incompatible
with this approach.
However,  it  is  reasonable  to  question  whether  countries  with  solid  public  finances  even  need
such a fund. After all, European fiscal rules are less strict when it comes to government debt
than the constitutions of the US states, most of which prohibit new borrowing altogether.
But  such  an  instrument  would  at  least  offer  greater  room  for  manoeuvre  in  difficult  situations
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
without needing to expand fiscal risk sharing or requiring cross-border payments.
4.3 Private risk sharing
Increased risk sharing within the euro area would make member states better able to absorb
economic shocks. The same goes, in particular, for private forms of risk sharing.
A recent article by ECB economists shows that, in the euro area, when a particular member
state experiences an economic slump, 80 % of that downturn bleeds through to consumption in
that country. Now, at first, it might seem plausible to us that it is chiefly the people in the affected
country that have to tighten their belts.
But in the US states, 40 % – at most – of a shock to GDP is reflected in a fall in consumption
growth.  So  there’s  clearly  another  way.  The  rest  of  the  impact  is  absorbed  elsewhere.  For
instance, because the losses sustained by an enterprise in one US state are distributed across
the whole country as shareholders are often domiciled in other states.[1]  
The much greater importance of private risk sharing in the United States shows that private risk
sharing  is  capable  of  enhancing  the  individual  countries’  resilience  in  the  euro  area,  too.
Integrated and efficient financial markets are a key prerequisite for this.
Creating a capital markets union, as proposed in 2015 by the Commission, would move Europe
a long way towards achieving this aim. Which is why the Bundesbank explicitly endorses the
project.
It  has  the  potential  to  spur  economic  growth,  dismantle  barriers  to  cross-border  investment,
diversify  corporate  financing  and  strengthen  private  risk  sharing. And  it  would  also  be  a  key
contribution to making the euro area more stable.
The  more  successful  efforts  to  strengthen  cross-border  equity  financing  are,  the  greater  the
sums  the  capital  markets  union  could  be  expected  to  contribute  to  strengthening  private  risk
sharing. After all, there is one key difference between equity and borrowed funds: equity investors
participate directly in economic risk and in gains and losses. Creditors, on the other hand, are not
exposed to losses – except in the case of insolvency.
Equity therefore provides better opportunities for sharing risks and opportunities. However, there
are incentives for firms to obtain funding through debt rather than equity. In many countries, for
instance, debt interest is tax-deductible, but the cost of equity isn’t.
To that extent, the efforts being made to create a common assessment basis for corporation tax
represent a good opportunity to reduce the preferential tax treatment being given to debt and to
make equity financing more attractive.
5 Focusing the EU
Ladies and gentlemen
The euro area can only be strong as part of a strong European Union.
What this requires – and that will be my last item for today – is for the EU to focus more single-
mindedly on those tasks in which it has a comparative advantage and the benefits of which it can
sell convincingly to the public – that is, tasks that clearly have European added value.
There are tasks that can be performed better at the European level than the national. From an
economic standpoint, these might include Europe-wide public goods and therefore policy areas
with cross-border externalities, in particular.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
As we know, public goods are defined as goods that individuals cannot be excluded from using,
the use of which does not reduce the amount available to someone else. Because these traits
are an open door to free ridership, these services have to be provided by the government sector.
The use of European public goods is scattered far beyond national borders. These tasks should
then be relocated to the European level.
French President Emmanuel Macron has listed as such tasks defence, the protection of external
borders, migration policy, climate protection and the expansion of digital networks. All of which
are  fields  in  which  there  is  visible  European  added  value. And  if  you  read  the  interview  with
Chancellor Merkel at the weekend, you will know that she expressed similar views.
That  is  why  it  would  be  appropriate  to  add  the  topics  of  border  security  and  migration  to  the
European  agenda  without  delay.  This  would  also  help  individual  member  states  to  feel  less
disadvantaged and abandoned on account of their geographical location.
At the same time, however, the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in the EU Treaty needs to be
applied more effectively, as there are tasks that are still more at home at the domestic level. And
that is why it is a welcome development that Commission President Juncker has convened a
task force for subsidiarity and asked it to consider which powers are better exercised nationally
or locally than at the European level.
This task force, headed  by  the  First  Vice-President  Frans  Timmermans,  has  been  given  until
mid-July to submit a report. This report should also present ways of better incorporating regional
and local government in EU policy-making – an idea which is surely being followed with great
interest here at the Representation of the State of Hesse.
More  Europe  does  not  necessarily  have  to  mean  more  money  for  Europe.  I  am  thinking,  for
instance, of the establishment of a single market for services and a common digital market in
Europe. These are projects that do not necessarily cost much but which deliver a lot. Studies
show that they could achieve growth effects twice the size of those provided by the creation of
the single market for goods.
However,  it  is  clear  that  providing  European  public  goods  generally  comes  with  a  price  tag
attached.
Germany  –  unlike  other  net  contributors  –  has  already  declared  its  willingness  to  put  more
towards the EU budget.
Europe first needs to define the tasks that it would make sense to accomplish jointly and that
should therefore also be funded jointly instead of starting off by talking about money, and thus
putting  the  cart  before  the  horse.  So  it  should  be  less  about  how  much  each  party  pays  and
receives and more about figuring out how to invest the funds wisely.
 
6 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
As  early  as  five  years  ago,  then-Federal  President  Joachim  Gauck,  in  my  estimation,  put  his
finger on the essence of the debate on European policy reform when he said that “This union
involves give and take; it must not be a one-way street for anyone. It is based on the principle of
reciprocity, equality and mutual commitment. More Europe must mean: more reliability. Reliability
and solidarity will rise and fall together.”
There is virtually nothing to add to that. And I therefore thank you for your attention.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 1.  J Cimadomo et al (2018), Risk sharing in the euro area, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, pp
98-112.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
