August  29,  2018 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Okinawa 
Hitoshi Suzuki 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Overseas Economies 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies. 
 Overseas  economies  have  continued  to  grow  firmly  on  the  whole,  although  the  global 
business sentiment of manufacturing firms has declined somewhat recently.   
 As  for  the  U.S.  economy,  business  sentiment  has  been  favorable  and  private  consumption 
has been on an increasing trend, partly supported by improvements in the employment and 
income  situation,  as  well  as  in  consumer  sentiment.  In  terms  of  the  outlook,  the  U.S. 
economy  is  expected  to  continue  expanding  on  the  back  of  a  steady  improvement  in  the 
employment  and  income  situation,  supported  by  expansionary  fiscal  policy,  although 
moderate policy rate hikes by the Federal Reserve are expected to continue. 
 As  for  the  European  economy,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  decelerated  somewhat,  due 
mainly 
to 
the  appreciation  of 
the  euro  and  weather  conditions 
throughout 
the 
January-March  quarter  of  2018.  It  decelerated  further  in  the  April-June  quarter,  although 
production has been increasing as a trend, and the overall economy is expected to continue 
its recovery. 
 The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  see  stable  growth  on  the  whole,  as  evidenced  by 
firm  exports  and  industrial  production,  although  the  pace  of  increase  in  fixed  asset 
investment  has  been  slowing  and  the  effects  of  trade  friction  with  the  United  States  have 
been  a  matter  of  concern.  As  for  the  outlook,  the  economy  is  likely  to  broadly  follow  a 
stable growth path as the authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner.   
 Emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-exporting  economies  as  a  whole 
have  been  recovering  moderately,  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  exports  and  the  effects  of 
economic  stimulus  measures.  Growth  rates  are  likely  to  increase  gradually,  due  mainly  to 
economic  stimulus  measures  and  the  spread  of  the  effects  of  steady  growth  in  advanced 
economies. 
1 
According  to  the  July  2018  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  Update  released  by  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  global  growth  is  projected  to  be  3.9  percent  in  2018, 
exceeding the result for 2017. The global economy could deviate upward from the baseline 
scenario depending on developments in fiscal and monetary policies and structural reforms 
in  each  country  (Chart  1).  However,  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  recent  gradual 
heightening  of  uncertainties  that  could  pose  a  downside  risk  to  economic  activity. 
Specifically,  there  is  concern  that  U.S.  protectionist  trade  policy  and  other  countries' 
retaliatory  measures  may  trigger  a  decline  in  world  trade  volume  and  have  an  impact  on 
global  financial  markets.  In  addition,  close  attention  should  continue  to  be  paid  to 
negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom's  exit  from  the  European  Union  (EU),  as  well  as  the 
political  situation  in  southern  Europe, developments  in  crude  oil  prices,  geopolitical  risks, 
and deceleration in the Chinese economy. 
 On this point, in emerging economies, while their U.S. dollar-denominated external debt has 
expanded  over the  past decade,  a  number  of  negative  factors  have  been  observed,  such  as 
the rise in U.S. interest rates, depreciation of these economies' currencies that would  have 
been used for the repayment of debts, and deceleration of the economy as a result of interest 
rate hikes aimed at containing inflation and defending the currencies. Although the effect on 
the global economy seems to be limited at this point, it is important to keep a close eye on 
developments.   
 B. Current Situation and Outlook for Japan's Economy 
I  will  now  discuss  the  economic  situation  in  Japan.  Japan's  economy  is  expanding 
moderately,  with  the  output  gap  maintained  in  excess  demand  and  a  virtuous  cycle  from 
income  to  spending  operating  (Chart  2).  Although  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the 
January-March  quarter  of  2018  registered  a  temporary  negative  figure,  due  mainly  to 
weather  conditions,  the  preliminary  estimate  for  the  April-June  quarter  showed  clear, 
positive growth mainly on the back of a recovery in private consumption and acceleration in 
the rate of increase in business fixed investment (Chart 3).   
 According  to  the  Regional  Economic  Report  released  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  July  2018, 
out  of  a  total  of  nine  regions  across  Japan,  six  regions,  including  the  Kyushu-Okinawa 
2 
region, reported that their economy had been expanding or expanding moderately (Chart 4). 
The  Kyushu-Okinawa  economy  in  particular  has been  expanding  moderately,  with  growth 
gaining a more solid footing, as private consumption has increased. This increase comes on 
the  back  of  an  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  amid  high  levels  of 
public  investment  and  increasing  business  fixed  investment.  In  Okinawa  Prefecture, 
inbound tourism consumption and business fixed investment in the private sector, including 
the construction of new hotels, have been increasing amid the rising trend in the number of 
domestic and international tourists, despite a temporary fall in the number brought about by 
typhoons in July. These represent the driving force for the growth of Okinawa's economy. 
 With  Japan's  economic  expansion,  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have 
tightened steadily. Firms' perception of a labor shortage suggested by the diffusion indexes 
(DIs) for employment conditions in the June 2018 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of 
Enterprises in Japan) has heightened in a wide range of industries, and the unemployment 
rate  has  declined  to  about  2.5  percent.  The  overall  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio 
has  been  at  its  highest  level  since  1974,  while  the  ratio  for  full-time  workers  specifically 
was the highest recorded since that survey began, in November 2004 (Chart 5). 
 Against this backdrop, labor-saving investment has increased in a wide range of industries 
with  a  view  to,  for  example,  using  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  robotic  process  automation 
(RPA), and other means. As the use of AI and RPA increases, the displacement effect caused 
by the labor positions of humans being taken over by robots and machines will be an issue 
of  concern.  However,  I  believe  the  use  of  AI  and  RPA  could  contribute  to  further  overall 
economic growth, through cost reductions brought about by automation, as well as through 
the creation of new employment in the production of new goods and services resulting from 
technological innovation. As Japan has been tackling the challenge of a declining birth rate 
and an aging population, the contribution of AI and RPA to further economic growth could 
be a key to solving this challenge. Indeed, there is research that analyzes both positive and 
negative effects of the use of AI and suggests challenges that the society should work on.1 
                                                    
1  Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo.  "Artificial  Intelligence, Automation and Work."  NBER 
Working Paper, no. 24196, January 2018. 
3 
With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. 
 Through  fiscal  2018,  it  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  mainly 
against 
the  background  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and 
the 
underpinnings through government spending, with overseas economies continuing to grow 
firmly.  Business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  continue  increasing,  supported  by  firms' 
heightened  growth  expectations  and  increases  in  Olympic  Games-related  investment,  as 
well  as  in labor-saving  investment  to address  labor  shortages.  Private  consumption is  also 
expected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend  as  the  employment  and  income  situation 
continues to improve. Moreover, exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing 
trend on the back of the growth in overseas economies.   
 Japan's economy is expected to maintain its expanding trend from fiscal 2019 through fiscal 
2020,  supported  in  part  by  the  increase  in  exports.  This  is  despite  a  likely  deceleration  in 
business  fixed  investment,  mainly  reflecting  cyclical  adjustments  in  capital  stock  and  the 
peaking  out  of  Olympic  Games-related  demand,  and  a  likely  temporary  decline  in  private 
consumption after the scheduled consumption tax hike in October 2019.   
 According to the Bank's July 2018 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the 
Outlook  Report),  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  of  the  real  GDP 
growth rate are 1.5 percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.8 percent for both fiscal 2019 and fiscal 
2020  (Chart  6). The  consumption  tax  hike  is  likely  to  affect  Japan's  economy  through  the 
following  two  channels:  (1)  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior to  the  consumption 
tax  hike  and  the  subsequent  decline  after  the  hike,  and  (2)  the  decline  in  real  income. 
However,  there  is  a  strong  possibility  that  the  effect  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  on  the 
economy will be smaller than that  in fiscal 2014, when the last consumption tax hike took 
place.  This  is  mainly  because  the  government  is  proceeding  with  efforts  to  deliberate 
various measures in order to reduce the burden of the tax hike on households. 
 C. Recent Price Developments and Concept of Price Stability Target 
As  for  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  for  all 
items less fresh food (core CPI) has been picking up somewhat recently, partly supported by 
4 
a rise in energy prices, although it did decelerate on one occasion after having increased to 1 
percent in February 2018 (Chart 7). 
 Prices reflect the state of the economy. A stable increase in prices within a certain range  -- 
not too high, not too low -- can be a driving force for the economy. To give an example, in 
an  environment  where  prices  rise moderately  --  through  an  increase  in  the  value-added  of 
products  and  services  --  corporate  profits  are  likely  to  increase.  In  this  case,  the  wages  of 
people  working  in  firms  also  would  rise,  as  would  household  income.  With  increased 
household  income,  people  are  likely  to  spend  more  on  products  and  services,  making 
corporate  profits  increase  even  more.  I  consider  it  important  to  ensure  that  this  virtuous 
cycle can operate.   
 What,  then,  is  the  most  favorable  state  for  the  economy?  The  Bank  sets  what  it  calls  the 
"price stability target" at 2 percent. There are three reasons for setting the target at 2 percent.   
 First, the CPI has a statistical tendency, or upward bias, toward indicating a slightly higher 
inflation rate than the actual one, which means that an appropriate figure for price stability 
in terms of the CPI is a slightly positive figure.   
 Second,  there  is  the  asymmetry  of  policy  measures.  Central  banks  usually  respond  to 
inflation  and  deflation  by  raising  or  lowering  policy  interest  rates.  They  can  more  or  less 
raise interest rates to as high a level as they feel necessary; there is  basically no ceiling to 
interest rates. On the other hand, there is a limit to the extent to which interest rates can be 
lowered.  It  is  therefore  prudent  to  have  a  buffer  to  secure  a  certain  "margin"  of  positive 
inflation  and  positive  interest  rates  in  advance,  so  that  central  banks  can  take  appropriate 
action through monetary easing if the economy heads toward deflation.   
 Third,  most  major  advanced  economies  define  price  stability  as  2  percent,  and  this  is  the 
target shared as a global standard.   
 5 
In  short,  the  appropriate  state  for  the  economy  is  similar  to  that  of  the  human  body;  it  is 
important to maintain the target as the "basal temperature" of the economy, and this is the 
consensus of the central banks in major advanced economies.   
 D. Key Factors for Prices and Wages 
Now,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  developments  for  prices  and  wages,  taking  into  account 
those in the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations.   
 The  first  point  is  developments  in  the  output  gap.  The  output  gap  has  widened  within 
positive territory on the back of the steady tightening of labor market conditions and a rise 
in  capital  utilization  rates.  In  theory,  an  expansion  of  the  output  gap  should  exert  upward 
pressure on prices, which would then increase core CPI, albeit with some time lag. However, 
in reality, prices have not been increasing as they should. Part of the reason that prices have 
remained sluggish is households' persistent concern regarding the future amid the declining 
birth rate and aging population, in addition to the fact that wage increases have been taking 
time  to  fully  take  hold,  as  I  will  touch  upon  later.  Frankly  speaking,  consumers  are  still 
keeping their purse strings tight. In other words, households' tolerance of price rises has not 
been  increasing.  Indeed,  some  firms,  mainly  in  the  services  sector,  such  as  transportation 
and dining out, have been raising prices since autumn 2017, reflecting increases in the cost 
of labor and materials. Price rises also have been seen since the beginning of 2018 in goods 
including beer for consumption in licensed premises and some food items. However, there 
have not been many cases so far where such efforts have led to an improvement in corporate 
profits, and many  firms appear to be having  difficulty  with accurately assessing consumer 
sentiment. These issues seem to be related to firms' cautious price-setting stance. Improving 
the  income  situation  by  raising  wages  would  be  the  most  direct  approach  to  reducing 
households' concerns regarding the future. However, it is also important to redesign safety 
nets with which the public can feel more secure, through frameworks such as pensions and 
other components of the social security system. 
 Regarding  wages,  the  increase  in  nominal  wages  has  been  sluggish  relative  to  the 
heightening seriousness of the labor shortage. This may be because regular employees tend 
to give priority to stability of employment over wage increases, and firms are maintaining 
6 
their cautious wage-setting stance in consideration of medium- to long-term risks. Amid the 
intensifying labor shortage,  there also has been an increase in the labor force participation 
of women and seniors, whose wage elasticity of the labor supply is high.   
 Real wages, which exclude the effects of price developments, also have been sluggish under 
these circumstances. If prices rise without an increase in wages, a burden might be placed 
on the national economy. Therefore, the Bank's goal is not necessarily solely to raise prices, 
but also to continue to closely monitor developments in wages  if it is  to achieve the price 
stability target and thereby contribute to the sound development of the economy. 
 The  next  point  concerns  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  which  are  more  or 
less  unchanged  recently  (Chart  8). Theoretically,  inflation  expectations  are  affected  by  (1) 
the  backward-looking,  or  adaptive,  component  that  reflects  past  rates,  or  the  observed 
inflation  rate,  and  (2)  the  forward-looking  component,  which  reflects  the  progress  in  the 
Bank's  pursuit  of  monetary  easing  through  its  strong  commitment  to  achieving  the  price 
stability  target.  While  promoting  a  rise  in  the  observed  inflation  rate,  given  that  inflation 
expectations in Japan tend to be more greatly influenced by the observed inflation rate, it is 
vital that the Bank maintain its strong commitment to achieving the price stability target. If 
firms'  and  households'  inflation  expectations  subsequently  rise,  albeit  gradually,  this  will 
feed  through  into  the  observed  inflation  rate,  which  in  turn  will  bring  about  a  gradual 
increase in the inflation rate. 
 Due to a combination of the several factors mentioned so far, prices have continued to show 
relatively  weak  developments  compared  to  the  improvement  in  the  economic  and 
employment conditions. However, it is also true that the year-on-year rate of change in the 
core  CPI  was  either  more  or  less  flat  or  increasing  for  19  consecutive  months  up  to 
February 2018. 
 It is better not to be too optimistic about the outlook, but many of the factors that have been 
delaying  inflation  are  likely  to  be  resolved  gradually  as  the  economy  continues  on  an 
expanding trend. Firms' moves to raise wages have gradually begun to spread, as suggested 
by the results of the annual spring labor-management wage negotiations in 2018. Although 
7 
the effects of technological progress, for example, may strengthen, the increase in wages is 
expected  to  become  more  evident,  with  tight  labor  market  conditions  continuing.  Upward 
pressure on sales prices is thereby likely to increase, as is happening in the services sector, 
such as dining out, and an increase in distribution costs resulting from labor shortage may 
ease competition between retailers and online retailers.   
 Households'  tolerance  of  price  rises  is  also  expected  to  increase  as  the  effects  of  rises  in 
labor  productivity  and  non-regular  employees'  wage  levels  spread  to  regular  employees' 
wages. 
 I  mentioned  earlier  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  more  or  less 
unchanged, but results of the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior 
released  by  the  Bank  show  that  the  proportion  of  respondents  who  answered  that  prices 
would go up one year from now  has been on an increasing trend -- indicating a change in 
people's perception of prices (Chart 9).   
 These points suggest that, while not yet sufficiently firm, the momentum toward achieving 
the price stability target is itself being maintained, and the year-on-year rate of change in the 
core  CPI  is  likely  to  increase  gradually  toward  2  percent,  although  it  will  take  more  time 
than  expected.  Specifically,  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  for  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI presented in the July 2018 Outlook Report are 
1.1 percent for fiscal 2018, and, excluding the direct effects of the scheduled consumption 
tax hike, 1.5 percent and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020, respectively (Chart 6). 
 II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. Following the introduction of QQE in April 
2013,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  since  September  2016, 
through which it has strengthened the framework of QQE. 
 By controlling short- and long-term interest rates -- the so-called yield curve control -- the 
Bank  facilitates  the  formation  of  the  yield  curve,  or  term  structure  of  interest  rates,  most 
8 
appropriate for achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. In theory, economic activity 
is stimulated by maintaining observed real interest rates, which are obtained by subtracting 
inflation expectations from the nominal interest rate, at lower levels than the natural rate of 
interest,  which  is  the  real  interest  rate  at  which  the  economy  neither  accelerates  nor 
decelerates; as the output gap improves, upward pressure on prices is generated. This is the 
mechanism that the Bank assumes will operate. 
 There  is  still  some  way  to  go  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  due  to  the  various 
factors  I  mentioned  earlier.  Let  me  note,  however,  that  Japan's  economy  has  continued 
expanding, as the effects of monetary easing have thoroughly demonstrated. In this situation, 
I  believe  that  the  path  to  a  rise  in  wages  and  prices  is  starting  to  appear.  For  these 
developments  to  take  hold,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  resolutely  continue  with  powerful 
monetary easing under QQE with Yield Curve Control and sustain the situation where the 
output gap is in positive territory for as long as possible, as this should lead to achieving the 
price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
 B. Challenges to Address in Continuing to Pursue Monetary Easing 
There  are  two  important  challenges  to  address  in  resolutely  continuing  with  the  current 
powerful monetary easing. The first is to maintain public confidence in the Bank's monetary 
policy, even under prolonged monetary easing, by further clarifying its future policy stance 
that aims at achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. At the latest Monetary Policy 
Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  July  30  and  31,  2018,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  forward 
guidance  for  policy  rates.  Specifically,  it  has  strongly  committed  itself  to  the  intention  of 
"maintaining  the  current extremely  low  levels  of  short- and long-term  interest  rates  for  an 
extended period of time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and 
prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 
2019."  I  believe  this  will  help  strengthen  the  Bank's  commitment  to  achieving  the  price 
stability target. 
 Second, in a situation where inflation is taking time to rise and the current monetary easing 
thus  needs  to  be  continued,  the  possible  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  the  Japanese 
government  bond  (JGB)  market  and  financial  institutions  must  be  monitored  even  more 
9 
closely. Even the most effective of medicines comes with side effects, and in this sense, a 
candid assessment of how and in what areas monetary policy is exerting its effects becomes 
crucial. 
 (1) Impact of Monetary Policy on JGB and Other Markets 
First,  Japan's  JGB  market  has  indeed  regained  some  stability  in  response  to  the  Bank's 
monetary policy decision released on July 31. Nevertheless, some developments have given 
rise  to  concerns  that  market  functioning  has  deteriorated.  Specifically,  with  the  decline  in 
the  amount  of  JGB  transactions,  the  number  of  days  when  inter-dealer  transactions  of 
newly-issued  10-year  bonds  were  not  settled  has  been  growing  at  an  unprecedented  pace 
since  the  beginning  of  2018.  Moreover,  while  long-term  interest  rates  are  often  used  as  a 
barometer  for  economic  activity,  there  have  been  instances  where  Japanese  long-term 
interest  rates  have  merely  followed  the  rise  in  overseas  long-term  interest  rates,  including 
those of the United States. Given these developments, some market participants have voiced 
concern  that  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  may  be  declining  --  in  terms  of  a  "fair 
price  formation  mechanism"  for  buyers  and  sellers,  and  of  "signaling  effects"  as  an 
economic barometer. Speaking from experience as someone who has worked in the market 
for a long time, interest rates essentially have been determined by the market. Thus, there is 
no change in the Bank's stance that, even under the framework of yield curve control, it is 
through  the  impact  on  markets  that  the  Bank  will encourage interest rates  to  approach the 
target  level  of  yields.  However,  given  that  transactions  have  been  carried  out  within  a 
specific narrow price range over a prolonged period in line with the Bank's target level of 
10-year JGB yields, the number of market participants, including a wide range of investors, 
arbitragers,  and  speculators,  has  become  limited,  and  restrictions  have  been  placed  on  the 
incentives for transactions. I believe this is one of the factors behind recent developments in 
the JGB market. At the latest MPM, upon maintaining the target level of 10-year JGB yields 
at  around  0  percent,  the  Bank  made  it  clear  that,  under  the  target,  long-term  yields  "may 
move  upward  and  downward  to  some  extent  mainly  depending  on  developments  in 
economic  activity  and  prices."  Movement  among  long-term  yields  may  be  assumed  to  be 
about double the range of around plus or minus 0.1 percent since the introduction of yield 
curve  control.  This  range  seems  acceptable  considering  recent  developments  in  10-year 
government bond yields in major economies (Chart 10).   
10 
 Some  may  argue  that  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  could  be  weakened  by  even  the 
slightest  rise  in  interest  rate  levels.  At  present,  however,  new  loans  to  individuals  and 
corporations  extended  by  major  financial  institutions  are  mostly  based  on  or  linked  to 
short-term interest rates, and regarding corporate bond issuance -- a medium- and long-term 
funding means -- the amount outstanding of domestic straight bonds, including those issued 
by  banks  and  insurance  companies,  has  been  about  60  trillion  yen.  Therefore,  even  if 
long-term  yields  moved  within  a  wider  range  and  10-year  JGB  yields  rose  somewhat  in 
response  to  the  Bank's  recently  implemented  policy  measure,  the  effect  on  financial 
institutions' lending and the corporate bond market is likely to be limited. In fact, this rise is 
expected to enhance the sustainability of the Bank's monetary easing policy (Chart 11). Let 
me add that the Bank will purchase JGBs promptly and appropriately in the event of a rapid 
increase  in  the  yields,  as  it  does  not  intend  the  level  of  yields  to  rise  as  a  result  of  its 
recently implemented measure.   
 Moreover,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real 
estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual 
paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. The Bank has worked to 
enhance the flexibility and sustainability of the current monetary policy framework, stating 
that it "may increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market conditions" 
with a view to lowering risk premia of asset prices in an appropriate manner (Chart 11). 
 (2) Impact of Monetary Policy on Financial Institutions 
It  is  important  to  monitor  closely  the  possible  effects  of  continued  low  interest  rates  not 
only  on  the  JGB  and  other  markets,  but  also  on  financial  institutions.  The  net  income  of 
some financial institutions has been supported by the realization of gains from the sales of 
bonds  and  assets  such  as  stock  investment  trusts,  as  well  as  the  reversal  of  allowance  for 
doubtful  accounts.  However,  financial  results  for  fiscal  2017  indicate  that,  for  all  types  of 
financial  institutions,  net  interest  income  has  decreased  as  domestic  lending  margins  have 
narrowed, and unrealized gains/losses on holdings of  bonds and other debt securities  have 
deteriorated in response to a rise in U.S. long-term interest rates. 
 11 
Following  the  lead  of  major  banks,  financial  institutions  have  proceeded  with  efforts  to 
improve  their  business  efficiency  through  the  introduction  of  various  labor-saving 
technologies,  including  AI,  suggesting  that  there  is  still  room  to  increase  profitability  by 
cutting costs. Nevertheless, the benefits of these efforts may take time to materialize. It goes 
without  saying  that  monetary  policy  is  not  conducted  solely  for  the  sake  of  financial 
institutions,  but  it  also  must  be acknowledged  that  financial institutions  play  a  key  role  in 
passing  on  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  to  the  economy.  Therefore,  careful  attention 
should  continue  to  be  paid  to  changes  in  the  business  conditions  of  financial  institutions, 
including  regional  institutions,  and  how  this  affects  the  financial  system  and  the  financial 
intermediation function.   
 C. Future Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let  me  now  discuss  some  salient  points  regarding  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based  on  the  objectives  and  effects  of  such  policy  and  the  impact  on  the  JGB  market  and 
financial  institutions  that  I  have  outlined  so  far.  Prudence  is  required  when  conducting 
monetary policy; decisions must be made after weighing the medium- to long-term positive 
effects  against  the  unintended  side  effects.  When  policy  side  effects  accumulate  over  an 
extended  period,  the  risk  is  that  it  may  prove  difficult  or  even  too  late  to  deal  with  these 
unintended consequences once they  materialize.  That is to say, we must focus not only  on 
the time frame in which monetary policy produces its positive effects, but also on the time 
frame  in  which  the  side  effects  build  up.  Conducting  monetary  policy  calls  for  a 
multi-faceted approach that takes both  these aspects  into consideration.  At least for now, I 
believe that financial institutions in Japan as a whole have strong resilience against stress in 
terms of both capital and liquidity, and stability in the financial system has been maintained. 
However, in facilitating the formation of an appropriate yield curve, the Bank should take 
particular  account  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial 
conditions,  as  was  indicated  when  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  was  introduced  in 
September 2016. 
 As  the  Bank  resolutely  continues  with  the  current  monetary  easing  policy,  it  will  conduct 
monetary policy in an appropriate manner so that the momentum toward achieving the price 
stability target will be maintained, while examining all relevant risks. 
12 
Economic Activity, Prices,  
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Okinawa 
August 29, 2018 
 Hitoshi Suzuki 
Bank of Japan 
Global Economy 
Chart 1 
   IMF Projections as of July 2018                 Real GDP Growth Rate of the World Economy 
Source: World Economic Outlook  (WEO), International Monetary   
             Fund (IMF). 
Note:  Figures in parentheses are the difference from the April 2018 
projections. 
 Source: IMF. 
 
Output Gap 
Chart 2 
  Excess demand 
(upward pressure on prices) 
 Excess supply 
(downward pressure on prices) 
CY 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
Note: Based on staff estimations. 
Japan's Economy: Real GDP 
Chart 3 
s.a., ann., q/q % chg.                       s.a., tril. yen  
s.a., q/q % chg. 
Real GDP (level, right scale) 
Real GDP growth rate 
(left scale) 
CY 
Source: Cabinet Office. 
Source: Cabinet Office. 
 Regional Economic Assessments 
  Comparison of Previous and Current Assessments by Region  
Chart 4 
Region 
Assessment in April 2018 
Changes 
from the 
previous 
assessment 
Assessment in July 2018 
Hokkaido  The economy has been recovering 
The economy has been recovering moderately. 
moderately. 
Tohoku 
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately. 
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately. 
Hokuriku  The economy has been expanding. 
The economy has been expanding. 
Kanto-
Koshinetsu 
The economy has been expanding 
moderately. 
The economy has been expanding moderately. 
Tokai 
The economy has been expanding. 
The economy has been expanding. 
Kinki 
The economy has been expanding 
moderately at a steady pace. 
Chugoku 
The economy has been expanding 
moderately. 
The economy has been expanding moderately, 
although effects of the earthquake have been 
observed in some industries. 
The economy has been expanding moderately. 
Shikoku 
The economy has been recovering. 
The economy has been recovering. 
Kyushu- 
Okinawa 
The economy has been expanding 
moderately, with its growth gaining a 
more solid footing. 
Source: Regional Economic Report, Bank of Japan. 
 
The economy has been expanding moderately, 
with its growth gaining a more solid footing. 
Labor Market Conditions 
Chart 5 
Unemployment Rate and Active Job 
Openings-to-Applicants Ratio 
 s.a., ratio                                                                       s.a., % 
Diffusion Index of Employment Conditions  
reversed, DI ("Excessive employment" minus "Insufficient employment"),  
% points 
Unemployment rate (right scale) 
 Insufficient employment 
Active job openings-to-applicants  
ratio (left scale) 
 Excessive employment 
Active job openings-to-applicants ratio for  
full-time employees (left scale) 
CY 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; 
               Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. 
 
CY 
Source: Tankan, Bank of Japan. 
 
Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members 
 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (July 2018) 
 y/y % chg. 
Chart 6 
Source: Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, Bank of Japan. 
Notes: Figures for the CPI (all items less fresh food) exclude the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. 
           Figures in brackets indicate the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates). 
 
CPI 
Chart 7 
 s.a., y/y % chg. 
 All items less fresh food and energy 
 All items less fresh food 
CY 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Inflation Expectations 
Chart 8 
 y/y, ann. avg., % 
 Firms (five years ahead) 
 Households (over the next five years) 
CY 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
Notes: 1. Figures for households are from the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior, 
                estimated using the modified Carlson-Parkin method. 
           2. Figures for firms are from the Tankan (General Prices, summary of "Inflation Outlook of Enterprises,"  
                all industries and all enterprises). 
Outlook for Price Levels 
Chart 9 
  Prices will go up over the next five years 
 Prices will go up one year from now 
CY 
Source: Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior, Bank of Japan. 
Note: Figures for both one year from now and over the next five years comprise the choices "will go up 
significantly" and "will go up slightly" that are found in the questionnaire. 
Comparison of 
10-Year Government Bond Yields 
 Chart 10 
 United States 
 Germany 
 Japan 
CY 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 
Strengthening the Framework for Continuous 
Powerful Monetary Easing 
Chart 11 
Likely to take more 
time than expected to 
achieve the price 
stability target of 2% 
Appropriate to 
maintain the output 
gap within positive 
territory for as long 
as possible 
Persistently Continuing  
with Powerful Monetary Easing 
Forward guidance for policy rates  
"The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely low levels of 
short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, 
taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and 
prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to 
take place in October 2019." 
” 
Yield curve control and ETF purchases 
The long-term interest rate:  The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 
10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.  While doing 
so, the yields may move upward and downward to some extent 
mainly depending on developments in economic activity and prices. 
ETF purchases:  The Bank will purchase ETFs so that their amount 
outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen.  
The Bank may increase or decrease the amount of purchases 
depending on market conditions.  
Achieving the price stability target of 2% at the earliest possible time 
while securing stability in economic and financial conditions 
