 The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen.  I am grateful to Trinity College Dublin for the invitation 
to be here today at this important event, ten years on from the onset of the banking crisis in 
Ireland.i  
 “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it"ii is a well-known, albeit 
ironically often forgotten, wisdom. There is a strong argument that the past was forgotten 
leading up to the crisis, including with the misconception that the great moderation had led 
to permanent reduction in business cycle fluctuations.  Given the costs and human misery the 
crisis has caused in Ireland, it would be inexcusable were this to happen again. 
 So today, in my brief remarks, I will spend a small amount of time on the causes of the crisis, 
before discussing the crisis itself, what has changed as a result and conclude by looking to the 
future.   
 The causes of the crisis 
10 years ago, almost exactly to today, New York Federal Reserve economists’ analysis of the 
US economy (prepared for the setting of interest rates), noted that “Falling real estate prices 
and  rising  defaults  on  home  mortgages  had  caused  stresses  in  financial  markets  and  the 
economy….  However, the analysis concluded that these problems would be contained.”iii Just 
five days later, Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy.  The rest, as they say, is history. I cite 
this analysis not to criticise the Fed, but as just one example of the international failures to 
understand the strength of the gathering storm clouds, notwithstanding their proximity.    
 Problems  had  started  to  crystallise  in  2007,  and  accelerated  in  2008,  particularly  post 
Lehmans, as market participants retreated towards safe assets. This tendency was intensified 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 by the complexity and lack of transparency in the financial system. In other words, due to the 
complexity of the market, participants could not establish with confidence which risks would 
end up with whom and how they might be exposed to the ultimate holder of certain types of 
risks. Consequently, the market moved away from many higher risks. This included Irish banks 
with their large property exposures. The move away from the higher risks due to concerns 
about solvency took the form of a withdrawal of short-term liquidity, leading to the failure of 
the Irish banks and many others.  
 It is obvious now that these storm clouds did not arise from a single cause. A recent Bank of 
England  Staff  Working  paperiv  noted  the  following  as  contributing  factors  to  the  global 
financial crisis:   
 Inadequate or flawed regulation, supervision or both; 
  Underestimation of the riskiness of securities created with financial engineering; 
  Bad incentives;  
  Excessive funding of long term assets with short-term liabilities; 
  Ratings agencies failures; 
  Flawed assumptions regarding house prices; 
  Elevated household debt; 
  A belief by bankers that their institutions were too big to fail; 
  Global imbalances; 
  Financial assets accounting; and 
  Too loose monetary policy. 
 It  is  a  long  list!    Across  the  globe,  “financial  innovation….vastly  outpaced  regulation  and 
supervision…. Financial institutions went on a frenzy of reckless risk-taking…. [relying] more 
on short-term funding, dramatically lowering lending standardsv.” 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
  Many of these failures are clearly relevant to the catastrophic impacts of the financial crisis in 
Ireland too. They have been well covered in various reportsvi, including the Honohan Reportvii, 
which presented five root causes specific to the collapse of the Irish banking system: 
  Macroeconomic and budgetary policies that contributed to the economic overheating, and 
which  relied  to  an  unsustainable  extent  on  the  construction  sector  and  other  transient 
sources for Government revenue; 
  Comprehensive failure of bank management to maintain safe and sound banking practices; 
  A  regulatory  approach  which  was  too  deferential  and  accommodating,  insufficiently 
challenging and not persistent enough; 
  An under-resourced approach to bank supervision that, by relying on governance and risk-
management procedures, neglected quantitative assessment and the need to ensure there 
was sufficient capital to absorb the growing property-related risks; and 
  An unwillingness to take on board sufficiently the real risk of a looming problem and act with 
sufficient decisiveness and force to head it off in time. 
 In  other  words,  a  myriad  of  decisions  both  large  and  small,  including  decisions  not  to  act 
(inaction bias), all underpinned by implicit and explicit assumptions, led to the global financial 
crisis and how catastrophic its effects were in Ireland. 
 There is also a strong argument that Ireland, as a small and open economy, was and is more 
susceptible to the economic cycle and is likely to experience more froth in the good times and 
is at greater risk of severe downturns than larger, less open economies.   
   The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 Results of the crisis 
As is well documented, Ireland experienced a credit-fuelled property bubble, which inflated 
both  residential  and  commercial  prices,  driving  individual  indebtedness,  reducing  overall 
competitiveness and encouraging an over reliance on property based taxes in the years from 
2003 to 2008viii.  Asset bubbles are at least 380 years old. This time, in Ireland (and elsewhere) 
it  happened  to  be  property  related  and  not  tulips,  trade  in  the  ‘South  Seas’  or  dot.com 
companies.   
 When confidence evaporated, there was no soft landing. The effects of plummeting property 
prices  quickly  spilled  over  to  the  rest  of  the  economy,  caused  distress  and  difficulties  for 
borrowers, hurt savers (including through the loss of value of supposedly ‘safe’ bank shares), 
and severely weakened the country’s fiscal position.  
 In response, a process of fiscal adjustment and banking sector support began in 2008. This 
included a guarantee of liabilities in the banking sector; a series of pro-cyclical, contractionary 
budgets; and capital injections into the domestic banks. By late 2010, Ireland’s fiscal position 
was unsustainable. The government agreed to enter an EU IMF support programme, with a 
total size of €85bn. The resulting adjustment programme brought additional contractionary 
budgets  (albeit  they  would  have  had  to  be  even  more  austere  if  Ireland  had  had  to  raise 
market-based funding, compared to cheaper, three-year official funding), public sector pay 
cuts, further banking stress tests, and more capital injections.  
 The associated human cost of this was immense. The effects are still being felt today by too 
many – such as those still directly affected by high levels of personal debt and indirectly by, 
for  example,  the  dysfunction  that  still  exists  in  the  housing  market.  The  emergency  brake 
applied to housing construction in 2008, is still being felt acutely today. Post the onset of the 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 crisis,  the  housing  stock  in  Ireland  flat-lined  at  just  over  two  million  homesix.  That  is  an 
increase of just 8,800 between 2011 and 2016, compared to an increase of more than half a 
million in the first decade of the 2000s, and c.74,000 in 2007 alonex. The consequences of this 
particular effect of the lack of resilience in the system took a while to work through; non-
performing loans emerged much more quickly.  
 10 years on from the onset of the crisis, and five years since their peak, non-performing loans 
(NPLs) in Ireland are still a cause of considerable distress to borrowers and vulnerabilities in 
the banking system. But that is not to say that there has not been considerable progress.  
 NPLs in the Irish retail banking system declined from €85bn in 2013 to c.€25bn by the end of 
2017xi. Importantly, loan “cure” (the return of previously defaulted balances to performing 
loan status) has been the key driver of NPL reduction in the residential mortgage segment, 
particularly for owner occupier mortgages, where loan restructuring has played such a pivotal 
role.xii In contrast, liquidations, write-offs, and sales account for a large majority of the NPL 
reduction in the commercial real estate segment. 
 This is illustrated by approximately one in six (116,010)xiii of all owner-occupier loans currently 
in existence having had some form of restructure.  87% of these loans were meeting the terms 
of this restructure, and 79% of them are no longer in arrears. This has been achieved through 
the hard work and sacrifices of those borrowers in distress that have engaged, the pressure 
and the requirements of the Central Bank (including that repossession can only be pursued 
as a last resort), and the actions of the banks, all underpinned by economic growth. 
 Unfortunately, significant problems remain. At the end of June 2018, c.46,000 accounts were 
in  arrears  greater  than  90  days.  The  outstanding  balance  on  all  lenders’  owner  occupier 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 mortgage accounts in arrears of more than 90 days was €9.5 billion, equivalent to c.10 per 
cent of the total outstanding balance on all  owner occupier mortgage accounts.  Accounts 
over 720 days past due constituted 42 per cent of all accounts in arrears, and at €2.5 billion, 
represent 91 per cent of arrears balances outstanding. 
 This matters because behind each account in arrears there is distress and, in the case of PDH 
loans,  the  vulnerability  of  borrowers  at  risk  of  losing  their  home.    This  is  why  there  are  a 
significant number of protections and supports for consumers facing mortgage arrears.  
 Within  the  remit  of  the  Central  Bank’s  responsibilities,  the  approach  to  mortgage  arrears 
resolution is focused on ensuring the fair treatment of borrowers through a strong consumer 
protection  framework  while  ensuring  banks  are  sufficiently  capitalised,  hold  appropriately 
conservative provisions, and have appropriate arrears resolution strategies and operations in 
place. 
 This includes regulatory requirements such as the Consumer Protection Code and The Code 
of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears  (CCMA),  which  govern  how  lenders  interact  with  retail 
borrowers  that  are  in  distress.  Firms  must  also  follow  the  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution 
Process (MARP) when dealing with borrowers facing arrears. The MARP process also requires 
alternative options if a restructure cannot be agreed or was not appropriate.  
 There is a range of advice and support for those in arrears, including the Money Advice and 
Budgeting Service (MABS), the national mortgage Arrears Resolution Service (Abhaile) and a 
Court Mentor service to assist debtors faced with court proceedings.  The Government also 
introduced  the  Personal  Insolvency  Act  2012,  which  introduced  three  debt  resolution 
processes: A Debt Relief Notice, A Debt Settlement Arrangement and a Personal Insolvency 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 Arrangement.  The  Insolvency  Service  was  established  in  March  2013  as  an  independent 
statutory body. The Government also introduced a national mortgage-to-rent scheme. There 
are  also  a  number  of  other  non-statutory  organisations  providing  assistance  to  those  in 
mortgage arrears.  
 However, these protections, safety nets and restructuring options are not going to address 
the  underlying  problems  if  distressed  borrowers  do  not  engage  with  their  lenders  or  the 
supports that are in place.  In this context, it is noteworthy that:  
  c.44% of PDH loans that are more than two years past due are more than five years past due; 
  c.40% of borrowers of PDH loans that are more two years past due are not engaging with 
their lenders;  
  more than half of loans that were more than four years past due at the end of 2016, were 
more than five years past due at the end of 2017; and  
  more than 70% of mortgages in arrears over five years are not engaging with their banksxiv & 
xv. 
Recognising the individual distress these numbers represent, I would again urge anyone in 
arrears to engage with their lenders and/ or the supports that are available.  Nonetheless, if 
we, economically and societally, want a functioning mortgage market, where secured lending 
is  priced  in  a  different  way  to  unsecured,  then  that  security  must  mean  somethingxvi  and 
banks, from both a commercial and a financial stability perspective must have a way of dealing 
with NPLs.   
 Sales  have  proved  to  be  controversial,  particularly  for  owner  occupier  loans.    They  are  a 
legitimate and necessary approach for banks to address non-performing mortgage loans.  To 
date,  there  has  been  no  material  difference  in  the  number  of  legal  proceedings  issued 
between banks and non-banks, as a percentage of total number of accounts in arrearsxvii. It is 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 also important to emphasise that the Central Bank has, with the support of the Oireachtas, 
ensured that the protections of our Codes of Conduct, including the CCMA, travel with the 
loans – it is the activity that is regulated, not the ownership. 
 The regulatory response to the crisis 
Domestically, much of the decade since 2008 was spent in crisis management mode, including 
as part of the Troika programme.  A veritable ‘alphabet soup’ of regulations, implementing 
technical standards, accounting and supervisory policies have  been implemented in recent 
years. The list of acronyms is long and confusing – CRD/ CRR, BRRD, SSMR, MiFID II, EMIR, 
IFRS9, GDPR, TRIM, PSD2, etc.xviii, but the extensive international regulatory response reflects 
the international nature of the crisis.  
 The Central Bank has also undergone significant organisational change in terms of  culture, 
structure, and process. Following the onset of the crisis, including through the enactment of 
Central  Bank  Reform  Act  of  2010,  we  introduced  significant  changes  to  the  regulatory 
framework and our supervisory culture and approach. 
 This has delivered a more assertive, risk based, outcomes-focused and analytical approach to 
supervision. Enforcement is now an important tool to effect deterrence, achieve compliance 
and promote the behaviours we expect. We are committed to the continued and necessary 
evolution of our regulatory framework, our supervisory approach and our ability to resolve 
firms as the industry and the risks it presents evolve.  
 From a prudential perspective, we are aiming for the Irish financial system to be resilient, to 
be trustworthy and to sustainably serve the needs of the economy and its customers over the 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 long  term  –  including  through  the  economic  cycle.    This  is  delivered  by  driving  regulated 
financial services firms to: 
1.  Have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;  
2.  Have sustainable business models over the long-term;  
3.  Be  well  governed,  have  appropriate  cultures,  with  effective  risk  management  and  control 
arrangements, and 
4.  Be able to recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, be resolvable in an orderly 
manner without significant externalities or taxpayer costs. 
 Where  these  objectives  are  not  being  met,  we  are  taking  action  to  remediate  them.    This 
remediation  continues  to  address  legacy  issue,  drive  improvements  and  build  greater 
resilience into the system.  
 The  creation  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  in  2014  is  also  fundamentally 
important. Its creation reflected the European nature of banking failures and has centralised 
banking supervision across the Eurozone under the authority of the European Central Bank. 
It  has  driven  greater  consistency  and  intensity  of  banking  supervision  and  has  started  to 
rebuild confidence in the European banking system – albeit there remains some fragility to it.  
 If  we  look  back  to  the  ‘light  touch’  regulation  of  yesteryear,  while  there  was  an  extensive 
rulebook, there was a catastrophic over reliance on banks, their management and the market 
as whole to act in a certain way that would avoid the build-up of undue risk. Now 10 years 
since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  rules  are  used  to  support  a  more  assertive,  intrusive,  and 
outcome  focused  approach  to  supervision.  The  construction  of  today’s  system  has  clearly 
been driven by the lessons of these last 10 years.  
   The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 Regulation has been  successful  in  improving the  safety and  soundness  of  banks  and  other 
financial services firms, governance and risk management arrangements, and reducing (but 
not  yet  removing)  contingent  taxpayer  liabilities  connected  with  failure.  To  take  one 
important and tangible example of what this means in the case of the Irish banks, we have 
demanded increases in the quantity, and quality of capital that banks hold to protect against 
losses that could be triggered by a negative shock. Overall, the system has over 3.5 times the 
level  of  equity  to  risk  weighted  assets  compared  with  2006xix.    Regulation  has  also  driven 
greater  transparency,  disclosure  and  consistency  in  reporting,  and  product  design  and 
literature. 
  Notwithstanding the progress, legacy issues remain.  These include the remaining high level 
of non-performing loans that I referred to earlier, remaining vulnerabilities in some banks’ 
business  models,  and  capability  issues  in  critical  areas,  including  in  IT  risk  management.  
Furthermore, resolution plans are not yet fully implementable, meaning that there is further 
work to be done to remove implicit taxpayer support for the larger banks.  As we have recently 
reported, banks also have work to do to improve their cultures and the levels of diversity at 
senior levelsxx.  
 This is why we remain focused on both addressing these legacy issues, and building resilience 
into the system during good times to mitigate the effects of the inevitable future downturns 
and shocks.  This is particularly important in the context of Ireland’s vulnerability as a small, 
open, economy, and the risks of which I referred to earlier.  
 We have also taken forward-looking macro prudential actions, which include:  
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
   The  activation  of  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  which  is  designed  to  build  resilience 
during times of growth, and so that it can be released during a downturn, avoiding the pro-
cyclical withdrawal of credit supply;  
  The  introduction  of  borrower-based  measures  that  limit  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income 
ratios, which increase the resilience in the system and reduce the risk credit-fuelled property 
bubbles from over-borrowing and over-lending; and 
  Advice to government regarding the need for running budget surpluses as a precondition for 
the running of stabilising, counter-cyclical deficits in a future downturn. If surpluses are not 
built up we increase the risk of requiring pro-cyclical fiscal austerity policies.xxi 
 My colleague, Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor, Central Banking, will speak more on these 
macro  prudential  measures  in  her  remarks  at  the  Dublin  Economics  Workshop  on  14 
September, so I will not discuss in detail here today.  
 We are also seeking to ensure that the financial services industry pays the direct costs of these 
necessary enhancements to regulation and supervision. Over the coming years we are aiming 
to increase the levy paid by regulated entities to 100% of our regulatory costs. 
 Looking Ahead 
The Irish financial system, and the banking system specifically, is undoubtedly stronger and 
more resilient that it was 10 years ago.  After many years of contraction, it is also growing 
again, becoming increasingly complex in nature and increasingly internationally focused, in 
part due to Brexit.   
 So, there are grounds for optimism.  However, as I have touched on, weaknesses remain, and 
as I have also referenced, it is likely that we are closer to the next downturn than we are to 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 the start of the last one. Even as the sun is shining today, there are clouds on the horizon. One 
can hope that future storms are not as severe as the last one, but storms there undoubtedly 
will be.   
 In this context, it is noteworthy that both globally and domestically the levels of debt that 
characterised the build up  to the  crisis  has  not disappeared.  In fact,  global debt  levels  are 
higher  now  than  they  were  in  2009,  reaching  the  record  peak  of  $164  trillion  in  2016  – 
equivalent to 225 per cent of global GDP. Debt in advanced economies is at levels not seen 
since the Second World Warxxii.  Closer to home, Ireland’s household and public debt levels, 
which  are  key  indicators  of  the economy’s  resilience to  shocks  remain  very  elevated  (Irish 
households are the fourth most indebted in the European Unionxxiii).  This level of debt clearly 
increases  the  vulnerabilities  to  shocks  (including  interest  rate  risk)  and  limits  authorities’ 
policy options for dealing with them in a counter cyclical way.  
 These macro risks are significant for Ireland, given the openness of the economy.  These could 
obviously affect the domestic retail banking system, notwithstanding its increased resilience. 
Risks also arise at a micro level.  One such risk arises from the increasing dependency on and 
interconnectedness  of  information  technology,  and  the  need  to  enhance  resilience  and 
mitigate cyber security risks in this area.  I have not discussed in detail today, but it is an area 
of concern that I will cover in more detail in a speech next month.   
 Conclusion 
Building resilience now, for individuals, governments and banks will serve us well for future 
downturns, whatever the cause may be.  It will also help with the pressing need to restore 
trust in the system, a foundation of which is that financial institutions are trustworthy.  
   The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 All of the actions taken during the crisis, and the changes made in its aftermath are to support 
the vital, public interest mission of the Central Bank. That is to safeguard the stability of the 
financial services system and protect consumers.  
 My  energies  are  focused  on  ensuring  that  the  Central  Bank  has  a  robust,  fit  for  purpose 
regulatory  framework,  and  is  delivering  an  effective,  intrusive,  analytical  and  outcomes-
focused approach to supervision, which remembers the lessons of the past, anticipates future 
risks, and continuously improves.   
 My hope is that in 10 years’ time, we will still remember the banking crisis and the lessons 
from it. But that between now and then we will have navigated the many challenges ahead 
and more successfully weathered the inevitable shocks that will occur, than we did 10 years 
ago.    This  will  require  continued  diligence,  building  resilience,  a  willingness  to  listen  to 
different voices and challenge the assumptions we are relying on – it is inevitable that not all 
of them will hold.  
 With that said, I look forward to hearing the perspectives of my distinguished fellow speakers, 
answering your questions and hearing your views. 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
 References 
                                                           
i With thanks to Michael McInerney and Martin Maloney for their assistance in drafting these remarks.ii George 
Santayana (1863-1952), Reason in Common Sense, The Life of Reason, Vol.1 
iii Lawrence M Ball, The Fed and Lehman Brothers 
iv David Aikman, Jonathan Bridges, Anil Kashyap and Caspar Siegert, Bank of England Staff Working Paper 
No. 747, “Would macroprudential regulation have prevented the last crisis?” 
v Christine Lagarde, “Ten Years After Lehman – Lessons Learned and Challenges Ahead.” 
vi See also Nyberg Report and Banking Inquiry Report 
vii Patrick Honohan, The Irish Banking Crisis, Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy, 2003 - 2008 
viii See also Mark Cassidy, Ireland’s Experience after an Adjustment Programme 
ix See Central Statistics Office - Census of Population 2016 - Profile 1 Housing in Ireland  
x Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government: Housing stock 1991 to date 
xi See Sharon Donnery, Trevor Fitzpatrick, Darren Greaney, Fergal McCann, and Mícheál O’Keeffe “Resolving 
Non-Performing Loans in Ireland: 2010-2018”in Quarterly Bulletin 2018 Q2. 
xii See “Cures and Exits: An investigation of the drivers of NPL resolution in Ireland since 2012”, Fergal 
McCann and Niall McGeever 
xiii See Central Bank Mortgage Arrears Statistics 
xiv See Enda Keenan and Martin O’Brien (2018) “New Mortgage Lending Activity in a Comparative Context”, 
Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter, Vol 2018 No 5.  
xv Measured as whether a borrower has submitted a Standard Financial Statement in accordance with the 
Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process. 
xvi See Ed Sibley, The Irish Mortgage Market – 2018 and beyond for a more detailed discussion on this 
xvii Figures derived from analysis of legal proceeding issued for loans in arrears as at 31 December 2017 by 
statistics division of the Central Bank 
xviii The Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) No. 575/2013 (CRR) and Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD IV) came 
into effect on 1 January 2014. The CRR is directly applicable to all Member States while CRD IV has been 
transposed into Irish national law via Statutory Instruments 158/2014 [European Union (Capital Requirements) 
Regulations 2014] & 159/2014 [European Union (Capital Requirements) (No.2) Regulations 2014]. Further 
information available here. 
 
The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) provides national resolution authorities with 
comprehensive and effective powers for dealing with failing banks. This framework and related legislation 
enhances both the resilience and the resolvability of EU institutions and in-scope investment firms, which will 
be better prepared to deal with, and recover from, a crisis situation. Moreover, in the event that an institution 
does fail, the impact associated with that failure should be minimised. See here. 
 
MiFID II contains new EU-wide rules governing investment firms, credit institutions, trading venues and market 
structures, as well as third-country firms providing investment services or activities in the EU. It significantly 
broadens the scope of MiFID by bringing new activities and firms into scope, removing or narrowing 
exemptions and covering new financial instruments and products. See here. 
 
Regulation 648/2012 on OTC Derivatives, Central Counterparties and Trade Repositories (“EMIR”) implements 
increased transparency in respect of derivatives by imposing requirements concerning reporting of all derivative 
contracts (including exchange traded derivatives) to Trade Repositories (TRs); clearing those OTC derivatives 
subject to the mandatory clearing obligation; risk mitigation techniques for non–centrally cleared derivatives, 
and setting out requirements for both Central Counterparties (CCPs) and TRs. See here. 
 
  The Banking Crisis – A Decade On 
                                                                                                                                                                                      
IFRS 9 is a new accounting standard that will be effective from 1 January 2018. It introduces an expected credit 
losses model (ECL) which may lead to higher impairment provisions and more volatile impairment charges with 
a consequent impact on capital ratios. 
 
The SSM has committed to undertake a targeted review of internal models (TRIM) for banking groups. See 
here. 
 
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is the first major reform of European data protection 
legislation in 20 years, comes into force on 25 May 2018. All companies who collect and process personal data 
in the EU will need to work out what data they hold on their customers, where they hold it, if they have 
permission to do so, whether it is stored safely, and how they can extract it in an easily “portable “ form or 
delete it if requested. 
 
The Payments Services Directive 2 (PSD2) will come into force in the EU in January 2018. Banks will be 
obligated to share their customer information with third parties; such as payments firms. See here. 
xix Source: SNL Financial Statement Data for AIB, BOI PTSB and UBID 
xx See Central Bank of Ireland report on Behaviour and Culture of the Irish Retail Banks 
xxi See also: Remarks by Governor Philip R. Lane at Central Bank Economics Roundtable 
xxii Eurofi regulatory update, September 2018 
xxiii Quarterly Financial Accounts, Q1, 2018 
http://www.centralbank.ie/polstats/stats/qfaccounts/Pages/releases.aspx 
 
 
 