William  C  Dudley:  The  outlook  for  the  US  economy  in  2018  and
beyond
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York City,
11 January 2018.
 Good afternoon.  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you at this event.  Today, I
will focus on the economic outlook for 2018 and beyond.  As always, what I have to say reflects
my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the
1
Federal Reserve System.
Broadly  speaking,  the  prospects  for  continued  economic  expansion  in  2018  look  reasonably
bright.  The economy is likely to continue to grow at an above-trend pace, which should lead to a
tighter labor market and faster wage growth.  Under such conditions, I would expect the inflation
rate to drift higher toward the FOMC’s 2 percent long-run objective.
Over the longer term, however, I am considerably more cautious about the economic outlook. 
Keeping the economy on a sustainable path may become more challenging.  While the recently
passed Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 likely will provide additional support to growth over the
near term, it will come at a cost.  After all, there is no such thing as a free lunch.  The legislation
will increase the nation’s longer-term fiscal burden, which is already facing other pressures, such
as  higher  debt  service  costs  and  entitlement  spending  as  the  baby-boom  generation  retires. 
While this does not seem to be a great concern to market participants today, the current fiscal
path  is  unsustainable.    In  the  long  run,  ignoring  the  budget  math  risks  driving  up  longer-term
interest  rates,  crowding  out  private  sector 
the  country’s
creditworthiness.  These dynamics could counteract any favorable direct effects the tax package
might have on capital spending and potential output.
Favorable near-term outlook
investment  and  diminishing 
Turning to the near-term outlook, the prospects appear favorable for another year of above-trend
growth.  Consumer spending should continue to grow at a moderate pace, supported by solid
fundamentals.    Household  income  is  being  bolstered  by  faster  compensation  growth  and
continued  healthy  employment  gains.    Moreover,  the  aggregate  household  balance  sheet
remains  in  good  shape,  due  in  part  to  rising  home  prices,  a  strong  stock  market,  and  only
moderate growth in household debt.  Over the past year, home prices have risen by about 7
percent on a national basis, and the S&P 500 equity index has risen by nearly 20 percent.  In
contrast, household debt has risen about 4 percent over the past year, only slightly higher than
the growth in personal income.  Further, the household debt service burden is low, reflecting the
extended period of low interest rates.
2
Of  course,  the  aggregate  figures  mask  some  underlying  problems.    Two  issues  worth
highlighting are the persistent growth in income and wealth inequality and the burden of rising
student loan debt.   Many people of more modest means don’t directly benefit from rising home
and stock prices.  And, increasing student debt burdens have made it more difficult for many
young adults to become homeowners.   This is significant because homeownership is a major
avenue for wealth accumulation for many households.  Nevertheless, the tightening labor market
should provide greater opportunities for workers to obtain employment, build human capital, and
gain greater opportunities to improve their financial circumstances.
3
On the business side of the ledger, investment spending should remain solid.  Business cash
flows are strong, and the corporate sector is set to receive a meaningful lift from the recently
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
enacted tax legislation.  The large reduction in the statutory corporate income tax rate from 35
percent to 21 percent and the 100 percent expensing provision for investment should drive down
the effective cost of capital for business. 
In addition, the U.S. economy should be well supported by the recent improvement in the global
economic outlook.  More synchronized cyclical recoveries in Europe and Japan—and a revival of
growth in many emerging market economies—should ensure that demand for U.S. goods and
services remains strong. 
Putting it all together, I have raised my real GDP forecast for 2018 by about half a percentage
point to three quarters of a percentage point to a 2½ percent to 2¾ percent range.  About one-
third of this upward revision reflects the firmer momentum of the economy going into 2018 and
about two-thirds the stimulative impact of the tax legislation. 
While this legislation will reduce federal revenues by about 1 percent of GDP in both 2018 and
2019, I anticipate the boost to economic growth will be less than that. Most importantly, most of
the  tax  cuts  accrue  to  the  corporate  sector  and  to  higher-income  households  that  have  a
relatively low marginal propensity to consume.  This suggests that a significant portion of the tax
cuts will be saved, not spent. 
On  the  business  side,  the  boost  to  investment  from  the  lower  corporate  tax  rate  and  full
expensing is likely to be relatively modest.  In the past, aggregate investment spending has not
been  very  sensitive  to  the  cost  of  capital,  which  is  only  one  of  many  factors  that  influence
investment spending.   Moreover, the reduction in the effective tax rate for corporations—or what
they  typically  pay  in  practice—is  only  about  3  to  4  percentage  points,  far  smaller  than  the
reduction in the statutory rate.  On the household side, the impact is likely to be attenuated by the
temporary  nature  of  many  important  provisions.    Households  may  not  spend  much  of  the
additional after-tax income if they perceive the gains as likely to be transitory. 
4
Finally, the legislation is likely to generate some frictional costs that will mitigate its effects on
growth.    In  particular,  it  likely  will  have  disparate  impacts  regionally  and  across  economic
sectors.  For example, the $10,000 cap on the amount of state and local income and property
taxes that can be deducted will raise the effective cost of owning higher-end residential property
in  high-tax  states.    This  could  adversely  affect  prices  and  construction  activity  of  high-end
housing in such states. 
If the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace in 2018, the labor market should tighten
further.  In fact, I anticipate that the civilian unemployment rate will fall below 4 percent this year
and reach the lowest level since at least 2000.  If this scenario proves accurate, this should lead
to further firming of wage growth. 
On  this  point,  some  wonder  whether  the  relationship  between  tight  labor  markets  and  higher
inflation  has  broken  down.    I  have  not  lost  faith  in  this  relationship.   As  the  labor  market  has
tightened over the past few years, we have seen a discernible firming in the wage inflation trend
from 2 percent to around 2½ percent.   Also, data at the state level indicate that states with lower
unemployment rates tend to have firmer wage trends.  This supports the case that tighter labor
markets tend to be associated with higher wage growth. 
5
As the labor market tightens and wage growth firms further, I would expect these conditions to
push up price inflation, particularly for services.  Research by the New York Fed has found that
prices  of  manufactured  goods  do  not  appear  to  be  sensitive  to  labor  market  tightness.     In
contrast, tighter labor markets tend to be associated with higher price inflation for services.  This
difference  presumably  reflects  several  factors.    First,  prices  of  manufactured  goods  are
determined in global markets, whereas prices for most services are determined locally.  Second,
there remains significant excess capacity in manufacturing across much of the world.  In the
6
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
United States, for example, the manufacturing capacity utilization rate was only 76.4 percent in
November, about 2 percentage points below its average since 1972.  Third, for manufactured
goods, there may be more scope for substituting capital for labor, and/or lowering labor costs by
importing  labor-intensive  intermediate  goods.    To  the  extent  that  this  margin  of  adjustment  is
available, it would tend to dampen the impact of higher wage costs on prices of manufactured
goods.  Finally, the  so-called  “Amazon”  effect,  which  results  in  greater  price  transparency  for
buyers, may weigh disproportionately on goods prices. 
Although inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective on a year-over-year
basis, I still anticipate that it will stabilize around that level over the medium term.  As I noted
earlier, above-trend growth should tighten the labor market further, pushing up wage inflation and
eventually services prices.  In fact, we have already seen some increase in inflation in recent
months.  Over the three months ending with November, core personal consumption expenditure
prices rose at a 1.8 percent annual rate, up from a corresponding rate of just 0.4 percent last
May.  The pronounced slowing of core inflation during the first half of 2017 was due, in part, to
transitory factors, such as a sharp fall in prices for cellular phone services.  Those influences
have been temporarily depressing the year-over-year figures. 
When these transitory influences drop out of the year-over-year numbers this spring, the inflation
rate is likely to move higher.  Importantly, even as inflation undershot the FOMC’s objective over
the past year, inflation expectations have been broadly stable.  I would be much more concerned
if low inflation outcomes were contributing to a decline in inflation expectations.  That would make
it more difficult to push inflation back toward our 2 percent objective and would increase the risk
of  getting  stuck  at  the  effective  lower  bound  for  interest  rates  following  the  next  economic
downturn, which inevitably will come. 
Even if inflation were to remain somewhat below 2 percent over the near future, that might not be
a serious problem, if the economy were to continue to perform well in other respects.  To me, it
would imply that the unemployment rate associated with “maximum employment” is lower than
current estimates and that we could let the labor market tighten a bit further.  This would be a
positive outcome because the productive capacity of the U.S. economy would be enhanced and
more people would be able to find jobs, develop their job skills, and build their human capital. 
In  short,  2018  looks  like  it  will  be  a  good  year  for  the  economy.    I  anticipate  that  the  Federal
Reserve  will  make  further  progress  in  achieving  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum
sustainable employment and price stability.  If circumstances evolve close to what I have outlined
today, I will continue to advocate for gradually removing monetary policy accommodation.  As I
see it, the case for doing so remains strong.  While the fact that inflation is below the FOMC’s 2
percent objective argues for patience, I think that is more than offset by an outlook of above-trend
growth,  driven  by  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  financial  conditions  as  well  as  an
increasingly expansionary fiscal policy. 
Moreover,  if  the  labor  market  were  to  tighten  much  further,  there  would  be  a  greater  risk  that
inflation could rise substantially above our objective.  But, let me be clear: A small and transitory
overshoot of 2 percent inflation would not be a problem.  Were it to occur, it would demonstrate
that our inflation target is symmetric, and it would help keep inflation expectations well-anchored
around  our  longer-run  objective.    In  contrast,  if  inflation  were  to  shoot  appreciably  above  2
percent for a considerable time, the FOMC would have to adopt a markedly tighter policy stance
that  would  put  the  economic  expansion  at  risk.    In  such  circumstances,  it  is  unlikely  that  we
would be able to sustain a low level of unemployment and also achieve our inflation objective.
Potential concerns for the longer-term outlook
So, if 2018 looks good, what about the longer term?  Let me start by discussing what I’m not
worried about, before turning to those areas where I have greater concerns.  For one, I do not
think the economic expansion—now in its ninth year—is vulnerable just because it is “old.”  As
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
we like to say, expansions don’t die of old age—they die either because monetary policy needs to
be tightened appreciably to combat rising inflation, or because the economy gets hit with a large
shock that overwhelms the ability of the Federal Reserve and other policymakers to stabilize it
successfully.  In general, with inflation below the FOMC’s long-run objective we can be cautious
in how we adjust monetary policy. 
Similarly, I am not concerned about the recent flattening of the Treasury yield curve even though
some commentators believe that such a flattening foreshadows a recession.  At the end of 2017,
the spread between the 10-year Treasury bond and 2-year Treasury note had narrowed to 52
basis points, from 125 basis points at the start of the year.  As I see it, some flattening in the yield
curve should be expected as we gradually remove monetary policy accommodation.  If the yield
curve  were  not  flattening,  it  would  suggest  that  we  were  behind  the  curve  in  removing
accommodation.  Moreover, this recent flattening is not particularly pronounced.  For example,
the 10-year/2-year spread of 52 basis points is only 46 basis points narrower than the average
since 1978. 
In addition, all else equal, we should expect the yield curve to be flatter than normal in the current
environment.  Not only are bond term premia depressed due to quantitative easing both here and
abroad, but the low inflation environment is also likely a contributing factor.  If investors perceive
that  the  risk  of  significantly  higher  inflation  has  fallen  over  time  as  inflation  has  persistently
undershot 2 percent, they should demand lower bond term premia as compensation for inflation
risk.  Finally, while inverted yield curves have typically preceded recessions, I am unaware of any
causal element in that relationship.  For example, I don’t believe that banks become unwilling to
lend  when  the  yield  curve  inverts  and  that  this  tightening  of  credit  availability  “causes”  a
recession.  I think it is noteworthy that in the current environment, higher short-term interest rates
tend to raise—not lower—the banking industry’s profitability.  This is demonstrated, in part, by the
strong performance of bank stocks in 2017 as the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest
rates.
As I see it, the Treasury yield curve becomes inverted when investors believe that short-term real
interest rates are high and monetary policy is tight.  Investors anticipate that such a regime will
slow  the  economy  and  be  followed  by  a  reduction  in  short-term  rates.    Because  these
expectations turn out to be validated eventually, we observe that inverted yield curves precede
and signal recessions.  But, we are not in this situation currently. Investors expect short-term
interest rates to rise, not drop, and to remain higher in the future than they are now.  Despite the
flatter yield curve, the consensus view continues to be that monetary policy is not yet tight. 
One  area  I  might  be  slightly—but  not  particularly—worried  about  is  financial  market  asset
valuations, which I would characterize as elevated.  While valuations are noteworthy, I am less
concerned than I might be otherwise because the economy’s performance and outlook seem
consistent with what we see in financial markets.  Volatility in the real economy has been low,
and this has been matched by low volatility in financial markets, which has helped support high
valuations.  I am also less worried because the financial system today is much more resilient
and  robust  than  it  was  a  decade  ago.    Thus,  even  if  financial  asset  prices  were  to  decline
significantly—which presumably would occur if the economic outlook were to deteriorate—I don’t
think such declines would have the destructive impact we saw a decade ago.  Higher capital and
liquidity requirements for major banks have made the banking system more resilient and better
able  to  absorb  market  shocks  without  this  impairing  its  ability  to  intermediate  credit  flows
between borrowers and savers.  It was the collapse of confidence in the financial system in 2008
that  caused  credit  availability  to  dry  up,  contributing  greatly  to  the  severity  of  the  Great
7
Recession.  
So, what am I worried about?  Two macroeconomic concerns warrant mention.  The first is the
risk of economic overheating.  Now, this seems like an odd issue to focus on when inflation is
low, but it strikes me that this is a real risk over the next few years.  Not only do we have an
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy that is growing at an above-trend pace—at a time when the labor market is already
quite tight—but the economy will be getting an extra boost in 2018 and 2019 from the recently
enacted  tax  legislation.    Moreover,  even  though  the  FOMC  has  raised  its  target  range  for  the
federal  funds  rate  by  125  basis  points  over  the  past  two  years,  financial  conditions  today  are
easier than when we started to remove monetary policy accommodation. 
This suggests that the Federal Reserve may have to press harder on the brakes at some point
over the next few years.  If that happens, the risk of a hard landing will increase.  Historically, the
Federal  Reserve  has  found  it  difficult  to  achieve  a  soft  landing—especially  when  the
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  below  the  rate  consistent  with  stable  inflation.    In  those
circumstances, the Federal Reserve has been unable to both push up the unemployment rate
slightly to a level that is consistent with stable inflation and avoid recession.   Now, I don’t want to
imply  that  a  recession  is  inevitable  once  the  FOMC  finds  it  necessary  to  nudge  up  the
unemployment rate to a sustainable level.  The starting point in terms of the inflation rate is also
important because it will influence how far the FOMC is likely to go in terms of making monetary
policy  tight.    Nevertheless,  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  track  record  on  this  score  is  not
encouraging.
8
The  second  risk  is  the  long-term  fiscal  position  of  the  United  States.    Recognizing  that  fiscal
policy is the domain of the executive and legislative branches rather than the Federal Reserve, I
would emphasize several points.  For one, the current U.S. fiscal position is far worse than it was
at the end of the last business cycle.  For example, in fiscal year 2007, the budget deficit was 1.1
percent of GDP; in fiscal 2017, it was 3.5 percent of GDP.  Similarly, federal debt held by the
public was 35 percent of GDP in fiscal 2007, and 77 percent in fiscal 2017.  Additionally, three
factors  will  undoubtedly  cause  these  budgetary  pressures  to  intensify  over  time:  the  tax
legislation will push up the federal deficit and federal debt burden; debt service costs will rise as
interest  rates  normalize;  and  entitlement  outlays  will  increase  as  the  baby  boom  generation
retires.  Let me discuss each of these in turn. 
9
With respect to the tax legislation, the Joint Committee on Taxation estimates the cost at around
$1.1 trillion over the next 10 years.   This estimate takes into consideration the likelihood that the
legislation  will  boost  the  productive  capacity  of  the  U.S.  economy  somewhat—raising  the
economy’s  potential  growth  rate—and  that  this  incremental  growth  will  generate  additional  tax
revenues.  To me, this seems like a reasonable estimate, recognizing that with any complex tax
legislation,  there  is  a  high  level  of  uncertainty  about  its  impact  on  longer-term  growth  and
revenues.    It  is  possible  that  the  boost  to  the  nation’s  productive  capacity  from  higher  capital
spending and greater labor supply will be higher than anticipated, leading to faster growth and
greater revenue.  But, on the other side, the revenue projections might also turn out to be overly
optimistic as households and businesses react to changes in the tax code by adjusting how they
conduct their activities in a way to minimize their tax liabilities.  This might especially be true as
people look to take advantage of the lower top marginal pass-through rate that is available on
sole proprietorships, partnerships, LLCs and S corporations compared to wage income. 
Debt  service  costs  will  undoubtedly  be  boosted  by  higher  levels  of  federal  debt  and  higher
interest rates.  In fiscal year 2007, federal debt service costs totaled $237 billion on $5 trillion of
federal debt held by the public.  By fiscal year 2017, although federal debt held by the public had
nearly  tripled  to  almost  $15  trillion,  debt  service  costs  were  $263  billion,  only  modestly  above
where they were 10 years earlier.  Over the past decade, the sharp decline in short- and long-
term interest rates has kept a lid on debt service costs—that lid is now being lifted. 
Although the future path of interest rates is highly uncertain, the most recent 10-year projections
of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) illustrate where debt service costs are heading.  For
example, the CBO projects that debt service costs in 2027 will be more than $800 billion—nearly
3 percent of GDP, more than double their current share.
10
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally, the retirement of the baby boom generation over the next decade will put considerable
pressure on outlays.  The CBO projects that, by 2027, outlays on Social Security and Medicare
will rise to 6 percent and 5 percent of GDP, respectively—each more than a percentage point
higher than in 2017. 
As the economist Herbert Stein once remarked, trends that are unsustainable must end.  How,
precisely,  the  United  States  chooses  to  address  its  fiscal  challenges  will  have  important
consequences for the economy, monetary policy, and financial markets in the years ahead. 
To  sum  up,  I  am  optimistic  about  the  near-term  economic  outlook  and  the  likelihood  that  the
FOMC  will  be  able  to  make  progress  this  year  in  pushing  inflation  up  toward  its  2  percent
objective.    The  economy  has  considerable  forward  momentum,  monetary  policy  is  still
accommodative, financial conditions are easy, and fiscal policy is set to provide a boost.  But,
there are some significant storm clouds over the longer term.  If the labor market tightens much
further, it will be harder to slow the economy to a sustainable pace, avoiding overheating and an
eventual  economic  downturn.   Another  important  issue  is  the  need  to  get  the  country’s  fiscal
house in order for the long run.  The longer that task is deferred, the greater the risk for financial
markets and the economy, and the harder it will be for the Federal Reserve to keep the economy
on an even keel.
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Gerard  Dages,  Saraphin  Dhanani,  Beverly  Hirtle,  Jonathan  McCarthy,  Richard  Peach,  and  Paolo  Pesenti
assisted in the preparation of these remarks. 
See  William  C.  Dudley, Remarks  at  the  Economic  Press  Briefing  on  the  Regional  Economy, August  10,
2017  and 2017 Economic Press Briefing: Wage Inequality in the Region.  See also William C. Dudley, The
Monetary Policy Outlook and the Importance of Higher Education for Economic Mobility, October 6, 2017.
See  the  New  York  Fed’s Economic  Press  Briefing  on  Household  Borrowing,  Student  Debt  Trends  and
Homeownership, April 3, 2017. See also Bleemer, Brown, Lee, Strair, and van der Klaauw, 2017.  Echoes of
Rising  Tuition  in  Students’  Borrowing,  Educational  Attainment,  and  Homeownership  in  Post-Recession
America. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 820 (July). 
For example, business investment in new equipment has historically been highly correlated with the capacity
utilization rate, which remains relatively low. 
As measured by average hourly earnings or the Employment Cost Index.
Peach, Richard, Robert Rich, and M. Henry Linder. 2013. The Parts Are More Than the Whole: Separating Goods
and Services to Predict Core Inflation. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and
Finance, Vol. 19, No. 7.
See William C. Dudley, Lessons from the Financial Crisis.
Since the late 1940s, any time the three-month moving average of the unemployment rate increased by 0.3
percentage points or more, it was a sign that the economy was either already in or about to enter recession. The
cumulative rise in the monthly unemployment rate from its low prior to the official start of the recession to its
peak has been at least 2 percentage points.
See Joint Committee on Taxation, Macroeconomic Analysis of the Conference Agreement for H.R. 1, the ‘Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act’, December 22, 2017.
10
Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office, An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook:
2017 to 2027, June 2017.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
