Yves Mersch: Virtual or virtueless? The evolution of money in the
digital age
Lecture by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London, 8 February 2018.
 European  folklore  warns  of  the  will-o’-the-wisp,  a  malignant  creature  that  dwelt  in  marshes.  It
would  appear  as  a  light  in  the  distance,  which  a  traveller  would  mistake  for  houses. As  they
reached the place where they thought the light was, it would move further ahead, drawing them
deeper  into  the  marsh  to  their  untimely  death  and  a  watery  grave.  In  some  areas,  will-o’-the-
wisps were said to mark buried treasure. Investigation of the phenomenon found it was related to
1
dissipating bubbles of marsh gas.
With  the  draining  of  marshes  to  make  way  for  agricultural  land,  will-o’-the-wisps  are  rarely
sighted  nowadays.  But  there  remain  plenty  of  distant  flashing  lights  to  distract  travellers  with
promises of riches. As with the previous incarnation, these flashing lights often turn out to be just
like bubbles of marsh gas – insubstantial and foul-smelling, but also flammable and sometimes
able to burn things around them.
The most recent beguiling wisps are named variously “cryptocurrencies” – to denote the use of
cryptographic methods and technology – or “virtual currencies” (VCs) – to denote their lack of
legal recognition. There are, at present, more than 1,500 VCs in circulation, with dozens of new
schemes  being  launched  monthly,  including  initial  coin  offerings  (ICOs).  Most  have  failed  to
attract users, in particular in the major currency areas. The total value outstanding has fluctuated
sharply, largely from speculative activity.
The  global  value  of  all  VCs  is  currently  around  a  fifth  of  the  value  of  all  euro  banknotes  in
circulation and around 3% of the narrow monetary aggregate M1. Of course, these figures are
probably already out of date, such is the volatility of the market. Having a million dollars’ worth of
Bitcoin  today  would  have  required  the  simple  investment  of  three  million  dollars  in  mid-
December. Because holders can hide their identity and location, it is impossible to accurately
analyse  VC  circulation  in  the  euro  area.  But  euro-related  activity  on  exchanges  represents  a
small share of global activity, and is concentrated on a small number of users.
While VCs remained an esoteric interest, it seemed sufficient for authorities to mostly observe
and issue warnings here and there. But it is the dose that makes the poison. Now that VCs may
grow  to  be  economically  significant,  we  need  to  reduce  the  risk  of  negative  impacts  on  the
economy.
In my remarks today, I wish to explain what it takes for something to be considered “money” –
and  how  VCs  measure  up.  I  will  then  set  out  what  I  believe  are  some  of  the  key  regulatory
questions  that  need  addressing,  and  actions  that  need  to  be  taken  to  mitigate  the  potential
blowback from VCs to the rest of the financial system.
What is money?
Money has formed an integral part of human economic interaction for millennia. It has appeared
in many forms – metallic currency, paper notes, cowry shells, cigarettes and even the great Rai
stones of Yap.  Are VCs the latest incarnation of money? The answer for now, and indeed for the
foreseeable  future,  is  no.  Economists  generally  define  money  as  being  a  verifiable  asset  that
fulfils three basic functions: a medium of exchange, a unit of account and a store of value.  How
well do VCs carry out those functions?
2
3
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Medium of exchange
Some  VCs  have  attained  patchy  acceptance  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  The  current  largest,
Bitcoin, is accepted by some retail outlets, but on a global scale these outlets remain small in
number, and hardly any actual transactions have taken place. On a daily basis, there are around
284,000 Bitcoin transactions globally, compared with 330 million retail payments in the euro area.
Indeed, a recent Bitcoin conference stopped receiving payment in Bitcoin because of the cost
4
and time involved in processing the payments.
Bitcoin  is  far  inferior  to  existing  payment  options.  Bitcoin  transactions  generally  require
confirmation  from  six  miners.  With  each  block  taking  around  ten  minutes  to  mine,  you  would
expect transactions to take an hour to process. But with recent network congestion, the average
time for one confirmation can easily exceed several hours.
At these speeds, if you bought a bunch of tulips with Bitcoin they may well have wilted by the time
5
the transaction was confirmed.
Bitcoin payments are also expensive. The recent cost of a Bitcoin transaction is €25, the same
cost as carrying out 12,500 transactions on the incoming TARGET Instant Payment Settlement
(TIPS). Bitcoin is heavily resource intensive, and certainly not a green technology. Bitcoin mining
is estimated to currently consume energy at an annual rate of 46 TWh,  approximately 35 times
the electricity consumption of all Tesla cars in the world.
6
In comparison, traditional payment services have made large strides in innovation. The instant
payments  scheme  SCT-Inst  was  launched  in  November  2017  and  the  Eurosystem  will
implement  the  TIPS  service  in  November  2018. A  key  characteristic  of  the  instant  payments
scheme is that funds are made available to the beneficiary in, at most, 10 seconds for 0.2 euro
cents. In TIPS, we aim to settle those transactions within a fraction of a second, in central bank
money,  with  Europe-wide  reach  and  interoperability.  So  it  is  with  conventional  technology,  not
with VCs, that genuine progress is being made in payment processing.
Unit of account
The second function of money is acting as a unit of account, without which buyers and sellers
would have to know how many chickens an iPhone would be worth, how many iPhones would
buy a house, and so forth. Such a system quickly becomes complex: just ten products already
have 45 bilateral pairs of prices. Money simplifies the comparisons of value between products.
VCs fail this test – none of them are generally accepted as a unit of account. A unit of account is
like a flag or an anthem, a representation of commonness backed by assets and values which is
even accepted beyond the territory of legal tender.
In part this is due to the lack of widespread recognition. VCs are not legal tender, and are not
backed by a central bank. Retailers accepting such assets as payment undertake notable risks,
including  potential  expropriation  by  hacking  or  by  an  enforced  rollback.   But  the  lack  of
acceptance as a unit of account is also down to the final function of money – being a store of
value.
Store of value
7
Wild fluctuations in the value of VCs mean that businesses pricing in VCs could find themselves
with a large and detrimental gap between their actual price and their optimal price. A stable value
is required to underpin effective pricing. Similarly, households benefit from being able to optimise
their spending over time by saving. To do so, they need an effective store of value that they can
be sure will enable them to buy goods and services in the future. When there is considerable
uncertainty  around  how  many  goods  and  services  an  asset  can  buy  in  the  future,  or  indeed
whether it can be used to purchase anything at all, it is a poor store of value.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Traditional currencies have a trusted issuing authority that acts as a guarantor of the stability of
the currency, and a legal framework that punishes counterfeiters. The ECB’s mandate for price
stability,  bolstered  by  the  treaty  provision  for  independence,  provides  consumers  with  the
confidence  that  the  purchasing  power  of  their  euro  will  remain  stable  from  year  to  year.  The
political capital the leaders of the euro area’s countries invested during the crisis to confirm the
integrity of the euro proved all sceptics wrong.
There are no equivalent structures in place for VCs. They have neither intrinsic value, such as
the commodity content of gold coins, nor extrinsic value, such as the value assigned to traditional
fiat currencies by the trusted public issuing authority. VCs do not even provide the dividend or
coupon  payments  that  tie  down  the  prices  of  equities  and  bonds.  They  are  in  fact  a  classic
Keynesian beauty contest,   where  investors  buy  what  they  perceive  others  view  as  the  most
attractive investment. Like in Mr Ponzi’s schemes, those investors hope for future price gains
and  believe  they  will  find  a  greater  fool  to  sell  to  before  the  inevitable  crash.  Under  these
conditions, VCs exhibit wild fluctuations in value, meaning that they cannot be trusted as a store
of value.
8
It is this failure, more than any other, that makes the label “currency” a misnomer.
Public versus private provision of money
Having  a  widely  accepted  unit  of  account  and  medium  of  exchange  helps  smooth  economic
transactions, reduce costs and enable some interactions to take place that would not be possible
under  a  pure  barter  system.   There  are  clear  network  and  scale  effects  with  money,  which
provide one justification for public issuance. Even Milton Friedman recognised this, noting that “a
moderately  stable  monetary  framework  seems  an  essential  prerequisite  for  the  effective
operation of a private market economy. It is dubious that the market can by itself provide such a
framework. Hence, the function of providing one is an essential governmental function on a par
with the provision of a stable legal framework.”
10
9
But that does not mean that private sector money is either impossible or undesirable. Forgotten
amid the hype surrounding VCs is that a widely accepted form of private sector digital money
already  exists:  bank  deposits.  This  private  sector  money  dwarfs  the  amount  of  public  sector
money  –  i.e.  cash  –  in  circulation.  In  November  2017,  euro  notes  and  coins  in  circulation
amounted to €1.1 trillion, compared with the €17.5 trillion deposited by euro area residents with
MFIs.
Certainly  this  private  sector  money  acts  as  an  effective  medium  of  exchange  and,  a  few
episodes  aside,  as  an  effective  store  of  value.  But  such  private  sector  money  is  not  truly
independent;  it  shares  its  unit  of  account  with  the  official  currency.  The  implicit  promise
underlying bank deposits is that customers can redeem them whenever they wish and one to
one with public sector cash, if they need a safe refuge in a time of crisis.
By providing liquidity to the banking sector and acting as lenders of last resort, central banks de
facto  recognise  this  private  sector  money,  even  if  it  is  not  legal  tender.  But  that  recognition
comes with obligations – including regulations on capital, liquidity, anti-money laundering (AML)
and  counter  terrorist  financing  (CTF).  For  VCs  to  cross  over  into  the  mainstream,  regulatory
acceptance  is  necessary,  and  that  acceptance  requires  equivalent  measures  for  governance
and legal certainty.
Potential impact of virtual currencies
Yet even if VCs are not money, central banks should still be aware of the potential risks they
pose for price stability and financial stability. The magnitude of such risks depends on the total
value of VCs outstanding, their interconnectedness with the rest of the economy, and the extent
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
to which investors in VCs are leveraged.
In terms of interconnectedness, the main concerns would be if a significant crash caused losses
of wealth that were large enough to affect consumer behaviour, or caused contagion through the
financial system. The bursting of the tech bubble in 2000 provides a useful comparison for the
first scenario. The market valuation of the NASDAQ fell by around $5 trillion between March 2000
and October 2002, roughly 20 times the current total value of VCs outstanding. How holders of
VCs  consume  out  of  their  perceived  wealth  and  how  much  is  built  on  leverage  are  crucial  to
determining the impact of a crash.
Until  recently,  VCs  have  lacked  perceptible  connections  to  the  financial  system.  Regulatory
requirements  on  the  use  of  certain  types  of  money  or  settlements,  the  high  risk  of  money
laundering associated with the lack of customer identification, the speculative pricing of VCs and
the limited liquidity are some of the reasons why regulated institutions have refrained from getting
involved in this asset class.
Yet  there  are  signs  that  greed  has  weakened  their  resolve  and  some  have  begun  to  form
tentative  linkages.  A  number  of  derivative  products  pertaining  to  VCs  have  recently  been
launched. There is rising activity in euro at VC exchanges and some jurisdictions are falling over
each  other  to  issue  licences  to  largely  unregulated  platforms  and  exchanges  in  a  misplaced
competitive race.
What  happens  if  this  trend  continues  and  VCs  become  more  commonplace  as  settlement
assets  in  some  niches  of  financial  markets?  What  if  credit  institutions  start  developing  larger
exposures to these assets? What if retail investors take out mortgages to buy VCs?
Amid the growing risks of contagion and contamination of the existing financial system, regional
regulatory  solutions  have  to  be  explored  while  we  await  an  outcome  from  G20  discussions.
Indeed,  we  ultimately  need  global  answers  in  the  absence  of  a  defined  jurisdiction  for  VC
issuance.
This  is  crucial  to  safeguard  the  integrity  of  financial  sector  services,  avoid  the  undue
mutualisation of risks, protect investors and consumers and prevent negative spillovers to the
real economy.
Resolute ring-fencing measures might be needed. Reviewing and updating legislation in a timely
fashion is a continuous challenge, yet inaction could be perceived as condoning VCs.
The four broad areas that require particular attention are:
VCs themselves;
the facilitators – VC exchanges, wallet-providers and brokers;
financial market infrastructures (FMIs); and,
the banking sector.
Regulating virtual currencies
Beginning with the VCs themselves, it is clear that they cannot be directly regulated or overseen
in the absence of a centralised governance and legal framework. In fact, most VCs are “mined”
peripherally  by  a  computer  programme  explicitly  to  prevent  any  legal  entity  being  in  control.
Recognising  their  limits  here,  most  countries  tolerate  the  usage  of  VCs,  without  trying  to  ban
them.
Many regulatory bodies and central banks have issued warnings, and this is certainly important
from  a  consumer  protection  viewpoint.  Retail  investors  need  to  understand  the  predominantly
speculative nature of VCs and the risks they entail. Statements regarding returns on investment
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
in  VC-related  advertisements  targeting  potential  investors  should  be  under  the  same  level  of
scrutiny as advertisements for financial products.
In the United States, awareness of the growing inherent risks to investors and consumers is on
the rise. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which oversees the US investment
industry,  warned  in  a  letter  sent  last  month  to  two  trade  groups  that,  “there  are  a  number  of
significant investor protection issues that need to be examined before sponsors begin offering
these  funds  to  retail  investors.”  The  SEC  outlined  more  than  30  questions  that  had  to  be
answered before it would give the green light to mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs)
that invest in Bitcoin and its peers.
The concerns refer in particular to the establishment of Bitcoin ETFs, some of which even use
leverage to amplify the price movements. The extreme volatility in recent months highlights the
large degree of speculation involved.
Likewise, the lack of liquidity is concerning. If many investors want to withdraw their money from
the ETFs on a particular day, the funds might struggle to meet the redemptions because they
would struggle to sell off their atypical assets. And how would such funds deal with cases of
market manipulation, as have happened in the past?  Clarity on such aspects is vital.
11
In the same vein, relevant market authorities should monitor, analyse and regulate the use of
ICOs. An ICO is a way of raising money from the public, often to start a project or to finance a
company, using coins or tokens. In an ICO, an entity issues newly created coins or tokens and
offers them in exchange for fiat currencies, such as the euro, but more often VCs. In 2016, the
total  amount  of  funds  raised  through  ICOs  was  less  than  €82  million.  This  number  has
dramatically increased to over €3 billion raised through ICOs in 2017. Potential explanations for
the  increasing  popularity  of  ICOs  is  that  they  allow  companies  to  raise  funds  without  ceding
control  to  venture  capital  investors,  or  enduring  the  rigour  and  expense  of  an  IPO  process
involving a legally binding prospectus, among other things.
Depending on their features and characteristics, ICOs can be regarded as either the issuance of
VCs, as utility tokens to access or purchase a service or product, or as securities. In the latter
case in particular, clarification is needed on the extent to which ICOs should be bound by existing
regulations, such as on disclosure and prospectuses. This is particularly relevant when tokens
are exchanged for fiat money.
Restraining the facilitators
Let me turn to the facilitators of the spread of VCs.
Vigilance is warranted in view of the repeated incidents, most recently the hack of the Tokyo-
based  VC  exchange  Coincheck,  where  €430  million  of  virtual  currency  was  stolen. Although
there is no specific evidence to confirm the suspicions, security experts are increasingly warning
that VCs could offer rogue states a route to circumvent sanctions and gain access to foreign
currency and world markets.
The ECB takes an active role within our mandate, for example our opinion on the 5th Anti-Money
Laundering  Directive,  which  will  extend  the  scope  of  obliged  entities  to  cover  exchanges  and
wallet-providers handling VCs, in order to avoid anonymous transfers into fiat currencies. The
ECB reminded the EU legislative bodies that they should not be perceived, through regulatory
forbearance,  to  be  promoting  VCs,  and  should  take  VCs’  inherent  stability  risks  into
consideration.
But  we  need  a  broader  perspective  on  regulatory  intervention  for  VC  facilitators  that  extends
beyond  the  fields  of AML  and  CTF.  Possible  regulatory  action  should  be  explored,  as  well  as
amending or broadening existing frameworks such as the revised Payment Services Directive
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
(PSD2) so that the licensing and supervision rules also apply to VC facilitators.
Protecting financial market infrastructures
Third, I would like to cover financial market infrastructure services. One could envisage a major
incident involving VCs triggering contagion from the market infrastructure services themselves to
their  participants,  and  even  beyond. Against  this  background,  we  have  to  review  whether  the
regulatory and oversight tools in the field of trading, clearing and settlement require updating.
One of the key questions is whether VCs could become a settlement asset in payments and
settlement services or be used in the clearing domain. Existing standards for FMIs, for example,
refer to the usage of “a settlement asset with little or no credit and liquidity risk ”. While it could
be argued that this by and large excludes settlement involving VCs in payment systems, it should
be  borne  in  mind  that  this  definition  currently  does  not  systematically  apply  to  all  FMIs.  The
situation is similar in the field of securities settlement. The question is whether VCs could be
used as an asset for settling securities transactions or constitute a security per se. The answer
hinges on whether they could be legally characterised as “financial instrument/financial asset”
under the applicable regulation.
12
Certain authorities have already qualified VCs as financial instruments or commodities and this
may  prepare  the  ground  for  the  issuance  of  some  specific  VC-related  products,  including
derivatives. VC derivative activities need to be fully transparent and records must be collected,
maintained and made available by trade repositories.
The use of VCs at central counterparties (CCP) should also be monitored. The European Market
Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  states  that  a  CCP  shall  accept  highly  liquid  collateral  with
minimal credit and market risk to cover its initial and ongoing exposure to its clearing members.
While it is doubtful that a VC would meet such a requirement, clear guidelines ex ante would be
helpful, and financial stability considerations will need to be taken into account by the relevant
authorities.
In my view, it should be examined whether any VC activity carried out by FMIs must be ring-
fenced from their other activities. The enforcement of segregated accounts and liabilities could
be discussed. FMIs play an important role in financial markets, and any liquidity support offered
by  central  banks  should  be  to  mitigate  shocks  emanating  from  the  real  economy,  not  from
gambling  in  risky  assets.  Certainly,  FMIs  should  not  be  obliged  by  legislation  to  provide
settlement services for VCs and VC-related products. In the same vein, the Eurosystem market
infrastructure  services  –  TARGET2  and  TARGET2-Securities  –  cannot  grant  access  to  VC
business according to their existing framework.
Regulating credit institutions
Finally, we need to look at the banking sector, whose profitability and stability might be impaired
by VC activities. EU credit institutions are already required to have adequate frameworks in place
to  assess  the  capital  they  need  to  cover  the  nature  and  level  of  risks  they  are,  or  might  be,
exposed to. Given the volatile nature of VCs, it could seem appropriate that any trading in VCs
would  be  backed  by  adequate  rates  of  capital,  and  segregated  from  their  other  trading  and
investment activity.
Any  VC  business  of  credit  institutions  needs  to  be  rigorously  supervised  to  ensure  that  risks
emerging from such activities are contained. This includes ensuring that proper protocols are in
place to meet obligations under AML and CTF regulations. Furthermore, given the risks posed by
leverage,  credit  institutions  should  not  accept  VCs  as  collateral,  or  only  accept  them  with
haircuts  that  appropriately  reflect  past  volatility,  liquidity,  and  market  and  operational  risks.
Likewise, limits on leverage could be examined.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central bank issuance of digital currency
The  advent  of  VCs  has  triggered  suggestions  that  central  banks  should  provide  central  bank
digital currency, or digital base money (DBM), as I have previously called it.
 DBM already exists
in  terms  of  the  reserves  of  the  banking  sector  held  at  the  central  bank,  but  the  more  recent
question is whether central banks should make DBM more widely available.
13
As with every central bank policy decision, any such move would need to be both necessary and
proportionate. There would need to be a clear motivation within our mandate to issue DBM, and
such  issuance  would  need  to  be  done  in  a  way  that  did  not  bring  about  risks  and  costs  that
exceeded the benefits. It is important to avoid being beguiled by the flashing lights of novelty and
assuming that, just because a technology is new, it is also better.
There  is  no  material  evidence  that  abolishing  cash  will  inhibit  crime.  Electronic  storage  and
transfer may well prove easier for criminals than banknotes. I’m also uncertain why cash is being
singled  out;  mobile  phones  and  cars  are  also  used  in  crime,  but  there  are  no  calls  for  their
abolition.
Moreover, there does not appear to be a global trend towards a cashless society. A recent study
conducted by the ECB finds that around 79% of all payments at point-of-sale were made with
cash. Indeed, the demand for cash in the euro area currently outstrips the rate of nominal GDP
growth.  And  people  who  currently  prefer  electronic  payments  already  have  a  wide  range  of
options available, without needing the central bank to provide the digital money.
A  further  argument  for  introducing  DBM  and  abolishing  cash  is  framed  in  terms  of  monetary
policy. Several authors have proposed DBM as a way to eliminate the effective lower bound on
interest rates, and impose much more negative interest rates than are currently possible. But
such rates are not necessary; the unconventional measures put in place by central banks over
the past decade have proven sufficient to meet the challenges of the crisis. And while sharply
negative interest rates may work well in some macroeconomic models, unforeseen changes in
real-world behaviour by households and businesses could inhibit the effectiveness of this tool
and achieve nothing more than the destruction of confidence in central bank money. Whether
this  would  work  to  the  advantage  of  private  moneys  with  large  disorders  in  exchangeability
remains to be seen from a social welfare point of view.
The decision on issuing DBM also needs to be assessed in relation to the impact on the financial
system.  During  a  systemic  banking  crisis,  holding  risk-free  central  bank  issued  DBM  could
become vastly more attractive than bank deposits. There could be a sector-wide run on bank
deposits, magnifying the effects of the crisis.
Even  in  the  absence  of  a  crisis,  readily  convertible  DBM  could  completely  crowd  out  bank
deposits  –  putting  the  existence  of  the  two-tier  banking  system  at  risk.  In  this  situation,  the
efficient flow of credit to the economy would likely be impaired. The central bank – now holders of
deposit funding – would have to decide which projects were financed, either directly by replacing
commercial banks, or indirectly by deciding which banks received funding. This is an undesirable
situation for European central bankers for two reasons:
1.  Legally, the Treaty provides for the ECB to operate in an open market economy.
2.  And,  by  the  same  logic,  we  are  well  aware  of  Friedrich  von  Hayek’s  warnings  about  “the
  Decentralised  market  decisions  are  the  “first  choice”  when  it
pretence  of  knowledge”.
comes to allocating resources in an optimal way. This includes the allocation of credit.
14
Overall,  there  is  currently  no  convincing  motivation  for  the  Eurosystem  to  issue  DBM  to  the
general public. It is unnecessary at present and, when the likely negative impacts on the financial
system are taken into account, such a move appears disproportionate to the aims put forward by
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
its proponents. There is no need to fix something that is not broken.
If anything, one could imagine a digital representation of cash that replicates the features of cash
in  the  reasonably  distant  future,  if  citizens  demanded  it.  Such  an  approach  seems  more
appropriate for jurisdictions whose currencies face domestic regress as they are also not widely
accepted beyond their territory – which is certainly not the case for the euro.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Virtual currencies are not money, nor will they be for the foreseeable future. Their market share is
still small and their ties to the real economy are still limited.
But  this  can  be  subject  to  change.  Regulators  and  legislators  on  all  levels  should  therefore
urgently  pay  close  attention  to  mitigating  the  potential  risks  that  could  stem  from  growing  VC
business.
It is not unknown for new innovations to bring about euphoria and hype, which in turn fuel bubbles
that eventually burst. And indeed, the hot air is already escaping from some of these bubbles.
But  just  because  the  initial  euphoria  and  hype  subsequently  fade,  it  does  not  mean  that  the
innovation is without virtue, even if early market leaders may not last the distance.
Despite  the  many  defaulted  railroad  bonds,  railways  are  a  common  mode  of  transport  today.
From London you can even take a train directly to many parts of Europe through the Channel
Tunnel – whose now profitable operator filed for bankruptcy protection in 2006. Netscape and
AltaVista were titans in the early days of the internet. Web browsers and search engines are still
with us, but those names are no more. So it may well prove with VCs. The technology may in
time become widespread and useful, but early versions of it may fade from view.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
L. Blesson (1832), “Observations on the ignis fatuus, or will-with-the-wisp, falling stars, and thunder storms.”,
The Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, 14: 90.
Friedman, M. (1991), “The island of stone money”, Working Papers in Economics, The Hoover Institution, E-91–
3.
Jevons proposed a fourth function: being a standard of value (see Jevons, W. (1875), Money and the Mechanism
of Exchange, Chapter 3). But that fourth function is generally considered nowadays to be subsumed into the
other three.
See news.bitcoin.com/miami-bitcoin-conference-stops-accepting-bitcoin-due-to-fees-and-congestion/
Also bearing in mind that settlement finality in Bitcoin is probabilistic and therefore not certain.
digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption
For example, the rollback of Ether in 2016 following the DAO platform being hacked.
Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London: Macmillan.
for  example,  Kiyotaki,  N  &  R.  Wright  (1993),  “A  search-theoretic  approach 
See, 
economics", American Economic Review, 83(1): 63–77.
to  monetary
Friedman, M. (1960), A Program for Monetary Stability, New York: Fordham University Press.
See Gandal, N & Hamrick J & Moore, T & T Oberman (2018), “Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Principle 
9 
of 
the 
CPMI/IOSCO 
Principles 
on 
Financial  Market 
Infrastructures
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
(PFMIs); www.bis.org/cpmi/info_pfmi.htm
13
14
The issues surrounding the design and issuance of DBM are discussed in much greater length in Mersch, Yves
(2017), “Digital Base Money: an assessment from the ECB’s perspective", speech at the Farewell ceremony for
Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank, European Central Bank, 16 January.
Hayek, F.A. (1974), “The pretence of knowledge”, Nobel Memorial lecture, 11 December. Published American
Economic Review, 79(6):3-7, 1989.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
