Yves Mersch: Reaping the benefits of payment services in a new
regulatory environment
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the European Banking Federation's Executive Committee, Frankfurt am Main, 22 February 2018.
 The  revised  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2)  has  featured  high  on  the  agenda  of  the
payments industry for some time and it will continue to do so. The regulatory technical standards
(RTS)  on  strong  customer  authentication  and  common  and  secure  open  standards  of
communication, which have been submitted by the European Commission to the co-legislators
for scrutiny, strike a fair balance between the previously diverging views of the different players.
They should soon be finalised and then published in the Official Journal.
The new legislative framework will support innovation and competition in retail payments; it will
enhance  the  security  of  payment  transactions  and  the  protection  of  consumer  data.  It  will
introduce major changes to which all payment service providers (PSPs) will have to adapt, and I
encourage all PSPs to ensure the highest level of security in their payment services and adopt
the requirements of the RTS ahead of time. Banks should also grasp the opportunity to work
towards a single and standardised interface to communicate with third-party providers (TPPs)
across Europe in a safe and efficient manner. Cooperation with TPPs and users is crucial in this
context in order to deliver innovative, efficient and competitive services to the people of Europe.
Let me explain this in more detail.
Security requirements during the transition period
As co-chair of the European Forum on the Security of Retail Payments (SecuRe Pay), the ECB
has  contributed  in  particular  to  the  RTS  in  respect  of  strong  customer  authentication  and
common and secure open standards of communication, the Guidelines on security measures for
operational  and  security  risks  of  payment  services  and  the  Guidelines  on  major  incident
reporting.  It  is  still  involved  in  the  finalisation  of  the  Guidelines  on  fraud  data  reporting
requirements.
Now that Member States have transposed or are about to transpose the PSD2 and almost all
pieces of secondary legislation have been finalised, I think we can say that the European market
has taken a major step towards:
increasing  the  protection  of  payment  service  users  against  fraud  and  possible  abuses  of
their financial information,
fostering the resilience of PSPs through harmonised minimum security requirements, and
towards
enabling  competition  in  the  field  of  payment  services  by  introducing  innovative  payment
services such as payment initiation services, account information services and issuing card-
based payment instruments where a confirmation on the availability of funds is requested,
as well as clarifying the applicable liability regime for such services.
I am aware that the market still has some concerns and that clarifications with respect to the
PSD2, and the RTS in particular, have been requested. The ECB will continue to provide support
and expertise in this field as an active observer in the API Evaluation Group, which was recently
established by the European Commission.
Beyond this, I am convinced that it is in your particular interest as payment service providers –
and in the interest of the security of the retail payments market more generally – to implement the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
RTS and other related PSD2 requirements as soon as possible. Please do not wait 18 months
until you are obliged to comply with the security requirements enshrined in the RTS. Take action
soon,  as  these  measures  are  necessary  to  mitigate  threat  scenarios  of  which  you  are  well
aware.
For example, strong customer authentication solutions with dynamic linking of the authorisation
to the specific amount and payee will help to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks. Transaction and
device monitoring is essential to identify unusual payment patterns and potential fraud cases. It is
also  essential  to  start  offering  well-functioning  and  reliable  access  interfaces  to  the  payment
service  user  accounts  in  order  to  protect  the  confidentiality  and  integrity  of  your  customer
information.
It is also paramount that TPPs be authorised or registered as soon as possible, and comply with
all legal requirements at an early stage. TPPs need to bear their share of the responsibility by
testing and using the access interfaces in a prompt and cooperative fashion, and by contributing
constructively to the ongoing efforts aimed at the standardisation of these interfaces.
Standardisation
Standardisation is a basis for the efficient and pan-European provision of payment services in an
integrated  market.  Already  shortly  after  the  adoption  of  PSD2,  members  of  the  Euro  Retail
Payments  Board  (ERPB)  voiced  concern  that  the  legal  requirements  alone  would  not  be
sufficient for the provisioning of efficient and integrated pan-European payment initiation services
(PIS)  and  that  the  industry  should  agree  on  common  technical,  operational  and  business
requirements to complement the legal requirements.
“Business” in this sense means, for instance, the processes for incident handling between PSPs
but excludes commercial aspects. “Operational” refers to matters such as a directory service
that banks could address 24/7 to check whether a TPP contacting them is indeed still a licensed
PSP. “Technical” relates mainly to the interfaces that banks are obliged to offer according to the
PSD2 and the RTS.
The  PSD2  and  the  RTS  do  not  provide  technical  specifications;  they  only  set  high-level
requirements.  In  order  to  remain  technologically  neutral,  and  to  cater  for  potentially  different
approaches  by  PSPs,  the  RTS  give  the  account-servicing  PSP  the  choice  of  establishing  an
interface dedicated to payment initiation services or allowing TPPs the use of the online banking
interface used by their normal customers.
As a consequence, the approximately 4,000 banks offering SEPA credit transfer could in theory
finally  try  to  meet  the  legal  requirements  of  PSD2  and  its  RTS  by  developing  and  offering  a
proprietary interface. Thus, in a worst-case scenario, any TPP would need to manage 4,000
bespoke IT-projects to connect to each of those banks, thereby clearly going against the spirit of
the new directive.
Back in February 2014 in the ECB’s legal opinion on the proposed PSD2, we pointed out the
importance  of  working  towards  a standardised  European  interface  to  facilitate  pan-European
PIS.  The  European  Commission  has  also  clearly  articulated  recently  that  a  standardised
interface is their preference, since it provides the technical basis for competition and allows even
the smallest players, including start-ups (fintechs), to enter the market with new and innovative
services that could be offered with a pan-European reach.
It is a step in the right direction that only a few initiatives are currently developing standardised
specifications  for Application  Programming  Interfaces  (APIs)  and  the  ERPB  already  called  for
close cooperation between these projects. I would even go a step further and encourage these
initiatives to join forces and agree on one common technical specification so that the whole of
Europe could base their systems upon one or a few technical API standards. This will greatly
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
facilitate market entry, avoid fragmentation and allow for competition at the service level, avoiding
obstacles at the technical level.
To  promote  the  uptake  of  standardised APIs,  the  European  Commission  has  invited  market
participants to establish an API Evaluation Group, which has just started its work. I call on the
banks  to  actively,  substantively  and  speedily  contribute  to  the  activities  of  this  Group,  as  its
findings  are  essential  for  the  competent  authorities,  after  consulting  the  EBA,  to  grant  an
exemption from the RTS obligation to offer a fallback solution for the dedicated interface.
I am of course aware that a bank can also be compliant with the RTS by offering an adaptation of
its  customer  online  banking  interface  instead  of  a dedicated interface. Such interfaces would
meet the legal requirements, but would not meet the market needs of efficient and pan-European
provision of payment initiation services. So I was disappointed when I heard that some banks
seem  to  be  seriously  considering  this  option.  I  strongly  encourage  them  to  offer  a  dedicated
interface, based on a standardised specification, as this is one pillar of successful PIS.
Last, but certainly not least, the ERPB extended the mandate of its Working Group on payment
initiation services to follow up several common requirements related to operational and business
elements, which together are the other pillar of successful PIS. I appreciate the commitment that
the banks have shown to this important task and expect to complete the work by June 2018. It is
important that the API Evaluation Group and the ERPB Working Group progress in parallel so
that PSPs have clarity by the summer and can plan their investments that need to be made.
Then they can prepare for a timely implementation of PSD2 and the RTS and be ready for the
competition that PSD2 aims to foster.
Conclusion
To conclude, I would strongly encourage European payment service providers to embrace the
opportunities  the  PSD2  provides  for  competition  and  innovation,  to  cooperate  in  the
standardisation  of APIs  that  should  preferably  result  in  a  single API,  and  to  implement  all  the
security requirements of the new directive and its RTS as soon as possible, even before they
become mandatory.
I  count  on  the  full  commitment  of  the  European  Banking  Federation  and  the  entire  payments
industry to work towards safe, efficient and innovative payment services.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
