Peter Praet: Global monetary policies - similarities and differences
on the way to the new normal
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  GIC/SUERF/Deutsche  Bundesbank  Conference  "Monetary  and  economic  policies  on  both
sides of the Atlantic", Frankfurt am Main, 8 February 2018.
Accompanying slides
 I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his support in preparing this speech.
One of the main features of central banks’ response to the crisis – and the threat it posed to their
statutory objectives – was the deployment of additional monetary policy instruments. Some of
these  instruments,  such  as  asset  purchases,  had  featured  in  the  traditional  toolkit  of  central
banks in the early years of central banking before largely falling out of use in some parts of the
world. Others, such as forward guidance on the future direction of policy, were a more recent
invention, but had been used with some regularity even before the crisis erupted in 2007. And
some  instruments,  such  as  moderately  negative  interest  rates,  were  more  specific  to  certain
jurisdictions.  Overall,  these  measures  have  been  very  effective  and  helped  set  in  train  the
synchronous expansion the global economy is currently experiencing.
As the global economy emerges from the greatest slump since the end of the Second World
War, the focus is on calibrating the degree of monetary accommodation that is still required. In
the United States, where real GDP returned to pre-crisis peak level back in 2011, the tightening
cycle has been under way for some time. The Federal Reserve stabilised its monetary policy
portfolio in October 2014 and started to raise the federal funds rate more than a year later. More
recently, it has started to reduce its balance sheet.
In  the  euro  area,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  meant  that  the  cyclical  recovery  took  considerably
longer to materialise than across the Atlantic. Real GDP did not return to its pre-crisis peak level
until 2015, four years later than in the United States.
Nevertheless,  the  euro  area  is  currently  experiencing  a  solid  and  broad-based  economic
expansion,  with  the  economy  in  2017  growing  at  its  fastest  pace  for  a  decade.  The  very
accommodative monetary policy measures we have taken since 2014 are judged to have had a
significant  impact  on  output  growth.  Looking  ahead,  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  remain
consistently above potential growth in the coming years.
Despite these favourable developments,  inflation  continues  to  be  lacklustre  and  to  date  is  not
receiving  sufficient  support  from  underlying  inflationary  pressures.  While  our  measures  have
clearly played a decisive role in keeping inflation expectations anchored and have contributed to
an improved inflation outlook, an ample degree of monetary accommodation therefore remains
necessary to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%
over the medium term.
How is our monetary policy likely to evolve in the foreseeable future?
Our monetary policy stance is currently determined by the combination and mutual interaction of
the asset purchase programme (APP), our policy rates and our forward guidance on each of
these  tools. Additional  stimulus  is  provided  by  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations
(TLTROs), which will remain outstanding for the next three years.
Once  our  key  interest  rates  had  reached  exceptionally  low  levels,  the  APP  became  for  all
practical purposes the primary policy tool for calibrating our monetary policy stance. This is why,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
since January 2015, we have been signalling the traditionally tight connection between the ECB’s
monetary policy and the price stability objective by linking an assessment of the medium-term
outlook for inflation to the size and duration of our net asset purchases. Accordingly, we have
consistently  communicated  our  intention  to  continue  with  our  chosen  pace  of  monthly  net
purchases  until  we  see  “a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  our
inflation aim”. In addition, the pledge to reinvest the proceeds from the principal payments that
accrue from the maturing securities in our portfolio should be seen as a necessary complement
to the net asset purchases.
Forward guidance on both policy rates and the APP plays a key role in determining our monetary
policy stance. Its function has evolved significantly over time. In July 2013, when we announced
for the first time that we expected our “key interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for
an  extended  period  of  time”,  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  was  intended  as  a  protective
measure  to  insulate  the  euro  area  money  market  from  the  global  financial  turmoil  that  had
followed the “taper tantrum” a few weeks earlier.
As the macroeconomic environment deteriorated in late 2013 and early 2014, our policy needed
to become distinctly more accommodative, and forward guidance turned into a vehicle for easing
the monetary policy stance. Forward guidance has not taken the same form across all major
economies, differing in terms of both its degree of conditionality and the instruments to which it is
attached
In the euro area, since the APP has been in place, forward guidance has been extended to key
parameters of our purchases and has helped investors form expectations about the size of the
APP and its duration. In particular, we have indicated a minimum horizon – an intended end-date
–  until  which  time  we  plan  to  carry  out  net  monthly  purchases,  while  retaining  the  option  of
extending the programme beyond that intended end-date if the “sustained adjustment” condition
has not been met.
The mutually reinforcing nature of our forward guidance on policy rates and the APP became
even more evident in March 2016, when the Governing Council clarified the future sequencing of
these two instruments. By stating that policy rates were expected to remain at present levels
“well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases”,  the  Governing  Council  made  it  clear  that
keeping policy rates well anchored for the entire lifespan of the asset purchases was an enabling
condition for the purchases to exert their full impact.
Looking ahead, monetary policy will evolve in a data-dependent and time-consistent manner. The
transition towards policy normalisation will begin once the Governing Council judges that there is
a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. This assessment will be based on three criteria for
the inflation outlook: convergence, confidence and resilience.
Convergence implies that headline inflation will have to be on course to reach levels below, but
close  to,  2%  by  the  end  point  of  a  meaningful  medium-term  horizon.  This  first  criterion  is  a
necessary but not sufficient condition for a sustained adjustment. The Governing Council needs
to be confident that the expectation of an upward adjustment in inflation has a sufficiently high
probability of being realised on a sustainable basis. So, a sufficient degree of confidence in our
inflation projections will be a key requirement for declaring that a sustained adjustment has been
achieved. Our third criterion, resilience, measures the robustness of inflation convergence to a
partial  withdrawal  of  monetary  policy  accommodation.  Ultimately,  we  will  need  to  verify  that
inflation  would  remain  on  a  sustained  path  of  adjustment  even  in  a  less  accommodative
monetary policy environment.
The lessons learnt from the financial crisis have shown that it is crucial to test the confidence
criterion and assess the resilience of the economy and of transmission to a partial withdrawal of
accommodation.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  strong  cyclical  momentum,  the  ongoing  reduction  of  economic  slack  and  increasing
capacity  utilisation  strengthen  our  confidence  that  inflation  will  converge  towards  our  aim.
However,  measuring  the  degree  of  remaining  unutilised  resources  in  the  economy  remains
challenging. In the labour market, the elasticity of labour supply during the recovery has been
greater  than  assumed  in  our  baseline  scenario.  This  can  be  partly  attributed  to  pension  and
labour  market  reforms  as  well  as  to  migratory  flows.  Increased  labour  supply  has  resulted  in
muted  wage  dynamics,  thereby  keeping  a  lid  on  underlying  price  pressures.  Overall,  the
uncertainty surrounding the upward path in inflation that we consider in our baseline scenario is
still too high.
Experience demonstrates the importance of our third criterion, resilience. Monetary policymakers
always  face  a  delicate  balancing  act  at  turning  points  in  monetary  policy.  In  2011,  when  we
increased interest rates, economic activity indicators were pointing to buoyancy and, of course,
inflation  was  high  on  account  of  oil  prices.  Hindsight  gives  us  today  a  clearer  view  of  the
underlying conditions of the economy than it was possible to have at the time, and we now know
that the apparent robustness of the economy was in fact masking vulnerabilities that made the
economy prone to sudden reversals. And in the summer of that year, a sudden reversal was
indeed  what  we  saw.  In  2013,  we  experienced  a  similar,  if  less  dramatic,  difficulty  in  our
assessment of the economic situation. Over that year, banks started to repay the funds that they
had borrowed under the two three-year LTROs which we had offered between late 2011 and
early 2012. Many observers at the time interpreted this massive reimbursement – including from
banks that had been hit particularly hard by the sovereign debt crisis – as a sign of normalisation.
In  reality,  it  was  a  symptom  of  the  aggressive  deleveraging  that  banks  were  pursuing,  which
made ECB borrowing unnecessary and costly to maintain on-balance sheet for many of them.
While  reimbursing  excess  liquidity  made  a  lot  of  sense  from  the  individual  bank’s  micro-
perspective, it was hurting the economy in the aggregate.
Today, we want to make sure that the economy is on a sufficiently robust footing before there is
a turn in policy. From that perspective, there is still some way to go before all three criteria for a
sustained adjustment are met at the same time. So, we still need patience and persistence in
our monetary policy.
We  need  patience  because  it  takes  time  for  price  pressures  to  build  up.  And  we  need
persistence because the pick-up in inflation is the result of the prevailing monetary policy stance.
If the flow of incoming data were to confirm the expectation of a gradual build-up of inflationary
pressures,  this  would  not  necessarily  be  sufficient  to  affirm  a  sustained  adjustment  as  less
supportive monetary policy conditions could imperil the inflation trajectory.
Once the Governing Council judges that the three criteria for sustained adjustment have been
met,  net  asset  purchases  will  expire,  in  line  with  our  guidance.  From  that  point  in  time,  the
evolution of inflation will remain conditional on reinvestments continuing for an extended period of
time,  and  on  policy  rates  remaining  at  their  present  levels  well  past  the  end  of  our  net  asset
purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure that inflation stabilises durably
around levels below, but close to, 2%.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
