Peter Praet: Economic developments in the euro area
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the European Finance Forum, Frankfurt, 9 April 2018.
 I would like to thank Claus Brand, Maarten Dossche and John Hutchinson for their support in
preparing this speech.
The economic expansion clearly shows that our monetary policy has been effective in laying the
groundwork  for  a  return  of  inflation  to  a  rate  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.
Inflation  developments  remain  subdued,  however,  and  we  have  not  yet  met  the  Governing
Council’s criteria for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, which is our stated condition
for ceasing our net asset purchases. Overall, an ample degree of monetary stimulus remains
necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and support headline inflation
developments over the medium term.
Real GDP has expanded for 19 consecutive quarters. It grew by 2.7% year on year in the fourth
quarter  of  2017,  according  to  preliminary  data.  This  is  well  above  the  latest  potential  growth
1
estimates of around 1.5%.
See, for example, the European Commission’s “European Economic Forecast – Autumn 2017”.
Potential growth was estimated at 1.4% for 2017 and 1.5% for 2018 and 2019.
The latest economic data and survey results point towards some moderation of late, but remain
consistent with strong growth for the first quarter of this year. The composite output Purchasing
Managers’ Index – which is closely correlated with growth in the euro area – remains above its
long-term  average  and  is  close  to  a  12-year  high.  Moreover,  Eurostat’s  Economic  Sentiment
Indicator is around its highest level for 17 years. While risks to growth can be assessed as being
broadly balanced, the international trade environment may have added to the downside. This is
also  reflected  in  financial  conditions,  which  have  recently  tightened  while  remaining  very
supportive.
The ongoing expansion has led to strong employment gains. The number of people employed in
the euro area has increased by almost 7.8 million since the trough in mid-2013. This implies that
all of the job losses recorded during the crisis have been recovered. The unemployment rate is at
its lowest level since December 2008, despite an increase in the labour force of more than 2%.
Consumer  spending  is  being  driven  by  steady  growth  in  households’  real  disposable  income,
favourable  bank  lending  conditions  and  the  notable  progress  achieved  in  deleveraging.  Since
2016 employment growth, together with the gradual increase in compensation per employee, has
become the main driver of households’ real disposable income, while the contribution of taxes
and  transfers  has  become  more  negative,  as  in  good  times  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers
somewhat  dampen  the  growth  of  real  disposable  income.  This  also  contrasts  with  the  early
years of the recovery (2014–15), when real disposable income was still strongly supported by
improvement in the terms of trade as a result of the fall in oil prices.
The  investment  outlook  is  supported  by  a  need  to  modernise  the  capital  stock  after  years  of
subdued investment and an improving outlook for profitability. Moreover, it is also supported by
easy financing conditions as our policy measures have passed through the financial system to
the benefit of businesses and their customers.
Since  we  announced  our  policy  measures  in  June  2014,  financial  conditions  have  eased
considerably. In particular, bank lending rates for euro area non-financial corporations have fallen
by around 120 basis points, and for households by around 110 basis points. Rates on very small
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),
have declined by around 200 basis points. The significant improvement in funding conditions for
SMEs is especially encouraging as these companies provide two-thirds of the total private sector
employment  in  the  euro  area.  Heterogeneity  of  lending  rates  across  countries  has  also  fallen
sharply.  For  example,  the  difference  between  the  average  lending  rate  for  firms  in  countries
which  were  severely  affected  by  the  crisis,  and  the  average  lending  rate  for  firms  in  other
countries,  has  narrowed  by  more  than  100  basis  points  since  we  announced  our  policy
measures. The pass-through of our monetary policy has become more even.
Banks  are  also  passing  on  the  favourable  funding  conditions  to  their  customers  due  to  our
second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II), which further supports
2
these positive developments.
For  more  details,  see  the  box  entitled  “The  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations:  an
overview  of  the  take-up  and  their  impact  on  bank  intermediation”, Economic  Bulletin,  Issue  3,
ECB, 2017.
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding.
According to the latest Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises
3
See  the  ECB’s  euro  area  bank  lending  survey,  January  2018,  and  the  ECB’s  Survey  on  the
Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area, April to September 2017.
,  covering  the  period  from April  to  September  2017,  euro  area  SMEs  have  continued  to  see
improvements  in  the  availability  of  bank  loans.  Market-based  funding  conditions  have  also
improved significantly in response to the corporate sector purchase programme we launched in
June 2016.
Against the backdrop of this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand has
become the mainstay of euro area economic growth, making it more resilient to developments
overseas.  Meanwhile,  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  remain  above  potential  growth  in  the
coming  years.  The  cyclical  momentum  and  the  ongoing  reduction  of  economic  slack  further
strengthens our confidence that inflation will converge towards our aim of below, but close to,
2%.
That being said, inflation continues to be lacklustre. After lingering at levels well below 1% for
three  years,  with  occasional  dips  into  negative  territory,  euro  area  headline  inflation  increased
towards the end of 2016 and has fluctuated, for the most part, between 1.3% and 1.5% since
May last year. Annual inflation stood at 1.4% in March, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. On
the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,  annual  rates  of  headline  inflation  are  likely  to  hover
around current levels in the coming months. Measures of underlying inflation remain subdued
and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Muted wage dynamics are one important element keeping a lid on underlying price pressures.
There  is  much  discussion  about  the  Phillips  curve  having  become  flatter  in  recent  years,
suggesting that the relationship between economic slack and inflation has weakened. But it is
difficult  to  determine  empirically  whether  changes  in  the  Phillips  curve  stem  from  a
mismeasurement of slack or from parallel shifts in the curve. In other words, a flattening of the
Phillips  curve  could  be  confused  with  a  mismeasurement  of  slack  or  a  parallel  shift  of  the
complete curve.
Indeed,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy.  One
reason for this is that productive capacities may have been positively affected by labour market
reforms. In addition, the prolonged period of robust economic expansion entailed a reversal of
crisis-related  hysteresis.  Indeed,  non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)
estimates have been continuously revised downwards. When looking at slack over the past few
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
years, it is also worth considering alternative measures of unemployment. The U6 measure, for
example, captures unemployment, underemployment (meaning workers who would like to work
more  hours)  and  marginal  attachment,  namely  those  workers  who  are  not  competing  very
actively in the labour market, for example because they are not available to start a new job at
4
short notice.
See the box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
Parallel shifts of the Phillips curve could arise from the impacts of cost-push shocks or from a
de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  with  different  implications  for  monetary  policy.  External
and domestic cost-push shocks could have led to a downward shift in the Phillips curve of the
euro  area.  Over  recent  years  the  global  economy  has  experienced  negative  price  shocks  in
energy markets, which have tended to push up output while containing inflation in the euro area.
If, however, shifts in the Phillips curve are the result of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations,
they raise significant concerns over the ability of the central bank to achieve its inflation objective.
While there were signs of de-anchoring appearing in 2014, our monetary policy measures have
been  successful  in  stabilising  inflation  expectations  and  making  deflation  risks  vanish.  Our
primary task as a central bank is to ensure that the traditional relationship between the real and
the nominal sides of the economy reasserts itself at a steady-state rate of inflation that is below,
but close to, 2%.
In summary, there appears to have been a disconnect between growth and inflation. However,
the ongoing economic expansion is expected to further contribute to a narrowing of the output
and unemployment gaps, whatever their current levels. As slack in the economy continues to be
absorbed,  price  pressures  will  gradually  build  up  and  the  traditional  Phillips  curve  relationship
between inflation and the business cycle should eventually reassert itself.
The disconnect between output growth and inflation is not the only type of disconnect that we
have  to  contend  with.  If  past  regularities  were  a  guide,  the  substantial  easing  of  financing
conditions prompted by our policy measures could have been expected to boost spending and
inflation  more  forcefully Across  advanced  economies  we  have  indeed  witnessed  a  ubiquitous
downward trend in real interest rates. In the euro area, lately they have been around –1.5% at
short  maturities  and  around  –0.5%  in  the  ten-year  maturity  segment.  Both  figures  are  around
1.5  percentage  points  lower  than  their  corresponding  averages  over  the  first  ten  years  of
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The fact that inflation dynamics have been tepid indicates
that historical averages may not be an appropriate benchmark for today’s policy stance and that
corresponding benchmark levels must have fallen.
Policymakers need to be wary of these trends. They are probably rooted in receding growth rates
in  potential  output  and  the  legacy  of  financial  factors  that  have  emerged  in  the  wake  of  the
financial crisis (like risk aversion and deleveraging pressures). The degree of monetary policy
accommodation, based on various real return measures, needs to be assessed relative to these
benchmark trends in real yields.
Certainly, if these slow-moving trends in real yields are also taken into account, the current level
of real interest rates provides an ample degree of policy accommodation. But interpreting their
present  levels  against  the  background  of  their  protracted  downtrend  and  persistently  subdued
inflation underpins our stance that we have to be prudent, patient and persistent in calibrating our
policy, as inflation will probably converge only gradually towards our objective.
Looking  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  evolve  in  a  data-dependent  and  time-consistent  manner.
Once  the  Governing  Council  judges  that  the  three  criteria  for  sustained  adjustment  –
convergence, confidence and resilience – have been met, net asset purchases will expire, in line
with  our  guidance.  From  that  point  in  time,  inflation  developments  will  remain  conditional  on
reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time and on policy rates remaining at their
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases. The stock of long-duration assets
held in our portfolio will continue to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates well
beyond the end of our net purchases. Policy rates remaining at their present levels well past the
end of our net purchases will contribute to holding the short to intermediate portions of the yield
curve  in  check  for  as  long  as  necessary,  thereby  ensuring  that  financial  conditions  remain
consistent with a sustained adjustment of inflation.
1
2
3
4
  See,  for  example,  the  European  Commission’s  “European  Economic  Forecast  – Autumn  2017”.  Potential
growth was estimated at 1.4% for 2017 and 1.5% for 2018 and 2019.
For more details, see the box entitled “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-
up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, January 2018, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, April to September 2017.
See the box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
