Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  ASEAN+3  -  emergence,  sustainability  and
success
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the AMRO-BSP  Joint  Seminar  on Asia's  Emergence  in  the  New
World Order: Growth, Integration and Resilience, Manila, 3 May 2018.
 Fellow Central Bank Governors, ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO) headed by
Dr.  Junhong  Chang,  distinguished  panelists,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  magandang  umaga...  a
pleasant morning to all.
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I am pleased to welcome
you  to  Manila  and  to  this  Joint  Seminar.  We  proudly  collaborate  with AMRO  and  co-host  this
event.    It  is  an  excellent  opportunity  for  open  discourse  and  the  exchange  of  vital  insights  in
economic policymaking and on developments in central banking in the region.
This Joint Seminar hopes to provide ASEAN+3 economies with broader insights in dealing with
contemporary challenges.   It also aims to elicit stronger consensus in fostering deeper regional
integration as a critical strategy to reduce external vulnerabilities and sustain our standing as an
economic powerhouse in the new world order.
Asia’s Economic Emergence
The  seminar’s  theme,  “Asia’s  emergence  in  the  new  world  order:  growth,  integration  and
resilience” invokes some feelings of nostalgia.  Like most of you here, we stand not as passive
witnesses, but as active participants in Southeast Asia’s emergence and transition from being a
developing-economic region into a dynamic economic powerhouse.
At  the  core  of ASEAN+3’s  successful  growth  story  is  globalization,  which  paved  the  way  for
greater trade openness and  deeper  economic  integration  in  the  region.  I  believe  that  member
states  have  positively  leveraged  on  regional  integration  to  retain  their  collective  growth
momentum.  Integration has also provided the additional impetus for individual country growth.
ASEAN+3 has become a major global economic player.  In 2016, the region accounted for more
than a quarter of the world’s gross domestic product (GDP).    With its combined output, the
ASEAN+3 region was considered as the richest economy in 2016.
ASEAN+3’s unrelenting expansion in recent decades can be attributed to adherence to sound
macroeconomic management.  There has been a credible and collective commitment to long-
run development.   
The Philippine Economy in ASEAN
The  narrative  of  the  Philippine  economy  mirrors  the  Southeast  Asian  experience.    After  the
pursuit of strategic, targeted and purposeful reforms over the last two decades,  the Philippines
now  enjoys  an  economic  bright  spot,  with  76  consecutive  quarters  of  positive  GDP  growth. 
Moreover, this sustained economic expansion was achieved in an environment of generally low
and stable inflation.
The continued stability and soundness of the financial system also contributed to the economy’s
resurgence.  The external sector has been a pillar of strength for many years. Given expectations
of strong growth of 7.0-8.0 percent over the medium term, we expect Philippine contribution to
the overall ASEAN+3 output to rise over time.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, is it time to relax?
In  fact,  the  Concept  Note  prepared  for  this  Seminar  comprehensively  captures  the  emerging
challenges that confront the ASEAN+3 economies in the new world order and during this time of
the fourth industrial revolution.
Among the issues that the distinguished panel of speakers will be addressing today include those
relating to demographic transition, the rapid rise of disruptive technologies, raising productivity,
and accelerating further market integration among the ASEAN+3 economies.
The  way  governments  tackle  policymaking  and  the  way  businesses  are  operated  are  being
altered  by  megatrends  like  those  earlier  mentioned,  along  with  a  rebalancing  of  the  world
economy,  furious  urbanization,  climate  change,  and  the  adoption  of  inward-looking  policies. 
These trends cannot be ignored.  They contribute to the uncertainties faced by the region and by
the individual countries that comprise it.
As  we  confront  these  challenges,  globalization  and  greater  regional  integration  remain  key. 
However, I believe that for these growth engines to continue to pay off amid global uncertainties,
there  has  to  transpire  a  seamless  fusion  between  conventional  growth  models  and  forward-
looking strategies aimed at ensuring sustained economic resilience in a technology-savvy future.
This is indeed an exciting time for the region and there is no better venue to discuss our endless
potential and possibilities. We look forward to the insights our keynote speaker and distinguished
panelists will share with us today.  
Thank you and welcome once again to the BSP-AMRO Joint Seminar!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
