 “Macro-Financial Stability and the Euro” 
Philip R. Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland 
IMF/Central Bank of Ireland/IMF Economic Review Euro At 20 Conference 
Dublin, June 26th 2018 
Abstract 
The goal of this paper is to examine the implications of monetary union for macro-financial 
stabilisation policies at national and area-wide levels.  The boom-bust-crisis-recovery cycle 
that  the  euro  area  has  experienced  revealed  the  costs  of  national  and  international 
institutional  frameworks  that  proved  inadequate  to  manage  the  policy  challenges  of  this 
period.   After the crisis, much has been done to remedy these policy shortfalls, even if the 
reform agenda is not complete. National and area-wide policymakers must make use of the 
improved institutional architecture to do a better job in terms of ex-ante risk management 
and ex-post crisis management.   
1. Introduction
This joint conference with the International Monetary Fund and the IMF Economic 
Review is a highlight in the calendar of events marking the 75th anniversary of the 
Central Bank of Ireland.1 I am delighted that the conference features so many that 
have contributed to the intellectual debate about monetary union in Europe, while 
also featuring the latest original research on the different dimensions of this debate. 
At a personal level, I welcome the opportunity in this keynote address to offer some 
reflections  on  twenty  years  of  the  euro.      European  monetary  union  has  been  a 
dominant factor in my professional career.  As a student and early-stage academic, 
I vividly recall the debates in the 1990s as to the potential benefits and costs of a 
single  currency  for  Europe,  while  the  launch  of  the  euro  and  its  impact  on  the 
European and global economies has stimulated much of my own research over the 
last  two  decades.2   In  recent  years,  my  roles  as  governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland and a member of the governing council of the European Central Bank (ECB) 
has allowed me to gain additional insights into the workings of the monetary union. 
Macro-financial policy makers have drawn two primary lessons from the experience 
of  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  euro.    First,  it  is  imperative to  address  emerging 
macro-financial imbalances in a pre-emptive manner, in order to limit the risk of 
triggering  a  country-specific  or  area-wide  crisis.  Second,  if  a  crisis  episode  does 
1 Honohan (2018) provides an account of our history. 
2 See Barry (2017) for an account of the 1990s debate in Ireland on the pros and cons of 
the single currency.  See also Lane (1997, 1998).  
occur, the euro area needs a better crisis management toolbox, compared to the 
minimalist framework that was in place at the onset of the 2008-2012 crisis.  In what 
follows,  I  address  these  two  dimensions  of  macro-financial  stabilisation:    pre-
emptive counter-cyclical policies and crisis management policies.  
In addressing these issues, I do not cover other important aspects of the monetary 
union. Amongst other omissions, I do not review the impact of the single currency 
on cross-border financial flows, international trade or the political economy of the 
European  Union.3   Nor  do  I  review  the  performance  of  the  ECB  in  relation  to  its 
primary mandate of maintaining price stability.4  It is also outside the scope of this 
contribution to address the related topics of promoting income convergence among 
EU member countries and regions or devising efficient mechanisms to fund common 
public goods. Finally, I do not seek to provide a guide to the scholarly literature on 
the economics of the euro area.5 
The plan for the rest of this address is as follows. In Section 2, I discuss the forces 
shaping  asymmetric  macroeconomic  performance  during  the  initial  years  of  the 
euro, with a particular focus on the evolution of external imbalances. I discuss some 
counterfactuals in Section 3 in order to provide comparisons to a scenario in which 
better national policymaking might have mitigated cyclical risks during this period 
and a “no monetary union” alternative benchmark.  I turn to the 2007-2012 period 
in Section 4, during which the euro area first had to deal with the global financial 
crisis  and  then  the  doom  loop  area-specific  crisis  during  2010-2012.  I  turn  to  the 
institutional reform agenda in Section 5, before offering some conclusions in Section 
6. 
2. Macro-Financial  Stability  and  External  Imbalances  During  1999-
2008 
3 See Lane (2006, 2010a), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008, 2017) and Galstyan and Lane 
(2013) on the impact of the euro on some dimensions of international financial 
integration. 
4 See Constancio (2018a) for an account of the ECB’s monetary policy since its inception. 
5 Overviews from different perspectives are provided by Lane (2006, 2012), Shambaugh 
(2012), O’Rourke and Taylor (2013), Sandbu (2015), Brunnermeier et al (2016) and Mody 
(2018). Case studies of individual countries are an important element in this literature: on 
Ireland, see Honohan (2010), Lane (2011) and Whelan (2014a); on Cyprus, see Michaelides 
(2014); on Greece, see Gourinchas et al (2017); on Portugal, see Reis (2013) and Blanchard 
and Portugal (2017); on Spain, see Santos (2014, 2017). 
 There  were  several  structural  changes  in  the  international  economy  and 
international  financial  system  from  the  mid-1990s  onwards,  so  that  the 
establishment of the monetary union cannot be viewed as the sole (or even primary) 
factor  determining  macro-financial  outcomes  in  the  euro  area  during  the  first 
decade of the single currency. 
At  a  basic  level,  the  twin  forces  of  technological  change  and  globalisation  have 
affected  the  member  countries  in  a  differentiated  manner.    For  instance,  the 
increasing  share  of  emerging  Asia  (especially  China)  in  output  and  international 
trade  was  associated  with  a  reconfiguration  of  comparative  advantage,  with 
asymmetric effects across individual European economies (Chen et al 2013). Some 
member countries (including Germany) gained from the rising international demand 
for  capital  goods;  other  countries  (Portugal,  Greece,  Italy)  faced  increasing 
competition in industries such as textiles and footwear.  The integration of Central 
and Eastern Europe into European supply chains was a further source of structural 
change, again with asymmetric effects across member countries.  
It  is  in  this  global  context  that  the  impact  of  the  euro  on  the  economies  of  the 
member countries should be interpreted. The production structures of the member 
countries  are  differentially  exposed  to  global  factors,  both  through  direct  trade 
linkages and indirect market structure effects. Furthermore, the variation in country 
size and global trade linkages across the member countries also mean that there are 
intrinsic  differences  in  terms  of  the  impact  of  global  factors  and  international 
currency movements on the individual member countries (Honohan and Lane 2003, 
Lane 2006, Lane and Stracca 2018). 
An important type of divergence across the member countries was the widening of 
external imbalances.6 Figure 1 shows the distribution of current account imbalances 
in the euro area across the groups of surplus and deficit member countries in each 
year. In relation to the deficit group, Figure 1 shows an entry effect in the late 1990s 
that  was  followed  by  a  stabilisation  phase  during  2000-2003.  There  was  a  sharp 
increase in the aggregate imbalances during 2004-2008. Over the last decade, the 
aggregate across deficit countries has gradually converged to close to zero, while 
the aggregate across surplus countries has climbed.  
Figure 1.  Current Account Imbalances in the Euro Area. 
6 I focus on “flow” imbalances.  See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) on the evolution of net 
international investment positions. 
EA Current Account Balances
 500
 400
 300
 200
 100
 s
n
o
i
l
l
i
b
  -100
-200
-300
Source: IMF WEO 
EA19 Surplus
EA19 Deficit
Note:  In each year, sum of surpluses and sum of deficits calculated for the group of countries that 
are now members of the euro area.  The graph is very similar if we restrict the group to the early-
stage members of the euro area. 
While there was certainly an entry effect during 1997-2001 that boosted the euro 
periphery  as  a  result  of  the  convergence  of  interest  rates  across  the  member 
countries (further augmented by the sizeable depreciation of the euro against the 
dollar during 1999-2001), this process had largely played out by 2001-2002, with the 
international  slowdown  during  that  period  marking  the  conclusion  of  that  phase.  
This initial phase could be interpreted in a benign manner to the extent that the 
qualitative  pattern  in  net  capital  flows  was  in  line  with  expected  convergence 
dynamics (Blanchard and Giavazzi 2002). 
From  2003  onwards,  the  expansion  in  imbalances  was  driven  by  an  international 
credit  boom  that  was 
inadequately  managed  by  national  macro-financial 
policymakers. The international credit environment entered a sustained loosening 
phase due to a combination of a savings glut in fast-growing emerging economies, 
low  policy  rates  set  by  major  central  banks,  financial  innovations  (asset-backed 
securitisations,  the  expansion  of  shadow  banking)  which  was  sustained  by 
excessively-relaxed 
the  “Great 
supervisory  attitudes,  over-confidence 
in 
Moderation”  hypothesis  and  a  widespread  risk-on  attitude  among  lenders  and 
borrowers.7  
Given  the  scale  of  the  international  credit  boom  and  the  expansion  in  external 
imbalances,  the  complacency  among  many  national  policymakers  during  the  first 
decade of the euro was surprising. After all, memories of the major financial crises 
that took place in the 1990s (the Scandinavian banking crisis; the Mexican crisis; the 
East Asian crisis; and the Russian crisis) should still have been fresh in the memories 
of policy officials. Moreover, the lack of an independent national exchange rate and 
the expanded scope for cross-border borrowing in a monetary union reinforced the 
importance  of  adopting  a  more  prudential  approach  to  credit  regulation,  banking 
supervision and fiscal policy (Lane 1997, 1998, 2006). 
The nature of European imbalances also shifted during the 2003-2007 period. While 
the expansion in current account imbalances that was observed until 2001 could be 
reasonably interpreted as a corollary to intra-European convergence and the euro 
entry effect, the significant increase in dispersion during 2003-2008 was significantly 
procyclical in nature, with those countries projected to grow more quickly running 
larger  deficits  and  those  countries  projected  to  grow  more  slowly  running  larger 
surpluses (Lane and Pels 2012). More broadly, the magnitudes of imbalances during 
this  period  significantly  exceeded  the  values  associated  with  historical  patterns 
(Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2012, 2015).  These imbalances largely took the form of 
net  debt  flows,  with  a  strong  correlation  with  domestic  credit  growth  (Lane  and 
McQuade 2014).8 
The  widening  of  current  account  imbalances  was  a  general  phenomenon  across 
advanced  economies,  rather  than  being  specific  to  the  euro  area.  In  particular, 
Iceland and many Central and Eastern European economies also saw a sharp rise in 
current account deficits during this phase.  Moreover, it is not obvious that the single 
currency amplified the scale of imbalances: a study of the relation between output 
growth and the current account for thirty-four OECD economies over 1984-2013 does 
not indicate that euro membership increased the cyclicality of the current account 
(Lane 2016).  The same study does not find an increase in the cyclicality of the real 
exchange rate for members of the euro area, with an increase in the cyclicality of 
the  domestic  inflation  rate  overwhelmed  by  the  exogenous  factors  driving  the 
external value of the euro.   
7 See also Lane (2006, 2012, 2013a, 2013b). 
8 Of course, the scale of net imbalances was not a sufficient indicator for the distribution 
of cross-border risk exposures, with gross flows far exceeding net flows.  
Still, the expansion in imbalances during 2003-2008 was especially troubling, given 
that it took place at the same time that there was an adverse shift in the underlying 
growth  prospects  for  the  euro  periphery.  Rapid  growth  over  the  previous  decade 
meant that the convergence dynamic was inevitably weaker than before; the sharp 
appreciation of the euro against the dollar over 2002-2007 was an external blow to 
the competitiveness of many European firms and reinforced the trend shift towards 
imports from emerging Asia; the new member countries from Central and Eastern 
Europe were tougher competitors for the location of manufacturing activities; rising 
commodity  prices  represented  an  income  transfer  from  commodity  importers  to 
commodity  exporters;  and  demographic  factors  constrained  aggregate  potential 
growth  at  the  European  level.  Furthermore,  it  is  also  plausible  that  the  easy 
international  credit  conditions  delayed  reform  efforts  in  some  member  countries 
(Fernandez-Villaverde et al 2013). In the aggregate, the expanding current account 
deficits in the periphery funded an expansion in the nontraded sector rather than 
boosting investment in the tradables sector, further aggravating the deterioration 
in growth prospects (Giavazzi and Spaventa 2011,  Benigno and Fornaro 2014).9  
The  bust  that  followed  the end of  the  international  credit  boom  in  2008  hit  hard 
those  economies  that  had  developed  excessively-large  current  account  deficits.  
Over 2009-2012, the cross-country variation in the declines in output and domestic 
spending  (with  little  relief  from  real  exchange  rate  adjustment)  was  strongly 
correlated  with  the  scale  of  the  gap  in  2005-2008  between  the  realised  current 
account positions and the current account positions that would fit a fundamentals-
driven model (estimated over 1969-2008 for a panel of sixty four countries) (Lane 
and Milesi-Ferretti 2012, 2015). However, it is noteworthy that membership of the 
euro area did not amplify the severity of the adjustment during this period: while 
high-deficit  member  countries  experienced  less  by  way  of  real  exchange  rate 
adjustment compared to other high-deficit advanced economies, other features of 
the  monetary  union  (such  as  access  to  cross-border  eurosystem  liquidity  and  the 
responsiveness of the common monetary policy to area-wide conditions) cushioned 
the  impact.    Indeed,  those  Central  and  Eastern  European  economies  that  were 
outside the euro area but pegged to the euro underwent sharper adjustment (Gros 
and Alcidi 2013, Lane 2016).   
The  limited  role  for  real  exchange  rates  in  the  external  adjustment  process  for 
advanced economies during this period suggests that the importance of the exchange 
rate  regime  as  a  determinant  of  macroeconomic  outcomes  might  sometimes  be 
overstated.  This  is  consistent  with  the  received  wisdom  that  it  is  difficult  to  find 
significant  differences  in  average  macroeconomic  outcomes  across  different 
exchange rate regimes (Mussa 1990). One reason is that floating exchange rates are 
subject  to  non-fundamental  shocks  that  may  push  an  economy  away  from  its 
9 The increased elasticity of net migration flows to domestic cyclical conditions further 
amplified the impact of local demand shocks (Howard 2018). 
equilibrium (Engel 2011, Berka et al 2018).  A second is that currency movements 
can  have  a  nuanced  impact,  with  wealth  effects  from  terms  of  trade  movements 
possibly  operating  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the  competitiveness  channel.  For 
instance, Lane and Stracca (2018) find that an appreciation in the external value of 
the euro raises disposable income and consumption through a positive terms of trade 
impact, even if the export sector shrinks.  
3. Counterfactual Scenarios
A primary lesson from this boom-bust cycle that the costs of tolerating the rise of 
persistently  large  imbalances  are  extremely  high,  especially  for  high-deficit 
countries (Lane 2013c).  
During a global credit boom period, what instruments are available to policymakers 
in an individual country to mitigate macro-financial risks? For members of the euro 
area, the absence of a national currency and national interest rate policy increases 
the importance of using other policy instruments. 
Most  directly,  a credit  boom  can  be  addressed  through  vigorous macro-prudential 
regulation  of  the  banking  system.  A  wide  range  of  policies  can  be  implemented: 
loan-to-value limits; debt service to income limits; sectoral concentration limits in 
lending; high capital asset ratios; counter-cyclical capital buffers; and limits on the 
use  of  short-term  funding.  The  very  limited  use  of  these  tools  in  the  mid-2000s 
meant that regulatory policies did too little to offset the scale of credit expansion. 
A common objection to the use of macro-prudential policies is that the effectiveness 
of  these  tools  is  weakened  through  regulatory  arbitrage  with  curbs  on  domestic 
lending  leading  to  growth  in  cross-border  lending.    However,  even  if  some 
substitution towards cross-border lending might have resulted, the balance of risks 
would have been shifted, since the credit risks would be on the books of foreign-
based banks rather than domestic banks. 
In  addition,  fiscal  policy  can  be  deployed  at  both  microeconomic  and 
macroeconomic  levels. 10  At  a  microeconomic  level,  a  property  boom  can  be 
10 In this section, I confine my attention to national fiscal instruments.  
mitigated through reforms that reduce the tax incentives offered to developers and 
households. More generally, time-varying tax rates on consumption and investment 
can  replicate  some  properties  of  national-level  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate 
policies  by  altering  the  intertemporal  terms  of  trade  (Farhi  et  al  2013).  At  a 
macroeconomic  level,  at  a  minimum,  a  government  under  such  conditions  should 
seek to maintain acyclically-neutral budget, with a countercylical budget balance 
even more desirable.  
While Ireland achieved small headline budget surpluses during the boom period, the 
underlying  budget  balance  was  much  less  healthy,  given  the  reliance  on 
construction-intensive  tax  revenues.  The  scale  of  the  boom  was  such  that 
significantly more positive budget surpluses were warranted, with the deterioration 
in fiscal discipline towards the end of the boom period especially unfortunate. In 
2007, the fiscal surplus in Ireland was just 0.2 percent of GDP, whereas it was 5.1 
percent in Finland, 5 percent in Denmark, 3.3 percent in Sweden and 2 percent in 
Spain. 
Running large budget surpluses is politically difficult, given the pressures to meet 
spending demands and cut taxes. In terms of safeguarding the public balance sheet, 
it may be more politically feasible to establish a fiscal reserve fund in recognition 
of the contingent nature of the windfall revenues during a credit boom and the fiscal 
risks  associated  with  banking  crises.  While  Ireland  did  set  up  a  reserve  fund  (the 
National Pensions Reserve Fund), its mandate was long-term in nature rather than 
cyclical  and  its  equity-dominated  investment  strategy  was  not  appropriate  in 
managing crisis conditions.11 Rather, an additional cyclically-focused fiscal reserve 
fund that held a liquid-assets portfolio should have been established (Lane 1998).  
To illustrate a counterfactual scenario in which national macroprudential and fiscal 
policies were deployed to lean against the wind,  Figures 2 and 3 show the evolution 
of household credit and output (relative to the euro area aggregate) in Ireland in a 
simulation of the model proposed by Martin and Philippon (2017). Figures 2 and 3 
show  that  the  avoidance  of  the  extraordinary  build  up  in  household  debt  (plus  a 
more conservative  fiscal  feedback  rule)  would  have  led  to  a  shallower  boom-bust 
cycle and a faster recovery.  In particular, through the preventive use of ex-ante 
macroprudential  policies  during  the  boom,  the  containment  of  sovereign  spreads 
during the crisis and the avoidance of fiscal recapitalisation of the banking sector 
11 Ireland also set up a household scheme (Special Savings Investment Accounts - SSIA) to 
boost the household savings rate during a period of low interestrates. However, this was for 
a fixed time duration (2001-2002 to 2006-2007), rather than tied to the cyclical state of the 
economy. 
would  have  made  it  more  possible  to  run  an  expansionary,  counter-cyclical  fiscal 
policy during the downturn. 
Figure 2.  Counterfactual Evolution of Household Debt in Ireland 
Note:  Simulation of model proposed by Martin and Philippon (2017). 
Figure 3. Counterfactual Evolution of Output in Ireland 
Note:  Simulation of model proposed by Martin and Philippon (2017). 
 Figure 4. National Interest Rates under Taylor Rules 
Counterfactual Taylor Rule Interest Rates
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Euro Area - Calibrated
Greece - Calibrated
Ireland - Calibrated
Italy - Calibrated
Portugal - Calibrated
Spain - Calibrated
Note:  Calibrated Taylor rules: 𝑖𝑡 = (1 − 𝜌)(𝑖∗) + 𝜌𝑖𝑡−1, where 𝑖∗ = 𝜙𝑟𝑟𝑡 + 𝜙𝜋(𝐸(𝜋𝑡+1) −
𝜋∗) + 𝜙𝑦(𝑦𝑡 − 𝑦𝑛). We  set 𝜌 = 0.8, 𝜙𝑟 = 1, 𝜙𝜋 = 1.5,  and 𝜙𝑦 = 0.5.  We  also  assume
perfect  foresight,  so  that  𝐸(𝜋𝑡+1) = 𝜋𝑡+1 ,  while  the  target  rate  of  inflation  is 
considered to be constant at 𝜋∗ = 2.
An  important  alternative  benchmark  is  to  assess  likely  macroeconomic  outcomes 
during this period had the monetary union not been established. 12  To this end, some 
researchers  have  run  Taylor-type  rules  to  capture  plausible  paths  for  national 
interest rates  in  this alternative  world  (Ahrend et  al  2008,  Taylor  2008).  Figure  4 
shows the hypothetical national interest rates for selected member countries over 
1999-2009.  By and large, the differentials vis-à-vis the euro area interest rate are 
relatively minor, which reflects the fact that there was relatively little dispersion in 
12 Of  course,  this  counterfactual  scenario  is  fundamentally  different  to  the  question  of 
whether any member country might gain by withdrawing from the monetary union.  I do not 
dwell  on  this  scenario,  which  has  been  extensively  analysed  (see,  amongst  many  others, 
Eichengreen 2010). 
national inflation rates during the mid-2000s and estimated real time output gaps 
were adjudicated to be quite small.13 
Even  if  higher  interest  rates  had  been  imposed  during  the  boom  period,  the 
effectiveness  of  interest  rate  policy  in  sharply  limiting  a  credit  boom  is  open  to 
question (Lane 2016). First, given that central banks choose to vary interest rates 
within  a  fairly  narrow  band  (since  small  interest  rate  movements  have  powerful 
effects on the real economy), even a moderately-higher path for interest rates may 
not  sufficiently  deter  investors  that  expect  sizeable  capital  gains  in  the  property 
market. Second, a positive interest rate differential vis-à-vis other economies can 
induce  domestic  investors  to  borrow  in  foreign  currencies,  just  as  happened  in 
Iceland  and  several  countries  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  Third,  the  currency 
appreciation associated with a higher path for interest rates could have encouraged 
extra borrowing by risk-taking entrepreneurs since the capacity to increase leverage 
in foreign currencies through loans collaterised against domestic assets would have 
been enhanced (Bruno and Shin 2015).  
The risks embedded in the 2005-2006 European macro-financial configuration were 
clear, even if the nature and timing of a future disruptive shock was unknown (Lane 
2006, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007). As it turned out, the trigger for the end of the 
international  credit  boom  originated  in  the  United  States,  with  a  sustained 
tightening in funding markets from August  2007 onwards and an  intensification in 
the financial crisis between the near-collapse of Bear Stearns in March 2008 and the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.  
4. The Euro and the Crises of 2007-2012
During  2007-2009,  the  availability  of  eurosystem  liquidity  provided  an  important 
buffer during the global financial crisis: banks in the euro area could replace private 
funding with central bank funding. For banks with insufficient eurosystem-eligible 
collateral, national central banks could also provide emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA),  within  the  framework  set  out  by  the  eurosystem.  Even  dollar  funding  was 
available  through  the  eurosystem,  thanks  to  the  currency  swap  arrangements 
13 The  largest  positive  differential  is  for  Ireland  during  1999-2000.  In  this  period,  Ireland 
experienced a burst of relatively high domestic inflation that was driven by a mix of the 
disproportionate  impact  of  the  large  euro-dollar  depreciation  during  this  period,  the 
inadequate scale of the 1998 Irish pound revaluation prior to joining the euro and the strong 
momentum in Irish wage growth during this phase (Honohan and Lane 2003). However, Irish 
inflation subsided by the mid-2000s. 
between  the  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  Since  individual  countries  had 
different funding shortages, these liquidity policies had asymmetric outcomes across 
the  individual  member  countries,  as  captured  by  the  intra-system  Target2 
imbalances.  At  this  level,  membership  of  a  common  currency  area  provided  an 
important  bulwark  against  the  global  financial  shock  by  allowing  cross-border 
liquidity  flows  to  replace  cross-border  private  flows  (Fagan  and  McNelis  2014, 
Whelan 2014b). By way of contrast, such automatic cross-border liquidity flows were 
not available to other European countries that retained their own currencies but had 
significant foreign currency liabilities.  
At  the  same  time,  the  application  of  eurosystem  liquidity  policies  involves  some 
discretionary  judgement  calls.  In  particular,  there  are  strong  feedback  loops 
between  liquidity  and  solvency  if  there  is  a  system-wide  crisis  and  loans  to  the 
nontradable  sector  (construction,  housing,  SMEs)  dominate  the  asset  side  of  the 
balance sheet. In particular, forced deleveraging over a short-time timescale can be 
self-defeating by driving down asset values in a firesale process. At the same time, 
open-ended  liquidity  provides  incentives  to  delay  excessively  the  resolution  of 
problem loans, such that the monetary authority must strike a delicate balance in 
setting  liquidity  policies.  On  an  ex-ante  basis,  the  prospective  availability  of 
eurosystem  liquidity  may  have  also  weakened  the  incentives  to  constrain  credit 
growth during the boom phase (Fagan and McNelis 2014).  Furthermore, in scenarios 
in  which  banks  are  substantially  exposed  to  sovereign  default  risk,  it  may  be 
necessary to condition access to eurosystem liquidity to compliance with specified 
fiscal plans, which inevitably puts central bankers in the political spotlight. 
In the absence of monetary union, the unfolding of the crisis would have been quite 
different.  Since  the  scale  of  the  pre-crisis  credit  expansion  in  the  euro periphery 
would only have been possible by taking on large-scale foreign-currency liabilities, 
a national central bank would have been limited in its capacity to provide substantial 
foreign-currency liquidity. In the event of a large-scale flight of bank depositors and 
bank creditors, the imposition of capital controls and/or liability restructuring would 
have been necessary. At the same time, a loss in confidence in the domestic currency 
could have resulted in a large devaluation, a sharp increase in interest rates and a 
corresponding decline in asset prices.  
While  devaluation  may  be  helpful  in  stimulating  economic  recovery  by  improving 
domestic  cost  competitiveness  over  time,  its  immediate  impact  is  to  further 
exacerbate  balance  sheet  problems  in  relation  to  foreign-currency  debts.  Taken 
together, these forces could have led to a more acute type of crisis, with a deeper 
initial recession, larger movements in interest rates and asset prices, a jump in the 
domestic price level and more debt restructuring.  Of course, a full evaluation of 
the pros and cons of alternative monetary regimes requires a broader set of criteria, 
with  the  role  played  by  exchange  rate  adjustment  during  a  crisis  episode  set 
 alongside  the  implications  for  monetary  conditions  during  normal  times.    In  the 
European context, a further political economy consideration is the potential impact 
of  fluctuations  in  national  currency  values  on  the  political  support  for  the  level 
playing field philosophy that is the foundation for the single market (Eichengreen 
1996). 
Assessing  the  relative  contributions  of  surges  in  sovereign  risk  premia,  fiscal 
austerity, poor investment dynamics and the monetary policy stance to the second 
phase  of  the  crisis  during  2010-2012  remains  open  to  dispute.14   One  basic  policy 
lesson from this episode was that compromised fiscal capacity severely inhibits the 
potential  role  of  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy  during  recessions,  especially  if 
monetary policy is near its lower bound.  In particular, if a counter-cyclical fiscal 
initiative  triggers  solvency  concerns,  the  adverse  impact  of  an  increase  in  the 
sovereign  risk  premium  can  dominate  the  traditional  Keynesian  transmission 
mechanism  (Corsetti  et  al  2014).  More  speculatively,  this  episode  also  raised  the 
question  whether  a  more  coordinated  approach  to  determining  the  fiscal  stance 
could  have  alleviated  the  impact  by  internalising  the  cross-border  spillovers  of 
national-level austerity policies.  
A  second  lesson  was  that  the  untested  foundations  of  the  single  currency  could 
amplify  crisis  dynamics  by  inviting  speculation  in  relation  to  redenomination risk.  
While cross-country variation in sovereign risk premia (and the funding costs facing 
banks)  that  aligned  with  differences  in  solvency  assessments  would  be  consistent 
with the operation of the monetary union,  it became clear during this period that 
investors  also  placed  some  weight  on  redenomination  risk  in  determining  asset 
prices, which was not compatible with a secure monetary union. 
A  third  lesson  was  the  force of  the  doom  loop by  which  national  fiscal crises  and 
national banking crises fed each other. While the balance sheets of the sovereign 
and the national banking system have common exposures to domestic recessionary 
forces,  national  governments  were  also  exposed  to  the  direct  fiscal  costs  of 
intervening in banking systems, which was more likely in the absence of recovery 
and  resolution  regimes  that  could  ensure  that  private  investors  bore  the  costs  of 
fixing a distressed banking system. In the other direction, banks were exposed to 
sovereign  risk  through  multiple  channels.    If  an  intensification  of  sovereign  risk 
triggered  recessionary  austerity  measures,  the  quality  of  the  domestic  loan  book 
would  decline,  while  banks  might  also  be  faced  with  a  higher  tax  burden.    In 
addition, banks were directly exposed to sovereign risk through holdings of domestic 
sovereign bonds. 
14 See, amongst others, Lane (2012), Veld (2013), Kollmann et al (2015), Rannenberg et al 
(2015) and Constancio (2018b).   
In the next section, we turn to the policy measures that were taken in response to 
the crisis and also address the future evolution of the institutional architecture for 
the euro area.  
5. The Institutional Design of European Monetary Union
The original work on the design of the monetary union focused on the mandate of 
the European Central Bank, while the fiscal policies of the member countries were 
also  restricted  by  the  EU-wide  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.15 The  crisis  induced  a 
significant expansion in the institutional framework of the monetary union, while it 
is  widely  agreed  that  further  progress  is  required  in  order  to  enhance 
macroeconomic stabilisation and ensure that the euro area proves sufficiently robust 
in the event of future crisis events.16   
The cohesion of the euro area is underpinned by the pursuit of sound public finances 
by each member state. If member countries maintain prudent fiscal stances during 
good  times,  fiscal  easing  (both  through  automatic  stabilisers  and  discretionary 
measures) during downturns can play an important stabilising role in the event of 
country-specific  or  common  shocks.  At  the  level  of  the  EU  and  the  euro  area,  a 
recurrent  challenge  has  been  to  design  an  institutional  framework  that  can 
effectively support and validate the running of prudential national fiscal policies, 
given the deficit and debt biases identified in the literature on the conduct of fiscal 
policy. In response to the crisis, extra fiscal safeguards were put in place, with a 
greater  emphasis  on  national  institutional  constraints  (fiscal  responsibility  laws, 
independent fiscal councils), a shift in focus towards the underlying structural fiscal 
balance, the introduction of feedback mechanisms to promote reversion in the debt-
output  ratio  during  recovery  phases  and  a  more  structured  approach  to  the 
monitoring and oversight of fiscal plans.  
The optimal design of the European fiscal framework remains a live debate, with 
open issues including the simplification of the set of fiscal rules and the effective 
15 James (2012) provides a comprehensive study of the institutional design negotiations 
prior to the launch of the euro. 
16 See Corsetti et al (2015), Juncker (2015), Corsetti et al (2016), Benassy-Quere and 
Giavazzi (2017) and Benassy-Quere et al (2018).  There is also a wider debate about the 
architecture of the international financial system that shares some common themes (such 
as the potential gains from international risk sharing) but the scope for trans-national 
institutional development is far greater at EU and euro area levels. 
measurement  of  structural  fiscal  positions.    Still,  the  framework  has  provided  an 
important  anchor  for  the  conduct  of  national  fiscal  policies  during  the  post-crisis 
period: while the counterfactual evolution of fiscal positions under purely national 
frameworks  is  difficult  to  pin  down,  it  is  plausible  that  the  collective  restraints 
imposed  by  the  European-level  framework  has  contributed  to  fiscal  discipline.  
Moreover, the development of a robust fiscal framework and the accumulation of a 
track  record  of  national  compliance  may  facilitate  effective  counter-cyclical 
national fiscal policies during future downturns, since cyclical loosening should not 
give  rise  to  concerns  about  long-term  sustainability  under  such  conditions. 
Furthermore,  a  credible  area-wide  institutional  framework  that  anchors  national 
fiscal  policies  is  a  precondition  for  other  initiatives  such  as  an  official  funding 
mechanism (the ESM), the outright monetary transactions (OMT) programme of the 
ECB and the deepening of banking union.  
The  combination  of  the  Greek  fiscal  situation  and  the  ongoing  weaknesses  in  the 
European and global financial systems induced the introduction of European official 
funding programmes in 2010 that went on to be deployed in Ireland, Portugal, Cyprus 
and  Spain  (banking  sector  only),  in  addition  to  Greece.    In  2012,  the  European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM) was formalised as a permanent official funding agency.   
A  permanent  official  funding  agency  reduces  the  probability  of  a  panic-induced 
sudden  stop  in  sovereign  debt  markets,  which  may  be  especially  prevalent  in  a 
monetary  union  to  the  extent  that  traders  believe  that  national  sovereigns  in  a 
currency  union  have  fewer  stabilisation  options  in  the  event  of  a  rollover  crisis 
(Bianchi  and  Mondragon  2018).  Compared  to  the  potential  disruptive  impact  of 
sovereign  debt  restructuring,  an  official  funding  programme  can  also  ease  the 
possible spillover impact of fiscal distress in a member country that has suffered a 
loss  of  market  access  but  which  can  plausibly  return  to  market  funding  after  a 
temporary phase of official support. 
An official funding agency is more sustainable, the less often it is called upon, such 
that there is a tight connection between the ESM and the European fiscal framework 
discussed above:  if the latter is effective, the former will only be needed in the 
event of severe cases of bad luck, with the fiscal position of a national government 
only undone by an unanticipated and large shock. Equally, the funding costs of the 
ESM are minimised, the more the long-term fiscal plans of a member country can be 
anchored by a credible fiscal framework, such that a programme country can return 
to normal market funding sooner rather than later.   
As  is  reflected  in  the  current  policy  debate  on  the  future  of  the  ESM,  an  official 
funding agency can also fulfill other functions, such as a temporary funding backstop 
to support resolution interventions or a necessary fiscal guarantee for the provision 
of  liquidity  in  resolution. 17  These  additional  functions  can  be  interpreted  as 
providing  the  fiscal  backing  needed  to  maintain  banking  union  even  under  tail 
scenarios.  
An ESM programme is also necessary for the viability of the ECB’s OMT programme, 
which  was  announced  in  2012.    The  scope of  the  OMT  programme  is  to eliminate 
liquidity  runs  on  national  sovereign  debt  markets  that  are  motivated  by 
redenomination  risk  concerns  (in  order  to  safeguard  the  integrity  of  monetary 
policy).  Accordingly,  a  precondition  for  OMT  is  to  exclude  scenarios  in  which 
solvency  concerns  remain  unaddressed  by  insisting  on  compliance  with  an  ESM 
programme.  By the way, it could be illuminating to think through the conditions 
under which central banks in other jurisdictions could reconcile stepping in as a last-
resort  purchaser  of  sovereign  debt  and  the  avoidance  of  fiscal  dominance.    Since 
this is an “out of equilibrium” scenario (liquidity runs should not occur if investors 
understand  the  willingness  of  a  central  bank  to  underpin  the  liquidity  of  the 
sovereign debt market),  such conditions are typically not explicitly laid out: as the 
central bank for a new multi-country monetary union, it ultimately proved necessary 
for the ECB to spell out these conditions (as customised to the nature of the euro 
area). 
The June 2012 European Council also marked the decision to move towards a banking 
union.      Banking  union  is  comprised  of  several  institutional  pillars  -  a  single 
supervisory  mechanism  (SSM);  a  single  resolution  mechanism  (SRM);  and  a  single 
European  deposit  insurance  system  (EDIS).    While  the  first  two  pillars  are  now  in 
place (even if the associated single resolution fund is only being phased in over a 
number  of  years),  the  timing  of  the  completion  of  the  third  pillar  remains  under 
discussion.  
Banking union is the most important component in improving the operation of the 
monetary union.  At a basic level, the effectiveness of monetary policy depends on 
a stable area-wide banking system; otherwise, the transmission of monetary policy 
is compromised by the fragmentation of the banking system and divergence in the 
pass through of policy rates to lending rates across the euro area.  In relation to the 
liquidity operations of the ECB, a single supervisory mechanism has the potential to 
improve understanding of the solvency and balance sheets of individual banks, which 
is necessary in adjudicating liquidity requests and evaluating posted collateral.  As 
a byproduct, banking union should also improve efficiency by ensuring a level playing 
field  and  insulating  supervisory  and  resolution  decisions  from  national  political 
pressures. 
17 I do not discuss the other elements of ESM reform, such as governance issues, 
programme design or the interplay between official funding and bail-ins of sovereign bond 
holders. 
Crucially, banking union also has the potential to mitigate national macroeconomic 
shocks. First, banking union may facilitate more diversified international ownership 
of bank equity and contingent debt instruments, such that the costs of distressed 
banks are not solely concentrated in the domestic economy. Second, banking union 
may  lead  to  more  geographically-diversified  banks,  such  that  local  shocks  do  not 
undermine the viability of banking operations.  
The realisation of the full potential of banking union is dependent on the weakening 
of the links between banks and national sovereigns.   All else equal, the valuation 
and funding costs of banks depends on the capacity of the sovereign to provide fiscal 
backing during tail events.  In this way, variation across countries in the strength 
and scale of national fiscal positions is a barrier to a fully-integrated banking union.  
Together  with  the  introduction  of the  single  resolution  mechanism  and  the  single 
resolution  fund,  more  stringent  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for  banks  have 
lowered – but not eliminated - the probability of future fiscal interventions in the 
event of a banking crisis.  In due course, a shared commitment to a common fiscal 
backstop can support a deeper level of banking union (Marzinotto et al 2011). 
Of  course,  a  nationally-focused  bank  shares  common  risk  factors  with  a  national 
sovereign:  a  domestic  recession  will  hurt  the  earnings  of  such  banks  at  the  same 
time  as  the  fiscal  position  of  the  sovereign  deteriorates.    This  correlation  is 
strengthened to the extent that a bank disproportionately holds domestic sovereign 
bonds on the asset side of its balance sheet and sovereign risk assessments materially 
decline during such downturns. In contrast, a bank that holds a diversified pool of 
sovereign bonds is less exposed to this type of bank-sovereign spillover. In a multi-
country monetary union, such diversification is feasible without taking on currency 
risk.   
There  is  an  extensive  debate  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  introducing  reforms  to  the 
regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures (RTSE) in bank balance sheets in order 
to prompt a shift away from home-biased sovereign portfolios (see, amongst others, 
ESRB 2015 and Constancio 2018b).  Clearly, any potential role for domestic banks as 
purchasers of last resort in the national sovereign bond market loses its salience if 
the risk of a liquidity run is credibly mitigated by the introduction of the ESM and 
the OMT programme.  Furthermore, even if sovereign risk is substantially reduced 
by long-term adherence to the European fiscal framework and the shift to a common 
fiscal  backstop  for the  banking union,  ongoing  sovereign  tail  risks  means  that  the 
removal of home bias in the sovereign portfolios of banks would provide additional 
reassurance  that  the  overall  policy  constellation  minimises  the  adverse  dynamics 
inherent in the linkages between domestic banks and domestic sovereigns. 
 While  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  each  bank  in  the  euro  area  directly  holding  a 
geographically-diversified portfolio of national sovereign bonds, an innovation that 
would simultaneously enable both area-wide diversification and de-risking  would be 
the introduction of sovereign bond backed securities (SBBS). The manufacturing of 
SBBS would involve the issuance of senior and subordinated tranches, backed by a 
GDP-weighted portfolio of national sovereign bonds of all members of the euro area 
that are able to raise market funding (High-Level Task Force on Safe Assets, 2018).18 
In  particular,  if  banks  held  the  senior  SBBS  tranche,  this  would  provide  both 
diversification and additional insulation against sovereign risks.  If the SBBS market 
achieved sufficient scale, the senior SBBS tranche could also play a role in expanding 
the set of low-risk securities, thereby also contributing to capital markets union by 
facilitating secured financing transactions.  Furthermore, if banks held senior SBBS 
rather than domestic national bonds, the probability of a sudden stop would decline, 
due to the weakening of the domestic doom loop.   
The  completion  of  banking  union  also  requires  an  integrated  deposit  insurance 
system, such that the protection offered to insured depositors is common across the 
euro area and is independent of national governments. In its absence, there remains 
the  possibility  of  national-level  bank  runs  driven  by  fears  of  the  viability  of  a 
domestic  deposit  insurance  scheme.    A  well-designed  scheme  in  which  banks  are 
charged risk-based premia should not generate ex-ante expectations of net transfers 
across  countries.  Moreover,  the  likelihood  of  deposit  insurance  being  invoked  has 
been  much  reduced  by  the  improvement  in  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  (more 
capital, more provisions, fewer non-performing exposures) and the ongoing issuance 
of  contingent  securities  that  insulate  insured  depositors  from  banking  distress 
(Carmassi et al 2018). Furthermore, in line with the preceding discussion, long-term 
adherence to the EU fiscal framework limits the risk of a sovereign-driven banking 
crisis.  This risk can be further mitigated by limiting the home bias in bank holdings 
of sovereign bonds.  
Alongside banking union, making progress in integrating European capital markets 
can  also  improve  the  coherence  of  the  euro  area.      In  relation  to  debt  finance, 
expanded  roles  for  non-bank  lenders  and  debt  securities  markets  would  reduce 
dependence  on  banking  systems.    Moreover,  an  expansion  in  cross-border  equity 
positions would enable risk sharing in relation to the types of permanent shocks that 
cannot be smoothed through borrowing and lending mechanisms.19  While tackling 
the  legal  and  institutional  barriers  to  cross-border  capital  market  activity  is 
valuable, the ultimate scale of cross-border equity holdings likely also depends on 
progress in completing the single market in goods and services (Obstfeld and Rogoff 
18 More precisely, the weights would be aligned to the capital key of the ECB, with a 
tolerance for limited deviations to take account of countries that issue little debt or that 
have lost market access.  
19 See Martinez et al (2018) for a recent analysis. 
2000).  In particular, a more integrated European economy would both reduce the 
degree of home bias in optimally-constructed portfolios and foster the emergence 
of the larger-scale firms that are more likely to issue significant volumes of equity 
and  debt  securities  against  pan-European  earnings  streams.    The  path  to  product 
market integration also plausibly involves a step increase in direct investment flows, 
enabling the expansion of dynamic firms both through greenfield investments and 
mergers and acquisitions. 
Through  enhanced  diversification  and  risk  sharing,  the  deepening  of  financial 
integration – through banking union and capital markets union – should dampen the 
national  impact  of  economic  and  financial  shocks.    This  should  be  viewed  as 
complementary  to  the  potential  buffering  role  of  counter-cyclical  national  fiscal 
policies and national macroprudential policies. Since the crisis, there has been an 
expanded  focus  on  macroprudential  policy,  with  the  establishment  of  national 
macroprudential authorities in each EU member country and the deployment of a 
range  of  macroprudential  instruments,  including  various  capital  buffers  and 
borrower-based  measures  such  as  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income  ceilings  on 
mortgages.20   
Given the early-stage status of macroprudential policy in advanced economies, much 
remains  to  be 
learned  about  the  normative  and  positive  economics  of 
macroprudential policies. Still, a well-understood problem is inaction bias, by which 
policymakers move too late and too little to contain risks.  If macroprudential policy 
is to play an effective role in building resilience and dampening the impact of shocks, 
macroprudential  authorities  must  be  willing  to  act  with  sufficient  force  and 
sufficient  timeliness. This  is  all  the  more  true  for  members  of  a monetary  union, 
since monetary policy cannot be deployed to clean up in the wake of country-specific 
shocks. 
So far, the institutional and policy reforms that I have discussed have not included 
elements that involve the expansion of fiscal union, beyond the joint backing of the 
ESM.21 There are several strands to the fiscal union debate (see Berger et al (2018) 
for  a  comprehensive  review).  Here,  I  focus  on  the  potential  macroeconomic 
stabilisation role of a central fiscal capacity (CFC). 
20 For member countries of the euro area, the ECB has top-up powers in relation to some 
capital buffers. Some of the limitations of macroprudential policy (such as cross-border 
leakages) are mitigated by the role of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in 
managing these spillovers. 
21 Of course, the member countries are also fiscally linked through joint ownership of the 
ECB, in addition through the common budget of the European Union. 
Since  borrowing  and  lending  at  the  national  level  should  be  sufficient  to  absorb 
typical cyclical shocks, the primary value of an area-wide risk sharing mechanism 
would be in relation to unusually large and persistent shocks. An important collective 
benefit  from  a  CFC  is  that  it  would  put  less  cyclical  pressure  on  fiscal  resources 
during a sharp downturn, which in turn would make it less likely that ESM assistance 
would need to be invoked. 
Such  public  risk  sharing  would  be  additional  to  the  private  risk  sharing  that  is 
obtainable  by  extending  the  degree  of  cross-border  equity  positions  across 
countries. Still, as pointed out by Farhi and Werning (2017), it is unlikely that the 
private market outcome would provide sufficient risk management since firms and 
households cannot factor in the macroeconomic externalities from national income 
fluctuations.  
A general characteristic of schemes that are intended to provide collective insurance 
against  unanticipated  shocks  is  that  it  is  difficult  to  calculate  the  relative 
contributions  of  exogenous  disturbances  versus  domestic  policy  errors  (such  as 
inadequate  deployment  of  macroprudential  policy  or  insufficiently-prudent  fiscal 
policy)  in  determining  the  magnitude  of  an  economic  downturn. 22    This  is  an 
important reason why such schemes would require sufficient political backing and 
oversight to reassure citizens across the euro area that such schemes would not be 
open to manipulation by poor policy decisions in some member countries.   
To the extent that such shocks are more easily observed and verified by external 
observers,  an  “exceptional  cases”  risk-sharing  mechanism  may  be  more 
operationally feasible than a linear-type scheme. Moreover, as suggested by Beblavy 
et al (2015) in the example of an unemployment reinsurance scheme, an experience 
rating  system  that  updates  country-specific  insurance  premia  for  those  countries 
that call on the fund also means that such schemes could be designed to ensure that 
long-run net cross-border transfers would be zero.  Arnold et al (2018) make a similar 
proposal  in  relation  to  the  design  of  a  central  fiscal  capacity  (CFC)  for 
macroeconomic stabilisation, with a “usage premium” levied on a recipient country 
after it has recovered from an adverse shock. In a tail scenario in which the euro 
area is collectively suffering a substantial adverse shock, the resources of a central 
stabilisation fund could be supplemented through a borrowing capacity that would 
be backed by the member countries.  
22 With the establishment of the SSM, poor supervision in relation to systemically-
important credit banks at national level is no longer a source of asymmetric policy errors 
within the euro area. 
Forms of central borrowing capacity that are ringfenced for limited-purpose entities 
– such as the funding of the ESM or a central stabilisation fund – are fundamentally
distinct  to  the  concept  of  Eurobonds  that  are  jointly  guaranteed  by  the  member 
governments and are intended to provide general funding for national treasuries (or 
an  expanded  central  budget).    The  scale  and  nature  of  the  mutual  commitments 
that  would  provide  the  backing  for  Eurobonds  would  require  a  proportionate 
expansion  in  joint  political  oversight  over  national  fiscal  policies.    Leandro  and 
Zettelmeyer (2018) provide an analysis of hybrid schemes that seek to capture many 
of  the  benefits  of  Eurobonds  with  more  limited  forms  of  joint  commitments.    A 
common feature of many of these schemes is that an area-wide funding instrument 
would have senior status, ranking ahead of national sovereign bonds.  It follows that 
moving forward with an expanded role for area-wide issuance programmes requires 
a fundamental acceptance by the member governments of a new hierarchy in terms 
of financial claims. 
Finally,  Blanchard  (2018)  revisits  the  potential  for  national  wage  negotiations  in 
improving the efficiency of the adjustment process in relation to asymmetric shocks. 
The appropriate national adjustment in wages depends on the nature of the shock, 
while decentralised wage determination cannot internalise the macroeconomics of 
aggregate wage dynamics.  While it is tricky to build and maintain a multi-level wage 
determination  process  that  takes  into  account  firm-,  sector-  and  country-specific 
factors,  it  does  offer  the  potential  to  improve  the  macroeconomic  adjustment 
process.23   
Conclusions 
There  has  been  substantial  convergence  in  the  diagnosis  of  the  boom-bust-crisis- 
recovery cycle that has defined the euro area economy over the last twenty years. 
Still, the relative importance of the different contributory factors remains open to 
dispute:  researchers  can  play  a  vital  role  in  closing  these  gaps  through  further 
theoretical and empirical studies of the properties of the euro area. 
The shared diagnosis has fostered significant institutional reforms since 2010: the 
current  architecture  of  the  euro  area  has  moved  significantly  compared  to  the 
original design at its launch in 1999.  In terms of the urgency of the reform agenda, 
the asymmetric legacies of the crisis in terms of the distribution of private and public 
debt positions and the impact on income and production levels doubtless makes it 
more difficult to initiate cross-border risk-sharing schemes that would operate most 
23 In the context of public sector wage setting, Lane (2010c) suggests a two-part wage 
contract, in which one part of the wage is protected but the other part is adjustable (in 
both directions) in relation to shifts in the macroeconomic environment. 
 easily  if  the  ex-ante  risks  were  similar  across  the  member  countries.  Still,  these 
same  legacy  vulnerabilities  also  constitute  a  potentially-damaging  transmission 
mechanism  that  both  increase  the  likelihood  and  the  potency  of  a  future  crisis 
episode.    Even  if  necessarily  complex,  suitably-adjusted  risk  sharing  programmes 
can help to mitigate the crisis risk that is the most significant vulnerability of the 
euro area.  
While  the  remaining  variation  in  policy  positions  on  reforming  the  euro  area 
institutional architecture in part can be related to the outstanding points of dispute 
in  relation  to  the  analytics  of  the  euro  area  and  assessments  of  the  likelihood  of 
future crisis events, it also reflects philosophical and political differences in relation 
to  the  balance  between  integration  and  national  autonomy.  As  ever,  the  future 
evolution of the euro area will depend on both economic and political forces.   
National and area-wide policymakers must make use of the improved institutional 
architecture to do a better job in terms of ex-ante risk management and ex-post 
crisis management.   
Acknowledgements: I thank Michael O’Grady, Micheal O’Keeffe and Paul Reddan for 
their assistance in preparing this paper.  This work draws on research funded by the 
Irish Research Council during 2013-2015 while I was on the academic staff at Trinity 
College Dublin. 
References 
Ahrend, Rudiger, Boris Cournede and Robert Price (2008), “Monetary Policy, Market 
Excess and Financial Turmoil,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 597. 
Arnold, Nathaniel, Bergljot Barkbu, Elif Ture, Hou Wang and Jiaxiong Yao (2018), “A 
Central Fiscal Stabilization Capacity for the Euro Area,” IMF Staff Discussion Note 
18/03. 
Barry, Frank (2017), “The Irish Single-Currency Debate of the 1990s in Retrospect,” 
Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland XLVI, 71-96.  
Beblavy,  Miroslav,  Daniel  Gros  and  Ilaria  Maselli  (2015),  “Reinsurance  of  National 
Unemployment Benefit Schemes,” mimeo, Centre for Economic Policy Studies.  
Benassy-Quere,  Agnes  and  Francesco  Giavazzi  (editors)  (2017),  Europe’s  Political 
Spring: Fixing the Eurozone and Beyond, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Benassy-Quere, Agnes, Markus K Brunnermeier, Hendrik Enderlein, Emmanuel Farhi, 
Marcel  Fratzscher,  Clemens  Fuest,  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas,  Philippe  Martin, 
Florence  Pisani,  Helene  Rey,  Isabel  Schnabel,  Nicolas  Veron,  Beatrice  Weder  di 
Mauro  and  Jeromin  Zettelmeyer  (2018),  Reconciling  Risk  Sharing  with  Market 
Discipline: A Constructive Approach to Euro Area Reform, CEPR Policy Insight No. 
91. 
Benetrix, Agustin and Philip R. Lane (2013), "Fiscal Cyclicality and EMU," Journal of 
International Money and Finance 24, 164-173. 
Benigno,  Gianluca  and  Luca  Fornaro  (2014),  “The  Financial  Resource  Curse,” 
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116(1), 58-86.  
Berger,  Helge,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Maurice  Obstfeld  (2018),  “Revisiting  the 
Economic  Case  for  Fiscal  Union  in  the  Euro  Area,”  IMF  Departmental  Paper  No. 
18/03. 
Berka, Martin, Michael B. Devereux, and Charles Engel (2018), “Real Exchange Rates 
and  Sectoral  Productivity  in  the  Eurozone,”  American  Economic  Review  108  (6), 
1543-1581. 
Bianchi, Javier and Jorge Mondragon (2018), “Rollover Crises and Currency Unions,” 
mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and University of Minnesota. 
Blanchard, Olivier (2018), “The Missing Third Leg of the Euro Architecture: National 
Wage Negotiations,” PIIE Real Time Economic Issues Watch (February 28). 
Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2002), “Current Account Deficits in the 
Euro Area: The End of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle?,” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 2, 147-209. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  and  Pedro  Portugal  (2017),  “Boom,  Slump,  Sudden  Stops, 
Recovery, and Policy Options: Portugal and the Euro,” PIIE Working Paper 17-8. 
Brunnermeier,  Markus  K.,  Harold  James  and  Jean-Pierre  Landau  (2016),  The  Euro 
and the Battle of Ideas,  Princeton University Press. 
Bruno,  Valentina  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2015),  “Capital  Flows  and  the  Risk-Taking 
Channel of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119-132. 
Carmassi, Jacopo, Sonja Dobkowitz, Johanne Evrard, Laura Parisi, Andre Silva and 
Michael  Wedow  (2018),  “Completing  the  Banking  Union  with  a  European  Deposit 
Insurance Scheme: Who is Afraid of Cross-Subsidisation?,” ECB Occasional Paper No. 
208. 
Chen,  Ruo,  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  and  Thierry  Tressel  (2013),  “External 
Imbalances in the Eurozone,” Economic Policy 28(73), 101-142. 
Constancio, Vitor (2018a), “Past and Future of the ECB Monetary Policy,” Speech at 
Central Bank of Malta (4th May). 
Constancio,  Vitor  (2018b),  “Completing  the  Odyssean  Journey  of  the  European 
Monetary Union,” Speech at ECB Colloquium on The Future of Central Banking (17th 
May). 
Corsetti,  Giancarlo,  Keith  Kuester,  Andre  Meier  and  Gernot  J.  Muller  (2014), 
“Sovereign  Risk  and  Belief-Driven  Fluctuations  in  the  Euro  Area,”  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 61(C), 53-73. 
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Lars Feld, Philip R. Lane, Lucrezia Reichlin,  Helene Rey, Dimitri 
Vayanos and Beatrice Weder di Mauro (2015), A New Start for the Eurozone: Dealing 
with Debt, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Lars Feld, Ralph Koijen, Lucrezia Reichlin, Ricardo Reis, Helene 
Rey and Beatrice Weder di Mauro (2016), Reinforcing the Eurozone and Protecting 
an Open Society, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Eichengreen,  Barry  (1996),  “A  More  Perfect  Union?  The  Logic  of  Economic 
Integration,” Princeton Essays in International Finance No. 198. 
Eichengreen, Barry (2010), “The Breakup of the Euro Area,” in (Alberto Alesina and 
Francesco Giavazzi, editors) Europe and the Euro, University of Chicago Press, 11-
51. 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (2015),  The  Regulatory  Treatment  of  Sovereign 
Exposures. 
Engel,  Charles  (2011),  “Currency  Misalignments  and  Optimal  Monetary  Policy:  A 
Reexamination,” American Economic Review 101, 2796-2822. 
European Systemic Risk Board (2015), 
Fagan,  Gabriel  and  Paul  McNelis  (2014),  “TARGET  Balances  and  Macroeconomic 
Adjustment to Sudden Stops in the Euro Area,” IIIS Discussion Paper No. 465. 
Farhi,  Emmanuel  and  Ivan  Werning  (2017),  “Fiscal  Unions,”  American  Economic 
Review 107(12), 3788-3834. 
Farhi,  Emmanuel,  Gita  Gopinath  and  Oleg  Itskhoki  (2013),  “Fiscal  Devaluations,” 
Review of Economic Studies 81(2), 725-760. 
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Luis Garicano and Tano Santos (2013), “Political Credit 
Cycles:  The  Case  of  the  Eurozone,”  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  27(3),  145-
166. 
Galstyan, Vahagn and Philip R. Lane (2013), "Bilateral Portfolio Dynamics During the 
Global Crisis" European Economic Review 57(1), 63-74. 
Giavazzi,  Francesco  and  Luigi  Spaventa  (2011),  “Why  the  Current  Account  May 
Matter in a Currency Union,” in (Miroslav Beblavy, David Cobham and L’udovit Odor, 
editors) The Euro Area and the Financial Crisis, Cambridge University Press, 59-80. 
Gourinchas,  Pierre-Olivier,  Thomas  Philippon  and  Dimitri  Vayanos  (2017),  “The 
Analytics of the Greek Crisis,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31, 1-81. 
Gros, Daniel and Cinzia Alcidi (2013), “Country Adjustment to a ‘Sudden Stop’: Does 
the Euro Make a Difference?,” European Economy Economic Paper No. 492. 
High-Level Task Force on Safe Assets (2018), Sovereign Bond-Backed Securities: A 
Feasibility Study, European Systemic Risk Board. 
Honohan, Patrick (2010), The Irish Banking Crisis: Regulatory and Financial Stability 
Policy 2003-2008, A Report to the Minister of Finance by the Governor of the Central 
Bank of Ireland. 
Honohan, Patrick (2018), “Three Quarter-Centuries of Central Banking in Ireland,” 
Economic Letter No. 2018-3, Central Bank of Ireland. 
Honohan, Patrick and Philip R. Lane (2003), “Divergent Inflation Rates under EMU,” 
Economic Policy 37, 358-394. 
Howard,  Greg  (2018),  “The  Migration  Accelerator:  Labor  Mobility,  Housing  and 
Demand,” mimeo,  University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
James,  Harold  (2012),  Making  the  European  Monetary  Union,  Harvard  University 
Press. 
Juncker, Jean-Claude in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, 
Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz (2015), Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary 
Union, European Commission (The Five Presidents’ Report). 
Lane, Philip R. (1997), “EMU: Macroeconomic Risks,” Irish Banking Review (Spring), 
24-34. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  (1998),  “Irish  Fiscal  Policy  under  EMU,” Irish  Banking  Review 
(Winter), 2-10. 
Lane, Philip R. (2006), “The Real Effects of European Monetary Union,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 20, 47-66, Fall 2006. 
Lane, Philip R. (2010a), “EMU and Financial Integration," in The Euro At Ten - Lessons 
and Challenges, 5th ECB Central Banking Conference Volume, 2010. 
Lane, Philip R. (2010b), “European Monetary Union and Macroeconomic Stabilisation 
Policies in Ireland," Report for National Economic and Social Council. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2010c),  “A  New  Fiscal  Framework  for  Ireland,”  Journal  of  the 
Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland XXXIX, 144-165. 
Lane, Philip R. (2011), “The Irish Crisis,” in (Miroslav Beblavy, David Cobham and 
L’udovit Odor, editors) The Euro Area and the Financial Crisis, Cambridge University 
Press, 59-80. 
Lane, Philip R. (2012), “"The European Sovereign Debt Crisis," Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 26(3), 49-68. 
Lane  Philip  R.  (2013a),  “Capital  Flows  in  the  Euro  Area,” European  Economy 
Economic Paper No. 497. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2013b),  “Financial  Globalisation  and  the  Crisis,”  Open  Economies 
Review 24(3), 555-580.  
Lane  Philip  R.  (2013c),  “External  Imbalances  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,”  New 
Zealand Economic Papers 47(1), 53-70. 
Lane, Philip R. (2016), “Macro-Financial Stability Under EMU,” in After the Crisis: 
Reform,  Recovery,  and  Growth  in  Europe  (edited  by  Francesco  Caselli,  Mario 
Centeno and Jose Tavares),  Oxford University Press, 89-108. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2007),  “Europe  and  Global 
Imbalances,” Economic Policy 22(51), 519-573. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2008),  “The  Drivers  of  Financial 
Globalization,” American  Economic  Review  (Papers  and  Proceedings) 98(2),  327-
332. 
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2011), “The Cross-Country Incidence 
of the Global Crisis,” IMF Economic Review 59(1), 77-110. 
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2012), “External Adjustment and the 
Global Crisis,” Journal of International Economics 88(2), 252-65. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2015),  “Global  Imbalances  and 
External Adjustment After the Crisis,” in (Claudio Raddatz, Diego Saravia and Jaume 
Ventura,  editors)  Global  Liquidity,  Spillovers  to  Emerging  Markets  and  Policy 
Responses, Central Bank of Chile, 105-142. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2018),  “The  External  Wealth  of 
Nations Revisited: International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global 
Financial Crisis,” IMF Economic Review 66(1), 189-222. 
Lane, Philip R. and Barbara Pels (2012), “Current Account Imbalances in Europe,” 
Moneda y Credito 234, 225-261. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Livio  Stracca  (2018),  “Can  Appreciation  Be  Expansionary? 
Evidence from the Euro Area,” Economic Policy 33(94), 225-264. 
Leandro, Alvaro and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2018), “The Search for a Euro Area Safe 
Asset,” PIIE Working Ppaer No. 18-3. 
Martin, Philippe and Thomas Philippon (2017), “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage 
and the Great Recession in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review 107(7), 1904-
1937. 
Martinez, Joseba, Thomas Philippon and Markus Silvonen (2018), “Does a Currency 
Union Need a Capital Market Union?,” mimeo, New York University. 
Marzinotto,  Benedicta,  Andre  Sapir  and  Guntram  B.  Wolff  (2011),  “What  Kind  of 
Fiscal Union?,” Bruegel Policy Brief No. 2011/06. 
Michaelides,  Alexander  (2014),  “Cyprus:  From  Boom  to  Bail-In,”  Economic  Policy 
29(80), 639-689. 
Mody, Ashoka (2018), Euro Tragedy: A Drama in Nine Acts, Oxford University Press. 
Mussa,  Michael  L.  (1990),  “Exchange  Rates  in  Theory  and  in  Reality,”  Princeton 
Essays in International Finance No. 179. 
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in 
Internatonal Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause,” NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual 15(1), 339-390. 
O’Rourke, Kevin and Alan M. Taylor (2013), “Cross of Euros,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 27(3), 167-192. 
Reis,  Ricardo  (2013),  “The  Portuguese  Slump  and  Crash  and  the  Euro  Crisis,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 46 (Spring), 143-193.  
Sandbu, Martin (2015), Europe’s Orphan: The Future of the Euro and the Politics of 
Debt,  Princeton University Press. 
Santos,  Tano  (2014),  “Antes  Del  Diluvio:  The  Spanish  Banking  System  in  the  First 
Decade of the Euro,” mimeo, Columbia Business School. 
Santos,  Tano  (2017),  “El  Diluvio:  The  Spanish  Banking  Crisis,  2008-2012,”  mimeo, 
Columbia Business School. 
Shambaugh, Jay C. (2012), “The Euro’s Three Crises,” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity. 
Taylor, John B. (2008), “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Response: An Empirical 
Analysis of What Went Wrong,” Critical Review 21(2-3), 341-364.  
Whelan, Karl (2014a), “Ireland’s Economic Crisis: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly,” 
Journal of Macroeconomics 39 (B), 424-440.  
Whelan, Karl (2014b), “TARGET2 and Central Bank Balance Sheets,” Economic Policy 
29, 79-137. 
