State Government Market Borrowings – Issues and Prospects 
(Keynote Address by Shri B. P. Kanungo, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Financial 
Market Conclave of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Mumbai, on August 31, 2018)1 
 
Shri  Chandra  Shekhar  Ghosh,  President,  Bengal  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Shri  T. 
Bandopadhyay,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  am  thankful  to  the  Bengal  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry for providing me the opportunity to be present here and speak 
on the subject of ‘State Government Borrowing’. 
In the federal system of governance that we have in our country, both the Central and 
the State Governments are responsible for the development of the nation. To discharge 
the  responsibility,  the  overall  magnitude  of  the  State  Budgets  is  significant,  and  the 
nature  of  spending  incurred  by  the  states  is  crucial  for  development.  As  states  have 
their  own  developmental  priorities,  financing  the  budgets  assumes  vital  importance. 
Given this scenario, it is important to examine the current conditions of budget and debt 
management at state level, identify the issues and dwell on the prospects. 
 
State  Budgets  have  increased  in  size:  Over  the  past  decade  the  size  of  State 
Government  budgets  have  increased  sharply,  and  they  now  collectively  spend 
substantially  more  than  the  Union  Government.  Aggregate  Expenditure  of  the  state 
governments increased to ` 30,285.1 billion in 2017-18 (RE) from ` 12,847.1 billion in 
2011-12  and  is  further  expected  to  increase  to  `  33,592.2  billion  in  2018-19  (BE). 
Growth  in  their  aggregate  expenditure  has  also  outpaced  that  of  the  Central 
Government for each of the years since 2011-12.  
 
Fiscal imbalances are also rising: It is a matter of concern that the finances of State 
Governments  are  showing  signs  of  increasing  fiscal  imbalance.  Reserve  Bank  in  its 
‘State Finances: A Study of Budgets of 2017-18’ observed that the consolidated fiscal 
position  of  states  deteriorated  during  2015-16  and  2016-17.  The  GFD-GDP  ratio  in 
2017-18  (RE)  is  at  3.1  per  cent  and  is  above  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management (FRBM) threshold for the third consecutive year. Outstanding liabilities of 
                                                            
1 Inputs received from Internal Debt Management Department and Shri Rajendra Kumar, General Manager are 
acknowledged. 
 1 
State Governments have been registering double digit growth since 2012-13 (2014-15 
being an exception). State-wise data reveal that the debt-GSDP ratio increased for 16 
states.  The  downside  risks  to  fiscal  position  of  the  states  include  stress  on  revenue 
expenditure  in  the  run-up  to  the  general  elections,  implementation  of  7th  pay 
commission  recommendations  by  states,  and  farm  loan  waivers  in  certain  states  etc. 
Fiscal slippages have also been noticed in central finances. In response to the Global 
Financial  crisis,  the  FRBM  Act  was  put  on  hold  during  2008-13  and  fiscal  stimuli 
expanded the centre’s gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to an average of 5.6 per cent of GDP 
during this period. During the period 2013-18, the GFD of the Centre, as a percentage 
of  GDP  averaged  3.9  per  cent.  The  GFD  target  of  3  per  cent  of  GDP,  stipulated  in 
FRBM Act, now stands deferred to 2020-21. In retrospect, the Central Government has 
achieved the target in one year only, i.e., in 2007-08 when the GFD/GDP ratio fell to 2.5 
per  cent.  Growing  fiscal  imbalance,  whether  by  the  Centre  or  State  can  derail  fiscal 
consolidation  at  the  general  Government  level.  General  Government  deficit  of  India 
rules at a very elevated level amongst the G-20 countries. 
States market borrowings have increased: A consequence of large expenditures and 
deficits is an increase in market borrowings reflecting rising trend in fiscal imbalance at 
States  level  and  increase  in  outstanding  liabilities.  The  Indian  State  Governments’ 
market  borrowings,  which  is  the  chief  source  of  funding  of  their  gross  fiscal  deficits, 
have risen sharply in recent years, in contrast to the stagnation displayed by the Central 
Government’s  dated  market  borrowings.  The  financing  of  gross  fiscal  deficit  (GFD) 
through  market  borrowings,  which  constituted  small  fraction  of  sources  of  financing 
before 1990, increased significantly to 74.9 per cent in 2017-18 (BE) (Chart 1).  
Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  to  note  that  gross  as  well  as  net  market  borrowings  of 
State Governments are budgeted to be similar to that of the Central Government in the 
current fiscal year. States have also borrowed significantly to take over the liabilities of 
state  power  utilities  under  UDAY  Scheme.  On  an  aggregate  basis,  states’  gross 
borrowings are budgeted to rise to ` 5.5 lakh crore or 2.9 per cent of GDP, while net 
borrowings are expected to rise to ` 4.2 lakh crore or 2.3 per cent of GDP in 2018-19. 
States have budgeted to finance nearly 91 per cent of their fiscal deficit through market 
borrowings as against around 66 per cent by the central government. Gross borrowings 
 2 
by  State  Governments  are  projected  to  increase  28.5  per  cent  year-on-year  (y-o-y) 
during 2018-19.  
  
Financing Mix has changed: The changes in financing mix of states also contributed 
to  increased  reliance  on  market  borrowings.  Pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of 
Finance Commission-XIV, almost all states have opted out of National Small Savings 
Fund  (NSSF).  As  a  result,  reliance  of  State  Governments  on  market  borrowings  has 
increased substantially in recent years. Increased redemptions, emanating from higher 
market borrowing of 0.5 per cent of GFD consequent to fiscal stimulus provided to the 
states in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) 2007-08, also contributed to 
the  rise  in  borrowings2  (Chart  2).   This  has  led  to  the  pace  of  increase  in  market 
borrowings of State Governments higher than that of the Centre, which is more or less 
at stagnant levels over the past couple of years.     
                                                            
2 The gross amount borrowed by States during 2007-08 was more than twice the amount raised in the previous year 
as States were sanctioned additional allocations by the Centre to meet the shortfall in National Small Savings Fund 
(NSSF) collections during 2007-08. 
 3 
  Impact of higher borrowings: 
Considering  the  large  redemption  pressure  of  around  `  1.3  trillion,  gross  market 
borrowings  are  expected  to  cross  ₹6  trillion  in  FY19,  slightly  more  than  Central 
Government  gross  borrowing  numbers  for  the  fiscal  year.  Market  share  of  State 
Development Loans (SDL) in outstanding has increased from 16.59 per cent in 2008-09 
to 29.06 per cent in 2018-19 as against decrease in share  of GoI from 83.41 per cent 
(G-Sec & T-Bills) to 70.94 per cent during the same period. Although market borrowings 
of the Centre and the State governments have been managed successfully by Reserve 
Bank,  the  increasing  reliance  on  market  borrowings  by  States  have  raised  concerns 
both from the supply and demand side and need to be managed so as to minimise any 
adverse effects on yields. I would highlight some of these concerns. 
i.  Hardening of yields: Increased reliance of Centre and States on market borrowings 
led to an oversupply of Government paper in the G-Sec market and contributed to 
hardening of sovereign yields.  This results in a spiral, whereby increased market 
borrowings  result  in  increasing  redemption  pressures  which  induces  further 
borrowing to service outstanding debt and accumulated interest burden.  Weighted 
average yield increased from 7.48 per cent in 2016-17 to 7.60 per cent in 2017-18. 
Average  spreads  of  SDL  yields  over  Central  Government  securities  of 
corresponding maturity have increased from 38 bps in 2014-15 to 59 bps in 2017-
 4 
18 signifying increase in the cost of borrowing for the States. As the investor base 
for G-Sec and SDLs are almost same, the continuous and large supply of SDLs 
had resulted in hardening of yields of Central Government securities also. 
Table:  Gross  Issuance  and  Spread  of  SDLs  over  Corresponding  Tenor  of  GoI 
Securities 
Gross 
Borrowing 
of States 
(in ` Cr) 
240,842 
294,560 
381,979 
419,100 
  Year 
2014-15 
2015-16 
2016-17 
2017-18 
 
YoY 
Growth 
per 
cent 
Gross 
Borrowing 
of GoI 
(in ` Cr) 
YoY 
Growth 
per 
cent 
22 
22 
30 
10 
5,92,000 
5,85,000 
5,82,000 
5,88,000 
5 
-1 
-1 
1 
Weighted 
average 
of SDL 
spread 
over GoI 
(bps) 
38 
50 
60 
59 
YoY 
Growth 
per 
cent 
49 
32 
20 
-2 
ii.  Impact  on  the  corporate  bond  market:  An  internal  study  of  RBI  and  CAFRAL  had 
examined the impact of SDL spreads on corporate bond yields and it was observed that 
rise in yields on state government paper end up pushing spreads on corporate bonds. 
Unlike  Central  Government  debt  which  crowds  out  bank  credit,  SDL  crowds  out 
corporate borrowings in the bond market by increasing costs. A one percentage point 
increase in the ratio of state debt issuance to GDP, results in an 11 per cent decline in 
the  volume  (in Rupees)  of corporate  bonds  issued  in FY2016.  High  rated  corporate 
bonds and those with longer maturity have a greater propensity for being crowded out 
by SDLs which work as substitutes.  
iii.  Impact  on  other  segments  of  the  financial  market:  The  increased  supply  and 
consequent  hardening  of  yields,  especially  so  in  case  of  the  benchmark  10  year 
security,  has  a  cascading  effect  on  interest  rates  in  other  segments  of  the  financial 
market, as pricing of other products are based on the risk-free yield curve.  This feeds 
into  inflation  through  input  costs,  further  increasing  yield  levels,  thereby  creating  a 
vicious cycle. Since economy is poised for higher growth trajectory, the private sector 
 5 
demand  for  domestic  funding  is  expected  to  significantly  accelerate  in  coming  years. 
Hence, stake holders would have to be sensitive not only to their own interest expenses 
but also to that of the financial sector.   
iv. Diminishing demand from banks: Given the large borrowing  requirement of Centre 
and  States,  assessment  of  the  institutional  demand  for  government  securities  is 
paramount.  Captive  funding  is  diminishing  as  banks  are  following  the  glide  path  for 
reducing the SLR requirements. In a market confronted by reduced pre-emption in the 
form of SLR, reduction in HTM  and likely  adoption  of IFRS that will seek to mandate 
mark  to  market  (MtM)  accounting,  the  demand  for  government  bonds  could  be 
impacted.   Additionally, international capital standards post GFC (Basel III), to which 
India  is  an  active  participant,  proposes  to  assign  credit  risk  weights  to  sub-sovereign 
borrowings.    If  and  when  accepted,  this  development  is  likely  to  impact  the  cost  of 
borrowing for State Governments and the attraction to hold SDLs in banks’ books, for 
reason other than the YTM they offer. Further Basel III capital requirements also seek to 
define  High  Quality  Liquid  Assets  under  it’s  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio(LCR) 
framework.   As per our extant regulations, SDLs being similar to Government of India 
(GOI)  securities  qualify 
level  1  High  Quality  Liquid 
Assets(HQLA), by virtue of an implicit sovereign guarantee and default free status for its 
market borrowings. This may change in the future, in which case banks may have to 
begin assigning risk weights to SDLs.  State Governments will need to strategize for this 
eventuality.   
 
v. Limited participation of FPIs: As part of the measures to increase the investor base, 
attracting  Foreign  Portfolio  Investors  (FPIs)  towards  SDLs  would  be  essential  for 
meeting  the  increased  borrowing  requirements.  As  per  Medium  Term  Framework 
(MTF), the FPI limits were to increase in phases to reach 2 per cent of the outstanding 
stock by March 2018. However, the FPI limit utilization of SDLs stood at only 12  per 
cent of the limit for the quarter ending March 2018, and lower at 10 per cent of the limit 
for  the  quarter  ending  June  2018.  FPIs  have  cited  lack  of  information  on  financial 
position  of  states  between  two  budgets,  and  opacity  of  State  Government  (SG) 
inclusion  as  part  of 
for 
 6 
operations as one of the main reasons for lackluster interest in SDLs, despite the yields 
they  have  to  offer.    There  is,  hence,  a  need  to  reach  out  to  investors  by  introducing 
transparency  and  making  accessible  high  frequency  data  on  State  finances  in  public 
domain.  
vi. Large cash balances and negative carry: An analysis of surplus cash maintained by 
the States in the past years throws light on the fact that there are States resorting to 
market borrowings despite having a surplus invested in ITBs and ATBs with a negative 
carry on such investments.  If a SG is investing in T-Bills locked in for 182 days and 364 
days,  there  is  a  need  to  re-examine  states’  market  borrowing  programme.  Further, 
accumulation of large surplus cash balance by State Governments reduces liquidity in 
the market thereby contributing to the pressure on interest rate prevailing in the market. 
It is, therefore, necessary for States with large surplus to rationalize their borrowings in 
tandem with their surplus cash balance. During 2017-18, seven states had raised less 
than  85  per  cent  of  the  amount  sanctioned  for  the  year  reflecting  the  fact  that  these 
States require lesser than the sanctioned amount. To address these issues, the States 
have  to  devise  a  mechanism  for  monitoring  their  surplus  on  a  continuous  basis  and 
mapping  it  to  their  market  borrowing  programme,  with  the  assistance  of  external 
consultants, if need be. This will reduce the inflow of bonds into the market, reduce the 
pressure on yields and have a positive impact on the borrowing cost of both Centre and 
other States. 
vii. Market microstructure and  illiquidity in  SDLs: The SDL market is relatively illiquid, 
especially when compared with Central Government bonds. This illiquidity premium is 
reflected in spreads. The liquidity of SDLs in the secondary market as reflected from its 
share in total G-Sec secondary market, remains significantly low (less than 5 per cent). 
The  lack  of  liquidity  can  be  attributed  to  reasons  such  as  low  outstanding  stock  of 
multiple  SDLs,  market  microstructure  issues  and  lack  of  market  makers.  SDLs  are 
almost  always  new  issuances,  and  hence  are  fragmented  lacking  critical  mass  to 
improve trading volumes. In 2017-18, the Central Government had 156 reissuances out 
of  a  total  of  159  issuances,  while  state  governments  had  43  reissuances  out  of  411 
issuances. Thus, there is a need for reissuance by State Governments.  
 7 
The  SDL  market  microstructure  could  also  partly  explain  low  liquidity.  As  on  March 
2018, more than half of SDLs ownership consisted of insurance companies (33.5 per 
cent) and PFs (18.1 per cent) who are largely investors who hold the bonds till maturity. 
Even  banks  investing  in  SDLs  are  averse  to  trading  because  of  the  valuation  norms 
which  facilitate  nudging  up  of  the  price  of  SDL  in  banks’  books  and  insulation  from 
market  risks  offered  by  HTM  dispensation.  With  an  objective  to  ensure  banks’  bond 
portfolios  reflect  their  current  market  valuation,  it  has  been  decided  that  the  SDLs 
should be valued based on observed prices. This measure could potentially discourage 
passive investment by banks and improve trading volumes in SDL. The market is also 
devoid of market-makers providing two-way quotes, thereby impacting liquidity.  
Risk asymmetry in SDLs 
the  recommendations  of  the  12th  Finance  Commission,  government 
Following 
disintermediated from the borrowings of State Governments from FY06 onwards. It was 
expected that a rise in the volume of market borrowings would enhance the scrutiny of 
the states’ fiscal health, and superior fiscal management would be incentivized through 
lower borrowing costs. 
However,  the  cut-off  yields  of  SDLs  issued  by  states  in  any  given  auction  remain 
narrowly  clustered,  despite 
fiscal 
performance.  A  closer  look  at  the  data  indicates  that  there  has  been  no  significant 
difference  in  inter-state  spreads,  which  on  an  average  have  been  between  5-7  bps. 
States  with  better  fiscal  parameters  have  expressed  view  that  the  market  is  not 
providing any incentive for better performance on fiscal front.  
the  state  governments’ 
large  variations 
in 
The  issue  pertaining  to  risk  asymmetries  across  states  have  been  receiving  policy 
attention as can be seen from observations in two reports viz., The Economic Survey 
2016-17 and the FRBM Review Committee Report, 2017 headed by Shri N. K. Singh. 
 
The Economic Survey 2016-17 stated that greater market-based discipline on 
state  government  finances  is  missing,  as  reflected  in  the  complete  lack  of 
correlation  between  the  spread  on  state  government  bonds  and  their  debt  or 
deficit  positions.  It  was  observed  that  there  is  a  flat  relationship  between  the 
8 
i) 
  ii) 
spread and the indebtedness of states therefore states are neither rewarded nor 
penalized for their debt performance.” 
The FRBM Review Committee Report titled “Responsible Growth: A Debt and 
Fiscal Framework for 21st Century India” published in January 2017 stated  that 
Despite  SDL  borrowing  rates  being  market  determined,  it  is  felt  that  risk 
asymmetries across states are not adequately reflected in the cost of borrowings. 
The report observed that  few well managed states with good fiscal performance 
have  expressed 
for  better 
management of their fiscal and there is some element of cross subsidization by 
the  financially  stronger  states  of  the  other  states  which    is  akin  to  financial 
repression.” 
 
they  are  not  adequately  compensated 
that 
To address this anomaly, RBI has taken several measures. The measures include a) 
conducting of weekly auction of SDLs since October 24, 2017 to prevent bunching of 
issuances, b) publishing of high frequency data in the RBI Monthly Bulletin relating to 
the buffers SGs maintain with RBI, the financial accommodation availed under various 
facilities by each SG from the RBI, the market borrowings and the outstanding of SDLs, 
so as to add transparency essential for deepening the SDL market.  c)  The interest rate 
on borrowing against the collateral of Consolidated Sinking Fund (CSF) and Guarantee 
Redemption Fund (GRF) funds has been lowered to incentivize State Governments to 
increase these buffers, which is again an element of comfort to the investors. d)  With a 
view to incentivising the State Governments to get SDLs rated publically, the cost of RBI 
repo facility against the collateral of ‘rated’ SDLs have been re-calibrated to provide for 
lower margins on SDLs3. e) For a fair valuation of SDLs in the books of banks, it has 
been decided that the securities issued by each SG  will henceforth be valued at the 
observed  prices  in  the  secondary  or  primary  auctions.  Although  improvement  in  debt 
sustainability  indicators  have  been  witnessed  over  the  years,  appropriate  pricing  of 
                                                            
3 The initial margin requirement for rated SDLs shall be set at 1.0 per cent lower than that of other SDLs for the  same maturity 
buckets, i.e., in the range of 1.5 per cent to 5.0 per cent. 
 
 9 
State Development Loans (SDLs) signaling underlying financial conditions of the states 
will have the potential to reinforce fiscal discipline of states. All these measures are part 
of the top down approach.  The time has come for a bottom up approach, where State 
Governments  themselves  take  proactive  measures  which  may  include  increasing 
investor engagement by holding investor meets and promote investment by local as well 
as foreign investors.  
 
Way Forward 
As the debt manager of the Government, Reserve Bank has to ensure that the financing 
needs  of  the  Government  is  met  at  low  cost  over  medium/  long-term  while  avoiding 
excessive risk. However, given the quantum increase in market borrowings, it is critical 
to  develop  a  strategy  by  coordinating  the  market  borrowings  of  Central  and  State 
Governments.  
i.  Revamping cash management  
State Governments will have to relook at their cash management practices and 
develop expertise for monitoring and reporting cash flows and using the data to 
forecast  cash  balances  with  the  objective  of  timing  their  respective  borrowing 
programmes.    
 
ii.  Inter-state lending borrowing 
State  Governments  have  in  the  past  been  demanding,  and  rightly  so,  greater 
avenues to invest their surplus cash balances.  Perhaps, the cash surplus SGs 
could lend to those in deficit at a rate linked to the market.  Of course, this would 
need to be budgeted for.   
iii.  Mandating 
investment 
in  Consolidated  Sinking  Find 
(CSF)/  Guarantee 
Redemption Fund (GRF): 
Investment  in  CSF  and  GRF  with  RBI,  is  voluntary  at  present.  These  reserves 
are  intended  to  provide  a  cushion  to  the  SGs  in  meeting  the  future  repayment 
obligations.  States  which  maintain  these  funds  are  holding  different  levels  of 
 10 
investments  in  terms  of  their  outstanding  liabilities.  There  is  merit  in  making 
investments  in  CSF  and  GRF  mandatory  for  SGs  and  specify  a  minimum 
threshold  in  terms  of  their  outstanding  liabilities  to  provide  greater  comfort  to 
investors.  To  further  incentivize  adequate  maintenance  of  these  funds  by  the 
State  Governments  and  to  encourage  them  to  increase  the  corpus  of  these 
funds, Reserve Bank has lowered the rate of interest on Special Drawing Facility 
(SDF) from 100 bps below the Repo Rate to 200 bps below the Repo Rate. 
iv. Rating of SDLs by rating agency on a standalone basis   
SDLs carry no credit risk, as they are sovereign and have power to impose taxes 
under constitution.  This absence of credit risk can be seen from the fact that the 
risk  weight  assigned  to  holdings  of  SDLs  by  commercial  banks  is  zero  in  the 
calculation of their CRARs under the Basel III capital regulations, similar to GOI 
bonds. There is no default history to assess probability of default. The states also 
maintain  a  consolidated  sinking  fund  (CSF)  with  RBI  to  provide  a  cushion  for 
amortization  of  market  borrowing/liabilities.  Having  CSF  and  GRF  gives  states 
and investors comfort that SDL payments will be made in all circumstances. On 
the  other  hand,  risk  needs  to  be  looked  into  in  its  totality.  An  index  measuring 
debt  sustainability  and 
indicators  could  be 
attempted to measure state government performance.  Fiscally strong SGs can 
take  the  initiative  to  get  themselves  rated  on  such  parameters  from  approved 
standalone  rating  agencies  and  make  them  public.  This  may  help  them  to  get 
better rates in auctions of their bonds. Such exercise would act as an incentive 
for states to perform better. To incentivize adoption of public ratings by the State 
Governments  for  SDLs,  recently  the  Reserve  Bank  has  decided  that  the  initial 
margin requirement under LAF for rated SDLs shall be set at 1.0 per cent lower 
than that of other SDLs for the same maturity buckets. The public disclosure of 
SG ratings may also help in price differentiation of SDLs.  
 
 
fiscal  prudence  performance 
 11 
V.  Robust calendar 
While  the  Central  Government  is  known  to  adhere  to  the  borrowing  calendar 
published  every  half  year  (HY),  the  SGs  do  not  adhere  to  their  quarterly 
calendars.  Such  deviations  leave  the  market  to  second  guess  their  market 
borrowing.   Communication to the market as well as predictability is critical for 
credibility of the borrowing programme.   
vi.  Consolidation of debt 
The maturity pattern of SDLs indicates that the redemption pressure would start 
increasing from 2022-23 and would continue to do so till 2026-27. The upsurge in 
redemption necessitates consolidation of debt. Each State Government will have 
to  plan  reissuances,  buyback  and  switches  based  on  their  respective  maturity 
profiles  and  cash  flows.  This  will  help  create  volumes,  facilitate  trading  in  the 
secondary  market  and  benefit  SGs  by  lowering  yields.    Additionally,  it  will  also 
even out redemption pressures and elongate the residual maturity of securities. 
Due to efforts of Reserve Bank, several states have started reissuing SDL. We 
are also working with states on debt buy-backs and will take this process forward.  
vii. Improved and timely disclosure of information: 
FRBM legislations have significantly improved budget reporting, debt and fiscal 
data of states is not readily available. With a view to improve transparency and 
facilitate  investors  in  taking  informed  investment  decisions,  there  is  a  need  to 
provide  high  frequency  data  on  State  finances  in  public  domain.  Transparency 
includes having an independent audit of sub-national financial accounts, making 
periodic  public  disclosures  of  key  fiscal  data,  exposing  hidden  liabilities,  and 
moving off-budget liabilities on budget.  
    12 
Conclusion:  
Development and reforms are a continuous process. During the new millennium, State 
Governments have taken several steps to improve fiscal and debt management. All the 
State Governments have enacted their Fiscal Responsibility Legislations incorporating 
the fiscal consolidation path. Therefore, an institutional commitment to fiscal prudence 
exists. The traditional debt sustainability indicators are on a reasonably strong footing. 
There  may  not  be  any  significant  systemic  risk  on  account  of  states’  public  debt. 
However, during the recent past there are indications of fiscal slippage. Rising deficits 
and  borrowings  of  states  with  low  liquidity  and  shallow  investor  base  have  macro-
economic implications. Hence, it is important for all the stake holders to take measures 
as  discussed  above.  I  would  urge  market  participants  to  utilize  the  SDL  data  being 
published by RBI to take informed investment decision and also encourage participation 
of  other  investors  including  FPIs  in  SDLs.  Economic  and  social  welfare  of  citizens  is 
dependent on effective fiscal and debt management by the states.  Building robust SDL 
markets and augmenting debt management systems in states to take care of emergent 
risks, is both imperative and urgent. Reserve Bank has been working actively with State 
Governments to achieve this objective. I would urge market participants also to play an 
active role in this endeavour. 
Thank You. 
 13 
