Øystein Olsen: Does Norway save too much?
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 22 March 2018.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
INTRODUCTION
 First,  let  me  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today.  I  am  very  happy  to  visit  the
Peterson Institute.
Norway  is  a  small,  open  economy  which  was  transformed  by  the  discovery  of  oil  on  our
continental shelf almost 50 years ago. Back in 1970, the year after the first discovery, income
levels  were  relatively  low  compared  with  other  western  countries.  That  picture  has  changed
completely.
Lower oil prices in recent years have reduced the relative income level somewhat, but measured
by GDP per capita, Norway still ranks among the richest countries in the world.
Graph: GDP per capita
Natural resource discoveries have been identified as a curse for some countries. For Norway, it
has  been  a  blessing.  We  have  managed  to  transform  oil  and  gas  resources  into  real  and
financial assets. Luck has been supplemented with what I dare claim is a sensible handling of
the resources. At an early stage, it was concluded that the resources belong to the Norwegian
people. Large savings in recent years means that also future generations will benefit from the
revenues.
Graph: The petroleum fund mechanism
Direct government participation in the industry and an extraordinary tax rate for oil companies,
currently at 78 percent, ensure that most of the resource rents flow into government coffers.
All  the  revenue  is  channelled  to  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global.  The  fund’s  capital  is
invested abroad. The annual transfers from the fund to the fiscal budget are guided by the fiscal
rule, which stipulates that on average over the cycle spending must be limited to the expected
real return on the fund – currently estimated at 3 percent.
The general view in Norway is that the management of our natural resource wealth has been a
success. The OECD and the IMF have commended the framework. Still, there is an ongoing
debate  on  whether  current  spending  is  too  high.  Some  argue  that  the  planned  consumption
profile takes too little account of future obligations, in particular pension liabilities. Others claim
that the estimates of the expected real return on the fund’s capital are too optimistic.
Bergsten and Gagnon (2017)  and Gagnon (2018)  present a different view. They point to high
current account surpluses over a number of years and argue that Norway instead spends too
little. Hence my presentation’s title – does Norway save too much?
1
2
I will proceed by giving a few general perspectives on global current account imbalances. I will
then  turn  to  the  question  of  how  much  oil  producers  should  save  –  and  the  reasons  for  high
saving in Norway.
Graph: Outline 
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
WHY A SURPLUS OR DEFICIT?
The  international  capital  market  allows  countries  to  decouple  the  size  of  savings  from
investments. The ability to run current account surpluses and deficits at different times facilitates
a  globally  efficient  capital  allocation.  In  addition,  it  may  help  absorb  country-specific  shocks.
Deficits  allow  countries  to  finance  productive  investments.  Surpluses  can  generate  higher
returns than those available on domestic investments. And the possibility to smooth consumption
is generally a benefit.
Graph: Current account balance for Norway
Norway is a prime example. Our oil history started with the country running significant deficits,
enabling large investments without the need to cut consumption correspondingly. Deficits peaked
at close to 12 percent of GDP in the 1970s, when the first investments in the oil industry were
made. Since then, we have mainly run surpluses, but our net international investment position
turned positive as late as in the mid-1990s, a quarter of a century after production began on the
Norwegian continental shelf.
Graph: Current account balances
Global current account imbalances have increased since the late 1990s, as can be seen in this
graph.  If  deficits  persist  over  time,  the  financing  of  the  debt  can  be  challenging.  High  capital
mobility  increases  the  vulnerability  of  high-debt  countries.  Unbalanced  developments  can
undermine support for open trade and flexible markets, in turn also hurting surplus countries. In
addition, both high deficits and significant surpluses may reflect policy and structural distortions
that could hamper growth.
A  current  account  deficit  or  surplus  can  thus  from  both  an  individual-country  and  global
perspective  be  either  desirable  or  excessive,  driven  by  distorted  policies.  To  judge  a  given
situation, we must therefore consider the fundamentals behind the imbalance.
For producers of non-renewable resources, it is important to remember that although extraction
of a depletable resource is counted as income in the national accounts, these revenues are of a
special kind. It would in many ways be more meaningful to view them as transformation of wealth
– from natural resources underground to financial assets abroad.
We  would  expect  such  producers  to  run  substantial  current  account  surpluses  during  the
production period. As the graph illustrates, this has also been the case, in particular in the 2000s,
when  oil  prices  were  high.  In  recent  years  these  countries  as  a  group  have  actually  been  in
deficit, while Norway has had a small surplus, barely visible in the graph.
HOW MUCH SHOULD OIL PRODUCERS SAVE?
Exactly how much producers of non-renewable resources should save is a more complicated
question. One potential yardstick is that savings should be sufficient to avoid the so-called “Dutch
disease”. The phrase was originally coined to describe the strong decline of the manufacturing
sector in the Netherlands following the exploitation of natural gas resources in the 1960s and
1970s.
The  classic  paper  by  Corden  and  Neary  (1982)  describes  the  key  mechanisms  behind  this
development. They describe two  effects  in  an  economy  experiencing  a  boom  in  an  extractive
industry, like oil or natural gas.
3
The first effect is the spending effect. An  oil  discovery  will  increase  export  revenues,  allowing
higher imports over time. Normally, demand for non-tradable goods will also increase. The non-
tradable goods sector will require more domestic resources.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Graph: Labour market in a three-sector model
As a result of higher labour demand from the non-tradable sector, the general wage level will
increase, and the non-tradeable sector will expand at the expense of the two tradable sectors.
Graph: “Spending effect”
But this is only half of the story. The second part is the resource movement effect. Also the oil
related-sector  will  demand  more  labour.  As  a  result,  wages  will  move  up  further,  and  the
manufacturing sector will shrink even more.
Graph: “Resource movement effect”
This crowding-out of manufacturing is unavoidable if the benefits of the oil resources are to be
enjoyed. But the process may go too far. The economy may find itself in a difficult situation when
resources are exhausted. The structural changes in the economy have to be reversed. Workers
who become unemployed must find new jobs in manufacturing. This could be quite challenging.
It is at this stage you can really assess whether a resource economy has escaped the “Dutch
disease” or not.
Gagnon (2018) argues that the necessary adjustment costs will be minimised if spending follows
the permanent income principle, i.e. the expected real return of the resource wealth should be
spent  every  year.  On  this  background  he  claims  that  Norway  has  saved  too  much  and  that
spending  should  rather  have  been  based  on  a  modified  version  of  the  permanent  income
principle.
REASONS FOR HIGH SAVING IN NORWAY
The Norwegian fiscal rule implies a more cautious spending path than the permanent income
rule.  The  government  spends  the  expected  return  on  its  current  financial  assets,  which  is
significantly lower than total oil and gas wealth.
Graph: Oil and gas revenues and government spending
The fiscal rule implies that real spending will increase as long as production continues, i.e. until
all oil and gas resources are transformed into financial wealth. As the economy grows, spending
as a share of mainland GDP will nevertheless fall slowly. This is illustrated in the graph.
The graph also illustrates that we have been able to cut through the very large, but temporary
income  flows  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  Since  2016,  government  spending  has
exceeded the net cash flow from the oil sector. This means that we are running a primary deficit
and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future. Currently, the transfer from the fund equals
8 percent of mainland GDP.
Eventually, as delayed consumption increases accumulated returns, spending according to the
fiscal rule will also surpass the current estimate of the permanent income. The real issue is thus
a question of timing.
Has this spending profile been too conservative, and the increase in consumption delayed for too
long,  as  Bergsten  and  Gagnon  claim?  My  brief  answer  is  no.  My  first  argument  is  that  the
conclusion to spend the permanent income does not take into account the resource movement
effects  discussed  above.  But  also  intergenerational  concerns,  uncertainty  and  considerations
about political processes may favour a more cautious spending rule. I will address these issues
in turn in more detail in the following.
Graph: Arguments for higher saving
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Resource movement
As described in the seminal paper by Corden and Neary, a resource economy is affected by
strong  structural  changes  also  due  to  increased  demand  for  labour  and  capital  from  the
extraction  industries.  Eventually,  demand  from  the  oil-related  sector  will  decline,  and  it  will  be
necessary to reverse a downsizing of manufacturing. To avoid “Dutch disease” effects, spending
should be well below the permanent income level during the extraction period.
Let me shed some light on the direct demand from the companies that operate on the Norwegian
continental shelf.
Graph: The Norwegian Troll A platform and some other structures
Crude  oil  and  natural  gas  are  extracted  from  large  depths  below  the  sea  level.  In  particular,
capital expenditure is high. The platform “Troll A” provides a striking example. If most of it was not
covered  by  water,  it  would  dwarf  some  other,  well-known  structures.  In  the  years  prior  to  the
recent oil price fall, oil companies invested about as much as all businesses in the mainland
economy combined. Total oil-sector demand  amounted to more than 13 percent of mainland
GDP in 2014. This is well above current government spending of oil and gas revenues, and also
more than the estimate of the permanent income.
4
Graph: Demand from the oil and gas sector and government spending of oil/gas revenues
It has been estimated that one in nine jobs in the Norwegian economy was related to oil sector
demand  in  2014.   The  step-wise  development  of  oil  and  gas  reserves  in  the  North  Sea  has
helped to create a supply industry that has become world leading in special areas.
5
The downturn following the oil price decline in 2014 has highlighted the oil-dependence of the
Norwegian economy. As oil-sector demand plummeted, the blow to the economy was cushioned
by a substantial increase in government spending. This room for manoeuvre in fiscal policy was
provided by the significant savings in preceding years. Without it, the recent downturn could have
become much more painful.
Intergenerational concerns
Graph: Old-age dependency ratio
Allow  me  to  move  on  to  another  argument  for  relatively  high  saving:  the  intergenerational
challenges facing the Norwegian economy. Like many other countries, we must cope with the
challenges  associated  with  an  ageing  population.  As  we  have  developed  a  more  extensive
welfare state than many other countries, the impact on public finances is significant. The pension
system is basically pay-as-you-go and health care is also funded by the government. An ageing
population will therefore weigh quite heavily on public finances.
In the 1990s and 2000s the demographic trend was different. During those years, the share of
the population 67 years or older actually declined, mirroring low birth rates between the two world
wars.  Since  around  2010  the  long-term  trend  towards  a  higher  old-age  dependency  ratio  has
resumed. Public pension costs have shot up as baby boomers have retired. The burden on the
health  and  long-term  care  system  is  rather  light  at  the  moment.  But  this  will  change  in  the
coming years.
With the alternative strategy of spending the permanent income, we would have spent more of
the oil wealth in the 1990s and 2000s, when demographic costs for the government were low.
The present fiscal rule, on the contrary, allows increased spending of oil revenue also in a period
where age-related costs are expected to grow much faster.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Uncertainty
A third concern related to wealth management is uncertainty. Both oil price movements and the
resource base are uncertain. Returns on foreign financial investments also fluctuate.
Graph: Oil price
In 2014, we were once again reminded that future oil prices are uncertain. Prices have roughly
halved from the peaks reached in 2011 and 2012. Still, prices are much higher than they were in
the  1990s.  In  1998,  the  nominal  price  dropped  to  USD  10  per  barrel. A  decade  later,  oil  was
trading at more than USD 100 per barrel.
Graph: The current account and value added in oil and gas extraction
With oil prices closer to the historical average, current account surpluses have been reduced
substantially  in  the  past  few  years.  In  2016,  our  surplus  was  less  than  4  percent  of  GDP,
including  the  return  on  the  fund  assets.  Trade  was  roughly  in  balance.  The  oil  price  has
rebounded somewhat recently, but is not expected to reach the levels we saw a few years ago.
Thus,  the  high  Norwegian  current  account  surpluses  may  belong  to  the  past.  Given  the
uncertainties  related  to  petroleum  wealth,  a  spending  rule  more  cautious  than  the  permanent
income rule seems to be a reasonable strategy.
Political feasibility
Allow me to round off this discussion with some reflections concerning practical policy. My point
is that fiscal guidelines  must  be  politically  acceptable  and  understandable  to  the  wider  public.
Simplicity and robustness are important concerns. Rules that are not adopted by policymakers
carry little value.
The  Norwegian  fiscal  rule  was  introduced  in  2001,  exactly  30  years  after  the  first  oil  was
extracted from the Norwegian continental shelf. This illustrates that it was not straightforward to
arrive at a strategy for how our natural resource wealth was going to be spent.
The need to decouple current spending from current revenues was underscored early on, and
potential mechanisms were discussed, but these concerns were not reflected in actual policy. In
periods, all the oil and gas revenues and more were spent.
The  fund  mechanism  was  established  in  1990,  during  Norway’s  deepest  recession  in  the
postwar  period.  At  the  time,  it  was  not  obvious  that  the  fund  would  gain  much  value.  The
government ran budget deficits in the following years. A first deposit was made in 1996, reflecting
a net fiscal surplus. From then on, the value of the fund started to increase quite rapidly. Higher
oil revenues towards 2000 led to calls for higher spending. The fiscal rule was established in
response to this development.
A fiscal rule based on the permanent income from petroleum wealth would require agreement on
what  this  number  should  be.  Since  2001  we  have  seen  large  revisions  in  the  estimated
permanent income, as oil prices and resource estimates have changed. The future development
of the value of the fund is also uncertain, but at least the value of the fund at a given point and the
actual return from year to year are observable.
It is also worth noting that the proposed rule enabled a smooth transition from the actual level of
spending at the time. In comparison, a permanent income rule would have implied a very large
increase in spending back in 2001.
In  2017  the  estimated  real  return  on  the  fund  was  revised  downwards  from  4  percent  to  3
percent.  This  spurred  no  significant  debate  and  was  largely  considered  more  of  a  technical
matter. This serves to illustrate the broad political consensus regarding the fiscal framework. The
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
framework has served us well for 17 years, and seems set to continue to do so.
CONCLUSION
Graph: Conclusion
The Norwegian economy has benefited tremendously from the oil and gas resources. Public and
private consumption have increased. Solid public finances have provided scope to make active
use of fiscal policy to counter external economic shocks. The accumulated wealth in the fund is
approaching three times mainland GDP, enabling a lasting annual income contribution to future
welfare of 6-8 percent of mainland GDP in the coming decades.
The present guidelines allow temporary income flows to be transformed into permanent gains,
benefiting all future generations. They are simple and robust. They take account of the effects on
the rest of the economy and on the economic policy debate.
Norway’s  experience  serves  as  an  example  of  why  temporary  shocks  in  general,  and  more
specifically discoveries of natural resources, justify deviations from a balanced current account.
Deficits used to finance investments that generated high returns have served us well.
I guess there is no such thing in the real world as an “optimal spending rule”. In the Norwegian
case, there were definitely lessons to be learned during the first two-three decades of resource
development. Still, over the years, and in particular with the present fiscal rule, I think we have
struck a reasonable balance.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
Bergsten, C.F. and Gagnon, J. (2017): Currency Conflict and Trade Policy. A New Strategy for the United States,
Peterson Institute for International Economics
Gagnon, J. (2018): Can a Country Save Too Much? The Case of Norway, Policy Brief 18–7, Peterson Institute for
International Economics
Corden and Neary (1982): Booming Sector and De-Industrialisation in a Small Open Economy. The Economic
Journal (92), pp. 825–848.
This is measured as the sum of labour costs, intermediate consumption and fixed capital investment.
Also including jobs related to exports from the oil-service industry, see Nordbø and Stensland (2015): “The
petroleum sector and the Norwegian economy”, Norges Bank Economic Commentaries 4/15.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
