Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the
Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 26 February 2018.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am glad to be back at the European Parliament for my first hearing of this year before your
Committee.
The two issues you have chosen for today’s debate are very topical and I will address them in
turn.  I  will  first  discuss  the  euro  area  inflation  outlook  and  the  main  factors  impacting  on  the
relationship between growth and inflation. I will then emphasise the relevance of financial market
infrastructures for monetary policy. In doing so, I will explain why the central bank of issue needs
to have the necessary tools to address possible risks in a limited number of areas which are
crucial from the perspective of its monetary policy mandate.
Inflation, growth and the ECB’s monetary policy
As I said in my introductory statement to the European Parliament plenary earlier this month, the
euro  area  economy  is  expanding  robustly.   Growth  is  stronger  than  previously  expected  and
more  evenly  distributed  across  sectors  and  geographies  than  at  any  time  since  the  financial
crisis. According  to  the  latest  data,  the  euro  area  economy  grew  by  2.5%  in  2017,  reflecting
strong domestic momentum in private consumption and investment.
1
These  positive  developments  have  been  fostered  and  supported  by  the  pass-through  of  the
ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures,  which  have  significantly  eased  borrowing  conditions  for
households and firms, notably also for small and medium-sized enterprises.
Considering all of the monetary policy measures taken between mid-2014 and October 2017, the
overall impact on euro area growth and inflation is estimated, in both cases, to be around 1.9
percentage points cumulatively for the period between 2016 and 2020. Our measures have put
the euro area economy on a solid growth pathway, driven by endogenous domestic dynamics
and thus more resistant to a potential slowdown in global demand.
At  the  same  time,  inflation  has  yet  to  show  more  convincing  signs  of  a  sustained  upward
adjustment. After  lingering  at  levels  well  below  1%  for  three  years,  with  occasional  dips  into
negative territory, euro area headline inflation has fluctuated between 1.3% and 1.5% since May
last year. Annual inflation stood at 1.3% in January. The changes in headline inflation have been
driven by movements in the more volatile components, namely energy prices and, to a lesser
extent,  food  prices.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  –  which  we  monitor  for  their  information
content concerning inflation dynamics – have remained subdued. Inflation excluding energy and
food was 1% in January, and has ranged between 0.9% and 1.2% since April 2017.
Let me now focus on the factors behind these moderate inflation developments from a longer-
term  perspective.  The  recent  period  of  low  inflation  may  appear  surprising  from  a  cyclical
perspective  given  that  we  have  seen  positive  economic  growth  over  the  past  four  years,
supporting a steady and gradual absorption of economic slack. This has raised the question of
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
which factors, cyclical or structural, may have played a role in the growth-inflation relationship.
A comprehensive analysis by the Eurosystem has concluded that adverse cyclical factors have
played a crucial role in explaining low underlying inflation. These notably consisted of dampened
economic  activity  and  high  unemployment  in  the  aftermath  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and
subsequently subdued foreign demand and low oil prices.  Yet, these factors are of a temporary
nature  and  should  not  affect  inflation  over  a  medium-term  horizon,  even  though  they  might
impact on the speed of adjustment in inflation. Moreover, given the uncertainty surrounding the
measurement of economic slack, the true amount may be larger than estimated, which could
slow down the emergence of price pressures. This is particularly visible in the labour market,
where  wage  growth  has  remained  subdued  despite  strong  employment  gains.  Nonetheless,
these  factors  should  wane  as  the  economic  expansion  continues  and  unemployment  further
declines. In fact, wage growth in the euro area has already picked up recently and the labour
market is expected to improve further.
2
On  the  structural  side,  globalisation  may  have  reduced  the  responsiveness  of  inflation  to
domestic  cyclical  conditions  but  empirical  evidence  for  the  euro  area  is  not  clear-cut.   Other
potential factors include demographic trends or changes in behaviour triggered by technological
developments,  which  may  contain  price  pressures,  for  instance  through  increased  price
transparency. However, even if these factors are somewhat more persistent, they should still not
exert a permanent impact on inflation.
3
Overall, the analysis indicates that the relationship between growth and inflation remains largely
intact,  even  if  it  has  temporarily  weakened  in  recent  years  to  the  extent  that  the  speed  of
adjustment in inflation towards our aim has been affected.
Looking ahead, we anticipate that headline inflation will resume its gradual upward adjustment,
supported by our monetary policy measures. At the same time, uncertainties continue to prevail.
In particular, the recent volatility in financial markets, notably also in the exchange rate, deserves
close monitoring with regard to its possible implications for the medium-term outlook for price
stability.
Therefore, while the strong momentum of the euro area economy has clearly strengthened our
confidence in the inflation outlook, patience and persistence with regard to monetary policy is still
needed for inflation to sustainably return to levels of below, but close to, 2%. In fact, the evolution
of inflation remains crucially conditional on an ample degree of monetary stimulus provided by
the  full  set  of  our  monetary  policy  measures:  our  net  asset  purchases,  the  sizeable  stock  of
acquired assets and the forthcoming reinvestments, and our forward guidance on policy interest
rates.
The relevance of central clearing for monetary policy and the role of the central bank of
issue
Let me now turn to the interactions between financial market infrastructures and monetary policy,
which you have chosen as a topic for today’s hearing. This is indeed an important and timely
issue, particularly in relation to central clearing, on which I will focus today.
Allow me to recall the important role played by central counterparties – or CCPs – in financial
markets:  by  interposing  themselves  in  a  network  of  financial  transactions,  CCPs  reduce
counterparty credit risk and increase market transparency. However, under crisis conditions, the
disruption of clearing activities can have a significant negative impact on our ability to conduct
monetary  policy  tasks.  For  instance,  it  may  cause  significant  liquidity  strains  for  CCP  users,
which  in  many  cases  are  also  our  monetary  policy  counterparties.  In  particular,  these  strains
may arise from large and sudden calls to provide additional resources to a CCP under stressed
market conditions. In addition, disturbances affecting a CCP active in the money markets can
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
impair normal monetary policy transmission channels. These are just two examples of the links
between the operation of CCPs and the transmission of monetary policy.
While  these  links  are  not  new,  they  now  warrant  closer  attention  for  two  reasons.  First,  the
financial system has come to rely more on central counterparties. The introduction of mandatory
central  clearing  requirements  in  response  to  the  crisis  has  made  financial  markets  safer  and
more transparent. This is in large part thanks to the European Parliament’s push for stronger
financial regulation, such as the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR). While this
strengthening  is  of  course  welcome,  it  also  means  that  CCPs  have  become  more  systemic.
Second, the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the EU means that, under the current legislative
regime,  several  CCPs  clearing  significant  volumes  of  euro-denominated  business  will  be
operating outside the framework of EU regulation and the safeguards this provides.
In this context, the Commission’s EMIR II proposal, currently being discussed by this committee,
is  a  welcome  and  necessary  initiative.  The  existing  regime  was  never  intended  to  cope  with
large-scale euro-denominated clearing activities being carried out in a country outside the EU.
The EMIR II proposal would enable EU authorities to directly supervise systemically important
third-country  CCPs  on  the  basis  of  EU  regulatory  requirements  using  EU  supervisory
instruments.  The  proposal  provides  for  an  enhanced  role  for  the  central  bank  of  issue  in  this
context, reflecting the strong links between clearing and monetary policy.
The indispensable corollary to the EMIR II proposal is the recommendation to amend Article 22 of
our Statute, which was  unanimously  adopted  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  last  June.  The
General  Court  in  Luxembourg  held  in  its  judgment  in  2015   that  it  would  be  for  the  ECB  to
request the EU legislature to amend Article 22, should the ECB consider that having the power to
regulate  CCPs  is  necessary  for  the  proper  performance  of  its  tasks  under  the  Treaties.  In
particular, revising Article 22 is a necessary step for us to carry out the tasks foreseen under
EMIR II. Considering the risks the ECB faces with regard to the implementation and transmission
of  its  monetary  policy,  it  is  imperative  that  it  be  equipped  with  the  necessary  tools  vis-à-vis
CCPs, particularly in a crisis situation.
4
I want to make clear that such measures would aim to address risks in a limited number of areas
which are crucial for the implementation of the single monetary policy and the smooth operation
of payment systems, which ultimately affect our primary objective of maintaining price stability as
mandated  by  the  Treaties.  Areas  of  particular  relevance  from  this  perspective  are  liquidity
arrangements, settlement processes, collateral, margins and interoperability arrangements. Let
me add that such measures would only be triggered in the event of a clear threat to the conduct
of our monetary policy, and would in no way encroach upon the prerogatives of CCP supervisors
or the frameworks established by EU legislators. The ECB will act only within its competence,
which  is  to  formulate  and  implement  the  monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  any
measures taken on this basis would need to be proportionate, and fully justified by the need to
fulfil our monetary policy tasks. I also want to stress that, as a rule, the implementation of the
regime for non-EU countries should continue to rely as much as possible on cooperation with,
and deferral to, local authorities.
Let me also stress the crucial importance of finalising the adoption of key pieces of EU legislation
–  such  as  EMIR  II  –  well  in  advance  of  Brexit,  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  all  possible
contingencies,  including  a  no-deal  scenario.  Failing  to  do  so  could  leave  central  banks  and
supervisors  without  the  appropriate  tools  to  handle  the  risks  linked  to  systemic  euro  CCPs
operating  outside  the  umbrella  of  EU  regulation.  Naturally,  we  are  available  to  provide  any
assistance in the context of these discussions.
Finally,  we  should  not  overlook 
implications  of  central
clearing within  the  EU.  We  should  therefore  also  strive  to  achieve  enhanced  supervisory
convergence within the Union. This would contribute to ensuring the integrity of the Single Market
the  systemic  cross-border 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  a  level  playing  field,  consistent  with  the  objectives  of  the  capital  markets  union.  The
European Parliament can play a key role in furthering these objectives.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Our monetary policy measures have had tangible benefits for the euro area economy. Further
policy  initiatives  are  however  needed  to  reduce  vulnerabilities,  strengthen  resilience  in  crisis
situations and increase growth potential. Only ambitious policies will deliver concrete benefits for
the people of Europe.
This is also what our common history tells us. This year marks the 25th anniversary of the Single
Market  and  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty’s  entry  into  force.  Those  were  bold  decisions  and  we
continue to benefit from them today: goods, people, services and capital can move freely and EU
legislation ensures that commensurate rights and obligations apply throughout our Union. With
the  creation  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  we  went  further  by  adopting  the  single
currency.
It is in this spirit that I look forward to the coming months and the pivotal discussions we will have
on reforming EMU governance.
Thank you for your attention. I am at your disposal for questions.
1
2
3
4
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180205.en.html
See  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and  consequences”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series,  No  181,
January 2017.
See “Domestic and global drivers of inflation in the euro area”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 4 /2017.
General Court’s judgment in Case T-496/11 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland v European
Central Bank. ECLI: EU:T:2015:133.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
