Philip Lowe: Remarks at Reserve Bank Board Dinner
Remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Reserve Bank
Board Dinner, Perth, 4 September 2018.
Good evening.
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank Board I would like to warmly welcome you to this community
dinner.  It  is  very  good  to  be  in  Perth  again.  The  Board  met  this  morning  at  our  office  on  St
Georges Terrace. This dinner is an opportunity for us to hear directly from you about how things
are going in Western Australia. So thank you for joining us.
As you have probably already heard, the Board left the cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent at its
meeting this morning. I doubt that this decision surprised anybody. The cash rate has been at
1.5 per cent for more than two years now and the Board expects it to remain there for a while yet.
Lest you think that keeping interest rates unchanged for an extended period means that life at the
Reserve  Bank  of Australia  must  be  very  quiet,  we  are  always  closely  tracking  domestic  and
international  developments  and  we  have  other  important  responsibilities  that  don't  attract  the
same spotlight as our monthly interest rate decisions.
The RBA is responsible for the issuing of Australia's banknotes. We are currently undertaking a
major upgrade of our notes to protect against counterfeiters. All up, there are 1.6 billion individual
banknotes on issue – that's an average of around 65 notes for each of the 25 million people in
Australia. Despite the growth of tap-and-go and other forms of electronic payments, the value of
notes on issue as a share of GDP is the highest in more than five decades. This highlights the
continued importance of banknotes as a store of value as well as a payment mechanism. So the
upgrade of the notes is a major logistical exercise.
The RBA is also the banker for the Australian Government. We operate the government's core
accounts and we are the transactional banker for many government departments. So if you get a
Medicare or tax refund, it comes from the government's accounts at the RBA.
We operate the core of Australia's payments system. The way that money moves from one bank
to  another  is  through  the  accounts  that  financial  institutions  hold  at  the  RBA.  In  addition,  we
operate a key part of the infrastructure supporting Australia's new payments system, generally
referred to as ‘the NPP’. This system allows you to move money between bank accounts in real
time on a 24/7 basis using an easily remembered ‘PayID’, such as a mobile number, to address
the payment. BSBs and account numbers can still be used, but if you have not already done so, I
encourage you to contact your bank to register a PayID, which makes it easier to use the new
system.
The  RBA  also  regulates  key  parts  of Australia's  financial  market  infrastructure,  including  the
central  counterparties  at  the  ASX.  In  addition,  we  have  broad  responsibilities  to  promote
competition, efficiency and stability in Australia's payments system. As a result of decisions of
the Bank's Payments System Board there have been significant changes to the ATM and debit
and credit card systems over recent times.
The  RBA  also  operates  in  financial  markets  every  day  to  ensure  the  system  as  a  whole  has
adequate liquidity. We also have a broad responsibility for financial stability, including acting as
the lender of last resort in a financial crisis to provide liquidity to solvent institutions. Finally, we
manage Australia's foreign exchange reserves.
These are all important functions that we carry out in the public interest. They are all critical to the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
functioning of our successful modern economy and financial system. I can assure you, we take
these responsibilities very seriously. This means that even when interest rates are being held
steady, we have a lot of things on our plate. But it is interest rates that mainly keep us in the
news.
At its meeting this morning, the Board's assessment was that the Australian economy is moving
in the right direction. Over the past year, GDP increased by 3.1 per cent and inflation was around
2 per cent. The unemployment rate is currently 5.3 per cent, which is the lowest it has been in
nearly six years. In the broad sweep of our history, these are a pretty positive set of numbers.
We will get another reading on the pulse of the economy tomorrow with the release of the June
quarter national accounts. We are expecting that this will confirm that over the first half of 2018,
the  economy  expanded  at  a  faster  than  trend  pace,  making  inroads  into  spare  capacity.  Our
central scenario is that economic growth this year and next will be a bit above 3 per cent, which
should  see  the  unemployment  rate  come  down  further.  So  things  are  moving  in  the  right
direction.
One of the factors helping us is that the global economy is expanding quite strongly. Many of the
advanced economies are growing quite strongly and unemployment rates in a number of them
are at multi-decade lows. The Chinese economy is also growing solidly, although the pace of
growth has slowed, partly as a result of efforts to put the financial sector on a more sustainable
footing.
The United States is most advanced in the process of monetary policy normalisation. This has
led to a broad-based appreciation of the US dollar this year. As a consequence, the Australian
dollar  has  depreciated.  If  sustained,  this  could  be  expected  to  improve  the  outlook  for  both
inflation and growth.
Notwithstanding the positive global picture, there are a number of international uncertainties that
we are monitoring closely. One is the possibility of an escalation in the current trade disputes. If
this were to happen, it would materially affect trade flows and investment plans around the world.
As a country that has benefited greatly from an open rules-based international system, Australia
has a strong interest in this not happening.
Another uncertainty we are watching closely is the possibility of a material lift in inflation in the
United  States.  The  United  States  is  experiencing  a  large  fiscal  stimulus  at  a  time  when  the
economy is at full employment and is growing quickly. This is an unusual combination to say the
very  least.  Past  experience  suggests  that  it  could  lead  to  inflation  increasing  significantly.
Financial markets are, however, heavily discounting this possibility, which means that if it did take
place it would come as quite a surprise, with repercussions for markets and the real economy.
We are also monitoring carefully the financial and economic problems in a number of emerging
market  economies  with  structural  or  institutional  weaknesses,  including  Turkey,  Brazil  and
Argentina.  If  these  problems  were  to  escalate,  they  could  put  strains  on  parts  of  the  global
financial system.
So these are some of the international issues we are keeping an eye on at the moment.
Domestically, the Board is closely monitoring housing markets across the country and trends in
housing finance. Housing credit growth has slowed, which, from a medium-term perspective, is
a positive development. Our assessment is that this slowing largely reflects reduced demand for
credit by investors, although there has been some tightening in the supply of credit as well. With
housing prices falling in a number of cities, largely due to a shift in the underlying fundamentals,
investors no longer find it as attractive to invest in residential property as they once did. This is a
normal part of the cycle. While credit standards have been tightened, mortgage credit remains
readily available.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  would  note  that  some  banks  have  increased  their  mortgage  rates  recently  in  response  to
somewhat higher interest rates in short-term wholesale markets. A much less remarked upon
fact  is  that  the  average  mortgage  rate  paid  in Australia  has  fallen  since August  last  year,  as
lenders have increased their discounts. I encourage anyone with a mortgage to shop around:
there  are  some  very  good  offerings  out  there.  We  can  all  play  a  role  in  promoting  strong
competition in our financial sector by shopping around and taking advantage of the good deals
that are out there.
Another set of issues that the Board continues to pay close attention to is the outlook for wages
growth and inflation. Wages growth has been quite low recently. For some time my view has
been  that  some  increase  in  aggregate  wages  growth  would  be  a  welcome  development,
especially if it is backed by stronger productivity growth. Many business people that I speak to
recognise that a pick-up in overall wages growth would be a positive development from a macro
perspective, although not from the perspective of their individual business. So there is a tension
there. Our expectation is that wages growth will pick up from here, but the pick-up is likely to be
only gradual. Firms are currently reporting a record number of job vacancies and increasingly
telling us that it is hard to find workers with the right skills. One way of dealing with this increasing
tightness  in  the  labour  market  is,  of  course,  to  lift  wages.  We  expect  that  as  this  happens,
inflation will also lift towards the midpoint of the medium-term inflation target, although this, too, is
likely to be a gradual process.
Against this background, this morning the Board again decided to keep the cash rate steady at
1.5 per cent. We are seeking to be a source of stability and confidence, as further progress is
made towards full employment and having inflation return to around the midpoint of the target
range. As that progress is made, you could expect the next move in interest rates to be up, not
down. This would be a sign that overall economic conditions are returning to normal and would
take  place  against  the  backdrop  of  stronger  growth  in  household  income.  But  any  move  still
seems some way off, given the gradual nature of the progress expected on unemployment and
inflation.
At  this  morning's  meeting,  as  well  as  a  thorough  review  of  the  international  and  Australian
economies, we had a detailed discussion on the Western Australian economy. We pay close
attention  to  what  is  going  on  here:  Western Australia  accounts  for  a  little  over  14  per  cent  of
Australian GDP and 35 per cent of our exports, so it is important. Reflecting this, this is my third
trip to, and public speech in, Perth in the past year.
This morning we heard that while the Western Australian economy is still feeling the effects of a
decline  in  the  level  of  mining  investment,  there  are  some  positive  signs.  The  level  of  mining
investment has further to fall as some large liquefied natural gas projects are completed. But
elsewhere  in  the  resources  sector  things  are  looking  brighter.  Sustaining  capital  expenditure,
particularly in the iron ore sector, is picking up with positive spillover effects. Higher prices for a
number of minerals have also led to increased exploration activity, including for gold and lithium,
and an expansion of some existing mines is taking place. For the first time in a number of years,
we are hearing reports through our liaison program in Western Australia that it is difficult for firms
to find workers with the right skills, including project engineers and related occupations. Business
conditions – as measured by surveys – have also risen significantly and are now above average.
At our meeting, we also discussed the population dynamics here in Western Australia. At the
peak of the resources boom, annual population growth reached almost 3½ per cent, which is
very fast. People moved here from overseas and from the rest of Australia to meet the needs of
your  rapidly  growing  economy.  In  contrast,  over  the  past  year,  population  growth  has  slowed
sharply, to around ¾ per cent, which is almost the slowest of any state in the country. There is
now a considerable net flow of people from Western Australia to the eastern states.
This change in population dynamics has had a significant effect on housing markets in Western
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Australia. The earlier strong growth in population contributed to a sharp rise in housing prices and
rents, and then a bit later to a surge in housing construction. With the resources boom now in the
past,  some  of  the  earlier  increases  in  prices  and  rents  have  been  reversed  and  residential
construction activity has been low. Western Australia has seen this type of cycle before, and I
expect  it  will  see  it  again  at  some  point  in  the  future.  Our  liaison,  though,  suggests  that  a
stabilisation of conditions is in prospect. If so, this should help support consumer confidence and
household spending and reinforce the recent more positive news from the resources sector.
Finally, as I mentioned earlier, we are currently upgrading Australia's banknotes. I am pleased to
be able to announce that the new $50 note will be released on 18 October. We are proud to have
a prominent West Australian on this note – Edith Cowan – as well as the Aboriginal writer and
inventor David Unaipon. The redesigned $50 note celebrates the fact that Edith Cowan was the
very first female member of an Australian Parliament. The microtext on the note will include an
extract from her first speech to the Western Australian Parliament. When the note is released,
those of you with great eyesight might be able to read this microtext without a microscope. But
for  those  who  will  struggle  to  read  it,  I  would  like  to  quote  a  little  from  the  text.  In  1921  Edith
Cowan said:
I stand here to-day in the unique position of being the first woman in an Australian
Parliament…  If  men  and  women  can  work  for  the  same  state  side  by  side  and
represent all the different sections of the community… I cannot doubt that we should
do very much better work in the community than was ever done before.
Nearly one hundred years on, this sentiment is just as relevant as it was back in 1921. We are
proud to have this text on the new $50 note and to recognise Edith Cowan's achievement. The
note will also have a seating plan of today's Western Australian Legislative Assembly. It will also
recognise Edith Cowan's lifelong advocacy of women. Western Australia's official bird emblem –
the iconic black swan – will also appear on the note a number of times. If the note is tilted you will
be able to see the colour of the swan change and its wings move. So I am sure that people here
in Western Australia will feel a great affinity for the note and enjoy spending it.
Once again, thank you for joining us and please enjoy the evening.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
