J u l y   5 ,   2 0 1 8
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Nagano 
Takako Masai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices 
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on April 26 and 27, 2018, the Bank of Japan 
published  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report.  In  this 
report, the Bank presented its projections for Japan's economic activity and prices through 
fiscal 2020. 
 
I will explain developments in economic activity and prices by presenting the main content 
of the Outlook Report. 
 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me first touch on developments in overseas economies. The Bank's assessment is that 
overseas economies have continued to grow firmly on the whole. 
 
In terms of the outlook, global production and trade activity in the manufacturing sector are 
likely  to  be  firm  and  both  advanced and  emerging  economies  are  projected  to  grow  in  a 
well-balanced  manner.  A  similar  view  was  presented  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO) released in April 2018 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
 
Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy is expected to keep expanding 
and the European economy is also projected to continue recovering. 
 
The  Chinese  economy  will  likely  continue  to  broadly  follow  a  stable  growth  path  as  the 
authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner. 
 
Other emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies are likely to continue their 
moderate recovery on the whole. 
 
There  are  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  overseas  economies,  and  I  consider  the 
outcome of protectionist moves in the United States as the downside risk that is of greatest 
concern. In the short term, growing uncertainty over U.S. trade policy will likely lead to a 
1 
sharp rise in volatility in global financial markets. This could in turn exert adverse effects 
on the sentiment of firms and households. In the medium to long term, if such protectionist 
moves  were  to  increase  globally,  this  may  significantly  affect  the  business  strategies  of 
global firms, and the subsequent impact on the capital flow of trade and investment cannot 
be ignored. Therefore, I will closely monitor whether the protectionist moves entail the risk 
of causing any imbalances in the global capital allocation. 
 
B. Japan's Economy and Price Developments 
1. Current situation 
Now I would like to move on to developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
 
The  Bank's  assessment  is  that  Japan's  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  with  a  virtuous 
cycle from income to spending operating. Industrial production has been on an increasing 
trend,  reflecting  the  increases  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  labor  market 
conditions have continued to tighten steadily. As a result, the output gap -- which shows the 
utilization of labor and capital -- has widened steadily within positive territory. 
 
On  the  domestic  demand  side,  business  fixed  investment  has  continued  on  an  increasing 
trend  with  corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment  maintaining  their  improving  trend. 
According to the June 2018 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), 
business  fixed  investment  plans  for  fiscal  2018,  especially  those  of  large  enterprises, 
showed firms' solid stance. This is evidenced by, for example, the fact that fixed investment 
plans on a basis close to GDP definition saw a year-on-year increase of 8.7 percent -- a level 
clearly exceeding the past average of 4.4 percent for the June Tankan surveys during the 
period of fiscal 2004-2017. Turning to the household sector, housing investment has been 
weakening somewhat, but private consumption has been increasing moderately, albeit with 
fluctuations, against the background of steady improvement in the employment and income 
situation.  Exports  have  been  on  an  increasing  trend  on  the  back  of  the  firm  growth  in 
overseas economies that I mentioned earlier. 
 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
items less fresh food is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, reflecting a rise in energy prices. 
2 
2. Outlook 
I  will  now  look  at  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy  during  the  projection  period,  which 
covers from fiscal 2018 through fiscal 2020. The economy is likely to continue its moderate 
expansion. Domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, mainly against the background 
of highly accommodative financial conditions and the underpinnings through government 
spending. Exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing trend along with the 
growth in overseas economies. Reflecting this outlook, the economy is likely to continue 
growing at a pace above its potential in fiscal 2018. From fiscal 2019 through fiscal 2020, 
the economy is expected to continue on an expanding trend supported by external demand, 
although the growth pace is projected to decelerate due to a cyclical slowdown in business 
fixed  investment  and  the  effects  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike.  Looking  at  the 
medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the April 2018 Outlook Report, the real 
GDP  growth  rate  is  projected to  be  1.6  percent  for  fiscal  2018, and  0.8  percent each  for 
fiscal 2019 and 2020. 
 
Let me explain the outlook in detail by major component. First, business fixed investment is 
likely  to  continue  increasing.  This  is  because,  in  a  situation  where  extremely  stimulative 
financial  conditions  are  maintained,  fixed  investment  will  be  positively  affected  by  an 
improvement in corporate  profits,  the  materialization  of  the effects  of  projects  conducted 
under 
the  effects  of 
investment-enhancing tax incentives, and a moderate improvement in growth expectations. 
Specifically,  an  increase  is  likely  to  be  seen  in  investment  such  as,  (1)  that  intended  for 
domestic  capacity  expansion  in  line  with  the  economic  expansion;  (2)  that  related  to  the 
2020  Olympic  Games  and  urban  redevelopment  projects;  (3)  that  aiming  at  improving 
efficiency and saving labor in order to deal with, for example, the labor shortage; and (4) in 
research  and  development  for  growth  areas.  Private  consumption  is  expected  to  follow  a 
moderate  increasing  trend,  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  employee  income  as  well  as 
replacement demand for durable goods, and housing investment is expected to remain more 
or less flat. Exports will likely continue their increasing trend for the time being, as those of 
capital goods and IT-related goods, in which Japan has a comparative advantage, are likely 
to be firm. Thereafter, they are expected to continue their moderate increasing trend, due 
mainly  to  the  improvement  in  overseas  economies.  Industrial  production  will  likely 
Investment  and  Loan  Program  as  well  as 
the  Fiscal 
3 
continue to increase firmly for the time being, and thereafter is projected to continue on a 
moderate increasing trend. 
 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to increase 
toward 2 percent. This is because, although upward pressure of energy prices is likely to 
wane moderately, firms are likely to gradually shift their stance toward raising wages and 
prices with the improvement in the output gap, and inflation expectations are expected to 
gradually rise. Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the April 
2018 Outlook Report, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) 
is projected to be 1.3 percent for fiscal 2018 and -- on a basis excluding the effects of the 
scheduled consumption tax hike -- 1.8 percent each for fiscal 2019 and 2020. 
 
Developments  in  prices  since  the  release  of  the  April  2018  Outlook  Report  have  been 
slightly weak relative to what had been assumed, but I believe that the momentum for price 
rises remains intact. 
I believe that there are the following risks to the outlook. Risks to Japan's economic activity 
are  developments  in  overseas  economies,  such  as  the  U.S.  economic  policies  and 
geopolitical risks, firms' and households' medium- to long-term growth expectations, fiscal 
sustainability in the medium to long term, as well as the effects of the consumption tax hike 
scheduled to take place in October 2019. Risks to prices, in addition to the risks that I just 
mentioned,  are  developments  in  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations, the fact that there are items for which prices are not particularly responsive to 
the  output  gap,  as  well  as  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and  international 
commodity prices going forward. 
 
In  assessing  the  outlook  for  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  I  am  paying 
particular attention to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. On this point, the 
Bank estimated in the April 2018 Outlook Report that the net burden on households around 
the  time  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  was  expected  to  be  smaller  than  that  of  the  two 
previous consumption tax hikes. In fiscal 1997, apart from the hike in the consumption tax 
rate by 2 percentage points to 5 percent, there were additional increases in the household 
4 
burden in the form of a termination of income tax reductions and an increase in medical 
costs resulting from reforms of medical care insurance. Together, these were estimated to 
have resulted in an increase of over 8 trillion yen in the net burden on households. In fiscal 
2014, the tax rate was raised by 3 percentage points to 8 percent, and the increase in the net 
burden on households was estimated to have been about 8 trillion yen. Although measures 
were taken to reduce the burden, such as increases in welfare benefits, the effects of such 
measures were lessened by an increase in pension-related burdens. On the other hand, in 
fiscal 2019, even though the consumption tax rate is scheduled to be raised by 2 percentage 
points  to  10  percent,  there  are  plans  to  implement  a  number  of  measures  to  mitigate  the 
burden -- such as a reduced tax rate and an increase in welfare benefits for pensioners -- 
along  with  the  provision  of  free  education.  As  a  result,  the  net  burden  on  households  is 
estimated to be about 2 trillion yen. Of course, these estimates merely indicate mechanical 
computations  of  the  net  burden  on  households,  and  there  is  inevitably  considerable 
uncertainty as to the impact of the consumption tax hike mainly because the impact on the 
sentiment  of  households  may  differ  significantly  according  to  their  financial  conditions. 
Given the recent favorable employment situation, the sentiment of households whose main 
source of income is wages is expected to remain reasonably firm. Meanwhile, households 
whose  main  source  of  income  is  pensions  are  expected  to  be  significantly  affected  by 
developments in consumer prices of such basic items as food and gasoline, although there 
are  plans  to  implement  measures  to  mitigate  the  burden.  I  believe  that  it  is  necessary  to 
carefully monitor the balance of these factors. 
 
II. The Bank's Monetary Policy 
Next, I will talk about the Bank's monetary policy. 
 
A. Making Financial Conditions Highly Accommodative 
Since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in 2013 with a 
view  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  has  been  maintaining 
highly accommodative financial conditions by consistently pursuing strong monetary easing. 
The  Bank  has  been  trying  to  push  down  the  entire  yield  curve  through  its  large-scale 
purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) under the framework which I will touch 
upon later. 
5 
 
The maintenance of highly accommodative financial conditions has led to an improvement 
in  the  funding  conditions  of  firms.  Importantly,  availability  of  funds  has  been  improving 
further among small firms in particular. Financial institutions' lending attitudes as perceived 
by firms are becoming very proactive. In the Tankan surveys, the diffusion index (DI) for 
financial institutions' lending attitudes for small firms has been at a high level last seen at 
the  end  of  the  1980s.  The  same  can  be  said  about  the  financial  positions  of  firms.  As 
suggested by the DI for firms' financial positions in the Tankan surveys, the momentum for 
improvement  in  financial  positions  has  recently  been  strengthening,  particularly  among 
small firms. This improvement in firms' funding conditions is leading to firms' solid stance 
on business fixed investment, which I mentioned earlier, although the pace of this increase 
is  moderate  relative  to  the  high  level  of  corporate  profits.  This  highlights,  among  other 
factors, the feature of the current phase of economic recovery in which both domestic and 
external demand have been driving the economy in a relatively well-balanced manner.1 
 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  economic  activity  of  firms  and  households  has  become 
invigorated,  and  the  output  gap  has  improved  steadily.  The  Bank  believes  that  it  has 
strongly supported Japan's economic activity by maintaining such accommodative financial 
conditions. 
 
B. QQE with Yield Curve Control 
The  framework  of  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  adopted  by  the  Bank  consists  of  two 
major components. 
 
The  first  component  is  "yield  curve  control,"  in  which  the  Bank  controls  short-term  and 
long-term interest rates. In the current framework, introduced in September 2016, the Bank 
sets the short-term policy interest rate and the target level of the 10-year JGB yields as its 
operating  targets.  At  present,  in  the  guideline  for  market  operations,  the  Bank  sets  the 
short-term rate at minus 0.1 percent and the target level of JGB yields at around 0 percent, 
                                                   
1  According to the "Survey of Corporate Attitudes towards Capital Investment in 2018" released by 
Teikoku Databank, Ltd. on May 16, 2018, in the case of capital investment to the value of 50 million 
yen  or  more,  about  half  of  firms  raised  funds  for  such  investment  by  borrowing  from  financial 
institutions. 
6 
and conducts JGB purchases so as to achieve this target level. These large-scale purchases 
of JGBs enable the maintenance of highly accommodative financial conditions, as discussed 
earlier. 
 
The  second  component  is  an  "inflation-overshooting  commitment,"  in  which  the  Bank 
commits  itself  to  continuing  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the observed CPI exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above 
the target in a stable manner. While it is originally allowed to exceed 2 percent as the price 
stability  target  needs  to  be  achieved  on  average  over  the  business  cycle,  the  Bank's 
commitment demonstrates its unwavering determination not to terminate monetary easing 
before the price stability target of 2 percent is achieved. In the case of Japan, as is often 
pointed  out,  we  have  yet  to  reach  the  situation  where  people's  perception  of  prices,  or 
so-called  inflation  expectations,  is  anchored  around  the  price  stability  target.  In  this 
situation,  sending  such  a  strong  message  is  of  great  significance  in  anchoring  inflation 
expectations at 2 percent.   
 
C. The Need for Persistent,    Strong Monetary Easing 
While  the  Bank's  strong  monetary  easing  has  showed  its  intended  effects  through  the 
maintenance  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions,  it  is  also  true  that  observed 
prices have not yet been sufficiently firm relative to the steady improvement in economic 
activity. 
 
As it has become clear that the deflationary mindset is more persistent than was initially 
assumed, the following opinions about the Bank's monetary policy have increasingly been 
heard. Specifically, some claim that the price stability target of 2 percent is not needed in 
Japan.  Others  --  while  acknowledging  the  need  for  the  2  percent  target  --  question  the 
continuation of strong monetary easing. They claim, for example, that the level of interest 
rates should be adjusted by taking into consideration financial institutions' profits, among 
other factors. I will discuss the first opinion in detail later. Let me first address the second 
opinion. 
 
At  each  MPM,  the  Bank  decides  the  guideline  for  market  operations  based  on  a 
7 
comprehensive consideration of (1) the possible spillover effects on bank lending rates and 
issuance rates for corporate bonds, (2) the impact on economic activity, and (3) the impact 
on  financial  functioning,  among  other  factors.  As  the  Bank  stated  in  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment: Developments in Economic Activity and Prices as well as Policy Effects since 
the Introduction of QQE, released in September 2016, the impact on financial functioning 
should  be taken  into consideration  when  conducting  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  it  warrants 
attention that financial institutions' lending margins have been shrinking due, for example, 
to strong monetary easing and intensifying competition among banks. It should be noted, 
however, that since the 1990s, deposit and lending margins have been on a narrowing trend 
with  low  economic  growth,  and  in  that  sense,  this  has  long  been  a  major  challenge  for 
financial institutions. In addition, it is an issue of urgent priority to take measures from a 
medium-  to  long-term  perspective  to  respond  to  FinTech  and  other  technological 
innovations  and  to  changes  in  the  external  environment,  such  as  the  decline  in  both 
population and the number of firms. Structural problems -- which will have an impact on 
financial institutions' business environment -- and the effects of monetary easing should be 
analyzed and discussed independently of each other. 
 
At  present,  Japan's  economy  has  finally  reached  a  state  of  being  no  longer  in  deflation, 
which is commonly defined as a sustained decline in prices. Given this, it is necessary to 
ensure that the economy fully overcomes deflation. Needless to say, the Bank does not aim 
solely at price rises. It is emphasized in the joint statement by the government and the Bank 
released in  2013  that  the  achievement  of  the price  stability  target  of  2  percent  should  be 
accompanied by the strengthening of the growth potential of the economy.2  In addition, in a 
speech delivered in May 2013, the month following the introduction of QQE, then Deputy 
Governor Hiroshi Nakaso said that "[t]he price stability target we aim at should be achieved 
in a virtuous cycle in which the real economy improves in a balanced manner, accompanied 
by an increase in corporate profits, employment, and wages."3  On the other hand, as I will 
discuss  in  detail  later,  it  is  extremely  important  that  Japan's  economy  fully  overcomes 
                                                   
2  "Joint  Statement  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and 
Achieving Sustainable Economic Growth," January 22, 2013. 
3  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  "Basic  Idea  Underlying  'Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Easing',"  Speech  at  the 
International Conference Organized by the Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, 
Government of Japan, May 31, 2013. 
8 
deflation, which is a challenge that the economy has faced for many years. 
 
Amid  the  persistent  deflationary  mindset,  it  may  take  some  time  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent. While strong monetary easing has been maintained for a long 
period,  it  is  appropriate  to  continue  with  strong  monetary  easing  in  a  persistent  and 
sustainable manner, while being more careful than ever when examining developments in 
economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. 
 
III. The Price Stability Target: Why Is It 2 Percent? 
Five  and  a  half  years  have  passed  since  the  Bank  introduced  the  price  stability  target  in 
2013, but the necessity of the 2 percent price stability target in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI seems to have not yet been widely accepted by the public. 
 
The  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  aimed  at  "achieving  price  stability,  thereby 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy." Price stability is defined 
conceptually  as  "a  state  where  various  economic  agents  including  households  and  firms 
may  make  decisions  regarding  such  economic  activities  as  consumption  and  investments 
without being concerned about the fluctuations in the general price level."4  While it seems 
that  the  intuitive  desirability  of  price  stability  may  be  readily  accepted  by  the  public, 
defining  price  stability  as  a  specific  numerical  value  of  a  particular  price  index  makes  it 
difficult to gain understanding since the definition must inevitably be based on somewhat 
arbitrary grounds. Overseas central banks also face similar difficulties. In a speech given in 
January 2017, then Federal Reserve Board Chair Janet L. Yellen -- noting that price stability 
does not mean having no inflation whatsoever -- explained that, "[b]ased on research and 
decades of experience, we define [the level of inflation considered as 'price stability'] as 2 
percent  a  year."5  She  then  added  that  most  other  major  central  banks  adopt  an  inflation 
objective similar to the 2 percent price stability defined by the Federal Reserve. 
 
If high inflation is undesirable for the public, the question naturally arises as to why central 
                                                   
4  Bank  of Japan,  "The  'Price  Stability  Target'  under  the  Framework  for  the  Conduct  of  Monetary 
Policy," January 22, 2013. 
5  Janet  L.  Yellen,  "The  Goals  of  Monetary  Policy  and  How  We  Pursue  Them,"  Remarks  at  the 
Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, California, January 18, 2017. 
9 
banks do not aim for an inflation rate of 0 percent.6  A number of technical reasons aside, 
among those central banks that define price stability as an annual inflation rate of 2 percent, 
the common answer is that this creates a buffer against falling into deflation.7  This buffer 
has the following dual meaning: (1) securing a safety margin to avoid deflation as far as 
possible; and (2) securing room for central banks to reduce interest rates -- that is, to put it 
simply, since a nominal interest rate level that is neutral to economic activity is determined 
by  the  sum  of  the  economy's  potential  growth  rate  and  an  inflation  rate,  either  a  rise  in 
potential  growth  rates  or in  inflation  rates  produces  an equivalent  rise  in  the  level  of  the 
neutral  nominal  interest  rate,  thereby  creating  room  for  monetary  easing  through  interest 
rate control.   
 
I would like to touch on two points relating to this issue, which I believe are important. The 
first is the costs of deflation. In Japan, the perception that "deflation should be avoided at all 
costs" seems to be weaker than in other countries. Particularly following the 2008 global 
financial  crisis,  Japan's  experience  of  facing  deflation  and  economic  stagnation  for  a 
prolonged period has been referred to abroad as "Japanization," and studies have been made 
to  avoid  the  situation  that  Japan's  economy  has  faced.  One  example  is  a  special  report 
published in the American magazine The International Economy in 2017, entitled "Is the 
World  at  Risk  of  the  'Japan  Disease'?"8  Authorities,  scholars,  and  experts  dealing  with 
economic and financial issues around the world are still engaged in active discussions over 
the  possibility  of  their  respective  economies  falling  into  a  situation  similar  to  that 
experienced by Japan's economy and on measures to avoid such an outcome. 
 
Japan's  deflation  has  been  receiving  attention  globally  because  protracted  deflation,  even 
when it is mild and does not produce a deflationary spiral, is viewed as imposing a great 
burden on the economy for a prolonged period. 
                                                   
6  It appears that similar questions are also being raised in the United States, where people's inflation 
expectations seem to be anchored at around 2 percent. Then Federal Reserve Chair Janet L.Yellen 
referred to this point in the speech at the Commonwealth Club cited above. 
7  As  indicated  by  Japan's  experience  of  suffering  from  prolonged  deflation,  the  difficulty  of 
overcoming  deflation  has  become  well  known.  This  is  perhaps  one  of  the  factors  that  motivated 
major central banks to reach a consensus of defining price stability as an annual inflation rate of 2 
percent. 
8  "Is the World at Risk of the 'Japan Disease'?" The International Economy, Summer 2017. 
10 
 
Why  exactly  is  deflation  problematic?  For  households,  it  is  problematic  because  it  often 
goes  hand-in-hand  with  a  decline  in  their  wages.  There  may  be  some  who  argue  that, 
putting aside wages, deflation is actually a desirable phenomenon because it increases real 
income. Indeed, it may be true that a transient mild deflation would cause no particularly 
significant  problems.  If  it  continues  for  a  protracted  period,  however,  households  will 
ultimately be forced to bear the burden through economic stagnation. Deflation becomes a 
factor  weighing  heavily  on  the  economy  through  a  number  of  channels.  One  of  the 
well-known textbook examples of the problem is that, when deflation continues, households 
and firms -- in anticipation of further falls in prices of goods and services and continued 
uncertainty  --  tend  to  opt  for  postponing  expenditure  and  reining  in  borrowing.  Such 
behavior could lead the overall economy to prolonged weak growth and deflation, thereby 
creating a vicious cycle within the economy. 
 
Furthermore,  there  also  is  the  complex  problem  that  if  deflation  drags  on,  it  becomes 
embedded in the habits of people, making an exit from deflation even more difficult. In the 
case of Japan, it seems that achieving the price stability target of 2 percent has been made 
more  difficult  by  the  fact  that  the  experience  of  over  15  years  of  deflation  has  become 
entrenched in people's mindset. In light of these points, a complete exit from deflation under 
the price stability target of 2 percent will ultimately be desirable for households in Japan. 
While the rest of the world is trying to learn the lessons of Japan's long period of deflation, 
we should also face our own experience more squarely. 
 
The  second  point  concerns  the  importance  for  Japan  of  pursuing  price  increases  that  are 
more or less equivalent to those of other countries. Two percent inflation is often referred to 
as  the  global  standard.  More  essentially,  however,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  the 
realization  of  similar  inflation  rates  by  Japan  and  other  countries  will  bring  stability  of 
exchange  rates  in  the  long  run,  and  ultimately  the  stability  of  financial  markets  and 
corporate activities. More specifically, from the perspective of corporate managers, while 
exchange rates fluctuate as a matter of course, if the rates come to be perceived as no longer 
having long-term trends, reflecting differences in inflation rates at home and abroad, they 
will no longer significantly undermine business sentiment, albeit with a certain degree of 
11 
fluctuation. In a situation where further globalization of Japan's economy is expected, Japan 
must  move  in tandem  with  overseas economies  to  achieve  stable  growth,  in  the  sense  of 
domestic prices rising to the same degree as those in other economies. 
 
12 
