Mojmír Hampl: Examining the resilience of emerging markets
Speaking  points  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  third
Annual SSGA-OMFIF Roundtable, London, 10 April 2018.
 Let me start with a discussion of what it means for an economy to be classified as “emerging”.
First of all, it is important to realise that our current taxonomy is to a large extent based on the
Marxist tradition of classifying economies according to “stages of development”. Prior to Marx,
there  was  no  such  taxonomy  and  really  no  need  for  it.  Instead,  we  used  to  group  countries
according to different criteria, such as religion, race, or territory.
But any discrete classification is arbitrary and artificial, and can sometimes even be confusing.
For  example,  the  post-communist  countries  of  Central  Europe  are  typically  classified  as
“developed” by most governmental or international institutions (the IMF, World Bank and EBRD),
but  as  “emerging”  by  most  market  institutions  (FTSE,  MSCI,  S&P  and  J.P.  Morgan,  among
others).  What  makes  the  entire  issue  even  more  complicated  is  that  having  an  emerging
financial market does not immediately imply being an emerging country, and theoretically vice
versa.
To put these thoughts into perspective, let me use the classification put forward by J.P. Morgan,
according to which both Bangladesh and the Czech Republic rank as emerging economies: in
this taxonomy, they are at the same stage of development. But the Czech Republic has a higher
GDP per capita than Portugal (or Greece, for that matter, and many other countries in the euro
area)  and  is  getting  closer  and  closer  to  Spain,  a  solidly  developed  country  according  to  all
measures.
The Czech Republic also has a human development index comparable to that of Austria and
Italy. In fact, living standards in the Czech Republic have been higher than those in Portugal for at
least  a  quarter  of  a  millennium,  since  the  start  of  the  industrial  revolution  (with  the  possible
exception of a couple of decades centred on 1990). But once a country enters the euro area, it is
almost automatically treated as a developed country, even in the eyes of the markets. Personally,
I find that rather confusing.
In practice, therefore, we observe that some nominally “emerging” countries (such as Poland,
Israel  and  Singapore)  have  been  dealing  with  exactly  the  same  issues  as  the  nominally
developed ones. At the same time, some nominally developed countries (such as Greece) are
dealing with problems typical of developing countries, issues including incomplete land registries
and an insufficient basic ability to collect taxes.
This confusion in taxonomy complicates our discussion a great deal, especially in the years of
the crisis and its aftermath. The question at the beginning of the crisis was: who in Europe will
prove to be most vulnerable to shocks? Many believed it would be Central and Eastern European
countries. But, in contrast to that prophecy, at the end of the day the countries that did not have
to bail out any of their financial institutions were, with one exception (Malta), located typically in
the CEE region.
So it seems to me that GDP per capita, human development and industrial tradition are not the
criteria  driving  the  market’s  classification  of  “emerging”  economies.  Should  euro  membership
automatically make a country “developed”? In other words, does giving up independent monetary
policy  make  a  country  more  “stable”?  But  why,  then,  isn’t  Bulgaria  considered  a  developed
country, when it holds a fixed exchange rate against the euro? Why not Kosovo and Montenegro,
which have adopted the euro unilaterally?
Much  space  has  been  devoted  to  the  so-called  decoupling  debate,  in  which  many  experts
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
claimed that emerging countries were less affected by the global financial crisis. But with the
benefit  of  hindsight,  we  now  know  that  the  GDP  declines  in  emerging  countries  were,  on
average, just as steep as those experienced by developed countries.
A part of the explanation, once again, lies in the confusing taxonomy: we see huge differences
among individual emerging countries as well, even within BRICS. I suggest an analogy to the
decoupling debate: we are now observing a “BRICS decoupling” to the power of two: only China
and India have shown robust growth since the Great Recession. Russia, Brazil and South Africa
have been stagnating, each for its own specific reasons.
But  despite  these  differences,  a  common  theme  arises:  emerging  markets  dependent  on  the
production  and  export  of  raw  materials  (Russia,  Brazil  and  South  Africa  serve  as  good
examples) are less resilient than countries dependent on vigorous labour force and innovations
(exemplified, within BRICS, by China and India).
There  are  also  differences  in  resilience  among  the  “emerging”  countries  of  Central  Europe.
During the Great Recession, Poland – a big country (by Central European standards), less open
and  with  greater  potential  for  catch-up  growth  –  proved  to  be  the  most  resilient.  The  Czech
Republic was also quite resilient (it experienced its own banking crisis in the late 1990s, with
banks  becoming  more  conservative  and  risk-averse  in  consequence).  Hungary  and  Slovenia
proved  less  resilient,  and  in  these  countries  the  government  had  to  intervene  in  the  financial
market.  In  the  case  of  the  Czech  Republic,  the  fact  that  our  host  financial  sector  was  more
resilient  to  shocks  than  its  home  countries  was  the  reason  why  we  never  joined  the  Vienna
Initiative.
The resilience of emerging economies is now under the spotlight also because we remember
the effects of the 2013 taper tantrum. That year, many emerging countries experienced a huge
outflow  of  capital,  while  at  the  same  time  some  other  countries  like  the  Czech  Republic  and
Poland  were  effectively  trying  to  discourage  foreign  short-term  capital  from  coming  in.  This
discouragement was accompanied by interest rate cuts and other forms of monetary easing in
general.  And  we  are  observing  no  taper  tantrum  in  response  to  the  current  plans  aimed  at
unwinding the ECB’s QE: so far, emerging countries appear to be surprisingly resilient. The likely
reason is a different backdrop, with rising commodity prices and synchronised global growth as
the leading factors.
I will close with a short observation on the so-called China effect in relation to emerging markets’
resilience.  For  decades,  China  has  pumped  savings  into  the  global  economy.  Among  other
effects  important  for  advanced  and  emerging  economies  alike,  this  inflow  of  savings  has
depressed the global equilibrium interest rate. The decrease in the equilibrium rate has, in turn,
restricted  the  options  of  central  banks  around  the  world  and  nudged  them  to  rely  more  on
unconventional  policies,  with  important  effects  on  the  stability  of  flows  to  and  from  emerging
economies. But the China effect will soon start to ebb as the country’s dependence ratio spikes,
pushing global interest rates higher.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
