How the Bahamian Financial System Serves Bahamian Society:
Why Our AML/CFT Reputation Is Important
Remarks by
John A Rolle
Governor
The Bahamas Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Risk
Management Conference
Baha Mar Resort
Nassau Bahamas
17 September, 2018
*As Prepared for Delivery
How the Bahamian Financial System Serves Bahamian Society:  Why Our
AML/CFT Reputation Is Important1
Remarks by John A Rolle, Governor, Central Bank of The Bahamas at The Bahamas Anti-Money Laundering and
Countering the Financing of Terrorism Risk Management Conference, Nassau, Bahamas, 17 September, 2018.
Introduction
Good morning.
I propose to review the ways in which the Bahamian financial services industry serves
Bahamian society, and also touch upon a few ways in which this can be and will be improved.  I will then
outline  why  the  Bahamian  jurisdiction’s  AML/CFT  reputation  is  a  critical  determinant  of  our  financial
services  industry’s  ability  to  prosper  and  grow,  and  summarise  our  current  international  standing,  as
represented in various league tables.
The take away from this that we must transform the domestic financial sector in ways that promote
more internally self-sustaining growth; fortify the international sector in ways that protect and expand
upon its direct economic contribution; and that we must exploit and amplify the positive feedback from
the direction of enhanced AML/CFT frameworks in favour of increased economic resilience, and from
the  direction  of targeted financial  sector  development,  access  and  inclusion in  favour  of  increased
AML/CFT effectiveness.
Why We Care about the Financial Services Sector - the Domestic Story
The Bahamian domestic financial system provides all the benefits typical to a country of our size and
economic development.  We have direct financial intermediation of savings— across a wide range of
sectors  and  activities. We  have  risk pooling,  and  we  have  specialist  services  such  as  payments
processing. In particular:
   The  banking  sector  provides  a  safe  place  to  store  liquid  funds, allocate credit,  and process
payments;
The insurance sector provides risk pooling and investment products; and
The securities and pensions sector provide investment products as an extension of the savings
process.
A well-functioning domestic financial sector serves society by making us safer, wealthier, more resilient
to financial distress; and better able to manage the risks and returns in the real economy.
It should also
distinguish itself by converting savings into investments, or into uses that generate net positive, long-
term benefits.
1 As prepared for delivery.
2
How does the Bahamian financial sector stack up against these criteria? In some ways well, in other
ways not so well.
The Bahamian Economy
It will be helpful for this discussion for us all to be reminded of the following facts.
First, the Bahamian resident population is less than 400,000, so in population terms we are quite a small
country. We are also significantly small in terms of our weight in the global economy, and in terms of
how sensitive we are to fluctuations of a policy or economic nature that radiate in our direction from
the outside world. On the other hand, The Bahamas enjoys a fairly high average per capita income, even
though this position has not improved in some years.
$27.8
$27.6
$27.4
$27.2
$27.0
$26.8
$26.6
$26.4
$26.2
$26.0
$25.8
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T
$
 Chart 1: The Bahamian Economy
1.00
1.40
(0.10)
(0.40)
2013
2014
2015
GDP/Capita ($‘000)
2017
2016
Real GDP Growth (%)
(1.70)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
Source: Department of Statistics
After  the  2007  to  2010  global  financial  crisis,  the  Bahamian  economy  suffered through  an  extended
period of challenges,  including  falls  in  asset  values,  and  on  average  near-zero  income  growth. The
recovery is only now becoming entrenched, but at levels of potential growth that are still unsatisfactory.
How do we then achieve more substantial and sustainable economic growth?  Part of the answer is that
we must foster a domestic financial system that better supports such growth and in more instances, can
seed  such  growth.    I  wish  to  emphasise,  however,  that  the  financial  system  cannot  manufacture
economic growth out of thin air. As it now stands, our financial system does best at supporting the
growth  potential that  is created  in  the  economy. Most of  the  enterprises that  attract domestic  bank
credit are in sectors that do not earn foreign exchange. Their prospects are linked to the second round
effects of thriving foreign exchange earning sectors such as tourism. This is what economist would term
as a “pro-cyclical” dependence.
It can only be reduced if more of the credit provided by banks helps to
expand those local enterprises  that are  either  direct  earners  of  foreign  exchange or  those that help
conserve on our foreign exchange dependency.
3
It is also important to remember that the financial system is the second largest industry in The Bahamas,
comprising 15 to 20 per cent of GDP depending upon the definitions used.  A growing financial industry
generates jobs, and they tend to be well-paying jobs.
The Bahamian public and private sectors have identified a great many reforms necessary to improve the
underlying growth potential in our economy.  As these reforms are delivered, the financial system will
help translate potential growth into actual growth.
Domestic Banking Sector
Our domestic banking system is soundly capitalized and nowadays solidly profitable. However, it is not
sufficiently incentivized to allocate or provide credit in ways that would better serve the economy.
Chart 2: Domestic Banking - Private Sector Lending
$6.55
$6.17
$5.95
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
B
$
 $7.0
$6.0
$5.0
$4.0
$3.0
$2.0
$1.0
$0.0
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Mar-18
Jun-18
Enterprises ($Bn)
Total Private Credit ($Bn)
Households ($Bn)
Private Cedit/GDP (%)
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas
In the five years from 2013 to 2018, domestic private credit shrank from $6.5 billion to under $6 billion.
Even more so remarkably, commercial loans fell to well under $1 billion, and well under 10 per cent of
GDP. Unfortunately it speaks to the pro-cyclical constraints on credit just mentioned; to the low-quality
information environment surrounding borrower risks and to a reward structure most favoring consumer
lending over other forms of credit.  It is not simply reversible by lowering interest rates, because the
credit  stimulus—skewed  to  consumer  financing—would  exhaust  rather  than  sustain  the  support  we
value for the fixed exchange rate.
To  give  a  sense  of  perspective  on  this  level  of  lending,  the  Bahamian  private  credit  to  GDP  ratio  is
currently about 55 percent.    The  same  ratio  among  the  large and  developed economies  in  the  G20
4
ranges from around 150 to over 200 percent. Currently, Canada has the highest ratio at 267 percent.
We are in the curious situation where the carrying or sustainable capacity for credit in Canada is several
multiples  greater  than is being sustained  in The  Bahamas,  where  we  are  both  serviced  by  the  same
leading institutions—and arguably, technology and capital are not the hurdles to be surmounted.
I am not advocating an expansion in Bahamian private sector credit to these much higher levels.  But in
comparison to other countries, Bahamian bank lending could stand to be larger, and still be prudent.
That  is, particularly,  if we incentivise more  lending of  the  right  mix,  to  fund more  counter-cyclical
business and investment growth. In the process, the economy could also be sustainably larger and more
prosperous. The transformation needed is to decrease the number of cents out each dollar of income
earned that must be spent on imports.
There are five conditions precedent for confident bank lending:
 Sufficient capital
Sufficient liquidity
Sufficient information about borrowers
A clear ability to collect on problem loans
Confidence in the general prospects for the economy
Bahamian  banks  at  this  point  have  plenty  of  capital  and  liquidity.    What  they  lack  is  borrower
information,  and  perhaps  confidence  in collecting  problem  loans,  and/or  confidence  in  the  business
prospects for The Bahamas.
The  Central  Bank  is  already  progressing  several  initiatives  that  will  improve  bank  confidence  to  lend.
This  includes  a  program  of  reducing  the  industry’s  aggregate  non-performing  loans, establishing a
Bahamian  credit  reporting  bureau,  and  commencing  a  program  to  move  more domestic transactions
from cash to electronic methods.
Just in 2017, the Central Bank relaxed capital controls on access to
financing in foreign currency for enterprises, that would make our credit policies more countercyclical,
and therefore of a more sustained impact on stronger growth.
Two issues are highly relevant in the AML/CFT context.
First, “sufficient  information”  about  a customer extends  beyond the  customer’s  financial  standing,  to
the  customer’s  potential  to  ensnare  the  bank  in  a  financial  crime  matter. The  Central  Bank,  the
Bahamian government, and the public sector overall have undertaken a great many reforms, in this area
that you will hear about during this conference. One benefit from these reforms is that Bahamian banks
and  other  financial  institutions  will  be  able  to  deal  with  their  customers  with  greater  confidence
regarding the customer’s non-involvement in financial crime.  Furthermore, through its regulation and
supervision, the Central Bank will be able to demonstrate to interested stakeholders that the Bahamian
banking system is reasonably well insulated against AML/CFT risks.
Our colleagues at the other Bahamian financial regulators have taken or are taking similar steps to lift
public  and  private  confidence  in  the  AML/CFT  robustness  of  their  regulated entities.  We  can  never
guarantee that no customer will ever put tainted money into a Bahamian financial institution.  We are,
however, approaching  the  day  when  we  can  undertake  that  no  Bahamian  financial  institution  has  a
substantial or systemic exposure to laundered money or terrorist financing.
5
The second AML/CFT confidence issue is more macro than customer-focused.  The Bahamas, in common
with  many  other  small  countries, still faces a  material  threat  from diminished  or cut-off  access  to
international  correspondent  banking or “de-risking”.    We  face  the  actual  consequences  of  more
difficulty in undertaking cross-border transactions.  This difficulty extends beyond the financial system to
all businesses. Faced with de-risking threats, domestic banks may validly conclude that the Bahamian
economy is more vulnerable to correspondent banking abandonment than they find comfortable.
Our work on lifting AML/CFT risk management, and all the other regulator work, will over time reduce
this risk.
It’s worth noting that moving the bulk of Bahamian payments from cash to electronic will generate a
great many benefits for our society and economy.  Among these benefits, commercial borrowers will be
able to document their receipts and expenses more credibly, and over time this must help in obtaining
bank loans.
The International Banking Sector
Moving to the international banking and trust sector, I will show you two hopefully interesting slides.
Chart 3: International Banking Assets
$558
$511
$409
600
500
400
s
n
o
300
i
l
l
i
B
$
 200
100
0
2013
2012
2014
On-Balance Sheet Assets
2015
2016
2017
Fiduciary Assets
Jun-18
Total Assets
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas
Funds held by the sector in The Bahamas have decreased in the past several years.  In broad terms, The
Bahamas is no longer in the business of hiding money from international tax authorities.  We have seen
a considerable return of now-compliant clients to their home jurisdictions, or alternatively to the United
States.
6
Chart 4: International Banks: Employment
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Home supervised
Host supervised
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas
Nevertheless, employment in the sector has remained more or less constant over the past several years.
So  jobs  are  holding  up,  despite  the decrease  in  funds  under  management.    The  Central  Bank’s
interpretation  of  this  is  that  the  remaining  international  clients  are  receiving  value-adding trustee,
advice, and management services.  Those services make for “stickier” clients, and they also require more
staff per client.
We also observe that home-supervised institutions, which have no overseas parent, have been growing
their staff relative to host-supervised institutions.  In 2012, about a quarter of the industry worked for
Bahamian-owned or headquartered firms, and this proportion has increased to a third.  We expect to
see  the  Bahamian-owned  international  banking  sector  continue  to  increase  in  proportion  to  the
offshore-owned sector.
Where does this leave the international banking and trust sector?  Clearly, smaller than it was a few
years  ago in  balance  sheet  terms,  but  still  substantial.    The  average  wage  for  the  jobs  in  this  sector
exceeds $100,000 per year.  Furthermore, the sector supports a great many service jobs in areas such as
accounting, law, and consulting.
The  Central  Bank  expects  that  the  number  of  international  banks  and  trust  companies  will decrease
some more,  as  several small  entities  have  indicated their  intent to  exit  The Bahamas.    This  does  not
necessarily mean that funds in the system, or employment, will materially fall.  We are hopeful that the
sector is finding a base from which it can grow.
If we are not in the money-hiding business, what business is this sector pursuing?  In a few cases our
licensees have highly specific business strategies, but the more general approach is preserving private
wealth, increasingly focused on Latin American clients.
This  suggests  that  if  The  Bahamas  wishes  to  preserve  and  grow  its  international  banking  and  trust
sector—and we do—both the public and private sectors will need to consider how best to become and
retain the Western Hemisphere’s jurisdiction of choice for private wealth preservation.
7
In following this strategy, we will need to continue grappling with AML and to a lesser extent CFT issues.
It is obviously the case that there is dirty money in Latin America. But it is equally obvious that there are
clean businesses and investors in Latin America, and in most cases they would be well-advised to keep
some of their family wealth offshore.  The Bahamas needs to be the natural place where clean money
from clean clients finds a home.
Maintaining  a  substantial  international  banking  and  trust  industry  in  The  Bahamas  materially
complicates  our  efforts  to  improve  our  jurisdiction’s  international  reputation  for  AML/CFT  risk
management.    Those  who  arbitrate  such  matters globally consider  that  private  banking  in  small
population centres such as Nassau is an automatically high risk business.
We are increasingly forming the view, contrary to this conventional wisdom, that properly regulated and
supervised  international  banking  and  trust  business  need  not  be  high  risk  in  AML  terms.    As  our
jurisdiction  has  dispensed  with  money  in  hiding,  and  concentrated  on  money  needing  more  active
services, what has become clear to us is the following:
a) First, that supervised financial institutions know their remaining customers closely;
b) Second,  that  not  only  customers  but  funds  and  transactions  are  scrutinized  at  the  individual
level; and
c) Finally, that the typical client is performing around one transaction per month, so this is not a
high volume proposition.
At this point we are still in transition, and our supervisors and examiners have identified a considerable
list of improvements necessary in the industry.  But nothing about this list and our other supervisory
findings suggest that the Bahamian international sector is irremediably high risk.  We are rather more of
the  view  that,  given  another one to  two  years  of  newly  intense  supervision,  under  considerably
improved  regulation,  this  sector  will  become  solidly  medium  risk.  We  look  forward  to  industry’s
cooperation in achieving this outcome, and in helping to demonstrate this outcome to the world’s AML
risk arbiters.
Sovereign AML Ratings Agencies
Speaking of AML risk arbiters, the Central Bank has identified six providers of AML sovereign risk ratings.
The first and most extensive of these is the Financial Action Task Force and its nine regional affiliates—
most relevantly in our case the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force.  Second and most accidentally, we
have  the  U.S.  State  Department’s  INCSR Volume  II,  which  is  an  annual  list  of  so-called  high-risk
jurisdictions.  In  spots  three  to  six,  we  have  four  subscription  based  services,  which  operate  on  very
similar weighted index approaches.
The Central Bank’s AML Analytics team maintains a watching brief on all six of these ratings, particularly
as regards The Bahamas.  We are normally rated towards the high risk end of the spectrum, but in this
space there is a strong bias towards high risk weightings.
Let’s look at each ratings provider.
First, the FATF, which helpfully provides comparisons for all countries it has assessed through mutual
evaluation reports.  There are in fact two ratings: a compliance
8
rating  based  upon  40  technical  assessments,  and  an  effectiveness  rating  based  upon 11  judgement
categories.  All 51 of these sub-ratings are based upon a four step scale.  There is no official method to
convert these 51 ratings into one or two aggregate ratings, but it is easy and common for interested
parties to perform this conversion themselves.
The current position of The Bahamas against about 50 other recently FATF-rated countries is show on
the next slide.  The horizontal axis gives our position on technical compliance, and the vertical axis our
position on effectiveness.  In these ratings small numbers are better than big numbers, and it can be
seen see that The Bahamas is in the middling group, but at the less good end of that group, particularly
on the effectiveness rating.
Chart 5: FATF Fourth Round Evaluation Rankings
Source: FATF
Nearly  all  of  you  would  be  aware  that  the  CFATF  issued  the  Bahamian  ratings  in  2017,  but  another
exercise is in progress now, with a new assessment scheduled to be published in a couple of months.
We  expect  that  the  re-rating  will  appreciably  improve  the  Bahamian  position  on  this  map of  relative
AML/CFT strength, as reflected through the FATF ratings universe.
Regardless of how one feels about the FATF in general and the Bahamian assessment in particular, it is
clearly the case that the FATF approach is:
 Credible;
Fully documented;
Reasonably consistent in global application; and
Represents a great deal of work by experienced AML professionals.
Only  the  first  of  these  characteristics  applies  to  the  next  rating  source,  the US State  Department’s
International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR).  In the absence of a credible competitor to the
9
FATF assessments, many around the world have launched on to this list as the second major source of
sovereign AML risk information.
The  problem  with  this  approach  is  that  the  INCSR is  not any  sort  of  rating  model.    It  is  simply  a  list
prepared  through  the  relevant  American  embassies  and  coordinated  in  Washington.    The  underlying
analytic support for this list, we understand, is a single page questionnaire, which is filled out locally, not
necessarily by an AML professional.
Our intent is not to criticise the State Department.  They have never claimed that the INCSR is any sort
of AML ratings tool, but it is simply a statutory requirement under relevant American legislation.
At  any  rate,  in  the  INCSR  universe,  The  Bahamas  is  on  the  list,  as  are  75  percent  of  the  countries
considered by the State Department.
Now we move to the four subscription services: Thomson-Reuters, about which you will hear more later
today;  IBM; the  Basel  Governance  Institute;  and  KnowYourCountry.com.    All  four  of  these  providers
deploy  a  weighted  average  approach  to  risk  scoring,  within  which  the  FATF  and  State  Department
assessments are typically the two largest inputs.  Other inputs include items such as global transparency,
rule of law, and economic league tables.
The Bahamas tends to rate somewhere in the medium to high risk range with these four subscription
services.  KnowYourCountry, for example, has us as medium risk and rated 139th out of 219 jurisdictions.
The Basel Governance ratings has us as high risk, and in the ninth out of ten deciles of countries.
Chart 6: Distribution of FATF Effectiveness Ratings
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Low
Moderate
Substantial
High
Immediate Outcome Rating
Why are AML sovereign ratings important?  Because, singly and in aggregate they often form a material
input into the risk considerations of correspondent banks and others who deal with The Bahamas.  The
effect  is  similar  to  debt  ratings  agencies:  If  Moody’s  and  Standard  &  Poor’s  lists  a  country  as  sub-
investment  grade,  it  becomes  much  harder  and  more  expensive  to  raise  funds.    If  the  AML  ratings
10
agencies  list  a  country  as  high  AML  risk,  it  becomes  harder  for  that  country  and  its  institutions  to
operate effectively in the global financial markets.
Financial inclusion
Now, let’s talk about financial inclusion.
“Financial inclusion” is something of a buzz phrase globally, but that hardly detracts from its importance.
It is easy to conclude that Bahamian financial inclusion is not nearly as complete as it needs to be.  Our
populace  is still  not fully  banked  on  either  the  deposit/transaction  or  the  credit  side  of  the  balance
sheet.    Our  insurance  penetration,  investments,  and  pension  participation  are  a  long  way  from  what
might be optimal. Our capital markets are neither large nor liquid in global terms.  Then there is the
geographic  issue  that  inclusion  in  the  Family  Islands  is  in  some  cases  markedly  less  than  in  New
Providence.
Neither the Central Bank nor any other agency can fix this on their own, but collectively we can do quite
a lot to create a more inclusive Bahamian financial system.  We look forward to providing advice to the
government on this point.
Financial inclusion is not mainly about AML, but it does generate two distinct AML advantages.  The first
is  that  cash intensity  in  the  economy  will  drop,  in  favor  of  electronic  transactions.    This  makes  our
society and economy safer and more efficient, and it makes large and possibly suspect cash transactions
easier  to  identify.    The  second  advantage  flows  indirectly  from the  increased  data  intensity  of  the
financial system.  It will become harder for financial criminals to hide in the undocumented recesses of a
non-inclusive system.
The Central Bank and other agencies are already progressing a number of financial inclusion initiatives.
In our case, these include joining the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, or AFI, and adopting that body’s
Maya Declaration.    The  AFI  has  already  helpfully  created  a  number of  national  inclusion  benchmarks
which we can adapt for Bahamian use.  The AFI also provides many case studies, research reports, and
other information, which will help us generate ideas for Bahamian financial inclusion.
The  Central  Bank’s  digital  currency  initiative,  for  which  we received expressions  of  interest through
September  15th,  is  a  financial  inclusion,  AML and  economic  efficiency  prospect. The  returns  against
these metrics will crystallize at varying pace over time.  It would be fair to say though that the future of
retail payments appears to be centered on mobile phones rather than cards, and much more so than in-
branch bank transactions.
The Central Bank’s promotion of a credit bureau, as already noted, should assist in financial inclusion, as
Bahamian  lenders  will  become  more  confident  that  they  understand  their  prospective  lending
customers. We are shortlisting potential operators of the bureau this month, and plan to complete the
licensing process for the successful bidder before the end of 2018.
Finally, the Central Bank recently released updated Guidelines for AML/CFT risk management.  Among a
great  many  other 
items,  these  Guidelines  have  substantially  streamlined  the  documentation
requirements to open a simple B$ bank account.  This will make banking easier for all Bahamians, and
also make banking available to some of our residents who previously couldn’t open a bank account.
11
Where to from Here?
In  forecasting  the  future,  it’s  important  to  remember  that  we  know,  but  can’t  predict  the  timing  or
incidence,  of  some  major  negative  shocks.    These  include  hurricanes,  global  recessions,  and  sudden
panics  in  the  international  financial  and  banking markets.   What  we  can  assert,  however,  is  that  The
Bahamas is not yet as well positioned for these shocks as we would like to be, or as we intend to be.
Most  obviously  in  the  context  of  this  conference,  The  Bahamas  has  become,  and  will  continue  to
become, a more robust jurisdiction in managing AML/CFT risks.  This has direct benefits in discouraging
criminality, corruption, and terrorism, and large indirect benefits in giving the world’s major financial
markets and institutions the confidence to deal with us on good terms.
Improved  financial  inclusion  will  also  lead  to  improved  resilience.    Our  banking  system  will  become
bigger and safer.  There is the prospect for our insurance, funds management, and pension industries to
grow, which creates better risk pooling and a larger pool of long term investable funds for The Bahamas.
Outside  the  sphere  of  this  conference,  we  see  the  Bahamian  Government  and  associated  parties
undertaking many initiatives to reduce societal risk.
We are a small country facing a somewhat uncertain future.  Provided we manage our risks sensibly and
proactively, however, I am confident that The Bahamas can aspire to a great future.  Part of that great
future involves a Bahamian jurisdiction that both is and is accepted as sound in managing its AML and
CFT risks.
Thank you for your attention today.
12
