Ravi  Menon:  Financial  regulation  –  20  years  after  the  Global
Financial Crisis
Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San
Francisco, 25 June 2018.
 Mr Mark Gould, Acting President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Ladies and gentlemen, friends and colleagues, good morning.
And welcome to the Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance 2028. 
It was 13 years ago, in 2015, that the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the Monetary
Authority of Singapore (MAS) began this collaborative journey of organising this Symposium.
Let me, on behalf of MAS, thank Mark and his colleagues at the San Francisco Fed for the
fruitful partnership and warm relationship over the years.
This Symposium began in 2007 to consider the lessons learned from the 1997 Asian Financial
Crisis.
Since then, we have lived through two other major crises – the Global Financial Crisis of
2008 and the Global Cyber Crisis of 2023.
Today, I would like to take stock of the evolution of financial regulation over the last 20 years,
since the Global Financial Crisis.  I think three broad themes characterise this journey:
first, fixing the fault lines that led to the Global Financial Crisis;
second, managing the risks posed by FinTech while harnessing its benefits;
third, defending against systemic cyber risk.
Fixing the Fault Lines of the Global Financial Crisis
Let me begin with the regulatory and supervisory responses to the Global Financial Crisis.  The
advances over the last 20 years can be broken down into three broad phases.
The era of regulatory reform (2008 to 2016)
The first eight years following the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 saw the most wide-ranging set
of reforms ever in the history of financial regulation.  The destruction that the Global Financial
Crisis had unleashed on our economies and societies galvanised action on an unprecedented
scale.
The Global Financial Crisis revealed some deep fault lines in the financial system that had been
masked by fortuitous growth.
Many financial institutions had leveraged themselves to the hilt – some of them by as much
as 40 dollars of debt to 1 dollar of equity – unthinkable these days.
Many banks had severe mismatches in liquidity.
An opaque OTC derivatives market led to rapid contagion when liquidity suddenly dried up.
Moral hazard grew as some financial institutions were seen as too-big-to-fail.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Financial  Stability  Board,  or  FSB,  was  strengthened  and  tasked  to  oversee  reforms  to
address  each  of  these  vulnerabilities.  The  way  the  international  regulatory  community  came
together and forged a consensus on the necessary reforms was exemplary.
Between 2008 and 2016, the FSB, working closely with the Basel Committee, IOSCO, and other
standard-setting bodies, put in place the basic building blocks for a new regulatory architecture
that continues to serve us today.
In banking, capital buffers were increased, liquidity requirements were introduced, and caps
placed on leverage under a new Basel III accord.
In  the  derivatives  markets,  requirements  were  put  in  place  for  trade  reporting,  central
clearing, and margining.
To tackle the too-big-to-fail problem, global systemically important financial institutions, or G-
SIFIs, were identified and subjected to higher loss absorbency requirements, more intensive
supervision, and resolution planning.
Implementation of the reforms – especially Basel III – progressed well, driven by a broad-based
consensus on preventing a repeat of the Global Financial Crisis. 
The generous timelines for implementation allowed industry to adjust to the new regulatory
landscape.
It was only last year, in 2027, that we achieved full implementation of the final component of
the Basel III reform package – the output floor.
Regulatory evaluation and adjustment (2017 to 2020)
During the second phase, from 2017 to 2020, the focus turned to evaluating the effects of the
regulatory reforms. 
There  was  growing  feedback  that  some  reforms  had  unintended  consequences,  some
reforms  were  at  odds  with  others,  and  that  the  cumulative  impact  of  the  reforms  had
dampened economic growth.
A series of reviews was undertaken during this period to assess both the effectiveness and
effects of various reforms. 
The  reviews  largely  affirmed  that  the  benefits  of  the  reforms,  in  terms  of  reducing  the  risk  of
financial crisis and its consequent economic impact, far outweighed the costs. 
In fact, controlling for other factors, there was little evidence that the reforms resulted in any
general deterioration in the availability or pricing of credit.
But the reviews did surface areas for improvement. 
They identified specific areas – like trade finance, infrastructure finance, SME finance and
market  liquidity  –  where  the  cumulative  effects  of  various  reforms  had  led  to  sub-optimal
social outcomes.
This led the way to carefully calibrated adjustments to regulations that eased the constraints
in these areas without significantly increasing risk.
The responsiveness and flexibility shown by regulators helped to sustain the broad-based
political and industry consensus in favour of the post-crisis reforms.
Today, looking back from the vantage point of 2028, we can say with greater certainty that the
post-crisis reforms have left us a financial system that is, on the whole, more robust and more
resilient.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Large banks are now stronger, more liquid, and less leveraged.
Derivatives markets are safer and better collateralised.
The era of enhanced supervision (2021 onwards)
The  third  phase  began  from  around  the  early  2020s,  when  the  focus  shifted  away  from  rule-
making to enhancing the supervision of financial institutions. 
The Global Financial Crisis was not just about gaps in regulation, it was also about gaps in
risk management and supervisory oversight. 
Three developments in recent years added new impetus to the supervision agenda.
First,  as  the  international  activities  of  global  banks  increased  and  became  more  complex,
regulators realised that effective supervision increasingly required much stronger cross-border
co-operation and even co-ordination.  The Basel Concordat II of 2024
laid the foundation for more collaborative and meaningful supervisory colleges;
strengthened the functioning of the crisis management groups; and
set out more clearly the responsibilities of home and host supervisors.
Second, supervision extended beyond checking on financial institutions’ risk management and
internal controls to better understanding the risk culture of these organisations.
Processes, controls, and limits can only go so far in restraining excessive risk-taking. 
Ultimately, it is people that take risks.  And the incentive structure, governance practices,
and value systems in financial institutions are what determine their attitude towards risk.
Regulators came together to establish common frameworks for what we now call culture and
conduct supervision.  This included sharing information on errant industry professionals to deter
the problem of “rolling bad apples”.
Supervisors began to use data analytics, sentiment assessments, and the tools of behavioural
psychology to gain insights on the culture and conduct in financial institutions.
These insights served as inputs to supervisory assessments of the risk culture in financial
institutions and, where necessary, pre-emptive interventions.
Third,  the  active  integration  of  technology  into  the  supervisory  process  –  what  we  now  call
SupTech – began to dramatically enhance supervisory effectiveness by the mid-2020s.
Data analytics finally solved the long-standing challenge that banks had in aggregating credit
and market exposures across various businesses and geographies.
This enabled banks to derive a consolidated risk profile in real-time.
And the integration of RegTech and SupTech allowed data from financial institutions to flow
directly  into  regulators’  data  bases  in  machine-readable  formats  through  Application
Programming Interfaces or APIs.
Supervisory  officers,  who  used  to  spend  long  hours  poring  over  spreadsheets  and  reports  –
cutting, pasting, and computing – began to use automated surveillance dash boards.
They are able to track on a daily basis the consolidated exposures, credit quality, value-at-
risk and other indicators of the banks under their purview.
They are able to carry out stress tests and simulations not only of individual banks but also
network analysis of risk transference across the financial system.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Compared to just ten years ago, technology has enabled supervision to become much sharper
and surveillance of systemic stability more rigorous.
Managing the Risks Posed by FinTech while Harnessing its Benefits
The second big theme in financial regulation over the last 20 years is the rise of FinTech. 
Technology has always featured in financial services.  But from about 2015 onwards, there was
an explosion in the application of various technologies in financial services – by both regulated
entities and unregulated FinTech firms offering niche financial products. 
FinTech transformed the way financial services were produced, distributed, and consumed. 
It has brought significant benefits to consumers, financial institutions, and the economy at
large. 
It has helped to reduce costs, manage risks better, create new business opportunities, and
improve people’s lives.
But  like  all  good  things,  FinTech  brought  in  its  wake  new  risks  and  new  challenges  for
regulators.    The  story  of  FinTech  regulation  is  still  unfolding  but  let  me  highlight  three  areas
where good progress has been made in the last 10 years:
setting standards for distributed ledgers;
making cloud computing services safer; and
dealing with artificial intelligence.
Setting standards for distributed ledgers
Experiments in applying distributed ledger technology to financial services began about 15 years
ago and gathered pace from about 2018 onwards.  The early days were characterised by both
hype and fear.
Popular imagination and regulatory concerns were focused on so-called crypto currencies
or  assets  –  essentially  crypto  tokens  which  assumed  a  life  of  their  own  as  means  of
payments or investment assets outside the distributed ledger.
But the euphoria did not last long.  Crypto tokens failed to achieve scale as more people
realised that they did not have the properties of either currencies or assets.
Today, crypto tokens are confined to specific purposes and limited ecosystems.
But after several false starts and failed use cases, the underlying distributed ledger technology or
DLT started making significant inroads in the financial industry. 
Essentially,  DLT  made  financial  transactions  and  processes  more  efficient,  more
transparent, less risky, less costly. 
The  three  areas  that  saw  the  biggest  transformations  were  in  compliance,  trade  finance
verification, and cross-border payments.
As  DLT  systems  became  more  pervasive,  they  began  to  assume  properties  of  critical
infrastructure with systemic implications.
There were information security-related risks as well as operational risks associated with
interoperability across multiple platforms.  
While  strong  cryptography  is  a  feature  of  DLT  systems,  they  are  not  immune  to  cyber-
attacks through the widely distributed network of participants.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
And old-fashioned risks like not having enough liquidity to settle transactions can potentially
lead to gridlocks in DLT systems which could, in turn, cause systemic risks.
The trigger for a co-ordinated regulatory response to DLT came in the cross-border payments
space. 
In  2020,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore  successfully  piloted  a
cross-border  DLT-based  system  that  achieved  almost  real-time  fixed  income  securities
trading and settlement.
Under the Global Payments Accord of 2024, central banks agreed to upgrade their real-time
gross  settlement  systems  to  a  DLT-inspired  infrastructure  with  a  view  to  connect  these
systems for safer, faster, and more efficient cross-border payments and settlements.
This called for internationally accepted standards for DLT-based payment systems.
The  FSB  and  standard-setting  bodies  worked  closely  with  the  newly-formed  International
Organisation for Distributed Ledger Standards to design a supervisory framework for DLT.
DLT  networks  that  performed  key  market  functions  like  clearing  and  trade  reporting  were
required to meet specified standards for settlement finality and the security of digital asset
custody.
Making cloud computing services safer
From about 2015, financial institutions increasingly began to use the cloud.
With cloud computing, financial institutions could efficiently integrate customer data across
platforms to enable sharper consumer insights.
The cloud provided scalable storage solutions to meet the real-time demands of trading and
analytics processes.
Some banks have even moved their core banking systems into the cloud to reap the benefits
of its scalability and resilience.
Cloud  computing  has  considerably  enhanced  risk  management.    Risk  assessments  are  now
more comprehensive, more granular, and more real-time. 
But the cloud has also introduced new risks.  The risks are not so much in the technology of
cloud computing per se but in the business and operating models of cloud services.
Cloud services are essentially a utility provided by specialist third-party providers.
And  as  with  any  third-party  service  provider,  there  are  outsourcing  risks  associated  with
these cloud service providers or CSPs.
But  with  cloud  computing,  these  outsourcing  risks  are  much  larger,  given  how  much  of  a
financial institution’s data and processing functions rely on CSPs.
Financial institutions have less knowledge, let alone control, of where their data are stored in
a cloud computing infrastructure spanning several different jurisdictions.    
Data breach or loss might occur due to a natural disaster, targeted attack, or poor security
processes at the CSPs.
The outsourcing risk is compounded by concentration risk.
The top 4 CSPs in the world had a market share of 80% last year.
About 25% of the core banking systems of global systemically important banks or G-SIBs is
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
now residing on the cloud.
A large supplier of cloud services can potentially become a single point of failure when many
financial institutions rely on them. 
The regulatory response to cloud computing has taken two forms.
First, regulators around the world have issued regulations or guidance on the management of
outsourcing risks pertaining to cloud services. 
The Monetary Authority of Singapore and the UK Financial Conduct Authority were among
the first regulators to do so, as early as 2013.
Second,  the  jurisdictions  where  these  CSPs  operate  from  have  begun  to  exercise  regulatory
oversight over them.
In the US, the Cloud Services Utility Agency, or CSUA, was formed in 2024 with the mandate
of regulating CSPs, working closely with the US Federal Reserve System.
I am pleased that the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has been designated as the
lead regulatory co-ordinator with the CSUA, as two of the four globally dominant CSPs are
based in California.  
Dealing with artificial intelligence
The use of AI has swept across the financial services sector in recent years.
Banks are benefitting from AI through better customer insights, increased productivity, and
cost savings.
AI applications range from customised financial services to enhanced risk management and
regulatory compliance.
But the growing application of AI has also introduced new risks and challenges for regulators.
Foremost are concerns about market disruption and financial instability caused by runaway AI
trading algorithms.
The  global  flash  crash  of August  2022  demonstrated  the  contagion  risks  that  multiple AI
trading programmes “learning” from one another can precipitate.
When an AI trading algorithm went amok and caused the failure of US hedge fund Smart
Money, AI  traders  across America,  Europe,  and Asia  went  into  a  massive  risk-off  mode,
causing  turbulence  not  only  in  equities  but  also  fixed  income,  commodity,  and  currency
markets.
Herd behaviour has always been a characteristic of financial markets.  But herds of robots
have proven to be far more deadly than herds of humans.
The  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  has  since  mandated  that
exchanges have in place mechanisms to manage extreme volatility. 
And securities regulators have themselves started to use AI – to provide early warning of
potentially disruptive AI-based trading patterns and trigger appropriate circuit-breakers.
But more generally, the increased use of AI by financial institutions has created the risk of “black
boxes” in decision-making.
Boards and senior management of financial institutions are struggling to validate AI-based
models which use continuous learning and adaptation as distinct from fixed parameters and
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
historical back-testing.
The application of AI in financial services has also created issues of financial exclusion which
regulators cannot ignore. 
Regulators  have  begun  to  detect  cases  where  AI-based  decision-making  has  led  to
systematic exclusion of certain demographics. 
When an AI tool finds an empirical basis for discriminating by a combination of variables
such as gender, ethnicity, religion, and nationality, say for a loan or insurance decision, how
much  of  that  empiricism  is  grounded  in  reality  and  how  much  of  it  is  due  to  unobserved
biases in society that the AI is learning from?
And  even  if  such  discrimination  is  backed  by  empirical  unbiased  data,  is  that  a  socially
acceptable outcome?
Regulators in many jurisdictions have been engaging the industry as well as the broader society
on developing guidance on the responsible and ethical use of AI and data analytics by financial
institutions.
Defending Against Systemic Cyber Risk 
The third theme that stands out in the history of financial regulation over the last two decades is
cyber security. 
But it was only after the Global Cyber Crisis of 2023 that cyber risk management has moved
to front and centre of the international regulatory agenda.
The Global Cyber Crisis laid bare our cyber vulnerabilities.
A highly skilled and well-resourced group of hackers used AI-enabled malware to infiltrate
banks across the world, subvert detection, and siphon monies.
Over a span of just 6 weeks, a total of US$45 billion was stolen from over 500 banks, leading
to loss of public confidence and bank runs in several jurisdictions.
Only 8% of the stolen funds has ever been recovered.
The failure of Algor Bank at the height of the Global Cyber Crisis demonstrated both the high
points and low points in financial regulation.
Algor Bank was successfully resolved with minimal disruption.
Thanks to efforts by the FSB after the Global Financial Crisis, the major jurisdictions that
Algor Bank operated in had robust resolution regimes.
With  a  clear  resolution  plan  formulated,  tested  and  discussed  at  the  bank’s  annual
Resolution College prior to the crisis, home and host regulators were able to resolve Algor
Bank in a smooth and timely manner.
But the fact that a cyber attack could bring down the 20th largest bank in the world with a Tier 1
capital  adequacy  ratio  of  16%  revealed  significant  gaps  in  the  global  regulatory  regime  for
technology risk.
It was ironic that in an industry where there were detailed internationally accepted standards
for capital, liquidity, and a range of prudential norms, there were no standards for cyber risk
management.
The FSB and standard-setting bodies swung into action and in 2025 produced a two-track set of
reforms to deal with cyber risk, which is essentially borderless.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the FSB’s Cyber Security Standards, building on its Cyber Lexicon of 2018, established a
minimum level of cyber hygiene for internationally active financial institutions. 
They  set  out  harmonised  standards  for  authentication,  implementation  of  cryptography,
intrusion detection, and incident reporting.
Higher standards were set for G-SIFIs.
G-SIFIs were required to put in place 24/7 cyber surveillance of all Internet-facing systems,
undergo annual cyber vulnerability assessments by internationally certified cyber specialists,
and carry out military-grade penetration tests.
Second,  the  Basel  Committee  and  IOSCO  developed  core  principles  and  practice  guides  for
prompt information sharing on cyber incidents and cyber threat intelligence among banks and
securities firms respectively. 
National  laws  were  amended,  where  necessary,  to  facilitate  information  sharing  across
these financial institutions without incurring legal liability.
Global  platforms  were  put  in  place  to  facilitate  information  sharing  among  central  banks  and
regulators  to  counter  cross-border  cyber  threats  of  the  kind  that  triggered  the  Global  Cyber
Crisis.
Through these platforms, financial regulators are able to quickly disseminate useful cyber
threat information to banks and securities firms so that they can take pre-emptive measures.
These  platforms  built  on  the  success  of  the  earlier  Central  Banks,  Regulators  and
Supervisory  entities  or  CERES  platform  of  2018  which  enabled  effective  sharing  of
actionable cyber threat information. 
But the enemy has not been lying still. 
Hackers  are  now  employing  more  advanced  quantum  computing  technologies,  and  a
number  of  weaker  encryption  solutions  used  by 
institutions  have  been
compromised.
Cybersecurity continues to be a cat-and-mouse game.  There is no room for complacency.
financial 
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The financial system today is more robust and resilient than it was 20 years ago.
The wide-ranging regulatory reforms following the Global Financial Crisis have stood us in
good stead.
There is broad consensus  across  industry  and  the  regulatory  community  on  the  value  of
sound regulation and risk management.
But the financial landscape has also transformed dramatically over these two decades.
The rise of FinTech has changed the face of financial services.
Technology  has  helped  us  reduce  some  risks  and  better  manage  others,  but  it  has  also
introduced new risks and vulnerabilities.
The regulator’s job is never done.
And while we have gotten better at managing traditional risks such as credit and market risk,
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
cyber risk has now moved to the front of the regulatory agenda.
But while the landscape has evolved and the nature of threats to financial stability has changed,
the core principles of sound regulation remain evergreen.
The goal is to keep the financial system stable and maintain public confidence and trust in
the financial sector.
And to do this in a way that allows the financial sector to innovate and grow, and serve the
needs of the economy and society.
That means taking a proportionate approach to risk, so that we can achieve resilience with
efficiency, stability with growth, safety with innovation.
Thank you.
Everything  said  here  about  the  future  is  pure  imagination;  it  is  neither  a  forecast  nor  a
recommendation, by me or the Monetary Authority of Singapore. My intention is merely to paint
a plausible scenario for the future of financial regulation, as food for thought for this Symposium.
In all likelihood, the Symposium of 2028 will find my account lacking in imagination or realism or
both.  The truth will be stranger than fiction.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
