Jens Weidmann: Higher growth, lower inflation? - Digitalisation from
a central bank's perspective
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  reception  hosted  by  the
Deutsche Bundesbank at the annual meeting of the German Economic Association (Verein für
Socialpolitik), Freiburg im Breisgau, 3 September 2018.
 1 Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of the Deutsche Bundesbank, I would like to welcome you to this reception here at the
Konzerthaus in Freiburg.
It gives me great pleasure to be here with you today. But I am particularly pleased that you are all
here. By that I mean physically in person and not virtually. At the Bundesbank, but also in the
fields of research and education, I’m sure, events like these are increasingly shifting from the real
world  to  the  virtual  world.  Presentations  are  being  streamed  live  on  the  internet,  and
conversations are taking place via chat. This eliminates costly and time-consuming travel.
But despite all the technological advances, buffets, refreshments and social gatherings cannot
be transmitted digitally, not yet anyway. And for most of us, real life is usually the more enjoyable
option. It would be a shame if we had to forego the pleasure this evening.
But digital technologies have become ubiquitous. They now have a major influence on how we
live and work. Most of you in this room are carrying a triumph of this development with you today:
the mobile phone.
You  could,  however,  argue  that  making  phone  calls  whilst  on  the  move  is  not  particularly
revolutionary. As early as 1958, the first analogue mobile telecommunication network was set up
in  Germany.  To  begin  with,  however,  the  bulky  telephone  devices  weighed  an  impressive  36
kilos, which is why they were only found in cars. It was only possible to make calls whilst actually
driving, because the telephones consumed an enormous amount of electricity. A battery capable
of lasting several hours or even days was completely unimaginable.
Over time, the devices became smaller and lighter, until the first “mobile phones” came onto the
market in the early 1980s. But despite all the technological advances, these analogue telephones
are still essentially what they have always been: devices for making phone calls.
It  was  only  in  the  course  of  digitalisation  that  mobile  phones  were  transformed  into  mini-
computers and thus into the clever all-rounders we could no longer do without in our everyday
life.  Today,  smartphones  also  double  up  as  cameras,  navigation  systems,  game  consoles,
diaries, address books, pocket calculators and much more, all on one single device.
Although  we  cannot  yet  fly  to  the  moon  using  our  mobile  phones,  smartphones  do,  however,
contain a memory chip which is several hundred thousand times larger than that used in the
computer on board the Apollo 11 mission, which was sufficient to take the first human beings to
the moon back in 1969.
This increase in the number of functions has also led to rapid growth in their distribution: there
are  now  more  mobile  phones  in  the  world  than  people.  And  yet  the  success  story  of  the
smartphone is just one example of the transformative power of digitalisation. Let's just look at the
way we communicate with each other, keep ourselves informed or do our shopping today: so
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
much has changed in recent years that it would be easier to list what has actually stayed the
same.
The increasing use of digital technologies is also taking companies and employees into a new,
digital age. These developments are the focus of this year's conference.
From  a  central  bank’s  perspective,  the  change  process  raises  the  question  of  the  overall
economic  implications.  In  other  words,  what  does  the  digital  revolution  mean  for  growth,
employment and price developments? I would like to take a closer look at these aspects with you
today.
2 Impact on productivity
“Productivity  isn’t  everything,  but  in  the  long  run  it  is  almost  everything.”  This  quote  by  Paul
Krugman  emphasised  the  fact  that  a  higher  standard  of  living  in  the  long  term  hinges  on  an
economy's  ability  to  boost  its  productivity.  And  this  is  where  technological  progress  through
digitalisation comes into play.
1
initially 
involves  companies 
This 
the  digital  economy,  such  as  manufacturers  of
telecommunications  technology,  software  developers  or  service  providers  in  the  IT  sector.
Labour productivity is growing much faster in this sector than in the economy as a whole.
in 
Although  the  share  of  these  companies  in  terms  of  total  value  added  is  still  rather  small  in
Germany,  this  sector  does  make  a  significant  contribution  to  overall  economic  productivity
growth: since the mid-1990s, it has averaged a quarter of a percentage point per year. In other
economies, such as in Sweden, Finland and some industrialised countries outside Europe, the
contribution was significantly higher.
Digital technologies are also breaking into other industries and changing products and processes
there,  too.  We  have  noticed  something  astonishing  here  since  the  mid-2000s,  namely  that
productivity growth has weakened.
This has led some to speak of a new paradox of productivity. New, because we already observed
a similar development back in the 1970s and 1980s. “You can see the computer age everywhere
2
but in the productivity statistics,” noted economist Robert Solow back then.
How can this paradox be explained? Apart from possible measurement errors, the explanatory
approaches can be roughly assigned to two camps:
The pessimists, especially Bob Gordon, generally view digitalisation as being less transformative
than assumed.  Digital technologies offer less potential for major productivity gains than previous
waves of innovation, which were driven, for example, by the development of the steam engine or
electrification.
3
4
In the other camp, the optimists, such as Erik Brynjolfsson, put forward the argument of time-
lagged  effects.   General-purpose  technologies  in  particular,  such  as  robotics  or  artificial
intelligence, require additional innovations and investments for use in everyday business life. It
takes time for new technologies to spread, to be integrated into production processes and to take
full effect. Accordingly, the essential productivity gains have yet to come, he claims.
Regardless of who is right in the end, it is clear that companies can only exploit the potential that
digitalisation brings with it if the necessary framework conditions are in place. For example, many
digital technologies require access to a fast internet connection.
And  Germany  is  lagging  behind  other  industrialised  countries  in  this  respect.  Last  year,  the
maximum connection speed in Germany was 65 megabits per second on average. In Spain it
 2 / 8
5
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
was no less than 85 megabits, and in Korea it was as high as 120 megabits.
In  particular,  the  expansion  of  the  fibre  optic  network  is  making  only  slow  progress  here  in
Germany. Just two per cent of broadband connections are based primarily on fibre optic lines
and  thus  on  the  technology  that  makes  particularly  fast  internet  connections  possible.  By
contrast, the OECD average is 26 per cent.
This makes it all the more important for Germany to forge ahead and vigorously expand its digital
infrastructure.
3 Impact on employment
Ladies and gentlemen,
One issue that is worrying many people is how digitalisation will transform the workplace. Self-
driving robo-taxis and parcel-delivering drones still aren’t a feature of our day-to-day lives. But
there is no denying that digital technologies are making ever greater inroads into worlds that were
long thought to be the reserve of human beings.
Nowadays, robots help doctors and carers; they crawl through narrow tunnels and shafts so that
we don’t have to; they mow the lawn, and they explore outer space and the oceans. Algorithms
make investment decisions in a fraction of a second, and many a sports report these days is
written by a robo-reporter.
As we venture into an era of automation, a witticism attributed to the economist Warren Bennis
springs to mind, and I quote: “The factory of the future will have only two employees, a man and a
dog. The man will be there to feed the dog. The dog will be there to keep the man from touching
the equipment.”
We  haven’t  quite  reached  that  point  yet.  But  looking  at  some  professions,  one  does  wonder
whether they will still be around in the medium term. The OECD estimates that nearly one in ten
6
occupations could be automatable over the next few years.
That said, there’s one thing we shouldn’t lose sight of. History books are full of occupations that
don’t exist any more. Or is there anyone here who still knows a copperplate engraver, a rag-and-
bone man, a cooper or a wheelwright?
So being scared of losing one’s job and resisting innovation were commonplace in earlier times
of upheaval as well. Just take the protests launched by the Luddites in the 19th century. To this
day, you will still find a four-liner – on the internet, of course – which goes like this: “Who got the
idea of steam into their head? / It cost the waggoners their daily bread / They truly are in a bad
7
way / Because of that damned railway!”
While there is no doubt that the railway cost many coachmen, cartwrights and wheelwrights their
jobs, it did create brand new type of jobs: track layers, train drivers and guards, to name but
three.
We haven't run out of work yet. And digitalisation will also forge new professions. Social media
managers, robotics engineers and drone pilots are just three I could mention here.
So  you  could  say  the  new  technologies  can  potentially  unleash  both  creative  and  destructive
energy  –  much  like  the  “creative  destruction”  coined  by  Joseph  Schumpeter. At  present,  one
could argue that the job losses are being compensated for by new ones. At the same time, a
shift is under way in employment prospects and relative wages.
Many routine activities will probably feel the pressure of automation particularly intensely. These
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
are areas where salaries may well feel the squeeze. Then again, there are other activities which
appear to be benefiting from automation. Taken in isolation, this can lead to greater inequality in
the distribution of income.
In this regard, digitalisation is having an impact much like that of globalisation, and it is presenting
similar  policy  challenges  as  well.  But  the  effect  of  digitalisation  goes  deeper  still  –  it  is
transforming many job profiles and, as a result, the requirements which employees are expected
to meet. Demand is on the increase for skillsets which a computer cannot replace: social skills
and creativity, and also the ability to operate ever-evolving technologies.
If society is to come to terms with structural change, people need to be in a position to harness
the  opportunities  which  digitalisation  presents.  And  education  is  the  key  to  unlocking  this
potential.
But education should not be misconstrued as a phenomenon that is confined to the first third of
our lives and is then over and done with. Quite the opposite: we need to make learning a firm
fixture in our professional lives. And we need to establish a culture of lifelong learning. That is
why  I  think  what  really  counts  is  making  sure  that  every  employee  has  access  to  continuous
professional development.
Of  course,  education  needs  to  start  much,  much  earlier  in  our  lives:  none  of  us  were  born
digitised – not even the digital natives, as they are known.
Needless  to  say,  children  nowadays  naturally  adopt  new  technologies  through  play.  You  may
have seen one of those online videos where a small child is standing in front of an aquarium and
puts his thumb and forefinger on the glass in an attempt to zoom in and make the fish bigger.
But in tomorrow’s workplace, being able to operate a smartphone won’t be enough. That is why
we need digital education to give young people a firm technical grounding and strengthen their
media skills.
This is another area where action needs to be taken. The International Computer and Information
Literacy  Study  (ICILS)  found  that  German  schoolchildren  have  average  skills,  if  that.   The
authors found that as few as one-third of teachers use computers regularly (i.e. at least once a
week) during lessons. In this particular category, Germany actually brings up the rear among the
9
countries surveyed.
8
Swiss economist Thomas Straubhaar also highlighted the fundamental importance of education
in  the  digital  age  in  a  recent  op-ed  piece  he  wrote  for  a  German  daily  newspaper:  “A  good
education system may be expensive,” he conceded, but in the long run, he continued, one thing
is even costlier, and that’s a bad education system.
4 Impact on inflation
10
Ladies and gentlemen,
As a central bank, we are interested in more than just the ramifications of digitalisation for the
real economy. Another aspect, and one that is of particular importance, is its impact on price
developments  –  keeping  prices  stable  is,  after  all,  our  primary  objective  as  monetary
policymakers.
Digital transformation impacts on inflation through multiple channels.
One of them is the way technological progress pushes up productivity, driving down production
costs. Prices ought to follow costs downwards, assuming there is sufficient competition.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another is the shift in sales channels. It is becoming increasingly common to buy goods online
rather  in  the  local  shop. As  recently  as  in  the  year  2000,  online  trade  accounted  for  a  near-
invisible 0.3% of retail sales. By last year, that figure had already climbed to just under 10%.
This can invigorate competition – after all, online marketplaces are where you will find providers
from  every  corner  of  the  world. At  the  same  time,  price  comparison  websites  let  consumers
scan the entire market in just a matter of clicks, creating very high levels of price transparency.
Even if there are some who only look for information online and still end up shopping locally, the
increased  transparency  nonetheless  intensifies  the  competition  and  squeezes  margins  and
prices.  My  US  counterpart  Jerome  Powell  spoke  in  his  testimony  to  the  Senate  Banking
Committee about the “Amazon effect story”.
 A study by the ECB concludes that the increasing
use  of  online  trade  in  the  EU  has  reduced  non-energy  industrial  goods  inflation  by  0.1  of  a
percentage point each year since 2003.
12
11
There  is  another  phenomenon  which  could  have  the  opposite  effect:  the  rise  of  dominant
“superstar firms”.
For  the  most  part,  these  firms  offer  information-based  goods  which  are  sold  online.  It  is  a
business model that involves substantial fixed costs but barely any variable costs. Just take the
video-on-demand  platforms  –  whether  they  have  a  large  or  a  small  customer  base  has  little
bearing on their overall costs.
Increasing  returns  to  scale  are  also  being  generated  in  the  social  media  or  by  peer-to-peer
ridesharing  or  accommodation  platforms,  to  name  but  two.  Market  leaders  benefit  from  the
network effect as well. The more active users a product has, the more attractive it becomes for
others.
That  is  why  some  companies  often  emerge  as  winners  as  time  progresses.  They  can  then
capitalise on the market power they gain to push up their prices and margins. To quote the title of
a famous song by ABBA, “The Winner Takes It All”, but do please forgive me for not breaking out
in song.
Jan De Loecker and Jan Eeckhout estimate that the general rise in firms’ price mark-ups in the
United States increased the inflation rate by roughly one percentage point a year between 1980
14
and 2014.
 That said, digitalisation is just one potential factor driving the rise in market power.
13
The bottom-line impact on inflation of the contrary effects of digitalisation cannot yet be quantified
with any real certainty. According to the Bank of Canada, the research findings so far indicate
that  digitalisation  can  have  a  small  dampening  effect  on  inflation.
  Sweden’s  Riksbank,
however, argues that the decline in the rate of inflation observed in Sweden in recent years is
primarily connected with other factors.
15
16
Another area where digitalisation is making itself felt is in the measurement of inflation.
In the online trade – and increasingly in the bricks-and-mortar retail world, too – prices can be
altered at the push of a button. The job of changing one price tag for another is a thing of the
past. This pricing mechanism, which is mainly deployed by big businesses, uses algorithms that
respond to demand and change prices dynamically.
It’s  a  phenomenon  you  might  have  noticed  when  you  book  a  flight  online  –  ticket  prices  vary
strongly depending on how full the aircraft is and what time you make your booking.
In  a  paper  prepared  for  the  recent  symposium  of  central  bankers  in  Jackson  Hole,  Alberto
Cavallo stressed that online competition is transforming pricing behaviour, writing that both the
frequency  of  price  changes  and  the  degree  of  uniform  pricing  have  increased.
  But  for
17
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
statisticians, prices that change frequently and fluctuate strongly are something of a challenge.
These days, it’s not enough to survey the price of a product once a month. So digitalisation is
making it more difficult to measure inflation.
But  on  the  other  hand,  digitalisation  opens  up  new  opportunities  as  well.  Web  scraping  –  a
statistical method to automatically capture online prices – is just one example I could mention
here.  Alberto  Cavallo  and  Roberto  Rigobon  are  already  using  web  scraping  to  collect  huge
amounts  of  online  data  as  part  of  their  Billion  Prices  Project  in  order  to  prepare  daily  price
indices, which have interesting leading indicator properties.
5 Potential implications for monetary policy
18
Ladies and gentlemen,
One thing is clear: digitalisation has many faces. Some of those faces we’ve already become
familiar with, some we’re just getting to know and others we can only guess at for now. There
can be no doubting its potential to influence productivity, employment and inflation. But what does
it all mean for monetary policy?
There  is  a  lot  of  talk  about  monetary  policymakers’  capacity  for  effective  intervention.  The
financial crisis saw central banks take their interest rate policy to the limits, with barely any room
to bring policy rates lower.
When it comes to interest rates, the lower bound is like the perimeter lines of a football pitch,
which set the boundaries of the playing area and players’ room for manoeuvre. The importance
of room for manoeuvre is something that Oscar Wilde recognised back in his day: “In modern life
margin  is  everything,”  he  has  one  of  his  characters  proclaim  in  the  play  “Lady  Windermere’s
Fan”.
And we may well see room for monetary policy manoeuvre shrink in future. If digitalisation were
to dampen inflation over a prolonged period of time, nominal interest rates would fall, narrowing
the gap to the lower bound. This increases the likelihood – all else being equal – of monetary
policymakers  having  to  resort  to  non-standard  measures  to  remain  capable  of  effective
intervention.
From  what  we  have  seen  so  far,  though,  it  looks  like  the  inflation-dampening  effect  of
digitalisation is fairly minor. It is also worth bearing in mind that the effects of reduced costs and
increased competition stem from an adjustment process. In the new long-term equilibrium state,
potential  for  price  cuts  would  already  have  been  exhausted  and  the  impact  on  inflation  would
have ceased.
However,  the  reverse  is  also  conceivable.  If  digitalisation  brings  increases  in  productivity  and
potential growth, the natural rate of interest will rise. This would push up nominal interest rates,
giving conventional monetary policy more room to play with.
The fact that capacity for effective action has become such a key issue for monetary policy in the
first place actually has nothing to do with digitalisation. It has more to do with the low inflation and
the low interest rates of recent years, both of which are, first and foremost, after-effects of the
financial and economic crisis.
Nevertheless,  some  observers  already  think  that  this  could  be  the  new  normal.  They  are
concerned that central banks are coming up against the lower bound with their policy rates more
and  more  frequently  and  are  having  to  turn  to  non-standard  instruments.  That’s  why  some
economists propose aiming for a higher rate of inflation, anticipating that this would provide a
greater safety margin to the interest rate floor.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
But there are side-effects and risks associated with raising the target inflation rate, something
which the Bundesbank highlighted at length in its June Monthly Report this year.
19
At this point, let's bear in mind the vital importance of firmly anchored inflation expectations for
effective monetary policy. Putting up the inflation target causes inflation expectations to shift. But
there is absolutely no guarantee that they will quickly fall into line with and remain anchored at the
new target rate.
Ben Bernanke once put it like this: “If we were to go to 4% and say we’re going to 4%, we would
risk a lot of … hard-won credibility, because folks would say, well, if we go to 4%, why not go to
6%? It’d be very difficult to tie down expectations at 4%.”
20
This is why I am convinced that we should continue aiming for inflation of below, but close to, 2%
over the medium term and not arouse any doubts as to our credibility as monetary policymakers.
In any case, with regard to the natural interest rate and the long-term outlook, a growth-promoting
economic policy and structural reforms are the right way to go.
And we can set about this at both the national and the European level. It is particularly crucial, for
instance,  that  we  harness  the  possibilities  offered  by  digitalisation,  by  improving  educational
opportunities, expanding the digital infrastructure, bolstering cyber security and modernising the
legal framework. The time has come for Europe to finally complete the digital single market.
21
A higher growth path leads to a higher general interest rate level, which would give monetary
policy more water under its keel again.
6 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
“Computers are useless. They can only give you answers.” Pablo Picasso is supposed to have
said that, over half a century ago.
And with that, he joins the ranks of famous inaccurate predictions – in some ways. For there is a
grain of truth in those words. Wherever things hinge, in particular, on asking the right questions,
in the world of research for example, computers are – as yet – just a tool. They cannot replace
humans in those areas.
But digitalisation is shaking things up. We will wait with bated breath to see what computers and
artificial intelligence can do in the future.
A newspaper recently ran a story about the Swiss bank UBS having created a virtual clone of its
chief economist. The idea is for his digital likeness to advise wealthy clients on their investments
in future. Evidently, we economists are not immune to being replaced by computers either.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
Krugman, P. R., The age of diminished expectations: U.S. economic policy in the 1990s, MIT Press (4th edition,
1999), p. 11; 1st edition Washington Post Company, 1990.
Solow, R. M., We’d better watch out, New York Times Book Review, 12 July 1987, p. 36.
See Gordon R. J. (2016), The rise and fall of American growth: the U.S. standard of living since the Civil War,
Princeton University Press.
See Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), The second machine age: work, progress, and prosperity in a time of
brilliant technologies, W. W. Norton & Company.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
OECD (2018), OECD Economic Reports: Germany 2018, OECD Publishing.
See  Arntz,  M.,  T.  Gregory  and  U.  Zierahn  (2016),  The  risk  of  automation  for  jobs  in  OECD  countries:  a
comparative analysis, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No 189, OECD Publishing.
Author  not  named  (2010),  175  Jahre  Eisenbahn  in  Deutschland  oder:  als  die  Eisenbahn  ins  Königreich
Hannover kam, Takt.
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2016), Educational Campaign for the Digital Knowledge Society.
See Bos, W., B. Eickelmann, J. Gerick, F. Goldhammer, H. Schaumburg, K. Schwippert, M. Senkbeil, R. Schulz-
Zander  and  H.  Wendt  (eds.,  2014),  ICILS  2013  –  Computer-  und  informationsbezogene  Kompetenzen  von
Schülerinnen und Schülern in der 8. Jahrgangsstufe im internationalen Vergleich, Waxmann.
Straubhaar, T., Diese Schicksalsfrage entscheidet über Deutschlands Wohlstand, Die Welt, 23 July 2018.
See Ozimek, A., Is Amazon holding back inflation?, Forbes, 7 April 2018.
European Central Bank (2017), Low inflation in the euro area: causes and consequences, ECB Occasional
Paper No 181, Box 3.
See De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017), The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications,
NBER Working Paper No 23687.
John Van Reenen also points to globalisation, and less to anti-trust rules or regulation. See Van Reenen, J.
(2018), Increasing differences between firms: market power and the macro-economy, paper drafted for the
Economic Policy Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole.
See Bank of Canada, Digitalization and inflation: a review of the literature, Staff Analytical Note, 2017–20.
See Sveriges Riksbank, Digitisation and inflation, Monetary Policy Report, February 2015, pp. 55–59.
See Cavallo, A. (2018), More Amazon effects: online competition and pricing behaviors, paper prepared for the
Economic Policy Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole.
See Cavallo A. and R. Rigobon (2016), The Billion Prices Project: using online prices for measurement and
research, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, pp. 151–178.
Lower bound, inflation target and the anchoring of inflation expectations, Monthly Report, June 2018, pp. 31–50.
Bernanke, B. S., Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress, 14 April 2010.
European Commission, A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe, COM(2015) 192 final.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
