Sharon  Donnery:  When  is  the  right  time?  Macroprudential  policy
and the cycle
Remarks by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Maynooth
University, National University of Ireland, Maynooth, 31 May 2018.
 It is a great pleasure to be with you today, and I would like to thank Dr. Rousseau and the staff at
Maynooth University for arranging the talk and following panel.
I briefly lectured in economics here before I joined the Central Bank of Ireland so it is a particular
1
personal pleasure to return to deliver a speech here today.
In my remarks I would like to take stock of the current state of the macro-financial environment in
Ireland,  the  uncertainty  around  the  outlook,  and  the  implications  for  policy,  in  particular
macroprudential policy.
Where we are
The Irish economy and financial system have been through a remarkable decade.
Following  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  painful  adjustment  that  households,
businesses, and the public finances went through at that time, the cycle has now firmly turned.
Consecutive years of strong employment growth have brought the unemployment rate down to
its  current  level  of  about  6  per  cent.  Household  incomes  have  benefitted  from  the  improved
labour  market,  supporting  higher  levels  of  consumption  and  investment,  and  promoting  an
improved trading environment for domestically focussed businesses. The Government finances
have  also  benefitted  from  the  improved  economic  performance,  with  the  general  government
2
deficit now being close to zero.
Importantly, this recovery has been sustained in recent years by a favourable global backdrop – a
period of robust economic growth in our main trading partners, accommodative monetary policy
and relatively benign financial market conditions.
3
These  strong  cyclical  dynamics  in  the  economy  are  expected  to  be  increasingly  reflected  in
wage growth.  However, they have already been evident in asset prices, and in particular, the
growth in house prices in recent years. This is due to the current relatively low levels of housing
supply, with the sector only slowly recovering from the crisis, while broader positive drivers of
housing  demand  in  terms  of  demographics,  incomes  and  interest  rates,  have  continued  to
strengthen.
These cyclical dynamics are also reflected in the performance of the domestic banking sector.
Profits  have  benefitted  in  recent  years  from  the  improved  economic  situation.    Funding  costs
have  come  down  in  the  context  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment.    Non-performing  loans
(NPLs)  have  also  fallen,  albeit  they  still  require  concerted  efforts  to  bring  them  down  to
appropriate levels.  New lending activity for households and businesses continues to increase
4
substantially.    In  2017,  owner-occupier  mortgage  lending  increased  by  almost  30  per  cent.
Gross new lending to SMEs rose by 10 per cent.  As is common following banking crises, new
lending growth was for an extended period offset by repayments, as the household and business
sectors deleveraged.  However, growth in the stock of non-financial private-sector credit, which
initially  emerged  in  loans  to  larger  enterprises,  consumer  credit  and  primary  dwelling  home
mortgages, is becoming increasingly broad based.
5
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite these very positive developments in recent years, certain challenges remain as a legacy
of  the  last  crisis.    The  extent  of  long-term  mortgage  arrears  and  the  relatively  high  levels  of
private and public debt are cases in point.  At this stage of the economic and financial cycle,
however, we are now facing additional challenges – how to maintain sustainable and balanced
growth when the economy hits capacity constraints.
What is the outlook?
We  continue  to  see  strong  cyclical  growth  with  a  tighter  labour  market  and  constraints  on
housing and other infrastructure.  While well-known measurement issues means there is some
uncertainty as to the exact stage of the economic or financial cycle in Ireland, the relatively low
unemployment rate, the continuing rise in real estate prices and the turn in the credit cycle are
indicative  of  potential  emerging  cyclical  risks.  We  also  know  from  the  experience  of  the  mid-
2000s  that  strong  cyclical  growth  can  lend  itself  to  imbalances.  These  imbalances  make
households, businesses and banks more vulnerable to negative shocks. The vulnerabilities that
remain from the last crisis compound the sensitivity of the financial system to any such change
in conditions. For example household debt stood at €140.5bn in Q4 2017. Irish household’s Debt-
to-Income ratio stood at 136.9 per cent in Q4 2017, which is extremely high compared to our
peers.  Such legacy debts increase our vulnerability to future cyclical reversals. While we remain
a long distance away from the worst of the excesses in 2004-2007 – where growth was more
dependent on construction activity and credit was fuelling a real estate bubble – it is important for
us  as  policymakers  to  recognise  the  risks  related  to  the  stage  of  the  economic  and  financial
cycle.  If necessary, we should also be willing to take actions to offset those risks.
6
In an Irish context, we must also consider another dimension, being as we are the typical ‘small
open economy’. Even when economic activity, asset prices and credit growth are consistent with
structural or fundamental conditions, the external environment underpinning those conditions is
outside of our control. The responsiveness of the Irish macro-financial environment to external
developments is also typically higher than other European countries. We do not have to look far
for the evidence of this. Over the past twenty-five years or so growth in employment, incomes,
consumption,  domestic  investment,  real  estate  prices  and  credit  have  been  more  volatile  in
Ireland than in the euro area, the United Kingdom, Sweden or Denmark.  While the experience of
the most recent quarter century will not necessarily hold going forward, it would be remiss of us
to ignore these past realities.
7
During the recovery phase, this responsiveness to external conditions was a strength – it is after
all partly responsible for how well the economy has recovered since the crisis.
However, it is also a source of vulnerability.
If recovery can be so significant with benign external conditions, the impact of negative external
conditions can also be as significant.
I have already mentioned the main external factors that contributed to Ireland’s recovery since the
crisis. To recall, these include trading partner growth, low interest rates and substantial global
liquidity  lending  themselves  to  benign  financing  conditions.  Not  only  are  these  outside  of  the
control of domestic policy makers, their path over the short-to-medium term is uncertain.
The  uncertainty  around  the  Brexit  process  poses  the  most  significant  issue  for  Ireland  in  this
regard. Given the degree of direct and indirect exposure of Irish financial and non-financial firms
to the UK economy, Brexit in any form is negative for the Irish economy and financial system. 
However, a disruptive hard Brexit would present significant and pervasive challenges. There is
also a more general tendency toward protectionism, particularly in the United States, which if it
materialises to a greater extent, could reduce global demand for Irish goods and services. At the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
same  time,  there  is  an  increased  role  of  international  investors  and  market-based  finance
generally in Irish real estate. This makes developments in the market potentially more vulnerable
to  global  financing  and  liquidity  conditions,  while  at  the  same  time  providing  a  beneficial
8
diversification of funding sources.
 
What can domestic policymakers do?
So  what  role  is  there  for  domestic  policy,  faced  as  it  is  with  emerging  cyclical  risks  and
substantially uncertain external conditions? Events beyond our control or influence will continue
to  shape  developments  in  the  domestic  macro-financial  environment.  So  what  can  we  do  to
steer the domestic responsiveness to those events, and limit the excesses of the economic and
financial  cycle?  In  a  small  open  market  economy,  such  a  goal  may  not  be  fully  achievable. 
However, can we build such resilience in the face of uncertainty and what do I mean by resilience
in this context?
Building  resilience  means  using  the  gains  from  strong  positive  cyclical  dynamics  to  build  up
sufficient buffers to withstand the losses that will arise during a downturn. These buffers can then
be released when necessary. Resilience can also complement efforts of policy to dampen, or at
least not to amplify, the cycle.
Building such resilience is an important motivating factor across a number of domestic policy
areas. In fiscal policy, for example, the Government has acknowledged that a priority is to build
fiscal  buffers  to  withstand  adverse  developments.  It  has  also  noted  that  the  appropriate
Government debt target in the Irish context is significantly below the European Union’s Stability
and Growth Pact threshold of 60 per cent of GDP, not just because of the measurement issues
9
around GDP, but also due to the relative vulnerability of the public finances to negative shocks.
In the area of macroprudential policy, for which the Central Bank has responsibility, we have also
cited  resilience  as  a  key  motivating  factor  to  act.  To  recall,  the  objective  of  macro-prudential
policy is to mitigate the risk of a disruption to the provision of financial services, caused by an
impairment of all or parts of the financial system, with serious negative consequences for the
real economy. This risk is known as systemic risk.
Our macroprudential framework and toolkit builds resilience in the system against different risk
factors,  and  complements  the  firm-specific  resilience  that  is  the  focus  of  micro-prudential
regulation.
To  build  in structural  resilience,  the  Other  Systemically  Important  Institutions  (O-SII)  buffer  is
designed to reduce the potential impact of a systemically important financial institution’s failure
on the domestic economy.
10
Looking at sectoral resilience, capital requirements can be applied by increasing micro-prudential
capital requirements for exposures to a particular sector or asset class. Alternatively, this can be
achieved  by  raising  the  risk  weights  associated  with  a  particular  sector  or  asset  class.  The
systemic risk buffer also aims to address systemic risks of a long-term, non-cyclical nature that
are  not  covered  by  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation.
  This  buffer  has  been  applied  for
various types of exposures in ten EU countries, but is not yet transposed into Irish law.
11
Finally, one of the main objectives of the mortgage measures, which limit the extent of high loan-
to-value  (LTV)  and  loan-to-income  (LTI)  mortgages,  is  to  ensure  banks  and  borrowers  build
resilience  so  as  they  are  more  able  to  withstand  the  impact  of  negative  shocks.  We  have
committed  to  an  annual  review  of  these  measures  to  ensure  they  continue  to  achieve  their
objectives effectively.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The two reviews that have taken place since the introduction of the measures have shown that
they have been successful in mitigating the extent of excessively high LTV and LTI lending, and
will continue to contribute over time to minimising both the probability of default and the loss-
given-default that may arise in the presence of negative shocks.
However, given the stage of the economic and financial cycle and the uncertainty surrounding the
outlook for the macro-financial environment, it is timely for us to consider wider aspects of the
macroprudential  policy  toolkit,  so  we  can  most  effectively  promote  resilience  in  the  financial
system.  In  particular,  it  is  appropriate  to  consider  capital-based  instruments  that  can
complement the mortgage measures in achieving the overall objective of macroprudential policy,
and mitigate the impact of cyclical systemic risk. One such instrument available to the Central
Bank,  and  which  has  been  activated  in  a  number  of  countries  already,  is  the  Countercyclical
Capital Buffer (CCyB).
Why capital based measures?
The  CCyB  is  a  time  varying  capital  requirement  designed  to  make  the  banking  system  more
resilient  and  less  pro-cyclical.    It  formed  part  of  the  range  of  measures  introduced  in  the
aftermath of the financial crisis, and has been operational in Ireland and across Europe since
2016. The Central Bank is the authority in Ireland that sets the CCyB rate.
  It is calculated as a
proportion of core equity tier 1 (CET1) capital that must be held relative to the amount of risk-
weighted  Irish  exposures  a  bank  has  on  its  balance  sheet.  We  review  the  buffer  rate  on  a
quarterly basis, and it is currently set at 0 per cent for Irish exposures.
12
From its original conceptual design through to its practical application in a number of countries,
the primary aim of the CCyB relates to protecting the banking sector from the build-up of cyclical
systemic risk. That is to ensure the sector overall holds sufficient capital to help it maintain the
flow of credit to the economy during periods of financial stress.
13
This buffer works by increasing the minimum capital requirement of banks when cyclical risks
begin to build. In this way, banks should have a greater level of capital to absorb losses that may
arise in any subsequent downturn or period of financial stress. During such a period the buffer
can  then  be  released,  reducing  minimum  capital  requirements  in  a  sustainable  way  from  a
system-wide perspective. As a result, the potential dampening impact of capital requirements on
bank lending is reduced during a downturn. This could otherwise restrict the flow of credit, further
depressing economic activity in a pro-cyclical manner.
The use of a CCyB could potentially also limit the build-up of risk itself, to ‘lean against the wind’
so to speak. However, at best this can only be viewed as a positive side effect rather than the
goal of the buffer itself.  In general, measures that target specific sources of systemic risk are
more effective at curbing the cycle.  The mortgage measures in Ireland would be an example of
the latter, and there are important complementarities between the use of policies such as the
mortgage measures and the CCyB, which I will return to in a moment.
14
Before  I  do,  I  would  briefly  like  to  consider  the  experience  of  some  other  countries  that  have
introduced  a  positive  CCyB  rate,  the  motivations  of  authorities  in  doing  so,  and  what,  if  any
lessons we can learn from these for Ireland.
In the UK, the primary objective of the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) in
setting  the  CCyB  is  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  is  able  to  withstand  stress  without
restricting essential services, such as the supply of credit, to the real economy.
 The FPC have
set out their stance that the CCyB will be set in the region of 1 per cent before the level of risk
becomes  elevated.  By  moving  early  during  periods  of  moderate  risk  and  before  risks  are
elevated, the FPC expects to be able to vary the CCyB gradually.  The UK CCyB will be 1 per
15
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
cent by end-November 2018.
16
In Lithuania, the central bank have set out the main purpose of the CCyB as holding a sufficient
capital  buffer  to  cover  potential  bank  losses  in  case  of  cyclical  systemic  risk  or  during  an
economic  downturn.
  They  have  outlined  that  if  economic  growth  and  credit  growth  are
sustainable and no cyclical imbalances form in the economy, their intention is to set a CCyB of at
least 1 per cent. When signs of overheating of the economy, unsustainable trends in the credit or
real estate market or signs of other cyclical imbalances are observed, the CCyB rate would be
further increased to above 1 per cent. The CCyB is thus accumulated more slowly and more
consistently,  while  the  accumulated  buffer  would  also  help  mitigate  unexpected  smaller
fluctuations in the financial cycle that could arise from economic or other unexpected shocks.
The Lithuanian CCyB will be 0.5 per cent by the end of the year.
In  Sweden,  the  purpose  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  to  maintain  banks’  resilience,
ensuring that the banking system as a whole has sufficient capital to sustain the flow of credit to
households and corporations following shocks to the financial system that could cause a credit
crunch. The buffer rate was initially set at 1 per cent with effect from September 2015, and has
since been raised to 2 per cent. A key motivating factor for the Swedish financial regulator in
setting a positive CCyB rate for the first time was the high level of household indebtedness, even
though growth in credit was not particularly excessive.
17
I  believe  certain  features  of  the  frameworks  in  these  three  countries  have  relevance  for  us  in
Ireland:
The central motivation of resilience;
The consideration of broad cyclical risks;
The preference to move early in the cycle so as to ensure sufficient resilience is built-up;
and
The  interplay  between  existing  vulnerabilities,  such  as  high  debt  levels,  and  emerging
vulnerabilities related to cyclical dynamics.
Given these relevant features, and what we know about the short-to-medium term outlook for the
Irish macro-financial environment – or perhaps more importantly what we are unsure of – a more
active use of the CCyB in Ireland should be considered.
Why now?
With these factors of resilience, the emergence of broad cyclical risks, and their interaction with
existing  vulnerabilities  in  mind,  what  are  the  potential  benefits  and  costs  of  having  a  positive
CCyB rate early in the cycle?
The  key  medium-term  benefit  is  more  stable  growth  without  a  pro-cyclical  reaction  of  bank
lending to future downturns.
 With the focus on resilience, the real countercyclical benefit of the
CCyB is in a downturn. In order to mitigate that pro-cyclical reaction by banks however, the buffer
has to be built up sufficiently in advance.
18
Scenario analysis by Central Bank of Ireland staff has shown that an increase in minimum capital
requirements earlier in the cycle maximises bank resilience more so than moving later in the
19
cycle. Their work suggests that this is without the adverse impact of limiting economic activity.
These findings in the Irish case are also consistent with the perspective of the framework in the
UK, which references how an early and gradual build-up of the buffer can minimise any potential
tightening of credit conditions.
Another important benefit of moving early relates to data and implementation lags. A number of
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
relevant  indicators  for  setting  the  CCyB  are  only  available  with  a  lag,  for  example  National
Accounts data. With respect to implementation, any increase in the rate only becomes effective
12 months after it is announced. This allows time for banks to adjust where necessary to the
higher capital requirement.
 These data and implementation lags lend themselves to activation
of  the  CCyB  relatively  early  in  the  cycle.  This  is  especially  important  for  a  macro-financial
environment typically more volatile and subject to uncertainty as in Ireland.
20
I referred earlier to the complementarity between borrower-based measures, such as the Irish
mortgage  measures,  and  the  CCyB.  This  complementarity  is  a  further  benefit  of  having  both
instruments active at the same time, and in one particular aspect deserves some consideration.
Given that residential mortgages account for the majority of Irish banks’ total outstanding lending,
it is appropriate that the effect of the borrower-based measures on risk taking in the domestic
mortgage  market  is  closely  monitored.  However,  approximately  30  per  cent  of  these  banks’
outstanding Irish loans are to customers in the SME, Corporate, Commercial Real Estate and
non-mortgage consumer asset classes. In the context of a broad cyclical expansion, new lending
flows are increasingly going towards these portfolios.
None  of  the  above  should  come  as  a  surprise,  given  the  combination  of  accommodative
monetary  policy,  a  robust  economic  recovery,  and  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the  mortgage
measures on the ability of banks to take excessive new risk in their largest asset class. Some
country specific research has also shown that when product-specific regulation, similar to the
mortgage measures is put in place, banks will expand lending in asset classes not covered by
the regulation, such as lending to domestic SMEs, corporates and consumer lending.
 Even if
lending  expansion  outside  the  domestic  mortgage  market  has  not  been caused  by  the
introduction of the mortgage measures, it is prudent for the Central Bank to ensure cyclical risks,
as they present in the entirety of the banking system, are effectively mitigated. The breadth of the
CCyB across all Irish exposures can complement the mortgage measures in that regard.
21
Another  important  feature  shaping  our  current  thinking  on  the  relative  CCyB  stance  is  the
introduction of the new IFRS 9 accounting standards at the beginning of the year, which could
have potentially important macroprudential side effects. The essence of these standards is that
they require banks to provision up-front for any future expected losses.  Relative to the previous
regime, there is also a broader category of loans subject to higher provisions.
 Under previous
regimes, these loans would have been classified with other, “healthier”, performing loans. Under
IFRS 9, this is no longer the case.
22
Counterfactual estimates from our own staff, based on certain assumptions, suggest that had
the new regime been in place between 2008 and 2016, the share of performing loans that would
have  been  required  to  hold  higher  provisions  would  have  grown  in  line  with  the  growth  in
unemployment  and  the  fall  in  house  prices  experienced  in  Ireland.  In  this  case,  the  share  of
23
performing mortgages requiring higher provisions would have reached 50 per cent by 2013.
Given  that  these  loans  carry  a  greater  provisioning  penalty  than  other  performing  loans,  the
analysis suggests there may be a greater degree of pro-cyclicality between the strength of the
economy and the provisions and profitability of banks under IFRS 9.
 If such pro-cyclicality is
indeed at play, the likelihood is that when the cycle turns downwards again, credit losses will
become  more  concentrated  and  immediate,  impacting  negatively  on  capital  positions  and
potentially leading to lower credit supply. Having a sufficient buffer in place limits this potential
pro-cyclicality.
24
It may also be the case that the pro-cyclicality of IFRS9 holds in the upswing of the cycle, such
that provisioning for certain portfolios may be lower due to favourable economic conditions or
strong house price growth, for example. Lower provisions, leading to improved profitability, may
then  lead  to  an  easing  of  lending  standards  and  further  credit-fuelled  economic  activity.  This
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
possible  pro-cyclical  relationship  between  the  economy,  asset  prices  and  bank  lending
represents precisely the type of risk that macroprudential policy makers aim to mitigate.
History has shown that looser management control of dividends may also arise in this instance,
which  could  reduce  retained  earnings  and  diminish  the  potential  for  capital  to  be  built-up
organically  during  the  upswing  of  the  cycle.  In  order  to  ensure  resilience  is  built-up  as  these
cyclical risks begin to emerge, a macroprudential policy maker could reasonably be expected to
have a higher tendency to increase the CCyB during the upswing of the cycle under IFRS9 than
under the previous accounting standards.
Let’s now consider the costs, which in the academic literature mostly relate to the potential for
higher capital requirements to dampen credit growth and subsequent economic activity.
 Early
activation may result in a short-run cost to economic activity. Alongside this, banks subject to the
higher capital requirements may have an incentive to charge higher interest rates to cover the
higher cost of equity, which in turn could dampen credit demand.
25
26
However, the actual evidence for these shorter-term costs is mixed, and is highly dependent on
the level of minimum capital requirements upon introduction. In Ireland, the domestically focused
banking  system  currently  has  capital  levels  well  in  excess  of  current  regulatory  minimum
requirements.  This  reflects  both  legacies  of  the  financial  crisis  and  current  challenges  in  the
sector.  In  these  instances,  banks  would  not  necessarily  have  to  deleverage  by  cutting  back
lending to meet a higher minimum capital requirement.
 In any case, research by staff in the
Central Bank has previously shown that the short-run impact of increased capital requirements
on Irish economic activity is relatively small.
 While there are uncertainties placing a precise
value on the short-term benefits and costs, in the longer-term, increasing the margins of safety in
an uncertain world is of benefit to all.
27
28
In summary, for a variety of reasons related to:
Ireland’s  intrinsic  volatility  and  the  scale  of  legacy  debts  which  increases  vulnerability  to
future cyclical reversals;
the likely minimal impact on credit growth and economic activity;
measurement and outlook uncertainty alongside data and implementation lags;
enhancing the effectiveness of already active macroprudential instruments; and
the role of new accounting standards;
the  arguments  in  favour  of  setting  a  positive  CCyB  sufficiently  early  in  the  cycle,  to  build  in
resilience and mitigate pro-cyclicality in a downturn, are compelling.
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  on  that  point.  In  the  context  of  emerging  broad  cyclical  risk,  the  existing
vulnerabilities  we  carry  from  the  last  financial  crisis,  the  inherent  volatility  of  the  Irish  macro-
financial environment, and the uncertainty around the short-to-medium term outlook, enhancing
resilience  should  remain  at  the  heart  of  Irish  macroprudential  policy.  This  is  certainly  the
perspective of the Central Bank. Unlike in previous periods where cyclical systemic risks were
emerging, this time there is an operational policy framework that may effectively mitigate some of
those systemic risks. The Central Bank is committed to using all aspects of that framework as
appropriate to safeguard domestic financial stability.
Thank you.
1
1 I would like to thank Martin O’Brien, Fergal McCann, Eoin O’Brien, and Sofia Velasco for their contribution to my
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
remarks.
2 See Department of Finance Stability Programme Update, April 2018.
3 See Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin No.2, April 2018.
4 Recent research has shown that this pace of new lending growth has brought activity in line with its structural
determinants. See Enda Keenan and Martin O’Brien (2018) “New mortgage lending activity in a comparative
context”, Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter, Vol. 2018 No. 5.
5 Owner-occupier mortgage lending is the sum of FTB Purchase, Mover Purchase and Top-up from the BPFI
Mortgage Drawdowns Report.  Gross new lending to SMEs is the total for non-financial sectors from Table
A.14.1 Business Credit and Deposits, Central Bank of Ireland.
6 See the latest Quarterly Financial Accounts Statistical Release.
7 See Central Bank of Ireland table for Standard Deviation of Annual Growth Rates (%): 1991–2017
8 Over the past 3 years, 62 per cent of the invested commercial real estate market was funded by non-Irish
resident  investors.    Meanwhile,  non-household  purchasers  of  residential  real  estate  (which  would  include
investment funds) have accounted for 13.4 per cent of transactions since 2015.
9 For a discussion see Department of Finance Stability Programme Updates, April 2017 and April 2018, and
also IFAC Fiscal Assessment Report, June 2017.
10 See Central Bank website.
11 See European Systemic Risk Board website.
12 Setting of the CCyB is a joint competence with the European Central Bank (ECB).  In this instance the ECB
have “top-up” powers to increase the rate that is set by the national authority, but it cannot reduce the rate set by
the national authority.
13  For  a  full  discussion  of  the  conceptual  underpinnings  see  the BCBS  Guidance  for  national  authorities
operating the countercyclical capital buffer (December 2010), and the ESRB Recommendation on guidance for
setting countercyclical capital buffer rates (ESRB/2014/1).
14 See Eoin O’Brien and Ellen Ryan (2017) “Motivating the use of different macroprudential instruments: The
countercyclical capital buffer vs. borrower based measures”, Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter, Vol. 2017
No. 15.
15 See The Financial Policy Committee’s approach to setting the countercyclical capital buffer, April 2016.
16 See Lietuvos Bankas (2017) Countercyclical capital buffer – Background material for decision, December
2017.
17 The Finansinspektionen Decision Memorandum (September 2014) outlines the rationale.
18 See Jimenez et al (2017), “Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers, and Credit Supply:
Evidence from the Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiments”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 125(6), and
Chen et al (2018), “Empirical Evidence on the Effectiveness of Capital Buffer Release”, MPRA Paper No. 84323.
19 Matija Lozej and Martin O’Brien, “Timing of changes to the Countercyclical Capital Buffer: Insights from the
Central Bank’s DSGE model”, forthcoming Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter.
20 In instances where the buffer is released it is effective immediately.
21  Auer  and  Ongena  (2016)  show  that  when  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  was  activated  in  2012  in
Switzerland, focussing solely on domestic mortgage lending, those banks with the largest shares of ex-ante
mortgage lending expanded their lending to Swiss enterprises the most. Such research points in the direction
of outward spillovers from product-specific regulation.
22 Under IFRS9 these are referred to as Stage 2 loans.
23 Edward Gaffney and Fergal McCann, “Credit risk under IFRS 9 accounting reforms: an application to Irish
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
mortgages”, forthcoming Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper.
24
25
26
27
28
24 Further analysis confirming the likely pro-cyclicality of provisions under IFRS 9 is in Abad, J., and J. Suarez
(2017): “Assessing the cyclical implications of IFRS 9: a recursive model,” ESRB Occasional Paper Series 12,
European Systemic Risk Board.
25 Some relevant literature in this area would include Aiyar, S, Calomiris, C and Wieladek, T (2014), ‘Does
macro-pru  leak?  Evidence  from  a  UK  policy  experiment',  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Blackwell
Publishing, Vol. 46(1), pages 181–214.
26  For  a  summary  of  findings,  see  Table  C  in The  Financial  Policy  Committee’s  approach  to  setting  the
countercyclical capital buffer, April 2016.
27 The relative role of deleveraging given binding capital requirements on credit supply is discussed in Behn,
M., M. Gross, and T. Peltonen, “Assessing the costs and benefits of capital-based macroprudential policy,”
Working Paper Series 1935, European Central Bank July 2016.
28 Lozej, M., L. Onorante, and A. Rannenberg, “Countercyclical capital regulation in a small open economy
DSGE model,” Research Technical Paper 03/RT/2017 2017.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
