  Opening Remarks 
Bangkok Sustainable Banking Forum 2018  
  Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Monday, 23 July 2018 
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
A very good morning to you all.  
I am delighted to welcome all of you to the Bank of Thailand for 
our very first Bangkok Sustainable Banking Forum. This forum aims to 
enhance greater awareness of sustainability practice in finance by 
bringing together leaders in the area of sustainability, showcasing 
best practices and efforts taken by participants from the financial 
sector, and identifying areas we can improve. This event is a part of a 
series of conferences organized throughout this year to 
commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the Bank of Thailand.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In 1987 the United Nations first defined sustainability or 
sustainable development as “development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs1.” Since then, this concept has served as a 
guiding principle for various long-term global development agendas. 
Yet, the principal ideas of sustainability, especially of moderation, 
responsibility and maintaining long-term focus, hardly takes the 
center stage in popular media, most notably in the economic and 
financial headlines—where we often focus our narratives on short-
term indicators, like GDP growth, shareholders’ earnings, stock 
prices, or bonus paychecks. Whatever it takes today to maximize 
these short-term indicators is believed to be the best course of 
action. We often forget that our short-sighted actions also dictate 
and impact the path for our long-term development and well-being.  
 
We at the Bank of Thailand believe in the pursuit of 
                                                           
1 United Nations. “Our Common Future: World Commission on Environment and Development.” 1987. 
 1/6 
  sustainability, that it can be achieved if we maintain our focus on 
long-term goals. The past year we have seen many welcoming 
developments in our financial sector. These include,  
First, a number of measures were introduced to improve 
financial institutions’ responsibility, such as regulations on credit 
cards and personal loans to address the issue of household debt, 
new regulatory framework on market conduct, regulations to 
enhance financial institution’s corporate governance, and a new 
code of conduct for banks developed by the banking community; 
Second, the debt clinic was set up to facilitate multi-creditor 
debt settlement for indebted individuals so that they can exit from 
the state of perpetual debt distress; and  
Third, a number of key financial infrastructures were 
established to help promote financial inclusion and transition the 
Thai economy towards the digital era. One in particular is the 
introduction of PromptPay, which provides efficient access to 
electronic payment at no cost and has served as a catalyst leading to 
complete elimination of electronic fund transfer fee by banks. 
These developments have contributed to efficiency 
improvement in the financial system; wider access and affordability 
of financial services, especially to those underserved; and mitigation 
of the impacts of several long-term issues. Essentially, they help 
ensure that our financial system can sustainably serve the well-being 
of the Thai people.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Despite our progress, we should not settle for what we have 
achieved thus far. Much more can be done and need to be done to 
improve the sustainability of the Thai society as a number of 
challenges remain. Some of which leave us to question our collective 
actions as a society on how we allow these challenges to get out of 
hand.  
Allow me to highlight four challenges in particular:  
First, despite a more broad-based economic growth and a 
number of government policies targeting low income households, 
 2/6 
  Thailand remains among the world’s most unequal countries in 
terms of wealth, with the richest one percent owning more than half 
of total household wealth2. Meanwhile, low financial literacy and 
high household debt level continue to hamper the ability of 
individuals to pursue new opportunities and secure long-term 
financial security. These have curbed individual’s chance to improve 
her socio-economic status in the long-run. Essentially, widening 
wealth and income inequality is a major contributor to the fragility of 
the Thai society and is frequently used as an excuse to draw public 
support for a number of costly and unsustainable populist policies. 
Second, our labor productivity growth is moderating and 
should be emphasized. As an aging society with declining labor force, 
enhancing productivity is critical for the Thai economy to maintain 
growth.  And yet a number of public policies have focused on 
creating short-term stimulus rather than on encouraging the 
necessary adjustments to address long-term productivity issue. 
Moreover, our educational standards have not been able to prop up 
our low productivity level and lag behind in many important areas. 
Without the necessary adjustment now raises the question of how 
Thailand could maintain our competitiveness going forward.  
Third, we have been too negligent on environmental and 
ecological issues. As a large portion of the Thai population remains in 
the agricultural sector and all of whom rely on quality natural 
resources for food and income, preservation of environment and 
natural resources should be our top priority. Our irresponsible 
actions—from massive burning of fossil fuels to excessive use of 
plastic containers—contributed to the overall deterioration of the 
global environment. And, as we have observed, climate change has 
resulted in increasing frequency as well as severity of natural 
disasters. The painful experience of the great floods of 2011 should 
be a case in point, as these floods were the result of rampant 
deforestation, new developments blocking natural water ways, and 
clogged drainage system from careless waste disposal.  
                                                           
2 Credit Suisse. “Global Wealth Report.” 2017. 
 3/6 
  Many other environmental issues continue to highlight our 
negligence. These include a recent report detailing Thailand as the 
new dumping ground for global electronic wastes; or that certain 
toxic chemical banned in a number of countries around the world is 
still widely used by farmers in Thailand.  
Fourth, entrenched corruption remains a major obstacle to 
achieving long-term focus. Paying bribes and granting favors are 
harmful practices that incur unnecessary costs and create distortions 
in resource allocation. Distorted policies and actions aimed at 
political or personal monetary gains can limit the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs. Despite years of anti-
corruption campaigns, Thailand’s level of corruption has been largely 
unchanged3. In addition, practices in the financial sector have also 
been the culprits of corruption. Insider trading, market manipulation, 
money laundering, favoritism in credit decision, and misselling of 
products are just some of the corruptive practices that have led 
regulators, including the Bank of Thailand, to tighten our code of 
conduct and market conduct supervision. 
Ultimately, these challenges are byproducts of actions taken 
without regard for moderation, responsibility, and long-term 
consequences, and they should serve as a wake-up call for all of us. 
For without a proper remedy, we would be transferring unfair 
burden to future generations, thus impairing long-term sustainability 
and prosperity.  
How did we allow these challenges to get out of hand? That is 
because we take for granted that someone else will step up to 
resolve them when in fact they are our collective problems and our 
collective responsibilities to take action. 
                                                              
3 Thailand’s Corruption Perception Index has a narrow score range of 35 to 38 between 2012 and 2017. 
Transparency International, 2018. 
 4/6 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
 Our financial sector can take the lead in making impactful 
changes with regard to sustainability as all of us play key roles in 
allocating one of the most important resources—that is the financial 
resources. As stated earlier, a number of welcoming developments 
are taking place in our financial sector. But, much more can be done 
and need to be done to foster an ecosystem that promotes the 
overall sustainability—that will discourage misallocation of 
resources, limit corruptive practices, and help preserve our 
environment. 
Adoption of best practices in sustainability is not just about 
making positive impacts to our society, but it can also be beneficial 
to financial institutions in a number of ways.  
First, it can help ensure long-term sustainability of financial 
institutions themselves. Growing acceptance of sustainability 
practices globally has encouraged new standards and practices and 
raised the expectation of our society. Early adopters of sustainability 
practices can meet society’s ever-increasing expectation; take lead in 
setting new industry standards; and make timely and necessary 
adjustment to their business models. These sustainability practices 
will help financial institutions mitigate strategic, operational, and 
reputational risks.  
Second, financial institutions can better attract and retain a 
new generation of talents, especially the millennials, who are 
increasingly more attracted to firms with sustainability and 
philanthropic practices4. This is no surprise because these young 
individuals are becoming more concerned of sustainability issues and 
want to take part in making positive impacts. Therefore, firms with 
strong sustainability values and practices can attract these talents by 
offering the additional satisfaction beyond remuneration benefits.  
Third, adoption of sustainability can help financial institutions 
gain access to increasing pool of capitals, given the increasing 
volume of funds and investment products based on sustainability 
                                                           
4 The 2017 Millennial Impact Report. The Millennial Impact Project, 2017. 
 5/6 
 criteria. It is estimated that more than a quarter of assets under 
management globally are now invested using the Environment, 
Social, and Governance or ESG principles5.  
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is now up to all of us—financial institutions, policymakers, 
and leaders—to embrace sustainability and incorporate its guiding 
principles in our daily lives and business practices.  
The objective of the Bangkok Sustainable Banking Forum is to 
raise awareness of the various issues of sustainability and identify 
gaps within our financial sector. Seeing much enthusiasm from our 
high-level participants this morning, I am certain we can make 
positive changes for our future generations.  
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of you for 
taking the time out of your busy schedules to be here with us. I 
would also like to thank the speakers, some of whom have traveled 
from different parts of the globe, for being here to share to with us 
their insights and best practices.  
Let me, once again, urge all of us to think wisely, maintain long-
term focus, and take responsible actions now so that in the next 
decade we would not be standing here asking ourselves again how 
we have allowed these challenges to get out of hand.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The Bank of Thailand looks forward to collaborating with all of 
 
you on our sustainability journey.  
Thank you very much for your participation. 
                                                           
5 Bernow, Sara, Klempner, Bryce, Magnin, Clarisse. “From ‘why’ to ‘why not’: Sustainable investing as the new 
normal.” McKinsey and Company, October 2017. 
 6/6 
