Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Ancient to modern networks
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  host  country  event  "Past,  Present  and  Future  of  the  World
Economy", ADB Headquarters, Manila, 4 May 2018.
 ADB President Takehiko Nakao, Chair of the ADB Board of Governors and Finance Secretary
Carlos G. Dominguez III, distinguished guests and speakers, Good Morning!
The  compelling  theme,  the  powerful  messages,  the  learned  speakers,  as  well  as  the  lively
discussions that ensued will not only be imprinted in our minds, but will inspire us to work harder
and closer to fulfill our goals.  
The  motivation  to  network,  cooperate  and  collaborate  is  one  that  is  ingrained  in  our  common
histories and in our very nature as global citizens.
This week, we were reminded of this shared intrinsic drive in the most fortunate way when we
revisited the Silk Road discussed (no less) by an outstanding historian who authored a bestseller
on the topic.  Professor Peter Frankopan impressively granted us greater understanding of the
past so that we could make better sense of the present.
For me, the discussion served as a reminder that to march on to the future  we must whole-
heartedly embrace our natural desire and need to continuously develop and grow through the
sharing and trading, not only of resources, goods, products and services, but also of precious,
innovative and transformative ideas.
For instance, the launch  of  the  current  Chinese  government’s  “One  Belt,  One  Road”  initiative
was inspired by the Silk Road initiative. The billions being poured into a reinvented and modern
‘Silk Road,’ comprising a network of around 60 countries in Asia and Europe will result in physical
connections through land bridges, railways, utility grids and maritime highways. It will birth a new
ecosystem of integrating networks which will benefit the Philippines and many countries in terms
of the global and regional supply chains.
The  “One  Belt,  One  Road”  initiative  highlights  China’s  growing  influence.  With  this  and  other
initiatives and resulting prominence, we ask, “will there be significant changes in rank and order
in the brotherhood of nations?”
Even now in various multilateral institutions, emerging markets are clamoring for greater voice,
representation  and  engagement.  This  is  consistent  with  our  increasing  role  and  growing
importance in the global economy. As we assess the shifts in the international economic order,
there is increasing awareness that the rules of the game are changing.
Take  FinTech  as  an  example.      This  “Fourth  Industrial  Revolution”  has  transformed  and  is
transforming  the  way  people  think  and  do  things.  Technological  advances  are  changing  our
needs and wants. Disruptions to the economic and financial landscape brought by innovation and
technology are the new normal. These disruptions may aggravate inequalities among nations,
putting  inclusive  growth  in  peril.  Will  we  be  able  to  cope  and  compete?  With  the  earlier
discussions, I believe we are convinced that we will.
In the Philippines, we nurture a regulatory environment that will foster innovation while ensuring
risks are effectively managed. We continuously monitor FinTech developments.  We espouse
proportionate  regulation,  multi-stakeholder  collaboration  and  consumer  protection.  We  do  this
because we believe that the democratization of technology enables efficiencies.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
This phenomenon of Fintech, while new and exciting, shares commonalities with the Silk Road. 
Both are powerfully transformative.  But like the Silk Road, FinTech’s positive impact can only be
sustained if its further development and use are done in an inclusive manner.
Technology is our now and our future.  To harness its benefits, we must collaborate and leverage
on each other’s strengths.  Only then will we be able to enjoy sustained economic growth over
the long term.   I would like to end with this thought.
This meeting is one of those opportunities to do just that.  The Philippines is honored to have
hosted  this  event  and  I  am  privileged  to  be  able  to  close  it.    We  thank  everyone  for  your
commitment that has made this event a success.  I look forward to more collaboration and the
pursuit  of  deeper  and  more  meaningful  relationships  as  we  move  from  ancient  to  modern
networks  and  as  we  move  forward,  thriving  as  co-participants  in  the  journey  of  digital
transformation.
Thank you and Mabuhay!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
