M a r c h   1 ,   2 0 1 8 
Bank  of  Japan 
Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Okayama 
Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices 
A. Recent Developments and Outlook for Economic Activity at Home and Abroad 
I would like to start my speech by looking at developments in the global economy affecting 
Japan's economy. Since the autumn of 2017, improvement in economic sentiment has been 
noticeable worldwide (Chart 1). The global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) has shown 
remarkable  improvement  for  manufacturing  activity  in  particular,  and  business  fixed 
investment  and  trade  volume  have  been  increasing.  One  of  the  factors  underlying  this 
improvement in economic sentiment is that, while advanced economies remain robust, there 
is  a  cyclical  factor  of  continued  moderate  recovery  in  production  for  the  resource  and 
manufacturing  sectors,  which  bottomed  out  in  2016  amid  the  waning  of  concern  over  a 
slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  especially  China.  The  cultivation  of  the  potential 
demand  by  utilizing  new  technologies  --  such  as  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  artificial 
intelligence (AI), and autonomous driving -- also contributes to the improvement to some 
extent (Chart 2). 
 
Looking at the global economy from the two perspectives of the real GDP growth rate and 
the  inflation  rate,  developments  can  be  described  as  follows.  Until  2016,  the  economy 
remained in a phase where sluggish growth coexisted with low inflation. In 2017, it moved 
into a phase where an improving trend in the growth rate became evident while the inflation 
rate remained low. Looking ahead, the global economy is likely to shift to a phase where 
inflation is clearly accelerated by continued relatively high growth if various downside risks 
that  have  been  pointed  out,  such  as  the  following,  do  not  materialize:  (1)  the  risk  of 
monetary policy normalization in the United States and Europe exerting downward pressure 
on  the  global  economy;  (2)  the  risk  of  deceleration  in  the  Chinese  economy;  and  (3) 
geopolitical risks surrounding North Korea and the Middle East. One of the key points for 
the time being is whether the global economy will reach the phase of rising inflation with 
high  growth that I just mentioned, while avoiding a situation of  economies  stalling, with 
major economies beginning to see changes in their monetary policy stances, and if such a 
phase is achieved, when that will happen. 
 
Next, I would like to turn to developments in Japan's economy. Supported by the moderate 
growth in the global economy, Japan's real GDP has continued to mark positive growth for 
1 
eight consecutive quarters since the first quarter of 2016. The annual real growth rate for 
2017  stood  at  1.6  percent,  the  highest  level  since  2013  (Chart  3).  The  breakdown  by 
component during this period shows that private business fixed investment and exports are 
the major driving forces of the growth. 
 
With regard to the outlook, in fiscal 2018, Japan's economy is likely to continue growing at 
a  pace  in  the  range  of  1.0-1.5  percent,  exceeding  its  potential  (Chart  4).  This  is  because 
business  fixed  investment  will  increase,  reflecting  improvements  in  corporate  profits  and 
business  sentiment,  and  exports  will  rise  on  the  back  of  robust  growth  in  the  global 
economy.  These  positive  developments  will  then  transmit  more  strongly  than  before  to 
households  through  a  rise  in  wages,  which  will  lead  to  some  acceleration  in  the  pace  of 
growth in private consumption. Meanwhile, it is highly likely that the economic growth rate 
for fiscal 2019 will decrease to the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, reflecting such factors as (1) 
the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled in October 2019 and (2) deceleration in 
business fixed investment due to the peaking out of Olympic Games-related demand. 
 
Now, I would like to talk about the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. The hike 
will  have  some  impact  on  the  GDP  growth  rates,  mainly  due  to  changes  in  household 
spending,  through  the  following  two  major  channels:  (1)  the  front-loaded  increase  and 
subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  (2)  the 
decline in real income. At present, the negative impact of the hike on the projected growth 
rate for fiscal 2019 is likely to be smaller than that on the rate for fiscal 2014, when the last 
hike took place. This is because the increase in the consumption tax rate is smaller than that 
of the most recent tax hike and a reduced tax rate will be applied to some items. In addition, 
as the consumption tax hike is scheduled to take place in the middle of the fiscal year, there 
are  technical  factors;  namely,  that  the  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in 
demand prior to and after the hike will offset each other during the fiscal year, and a decline 
in real income could only occur in the second half of the fiscal year. 
 
B. Recent Developments and Outlook for Japan's Prices 
Next, I will move on to recent price developments in Japan and their outlook. 
 
2 
Looking at recent developments in the consumer price index (CPI), the year-on-year rate of 
increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food for January 2018 was 0.9 percent. However, 
it should be noted that the contribution of energy items was significant, at 0.5 percentage 
point, and in terms of the rate of increase for all items less fresh food and energy, which 
directly  reflects  domestic  supply-demand  conditions,  the  rate  only  stood  at  0.4  percent 
year-on-year. Although this rate indicates a continued moderate increase, its level is still low, 
mainly against the background that firms' wage- and price-setting stance remains cautious 
so far. 
 
As  for  the  outlook,  I  would  like  to  first  take  a  look  at  the  Bank's  baseline  scenario. 
According to the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices (Outlook Report) released in 
January 2018, inflation expectations  are projected to rise as firms' stance gradually shifts 
toward raising wages and prices with the economy still growing at a pace above its potential 
and  the  output  gap  continuing  to  improve.  It  also  indicates  that,  as  a  consequence,  the 
inflation rate is likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent. With this 
mechanism operating, the inflation rate -- specifically, in terms of the median of the Policy 
Board members' forecasts for the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) -- is projected to rise to around 1.8 percent through fiscal 2019, excluding the direct 
effects of the consumption tax hike (Chart 4). 
 
In contrast to this baseline scenario, I consider that the possibility of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  increasing  to  2  percent  through  fiscal  2019  is  low  at  this  point.  This 
difference  in  the  price  outlook  reflects  the  discrepancy  in  how  to  view  the  overall 
effectiveness  of  the  current  monetary  easing  policy  and  the  functioning  of  the  policy's 
transmission channels. I will elaborate on this later when I explain the conduct of monetary 
policy. 
 
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
In  what  follows,  I  describe  the  Bank's  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to  first  explain  the 
current framework and then present my views on policy measures necessary for achieving 
the Bank's price stability target. 
 
3 
In  January  2013,  the  Bank  set  the  price  stability  target  at  2  percent  in  terms  of  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, and has been aiming at achieving this target at the 
earliest possible time. The Bank also announced strengthening of policy coordination with 
the  government  by  releasing  a  joint  statement,  and  the  two  entities  have  been  working 
together to overcome deflation early and achieve sustainable economic growth with price 
stability.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  introduced  Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  in  April  2013.  Since  September  2016,  it  has  been  conducting 
monetary  policy  under  the  framework  of  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control.  This  current 
framework for monetary policy consists of two major components (Chart 5).1 
 
The  first  is  yield  curve  control  in  which  the  Bank  controls  short-term  and  long-term 
nominal interest rates and thereby encourages a decline in real interest rates -- calculated as 
nominal  interest  rates  minus  expected  inflation  rates  --  so  as  to  achieve  highly 
accommodative financial conditions and stimulate economic activity and prices. The Bank 
has set the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and the target level of 10-year 
Japanese government bond (JGB) yields at around 0 percent. It conducts purchases of JGBs 
so as to achieve these targets, thereby encouraging the formation of an optimal shape of the 
yield curve to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. 
 
The second component is an inflation-overshooting commitment. Under this commitment, 
the Bank continues expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above this target 
level in a stable manner. With this  commitment, the Bank aims to increase its credibility 
among the public that it will achieve the 2 percent price stability target by ruling out the 
possibility  of  a  change  in  the  direction  of  monetary  policy  at  an  early  stage  when 
achievement of the target comes in sight. 
 
In my view, this monetary policy framework will lead to higher inflation, mainly through 
four transmission channels (Chart 6). The first is highly accommodative financial conditions 
                                                   
1  In addition to the two major components, the Bank conducts purchases of risky assets -- namely, 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  --  as  part  of 
monetary policy. 
4 
-- accompanying declines in real interest rates through declining nominal interest rates and 
in  risk  premia  --  to  bring  about  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap.  The  second  is  the 
improvement in the output gap to push up the observed inflation rate. The third is the rise in 
the  observed  inflation  rate  resulting  in  higher  inflation  expectations  through  the  adaptive 
expectation formation mechanism, which further raises the observed inflation rate. And the 
fourth  channel  is  that  the  Bank's  strong  commitment  to  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability  target  will  directly  raise  inflation  expectations,  prompting  a  rise  in  the  observed 
inflation rate in turn. 
 
Earlier,  when  I  described  the  outlook  for  prices,  I  mentioned  that  the  possibility  of  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI increasing to 2 percent through fiscal 2019 is low. 
This  is  because  I  still  lack  confidence  that  the  four  transmission  channels  I  have  just 
explained are operating to an effective extent whereby the inflation rate will be pushed up to 
reach 2 percent, even though more than a year has passed since the Bank's adoption of QQE 
with Yield Curve Control. Of course, the positive effects of monetary easing are likely to 
strengthen gradually, given that the improvement in the output gap continues. At this point, 
however, my view is that the momentum for a rise in inflation is not strong enough to reach 
2 percent through fiscal 2019.2 
 
To illustrate this, I plot the relationship of the output gap and the inflation rate on a graph 
(Chart 7). In the period after the adoption of QQE leading up to the introduction of QQE 
with Yield Curve Control, the slope of the trend line became somewhat steep and the line's 
level rose (Chart 7, red line in the left-hand panel) compared with that for an earlier period 
(black  line  in  the  same  panel).  These  developments  suggest  that  ideal  changes  in  the 
economy had been taking place, implying that the effects through the second channel -- that 
is, the improvement in the output gap that thereby pushes up the observed inflation rate -- 
                                                   
2  For  the  inflation  rate  to  increase  to  2  percent  going  forward,  I  consider  that  it  is  essential  to 
achieve  a  widening  of  the  output  gap  that  exceeds  2  percent,  as  well  as  a  rise  in  the  expected 
inflation  rate  that  is  greater  than  that  observed  during  2013  and  2014.  This  view  is  based  on  a 
projection  of  price  developments  derived  by  (1)  estimating  the  so-called  hybrid  New  Keynesian 
Phillips curve that takes the expected inflation rate, the observed inflation rate, the output gap, and 
the consumption tax dummy as explanatory variables and then (2) applying projections of the output 
gap -- deduced from the forecasts of the majority of the Bank's Policy Board members on real GDP 
growth -- and the expected inflation rate. 
5 
had been enhanced, and that both the third and the fourth channels had begun to operate 
following  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations.  Taking  a  look  at  developments  since  the 
October-December  quarter  of  2016,  when  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  with  Yield  Curve 
Control, however, the slope of the trend line has become gradual and the line's level has 
declined slightly, although these changes should be regarded as being subject to a margin of 
error due to a limited sample size (Chart 7, green line in the left-hand panel). This suggests 
the possibility that, although the first channel has been operating, the other three channels 
have not yet been doing so to their full extent.3 
 
In  other  words,  under the  current monetary  policy  framework,  supply-demand  conditions 
are tightening further, but this has not yet affected firms' overall price-setting stance toward 
raising  prices.4  It  also  should  be  noted  that  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations  remains 
moderate,  partly  reflecting  the  moderate  pace  of  increase  in  the  observed  inflation  rate. 
Short-term inflation expectations have increased somewhat, due mainly to the rise in crude 
oil prices, but they have not recovered to the level seen in the period between mid-2014 and 
mid-2015,  when  such  expectations  shifted  from  increasing  to  being  flat.  Medium-  to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  somewhat  weak  (Chart  8).  I  would  note  that  the 
inflation-overshooting  commitment  was  effective  in  stopping  a  decline  in  inflation 
expectations, but it has not been sufficient to clearly increase inflation expectations. 
 
On the basis of such understanding, I believe that further monetary easing is  necessary to 
achieve the price stability target at an early stage. Specifically, the Bank should  purchase 
JGBs so that yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer will broadly be lowered 
further. With a view to reinforcing the inflation-overshooting commitment, the Bank should 
also  add  the  commitment  that,  in  terms  of  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members' 
                                                   
3  These  facts  also  can  be  confirmed  from  an  estimate  of  the  Phillips  curve  with  time-varying 
parameters (Chart 7, the right-hand panel). 
4  The output gap estimated by the Bank's Research and Statistics Department became positive from 
the  October-December  quarter  of  2016  and  has  increased  further  to  1.35  percent  in  the 
July-September quarter of 2017. Having said that, a further widening of the output gap is necessary 
to affect firms' overall price-setting stance toward raising prices, in view of the fact that the average 
of  the  output  gap  was  in  the  range  of  2.5-3.0  percent  in  the  past  when  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) exceeded 2 percent on a basis excluding the 
effects of consumption tax hikes. 
6 
forecasts presented in the Outlook Report, if there is a delay in the timing of achieving the 
price  stability  target  due  to  domestic  factors,  the  Bank  should  take  additional  easing 
measures. 
 
I  would  note  that  a  further  lowering  of  yields  on  JGBs  with  maturities  of  10  years  and 
longer will promote business fixed investment and housing investment to a greater extent 
from the financial side. This lowering of JGB yields is also expected to have synergy effects 
with  the  government's  fiscal  policy  providing  tax  support  for  firms  that  have  a  positive 
stance toward making fixed investment and raising wages. These developments will further 
increase the pace of improvement in the output gap, and thus enhance the dynamism of the 
rise in the inflation rate through the first and second transmission channels that I explained 
earlier.  Among  many  options  for  additional  monetary  easing  measures  under  yield  curve 
control, the further lowering of yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer is the 
best at this point, in my view, considering the balance between positive and negative effects. 
 
Strengthening of the inflation-overshooting commitment aims at increasing the transmission 
effects  of  higher  inflation  expectations  on  the  observed  inflation  rate  --  in  other  words, 
increasing  the  effects  through  the  third  and  fourth  transmission  channels.  The  rise  in 
inflation  expectations  from  2013  was  attributable  to  the  Bank's  decision  to  introduce  an 
inflation  targeting  policy.  It  also  was  attributable  to  the  initiatives  taken  to  achieve  the 
policy; the Bank announced the strengthening of policy coordination with the government 
by  releasing  the  joint  statement,  and  the  two  entities  have  taken  concrete  actions  by 
implementing flexible fiscal policy and bold monetary policy as well as the growth strategy. 
In order to influence inflation expectations, it is essential that policy coordination with the 
government  aiming  at  achieving  the  price  stability  target  be  firmly  ensured  through  both 
entities' concrete actions. The Bank, for its part, should further promote powerful monetary 
easing backed by a clear and strong commitment to achieving the price stability target. 
III. Reason for Importance of Achieving and Maintaining the Price Stability Target 
As  the  global  economy  continues  to  grow at  a  moderate  pace, the  Federal Reserve  is on 
course to raise policy interest rates and the European Central Bank is moving toward an exit 
from  monetary  easing.  Under  such  circumstances,  there  is  some  speculation,  especially 
7 
overseas, that Japan's monetary policy might also shift to a tightening in the near future, or 
might at least make a slight adjustment toward an exit from monetary easing. However, the 
inflation environment in Japan differs substantially from that in the United States and major 
countries  in  Europe.  I  believe  that,  in  Japan,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  before 
considering a change in monetary policy stance. 
 
Let me first look at price developments in Japan as well as in the United States, where the 
policy  rate  hike  is  proceeding.  Chart  9  compares  developments  in  the  inflation  rate 
excluding those of fresh food and energy between Japan and the United States since 1995. 
The  bold  black  line  indicates  an  inflation  rate  of  2  percent  and  the  gray  bands  show 
recession periods. In the United States, the inflation rate has been more or less at around 2 
percent from 1995 to the present. On the other hand, in contrast to the United States, the 
inflation rate in Japan moved in negative territory  for most of the time during the period 
between the latter half of 1998 and early 2013. In 2013 onward, the inflation rate has turned 
positive, mainly due to the introduction of QQE, but remains distant from 2 percent. 
 
Such  a  difference  in  price  developments  between  Japan  and  the  United  States  is  often 
compared to the existence or absence of an anchor that stabilizes a ship in the ocean. The 
inflation rate generally fluctuates with volatilities of and shocks to the macroeconomics and 
market  conditions,  such  as  crude  oil  price  changes.  In  the  United  States,  however,  the 
inflation rate has returned to close to 2 percent even after major shocks such as the global 
financial crisis following the failure of Lehman Brothers. This is because people's inflation 
expectations are firmly fixed, just as a ship is anchored, at around 2 percent.5  In my view, 
the reason why incremental policy rate hikes have been possible in the United States so far 
is that inflation expectations are judged to be anchored well. In Japan, on the other hand, 
firms'  and  households'  mindset  has  been  formed  under  the  prolonged  deflationary 
environment  after  the  mid-1990s,  such  that  economic  activity  assuming  no  inflation  has 
                                                   
5  For  the  implications  of  inflation  expectations  being  anchored,  see  Ben  Bernanke,  "Inflation 
Expectations  and  Inflation  Forecasting:  Speech  at  the  Monetary  Economics  Workshop  of  the 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Summer  Institute,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,"  Federal 
Reserve Board (July 2007). 
8 
become rational. In other words, Japan has lost the anchor for inflation expectations and has 
been stuck in a deflationary equilibrium.6 
 
The Bank, through its bold monetary easing policy, now aims at shifting the economy from 
being stuck in a deflationary equilibrium to entering an inflationary equilibrium in which 
inflation expectations are anchored at around 2 percent. However, as I have explained so far, 
the improvement in the inflation rate is not enough and still only halfway accomplished. If 
the direction of monetary policy is changed without deep consideration in such a situation, 
there is a risk of the economy fully returning to a deflationary equilibrium. 
 
After the introduction of QQE in April 2013, inflation expectations rose steadily toward 2 
percent. However, the momentum weakened, stemming from the consumption tax hike and 
the fall in crude oil prices. Subsequently, a headwind  -- that is, a slowdown in emerging 
economies  and  instability  in  global  financial  markets  --  led  to  sluggishness  in  inflation 
expectations. This experience suggests that, at the stage where the 2 percent price stability 
target  is  not  yet  achieved,  inflation  expectations  are  susceptible  to  negative  economic 
shocks and the economy could easily return to a deflationary equilibrium.7 
 
That is the very reason why it is necessary to carefully conduct the current monetary policy 
by  giving  full  consideration  to risks  to  economic activity  and  prices.8  Going  back  to  my 
                                                   
6  See James Bullard, "Seven Faces of 'The Peril'," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 92, 
no. 5  (2010):  339-52.  Based  on  Japanese  and  U.S.  data  for  2002-2010,  Bullard  discusses  the 
possibility of the U.S. economy at that time falling into a deflationary equilibrium like Japan, and 
analyzes monetary policy so as to avoid such equilibrium. 
7  See Ryan Banerjee and Aaron Mehrotra, "Deflation Expectations," BIS Working Papers, no. 699 
(February 2018). The authors found that, by analyzing inflation expectations across 43 economies, 
expectations  become  "less  well  anchored"  and  are  associated  with  "somewhat  higher 
backward-lookingness" during deflations. 
8  In assessing the effects of large-scale monetary policy on the financial system and the functioning 
of  financial  intermediation,  multiple  factors  also  should  be  taken  into  account;  for  example,  (1) 
effects of developments in lending rates, (2) declines in firms' bankruptcy rates and in banks' credit 
costs, both resulting from monetary easing, and (3) effects of improvement in asset markets pushing 
up financial institutions' profits. When making monetary policy decisions, it is necessary to give due 
consideration to the likelihood that the longer it takes to achieve the price stability target, the more 
risks to the robustness of the financial system arise. 
9 
earlier reference to recent developments and the outlook for economic activity and prices, 
from the perspective of careful conduct of monetary policy, I believe that the following two 
points  require  due  attention,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  assessment  of  economic 
developments in fiscal 2019. 
 
The first point to be considered is that, since the most recent consumption tax hike in fiscal 
2014,  a  rise  in  real  disposable  income  has  not  strongly  linked  to  an  increase  in  real 
consumption. It should be noted that, if the next consumption tax hike scheduled in October 
2019  causes  similar  effects,  improvement  in  aggregate  demand  will  not  make  sufficient 
progress. I also would note the possibility that, if the tax hike takes place when the anchor 
of  inflation  expectations  is  not  yet  functioning  effectively,  people's  inflation  perceptions 
might  change  and,  mainly  due  to  declines  in  consumption,  inflation  expectations  might 
become  sluggish  again.9  That  is,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  tax  hike  could  increase 
downward  pressure  on  prices  through  both  channels  of  the  output  gap  and  inflation 
expectations (Chart 10). 
 
The  second  point  is  that  there  is  some  possibility  that  risks  to  developments  in  overseas 
economies  will  materialize  by  fiscal  2019.  If  the  risks  materialize,  Japan's  economy  will 
slow down to some degree as it loses support from the firm growth in the global economy. 
In  my  view,  particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  that  U.S.  monetary  policy 
normalization will put downward pressure on the global economy, as its potential impact on 
the global economy is larger than that of other risks. 
 
                                                   
9  As for the impact of the tax hike on the inflation rate and inflation expectations, one possibility is a 
decline in aggregate demand to push down the observed inflation rate, which will  lower inflation 
expectations  in  turn.  Another  possibility  is  a  rise  in  prices  accompanied  by  the  tax  hike  to  raise 
inflation expectations. Earlier episodes of tax hikes in April 1997 and April 2014 suggested that the 
inflation rate initially rose following each hike but declined as aggregate demand decreased, thereby 
causing a fall in inflation expectations. 
10 
Following the bursting of the bubble in the 1990s, Japan experienced a prolonged period of 
economic stagnation aggravated by deflation, described as the "lost two decades."10  Since 
2013, the price situation is finally no longer deflationary, owing to the improvement in the 
environment surrounding firms and households -- such as represented by the employment 
situation  --  in  addition  to  the  Bank's  implementation  of  bold  monetary  easing  policy.11 
While  Japan's  economy  is  still  on  its  way  toward  achieving  and  maintaining  the  price 
stability  target,  as  I  described  earlier,  it  is  necessary  to  augment  the  momentum  of  the 
virtuous cycle that has emerged during the process toward achieving this target, and put an 
end to the "lost two decades" for good by realizing the target at an early stage. As a member 
of the Policy Board of the Bank, I will continue to devote the best of my abilities toward 
achieving and maintaining the price stability target. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                   
10  For details about Japan's prolonged stagnation, see the following publications: (1) Koichi Hamada, 
Anil  Kashyap,  and  David  Weinstein,  Japan's  Bubble,  Deflation,  and  Long-term  Stagnation 
(Massachusetts:  The  MIT  Press,  2010);  (2)  Masazumi  Wakatabe,  Japan's  Great  Stagnation  and 
Abenomics: Lessons for the World (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015); and (3) Kataoka Goushi, 
Nihon  no  "Ushinawareta  20-nen":  Defure  o  koeru  keizai  seisaku  ni  mukete  [Japan's  Lost  Two 
Decades: For economic policies to overcome deflation] (Tokyo: Fujiwara-Shoten, 2010). 
11  See Adachi Seiji, "2 pāsento no infure mokuhyō wa datō ka" [Is an inflation target of 2 percent 
appropriate?],  Keiki  to  Saikuru  (Japan  Association  of  Business  Cycle  studies),  no.  64,  November 
2017. Adachi estimates a New Keynesian Phillips curve by adopting the framework of the Logistic 
Smooth Transition Autoregressive model, on the assumption of two regimes; namely, a "deflationary 
regime" and an "inflationary regime." Looking at the estimates on the probability of a regime change, 
the figure for the April-June quarter of 2017 is estimated at 57.8 percent. While this is greater than 
50  percent  --  the  threshold  between  the  "deflationary  regime"  and  the  "inflationary  regime"  --  it 
suggests that the economy is still distant from 100 percent, a level that would indicate the economy's 
complete overcoming of deflation. 
11 
Economic Activity, Prices,  
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Okayama 
March 1, 2018 
Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan 
Chart 1 Global Economy (1) 
Global PMI 
Projections of Real GDP Growth by 
Major Economies (as of January 2018)  
y/y % chg., % pts. 
Projection 
for CY 2018 
Revision 
World 
Advanced economies 
United States 
Euro area 
Emerging market and 
developing economies 
China 
3.9 
2.3 
2.7 
2.2 
4.9 
6.6 
+0.3 
+0.3 
+0.2 
+0.6 
+0.1 
+0.6 
Note: Figures are from the J.P. Morgan Global PMI. Figures above 50 
indicate improvement and below 50 show deterioration on a 
month-on-month basis. 
Source: IHS Markit (© and database right IHS Markit Ltd 2018. All 
rights reserved.). 
Note: Figures in the column “Revision” indicate differences from the 
projections as of January 2017. 
Source: IMF, “World Economic Outlook Update, January 2018.” 
1 
Chart 2 Global Economy (2) 
Global Semiconductor Demand by End Use 
Note: “Communications” includes smartphones, “Computer, etc.” includes PCs and data centers, “Consumer” 
mainly represents household electrical appliances, and “Industry, etc.” includes industrial robots. 
Source: Semiconductor Industry Association, 2017 and 2014 Factbook. 
2 
Chart 3 Japan’s Economy (1) 
Real GDP Growth and Breakdown by Component 
Source: Cabinet Office, “Quarterly Estimates of GDP for October-December 2017 (First Preliminary Estimates).” 
3 
Chart 4 Japan’s Economy (2) 
Medians of the Policy Board Members’ Forecasts (as of January 2018) 
y/y % chg. 
Real GDP 
CPI  
(all items less 
fresh food) 
Excluding the 
effects of the 
consumption  
tax hike 
FY 2017 
Forecasts made in 
October 2017 
FY 2018 
Forecasts made in 
October 2017 
FY 2019 
Forecasts made in 
October 2017 
+1.9 
+1.9 
+1.4 
+1.4 
+0.7 
+0.7 
+0.8 
+0.8 
+1.4 
+1.4 
+2.3 
+2.3 
+1.8 
+1.8 
Notes: 1. Figures indicate the forecasts (point estimates) presented in the January 2018 Outlook Report.  
2. The consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019 (to 10 percent) and the reduced tax rate to be applied 
to food and beverages (excluding alcohol and dining-out) and newspapers are incorporated in the forecasts. 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
4 
Chart 5 QQE with Yield Curve Control 
Yield Curve Control 
Inflation-Overshooting Commitment 
JGB yield (%) 
Inflation rate (%) 
Target level of 10-year 
JGB yields: 
 around 0 percent 
2 % 
0 
Short-term policy interest rate:  
minus 0.1 percent 
0 
10 
20 
40 
30 
Residual maturity 
(year) 
Continuation of monetary base expansion 
Time 
5 
Chart 6 Transmission Channels of 
Monetary Easing to Prices 
Decline in Nominal Interest 
Rates and Risk Premiums 
Declining real interest rates through 
declining nominal interest rates 
Facilitating private investment 
Stabilizing financial markets 
1 
Exerting synergy effects with fiscal policy 
Reinforcement of  
Commitment 
4 
Improving credibility in 
inflation targeting policy 
Improvement in Output Gap 
Rise in Inflation Expectations 
Increasing upward pressure on wages 
Improving labor market conditions 
2 
Adaptive formation of 
inflation expectations 
3 
Raising capital utilization rates 
Greater increases in base wages 
Facilitating cost pass-through 
Realization of inflation expectations 
Increasing effectiveness of monetary easing 
Increase in Inflation Rate 
Achievement and Maintenance of 
the Price Stability Target 
6 
Chart 7 Output Gap and Inflation Rate 
Output Gap and Inflation Rate 
Reference: Intercept and Slope of  
the Phillips Curve  
Notes: 1. Trend lines are determined as <Inflation Rate> = Intercept + Slope * 
<Output Gap [-3]>.  
2. Inflation rate (vertical axis) shows year-on-year growth in the CPI (all 
items less fresh food and energy).  
3. Output gap (horizontal axis) is lagged behind the inflation rate by 3 
quarters. Figures are estimated by the Research and Statistics 
Department of the Bank of Japan (lag is determined by timing 
correlation). 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Bank of Japan. 
Notes: 1. Figures are estimation results of the Phillips curve obtained by 
employing time-varying intercepts and slopes in the left-hand 
panel. Estimation period is from January 1983 through December 
2017.  
2. Output gap is lagged by 3 quarters (lag is determined by the AIC).  
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Bank of Japan. 
7 
Chart 8 Inflation Expectations 
Firms’ Inflation Expectations (Tankan) 
Synthetic Indicators of Inflation Expectations  
Obtained through Principal Component 
Analysis (Medium- to Long-Term) 
Notes: 1. Lines in the left-hand panel show the average outlook for general prices for all industries and enterprises released in the Tankan.  
2. Inflation expectations of firms, households, and experts are synthesized in the right-hand panel. Inflation expectations of firms are represented by 
the Tankan and those of households are represented by the Bank’s Opinion Survey on the General Public‘s Views and Behavior. For experts’ inflation 
expectations, data from the Consensus Forecasts, the QUICK Survey, and the inflation swap rate are used, which is shown as the different lines 
respectively.  
3. Semiannual data from the Consensus Forecasts up through 2014/Q2 are linearly interpolated. Figures for the Opinion Survey exclude inflation 
expectations by respondents whose annual inflation expectations were ±5% or greater. The output prices DI in the Tankan represents the difference 
between the share of firms that raised prices in the preceding three months and the share of firms that lowered prices. 
Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts”; QUICK, "QUICK Monthly Market Survey (Bonds)"; Bloomberg; Bank of Japan. 
8 
Chart 9 Comparison of Inflation Rates 
in the United States and Japan 
United States 
Japan 
Notes: 1. Red dots show year-on-year changes in the PCE deflator (all items less fresh food and energy) for the United States, and those in the CPI 
(all items less fresh food, energy, and excluding direct effects of consumption tax hikes) for Japan.  
2. Bold black lines indicate inflation rate of 2 percentage points.  
3. Black broken lines indicate average inflation rate after CY 95 (discontinued at the introduction of QQE for Japan).  
4. Gray bands indicate recession periods (peaks and bottoms of business cycle are those determined by the National Bureau of Economic 
Research for the United States and Cabinet Office for Japan). 
Sources: Cabinet Office; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; National Bureau of Economic Research. 
9 
Chart 10 Consumption before and after 
Consumption Tax Hike 
Real Disposable Income and  
Real Consumption Expenditures 
Average Consumption Propensity 
Note: Data are for workers’ households with two or more members. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 
”Family Income and Expenditure Survey.“ 
Notes: 1. Average Consumption Propensity = Household Consumption 
Expenditure / Household Disposable Income. 
2. Disposable income for National Accounts includes that of private 
unincorporated enterprises.  
3. Figures for the Family Income and Expenditure Survey are those 
for the average of each fiscal year (average of April to December 
for 2017).  
Sources: Cabinet Office, “System of National Accounts”; Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications, ”Family Income and Expenditure 
Survey.“ 
10 
