  An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), 
at the Ninety-eighth annual Ordinary General Meeting 
of the SARB shareholders 
 South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
27 July 2018  
  This past year was, to some extent, one of contrasting halves. The second half of 2017 
saw  a  generally  constructive  global  backdrop  for  South  Africa  and  other  emerging 
markets. The recovery in the advanced economies continued at a steady pace, with 
most showing signs of sustained growth. In the United States (US), growth was above 
the estimated potential, and unemployment continued to decline. Economic activity in 
the euro area surprised on the upside after a protracted period of sluggish growth. A 
notable exception to this trend was the United Kingdom, where growth prospects were 
adversely affected by the uncertainty arising from the decision to leave the European 
Union.   
 There were also indications that, while the withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus was 
likely to continue in the advanced economies, the policy tightening cycle was expected 
to  be  moderate.  These  settings  remained  supportive  of  strong  capital  flows  to 
emerging  markets.  Stronger  demand  underpinned  higher  commodity  prices, 
reinforced by strong growth in China.  
 This favourable setting did not last long into the first half of 2018. Expectations of a 
faster pace of monetary tightening than previously expected began to emerge as the 
strong US growth was sustained. The US unemployment rate reached levels below 
the  estimated  natural  rate,  while  fiscal  policy  became  more  expansionary.  This  put 
upward pressure on long-term US Treasury yields, which exceeded 3% for the first 
 Page - 1 - of 9 
time since July 2011. Surprisingly, US inflation remained stubbornly below the target 
of 2% in the absence of significant wage growth. The recent communications of the 
Federal Open Market Committee appear to have reinforced the likelihood of a tighter 
stance, which in turn has sustained US dollar strength. 
 By contrast, growth in the euro area and Japan slowed, leading to a reassessment of 
expectations of early withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation in these regions. 
In addition, the strong dollar effect dominated global markets, which saw a reversal of 
capital  flows  from  emerging  markets,  reminiscent  of  the  so-called  taper  tantrum  in 
2013.  While  most  emerging  markets  are  assessed  to  be  more  resilient  to  these 
developments than was the case at that time, their exchange rates and bond yields 
have come under pressure, although experiences have differed widely. 
 Two  other  developments  overshadowed  the  global  environment  in  the  first  half  of 
2018. First, while most commodity prices declined during the first half of this year, the 
international oil price continued what seemed to be  an inexorable ascent. This was 
driven to a large degree by the successful implementation of the agreement to restrict 
output by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-
OPEC countries. The result was a steady increase in the price of Brent crude oil, from 
US$50 per barrel in July last year to around US$80 by June this year. Although some 
moderation  has  been  evident  recently,  the  outlook  remains  uncertain,  with  mixed 
views by analysts in this regard. To date, the impact on domestic petrol prices and on 
inflation has been significant. 
 The second development was a marked escalation in the changes to US trade policy. 
Initially, tariff increases were focused primarily on China, but have subsequently been 
broadened to encompass some traditional allies of the US as well. It is still unclear 
whether these actions and countervailing reactions will evolve into a full-blown trade 
war. However, the rise in protectionism has already had a moderating impact on the 
optimism for global growth, and has also already contributed to risk-off scenarios in 
global financial markets. Of concern is that the sharp contraction in world trade that 
was recorded in April would be protracted. This was the worst performance in world 
trade since May 2015.  
  Page - 2 - of 9 
The  net  result  of  all  of  these  recent  global  developments  has  been  a  generally 
deteriorating environment for emerging markets. 
 During the second half of last year, the domestic economic outlook was overshadowed 
by  heightened  political  uncertainty  in  the  lead-up  to  the  African  National  Congress 
(ANC) elective conference. Business and consumer confidence were at extremely low 
levels. Although the 1.3% growth rate for the year exceeded the post-crisis low of 0.6% 
recorded in 2016, it was in stark contrast to the average emerging market growth rate 
of 4.7%. The low growth and deteriorating fiscal position exacerbated the risk of rating 
agencies’ downgrades that could have seen South African bonds falling out of some 
of the major global bond indices. In response to these developments and risks, the 
rand remained under pressure for much of that period and reached its weakest level 
of R14.47 against the US dollar during November. 
 Renewed  optimism  following  the  outcome  of  the  ANC’s  elective  conference  set  in 
during the early part of 2018. Consumer confidence reached a record high in the first 
quarter of the year and remained high, although slightly lower in the second quarter. 
Business confidence also improved significantly in the first quarter, but fell back again 
in the second quarter. The rand exchange rate appreciated to R11.55 in late February, 
a level last seen in mid-2015. At the same time, there was a positive response to the 
2018 government budget, which reconfirmed the commitment to fiscal consolidation 
and  maintaining  the  expenditure  ceiling.  This  also  helped  to  avoid  a  downgrade  of 
South African domestic government debt to sub-investment grade. 
 Unfortunately,  the  boost  to  confidence  did  not  translate  into  a  short-term  boost  to 
actual growth. Following an upside surprise growth rate of 3.1% in the final quarter of 
2017, the economy contracted by 2.2% in the first quarter of this year. At this stage, 
the high-frequency data for the second quarter indicate that a modest improvement is 
likely in the quarter, and the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) does not expect a 
second  consecutive  quarter  of  contraction.  Nevertheless,  a  reassessment  of  the 
growth  outlook  has  resulted  in  a  downward  revision  to  the  SARB’s  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP)  growth  forecast  for  2018,  from  1.7%  to  1.2%.  Growth  of  1.9%  is 
expected in 2019, while the forecast for 2020 remains unchanged at 2.0%. At these 
 Page - 3 - of 9 
growth levels, we cannot expect to make appreciable inroads into the unemployment 
problem of the country.  
 During the past year, monetary policy has been able to achieve its objective of keeping 
inflation within the target range of 3-6%. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation has been 
continuously within the target range since April 2017, and is expected to remain within 
the target range for the rest of the forecast period, ending in 2020. Inflation averaged 
4.7% during the past financial year, and reached a recent low of 3.8% in March of this 
year, the lowest level recorded since 2010. The favourable outcome was due, in part, 
to  lower  food  price  increases  following  the  end  of  the  drought  in  most  parts  of  the 
country, as well as subdued domestic demand. However, the low point of the inflation 
cycle appears to be behind us, as the impact of the value-added tax (VAT) increase 
and higher petrol prices, and more recently the depreciated exchange rate, is being 
felt. 
 The  improved  inflation  outlook  and  below-potential  growth  afforded  some  space for 
monetary policy to be more accommodative. This was particularly in the context of a 
moderation in inflation expectations during the first half of this year. For some time, 
these expectations had been stubbornly anchored at the upper end of the target range. 
In July 2017 and March 2018, the SARB’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) reduced 
the repurchase rate by 25 basis points on each occasion, to its current level of 6.5%.  
 The  MPC  still  assesses  the  monetary  policy  stance  to  be  accommodative,  and 
appropriate  in  the  context  of  the  current  state  of  the  economy.  But  there  is  a  limit 
to what  monetary  policy  can  do  to  stimulate  growth.  At  best,  monetary  policy  can 
provide some support over the cycle, and can provide a stable environment for growth. 
As  the  MPC  has  emphasised  on  numerous  occasions,  a  firm  commitment  by 
government to credible structural policy initiatives and implementation is required to 
make an appreciable impact on employment and potential output. 
 At the March MPC meeting, we warned that the global risks in particular could upset 
the  improved  inflation  outlook.  Unfortunately,  these  risks,  which  I  have  highlighted 
earlier, have taken centre stage. Since April, the rand has depreciated, alongside other 
emerging  market  currencies.    Together  with  the  higher  international  oil  prices,  the 
 Page - 4 - of 9 
depreciation of local currency has resulted in domestic petrol prices reaching record 
highs  in  nominal  terms.  Furthermore,  risks  from  higher  electricity  prices  have  also 
emerged.  
 At the recent meeting of the MPC, the repurchase rate was kept unchanged, although 
concern was expressed regarding the possibility of upside risks to the inflation outlook 
materialising. At this stage, inflation is still expected to remain within the target range 
for the forecast period, but at higher average levels than previously thought.  
 The most recent forecast suggests that inflation will average 4.8% this year, but is then 
expected to rise to 5.6% and 5.4% respectively in the coming two years. This upward 
drift will not help in our quest to get inflation and inflation expectations anchored closer 
to  the  midpoint  of  the  target  range.  However,  because  the  deteriorating  outlook  is 
driven mainly by supply-side factors, the MPC will look through the first-round effects. 
The MPC will maintain its vigilance and will react should there be second-round effects 
that take inflation significantly away from the midpoint of the target range. 
 Protecting and enhancing financial stability is now an explicit statutory mandate of the 
SARB. After a protracted process, the Financial Sector Regulation Act was enacted in 
August  last  year,  and  the  Prudential  Authority  was  officially  established  within  the 
SARB on 1 April 2018. This involved the transfer of a number of employees from the 
former Financial Services Board, particularly those tasked with the regulation of the 
insurance industry. This responsibility now resides in the SARB and adds to the long-
standing  role  that  the  SARB  has  played  in  regulating  and  supervising  the  banking 
sector. The amalgamation facilitates the SARB’s role in maintaining, promoting and 
enhancing financial stability in the country, at both the macro- and the microprudential 
levels. 
 In general, the banking system remains sound and well capitalised and there were no 
significant  financial  stability  risks  during  the  past  year.  Nevertheless,  there  were  a 
number of highly publicised events that were not assessed to be systemic in nature, 
but which do hold important lessons for all of us. In particular, they have underlined 
the  importance  of  having  a  strong  and  ethical  auditing  profession  as  an  integral 
component of maintaining financial stability. 
 Page - 5 - of 9 
 In March 2018, having observed signs of a severe liquidity crisis, the SARB placed 
VBS  Mutual  Bank  under  curatorship  with  the  aim  of  protecting  the  interests  of 
depositors. Subsequent to this step, the SARB instituted a forensic investigation into 
possible  fraud  and/or  material  misstatements. Financial  statements  are  currently 
being restated, and until they are, we will not know the full extent of the problem. Any 
evidence of wrongdoing will be handed over to the relevant law enforcement agencies. 
 Given the size of VBS Mutual Bank and its limited interconnectedness with the rest of 
the  financial  sector,  it  is  not  assessed  to  pose  a  systemic  risk.  Nevertheless,  it  did 
create hardship and anxiety for the thousands of retail depositors who stood to  lose 
their  life  savings.  Fortunately,  most  of  these  deposits  are  now  guaranteed  by  the 
National Treasury, although the corporate and municipal deposits are not. On 9 July, 
the SARB announced a mechanism to repay retail depositors up to R100 000 of their 
deposits in the troubled bank. 
 Some  criticism has been  levelled  at  the  SARB for  not  picking  up evidence  of fraud 
and/or wrongdoing at VBS Mutual Bank earlier. It is not the role of the regulator to run 
the  bank.  The  regulator’s  role  is  to  protect  the  depositors  of  the  bank,  not  the 
shareholders,  and  to  ensure  that  the  bank  adheres  to  its  prescribed  prudential 
requirements.  
 The governance of the bank is the responsibility of its board, and its operations are in 
the  hands  of  management.  It  goes  without  saying  that  proper  control  systems  and 
governance structures are of paramount importance. As regulators, we have to rely 
on the accounts given to us by the bank as the basis for our risk assessment, and 
these  will  have  been  signed  off  by  both  the  internal  and  the  external  auditors.  The 
auditors,  in  turn,  rely  on  the  information  provided  to  them  and  cannot  be  held 
responsible if they are misled by fraudulent activities. However, if they are complicit in 
the  misstatements  or  irregularities  in  the  running  of  the  bank,  they  will  be  held 
accountable.  
  Page - 6 - of 9 
Regulators cannot prevent banks from failing if bad or illegal business decisions are 
made.  Our  role  is  to  ensure  that  bank  failures  do  not  put  the  entire  banking  and 
financial system at risk.  
 The  issue  of  the  integrity  of  company  audits  was  also  in  the  spotlight  with  another 
potential  financial  stability  risk.  The  collapse  of  the  share  price  of  Steinhoff 
International Holding NV, following the announcement of an investigation into alleged 
accounting irregularities, raised concerns about the exposure of South African banks 
to  the  company.  Fortunately,  the  company’s  debt  is  mainly  concentrated  in  foreign 
banks, and the impact of a potential default on loans on the domestic banking system 
appears to be limited. 
 During  the  past  year  we  also  had  to  deal  with  the  potential  risks  posed  by  a 
questionable report on Capitec Bank and the subsequent short-selling of the bank’s 
shares,  which  caused  some  volatility  in  its  share  price.  The  SARB’s  view  is  that 
Capitec Bank is well capitalised and has sufficient liquidity. The share price has since 
clawed back most of its losses, and there was no run on the bank. 
 At the previous AGM, I reported on our challenge to the Public Protector’s ruling on 
the  legality  of  the  SARB’s  assistance  to Bankorp  over  30  years  ago  as  well  as  her 
finding that Absa, as the purchasing bank, was liable to repay the facility. We were 
particularly concerned about the binding remedial instruction to Parliament to set in 
motion a process to change the constitutional mandate of the SARB away from price 
stability. We challenged this remedial action, as well as the Public Protector’s  other 
findings. The judgement, as you may know, went in our favour. The entire report was 
set aside, and we have finality on these issues. Our mandate, to protect the value of 
the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the 
country,  remains  unchanged  and  enshrined  in  the  Constitution. We  will  continue  to 
vigorously defend challenges to our independence and mandate. 
 The  issue  of  the  mandate  of  the  SARB  is  often  confused  with  the  proposed 
nationalisation of the SARB. Some proponents of nationalisation believe, erroneously, 
that such a move would facilitate a change in our mandate. This view is partly based 
on the premise that the SARB operates in the interest of private shareholders. This is 
 Page - 7 - of 9 
definitely not the case. We act in the interest of the economy as a whole, guided by 
our mandates, and we do not favour any particular interest group or groups.  
 Given that this issue remains very much part of current debates, it may be instructive 
to explain again the role that SARB shareholders play and the SARB’s view on this 
matter. The rights of our shareholders are extremely constrained, limited to voting for 
some Board members at the SARB’s AGM. In fact, government appoints 8 of the 15 
Board members, but it plays no role in the broader policy or regulatory decisions of 
the  SARB.  These  decisions  are  the  responsibility  of  the  Governor  and  the  Deputy 
Governors, who are themselves appointed by government. Private shareholders and 
Board members they elect have no influence whatsoever on monetary policy, financial 
stability  or  banking  regulation.  There  is  also  no  mechanism  through  which  the 
shareholders, or indeed even the Board, can influence these policies. 
 Furthermore,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Act  90  of  1989  caps  shareholder 
dividends at 10 cents per share per annum. With two million shares on issue, and a 
limit of 10 000 shares per shareholder and associates, the total dividend payment by 
the SARB to its shareholders is R200 000 per year, and a maximum of R1 000 per 
shareholder  per  year.  In  addition,  any  surplus  remaining  at  the  end  of  the  SARB’s 
financial year, after provisioning for bad debts; depreciation of assets, pension benefits 
for employees and the payment of the dividend to shareholders, one tenth (10%) is 
allocated to the reserves of the Bank and 90% to government.  
 Private  shareholders  do,  however,  represent  an  additional  layer  in  the  governance 
framework  of  the  SARB.  This  helps  to  strengthen  accountability  and  transparency. 
Shareholder-elected Board members add valuable expertise and inputs to the internal 
operations  of  the  SARB.  Getting  rid  of  private  shareholders  would  not  necessarily 
improve  governance.  The  South  African  experience  has  taught  us  that  boards 
appointed  by  government  are  no  guarantee  of  good  governance,  nor  are  they  a 
guarantee that decisions will be taken in the interest of the broader economy.  
 Private shareholding in central banks is an historical legacy, and is no longer common. 
Admittedly,  there  is  no  strong  argument,  in  principle,  in  favour  of  retaining  private 
shareholders. However, we are concerned that the process could be expensive, as 
 Page - 8 - of 9 
the shares trade for far less than what some existing shareholders are prepared to sell 
their shares for. Indeed, it is the case that a group of shareholders is agitating for the 
SARB’s nationalisation as they believe that they are entitled to a share of the assets 
of the SARB and see this as an opportunity to make enormous profits at the expense 
of taxpayers. This could turn out to be a protracted legal process and a very expensive 
exercise  for  what  would,  at  best,  be  a  cosmetic  gain.  To  reiterate:  whatever  the 
shareholding structure, the primary mandate of the SARB will remain unchanged. 
 This past year leading up to this AGM has been challenging, but we have ended it on 
a  positive  note.  As  you  are  all  no  doubt  aware,  this  year  marks  the  centenary 
celebrations of former President Mandela’s birth. The SARB played its role in these 
celebrations by issuing a commemorative banknote series and a commemorative R5 
circulation coin in Tata Madiba’s honour earlier this month. This was the first time in 
the SARB’s nearly 100-year history that commemorative banknotes were issued. The 
full  range  of  banknotes,  as  well  as  the  commemorative  circulation  coin,  depict  the 
history of Madiba’s long walk to freedom.  
 At  the  same  time  as  the  commemorative  notes,  we  launched  a  mobile  app  as  a 
platform  to  create  greater  public  awareness  of  the  security,  technical  and  design 
features of our bank notes. The app also features interesting details on the life and 
times of Madiba – aligned with the commemorative banknotes. I encourage you all to 
download the mobile app from any of the mainstream app stores to learn interesting 
facts and details about our currency.  
 It is our responsibility to ensure that the integrity of Madiba is reflected in the integrity 
and value of our currency. This we will do not only by constantly upgrading the security 
features of our notes, but also through protecting the value of the currency by striving 
for  price  stability.  This  is,  after  all,  the  primary  mandate  of  the  SARB,  and  we  will 
continue to pursue prudent monetary policy in the interest of balanced and sustainable 
economic growth in our country. 
 Thank you. 
   Page - 9 - of 9 
