BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks by 
 Louis Kasekende (PhD) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
  At the 9th Annual Uganda Top 100 Mid-sized Companies’ 
Awards- Gala Dinner  
      Hotel Africana, Kampala 
 November 10, 2017 
 1 
  Executive Director, Uganda Investment Authority 
Country leader, KPMG Uganda 
MD of Monitor Publications 
MD of DFCU Bank 
CEOs/MDs of ICEA General Insurance, Vodafone & South African Airways 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Let me begin by thanking KPMG for inviting me to this Gala Award Dinner for 
the top 100 mid-sized companies in Uganda and also to commend both KPMG 
East Africa and the Nation Media Group/Monitor Publications for this laudable 
initiative.  It  is  laudable  because  this  section  of  the  business  community  –  the 
mid-sized companies – is crucial for the future growth and development of our 
economy,  as  I  will  explain  in  my  remarks  tonight.  The  top  100  mid-sized 
companies  will  not  only  offer 
recognition 
to  outstanding  corporate 
achievements  but  also  provide  valuable  information  about  this  section  of  our 
economy. 
 The  main  reason  why  mid-sized  companies  are  so  important  for  economic 
development  is  their  productivity.  Sustainable  increases  in  the  per  capita 
incomes  of  a  country  require  sustained  growth  in  labour  productivity.  Uganda 
cannot  hope  to  reach  middle  income  status  without  a  very  substantial  rise  in 
labour productivity.  
 In  a  developing  country  like  Uganda,  the  main  source  of  labour  productivity 
growth is the modern business sector, for reasons I will discuss shortly.  
The  modern  business  sector  in  many  respects  is  conterminous  with  medium 
sized  and  large  companies.  In  Uganda,  there  are  few  large  companies,  so  the 
modern business sector of our economy mainly comprises mid-sized companies. 
 2 
The  Bank  of  Uganda’s  annual  Private  Sector  Investment  Survey  (PSIS) 
provides valuable information on this sector of our economy.  
 The  2016  PSIS  (which  is  available  on  our  website  –  www.bou.or.ug)  provides 
data derived from 630 companies which responded to a questionnaire; and these 
companies comprise the majority of the largest companies in Uganda.   
More  than  70  percent  of  the  companies  covered  by  the  PSIS  had  an  annual 
turnover within the thresholds for defining a mid-size company for the purposes 
of the KPMG Gala Awards; i.e. a turnover of between Shs 360 million and Shs 
25 billion.  
The  data  in  the  PSIS  enables  us  to  estimate  the  average  labour  productivity, 
defined as value added per worker, of the sampled 630 companies. In 2015 this 
amounted to Shs 38 million in current prices. For the economy as a whole, value 
added  per  worker  in  2015  was  just  over  Shs  5  million.  Hence  the  companies 
surveyed  in  the  PSIS  generate  labour  productivity  which  is  more  than  seven 
times the average for the entire Ugandan economy.   
 Not only are the mid-sized companies much more productive than the economy 
as a whole, their labour productivity has been growing much faster than that of 
the rest of the economy. In real terms, the labour productivity of the companies 
covered  by  the  PSIS  increased  by  an  annual  average  of  5.1  percent  between 
2010  and  2015.  This  is  much  higher  than  the  estimated  2.2  percent  average 
annual  labour  productivity  growth  for  the  economy  as  a  whole  over  the  same 
period.   
 Why are our mid-sized companies so much more productive than the rest of the 
economy,  which  mainly  consists  of  small  scale,  micro  and  household 
enterprises? There are four reasons for the large difference in productivity. 
  3 
The first is that mid-sized companies are able to realise economies of scale that 
small  and  micro  enterprises  are  unable  to  do.  In  many  types  of  business, 
especially  manufacturing,  efficiency  depends  on  being  able  to  operate  at 
optimal  economies  of  scale.  Operating  at  a  larger  scale  also  allows  individual 
staff to specialise in specific tasks which raises their productivity. 
 Secondly, mid-sized companies combine labour with capital equipment, thereby 
raising  substantially  the  productivity  of  labour.  In  contrast,  at  small  scales  of 
operation,  the  use  of  many  types  of  capital  equipment  is  not  economically 
viable, so most small and micro enterprises use very little capital which means 
that their labour productivity is low as a result. 
 Thirdly,  mid-sized  firms  are  large  enough  to  employ  professional  managerial 
and  technical  specialists  which  enable  them  to  utilise  their  resources  most 
efficiently.  Fourthly,  by  applying  modern  management  techniques,  mid-sized 
firms can generate continuous productivity improvements through “learning by 
doing”;  that  is  utilising  the  knowledge  gained  through  their  own  production 
activities  and  those  of  other  firms  to  make  these  activities  more  efficient. 
Economic growth theories have identified learning by doing as one of the most 
important sources of long run growth. 
 One  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  Ugandan  economy  is  that  the  modern  business 
sector still comprises a relatively small share of it. The companies surveyed in 
the PSIS comprise only 5 percent of GDP.  
Although these companies have achieved robust productivity growth, their share 
of the economy is too small for their productivity growth to make a substantial 
impact on that of the economy as a whole. Therefore, if we are to transform our 
economy into that of a middle income country, we must expand the size of the 
modern business sector many times. 
 4 
 The fact that the modern business sector has remained a relatively small part of 
the  overall  economy  despite  a  quarter  of  a  century  of  consistently  robust  real 
economic  growth  indicates  that  there  are  major  barriers  to  investment  by  this 
sector.  The  2017  Global  Competitiveness  Report,  published  by  the  African 
Development  Bank,  the  World  Economic  Forum  and  the  World  Bank,  lists 
some  of  the  factors  which  impede  the  competitiveness  of  the  Ugandan 
economy.  These  include  some  aspects  of  the  institutional  environment, 
especially  pertaining  to  public  administration,  poor  infrastructure,  higher 
education and training, and technological readiness.  
 The  long  term  prospects  for  our  economy  depend  on  creating  a  business 
environment  which  is  conducive  to  attracting  investment  by  mid-sized 
companies  on  a  large  scale.  If  this  sector  is  to  expand  to  command  a  much 
larger share of  the  Uganda economy,  which is necessary  if  per  capita  incomes 
are  to  rise  substantially;  thousands  of  new  mid-sized  companies  will  have  to 
invest in Uganda.  
 The  factors  needed  to  attract  private  investment  on  such  a  scale  include 
prospects  for  strong  long  term  growth  in  markets  for  goods  and  services, 
macroeconomic  stability  and  a  competitively  priced  workforce.  They  also 
include  a  clear  and  transparent  institutional  environment  with  clear  rules  and 
regulations  which  are  implemented  fairly  to  create  a  level  playing  field  for  all 
investors and which protect the legitimate rights of businesses.   
 To  strengthen the  business  climate  in  Uganda, the business community  should 
play  a  more  prominent  role,  through  its  collective  institutions  such  as  the 
Private  Sector  Foundation  and  the  Uganda  Manufacturers’  Association,  in 
identifying and highlighting obstacles to investment and business expansion and 
 5 
lobbying  for  economic  and  institutional  reforms  to  remove  or  mitigate  these 
obstacles.  
There  are  many  important  public  policy  debates  in  this  country,  about  for 
example the appropriate level of tax rates and import tariffs, the types of skills 
needed  in  the  labour  force,  the  type  of  infrastructure  that  is  required,  and  the 
importance  of  regional  integration,  which  would  benefit  from  the  collective 
voice of the business community.  I hope that events such as this Gala Awards 
Dinner can help to stimulate the debate that is needed in Uganda  to strengthen 
the business environment and attract much more private investment. 
 Finally,  I  congratulate  all  the  entrepreneurs  here  tonight,  especially  those  that 
have  received  awards,  and  encourage  them  to  use  their  experience  to  nurture 
and mentor other aspiring entrepreneurs, so that we can collectively expand the 
formal business sector in this country - that is vital for employment generation. 
 Thank you for listening. 
 6 
