Gent Sejko: Launch of the EBRD Transition Report 2017-18
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  launching  of  the
EBRD Transition Report 2017-18, Tirana, 11 April 2018.
 Dear Mr Colangeli,
Dear Mr Sanfey,
Dear participants,
It is a special pleasure for us to host again the presentation of the Transition Report 2017–18 by
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The Transition Report 2017–18 addresses some very important issues for transition economies,
such as convergence of firm dynamics and productivity, the importance of road infrastructure to
economic growth, and the new opportunities from the green economy. 
It is a pleasure to note that the Report presents a positive assessment of the developments in
the  region. After  some  years  of  anaemic  growth,  the  economic  activity  in  the  region  shows
recovery and the prospects remain positive, notwithstanding the geopolitical concerns and the
internal  and  external  challenges  we  face.    Some  regional  countries  grew  faster  than  other
countries  around  the  world,  of  similar  development  level  and  market  size.  The  capital  inflows
have  been  relatively  considerable,  driving  to  the  narrowing  of  the  interest  rates  spread  in  the
region  compared  with  those  in  large  economies.  More  importantly,  it  seems  that  inflation  is
gradually returning to target levels and the accelerated economic growth in the Western Balkans
is supported by bank lending and some major infrastructure projects.
Nevertheless, the Report notes that productivity growth slowed down; hence, the firm dynamics
is identified as one of the main issues that should concern our region.
The main reasons of these developments seem to derive from some factors:
First, the low capacity of markets and firms to regenerate, decelerates the replacement of
non-productive  firms  with  new  innovative  ones,  and  hinders  the  efficient  allocation  of
resources.
Second, small firms do not succeed in increasing their output or the number of employees.
Studies show that their productivity is rather lower compared with larger firms. Smaller firms
make  up  the  majority  of  producing  entities  –  around  80%  in  EBRD  region,  and  95%  in
Albania.  For this reason, more should be done for the integration of smaller firms into global
production  networks,  finding  human  capital,  access  in  the  financial  system  or  capital
markets.
The Bank of Albania deems that the development of the financial system is indispensable for the
economic  development  of  the  country.    In  this  regard,  through  our  policies,  we  are  trying  to
encourage  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  bank  lending,  in  order  for  it  to  be  less  fragmented  or
concentrated in certain sectors of the economy.
Also, we are closely monitoring the financial and borrowing situation of micro-economic firms,
including those in the agricultural sector. These firms have a considerable share in the gross
value added and in the number of employed persons in Albania. Our recent surveys show that
the primary concerns of smaller firms are: unfair competition; difficulties in finding markets to sell
the products; and, to a lesser extent, limited access in financing or the cost of providing banking
products and services.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are aware that the growth of productivity, in particular for smaller firms, is very important for
the  economic  convergence  of Albania.  The  fulfilment  of  needs  for  investing  capital  is  a  main
challenge for small producers, as they have less or no borrowing history in the financial system.
For this reason, the analysis with micro data are already subject of discussion in the activities
and conferences organised by the Bank of Albania, to understand the needs of small firms and
how we can help to improve the infrastructure, aiming to increase their financial inclusion in the
future.
Productivity  is  important  as  it  determines  the  convergence  speed  towards  the  advanced
economies.  So far,  the  productivity  convergence  of  our  countries  with  advanced  countries  is
guided  mostly  by  a  re-allocation  of  resources  from  state-owned  firms  to  private  firms.
Nevertheless, this process has not succeeded to move further forward to the development of
innovative products. Unless these trends change, the Albanian and regional firms will likely lose
competitiveness against their EU partners.  Overall, it means that the economic convergence
and the equality of income with EU countries will be considerably delayed.  In a more specific
aspect, the European integration processes will slowdown, as far as our firms will not be able to
withstand the competitiveness pressures.
For  this  reason,  I  think  that  the  regional  and  Albanian  authorities  should  continue  with  the
implementation of structural reforms, which aim to:
Increase the formalisation level of the economy, as a tool for raising competitiveness, for
promoting  consolidation,  for  improving  the  governance  of  firms,  and  for  lowering  their
financing costs;
Promote the development of firms in fields where the region and Albania provide competitive
advantages, such as tourism or the agro-industry, and in those fields that have high value
added, such as the information technology or the financial services.
Development capital markets, as a tool to support new and innovative firms and as a partner
to share the financial risk of entrepreneurs in the stage of the expansion and development.
Dear participants,
Let me emphasise that, notwithstanding the focus on the future challenges, the report shows
optimism for the region. It notes that, unlike the other emerging economies, the presentation of
productive industries will contribute to the increase of employment.
Also, the regional integration in industry has the capacity to generate growth of productivity, to
better compete with the imports and contribute to the growth of regional exports. The institutional
adoption and convergence is considerably important for the integration of Albanian firms in the
global  output  chain,  and  for  strengthening  their  sophistication  and  specialisation  in  the  global
market.
Another  potential  for  the  transition  to  an  innovation-based  economy  is  “The  green  economy”,
where  the  convergence  capacity  of  the  existing  producing  processes  in  other  processes
releasing less carbon may be considered as an opportunity for the further development of our
region.  
Regarding  the  future,  the  report  assesses  positively  the  reforms  undertaken  by  the Albanian
authorities.  The  macroeconomic  environment  is  assessed  as  stable  and  prospects  show  the
positive growth pace will be maintained. Trade, construction, transport and industry, as well as
the narrowing of the deficit in the external sector of economy contributed most to the economic
growth in 2017. At the same time, the financial system activity continued to reflect considerable
improvement and showed good resilience to operational risks. The indicators of financial result,
capitalisation and liquidity evidence the considerable improvement of credit quality and show the
importance to continue the implementation of the measures undertaken by the Bank of Albania.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Also, the Report evidences that the projects and investments in infrastructure have contributed to
economic  integration  of  Albania  with  regional  countries,  providing  a  positive  effect  on  higher
productivity and more opportunities. We assess that TAP investment will provide positive effects
on  the  energy  infrastructure  and  will  contribute  to  higher  productivity  through  lower  costs  and
covering the needs for energy capacities, thus reducing one of the structural weaknesses of the
Albanian economy (the reliable supply with energy).
Concluding, I would like to highlight the suggestions found in the report that it is now the time for
the financial sector to focus on firms, as the basis for employment, innovation, productivity and
economic growth. Thus, the development policies should focus on the firms and their future, as a
source of convergence growth.  The economic development policies and priorities, at micro and
macro level, should focus on: the improvement of the institutional and financial infrastructure; the
development of the capital market; the investments in infrastructure; and, the regional integration.
Dear participants,
 The EBRD Transition Report 2017–18 is an important document to all of us. Irrespective of our
status  as  decision-makers,  policy-makers,  researchers,  academics  or  journalists,  the  Report
provides ample information to further corroborate our analyses and conclusions.
I invite you to further read the Report and materialise its conclusions rationally and responsibly in
your analyses for the present and the outlook of our economy, and beyond. 
Thank You!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
