Elisabeta Gjoni: Modernisation of retail payment systems in Albania
Opening address by Ms Elisabeta Gjoni, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the
Conference on the "Modernisation of retail payment systems in Albania", Tirana, 21 June 2018.
Good morning!
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the Conference on the “Modernisation of retail payment
systems in Albania”. The Bank of Albania is honoured to have today representatives from the
European Central Bank, the World Bank, and central banks of Italy, Kosovo, and Serbia. Also, I
would  like  to  welcome  the  operators  and  providers  of  well-known  payment  services  in
international  markets,  representatives  of  the  domestic  banking  and  payments  industry,  public
authorities and, the Governor of the Bank of Albania and the Deputy Prime Minister of Albania,
Mrs Senida Mesi.    
This  conference  takes  place  only  one  day  after  the  meeting  of  the  National  Payment  System
Committee (NPSC). The members of this Committee undertook important commitments related
to the development of payment systems and financial inclusion.
The approval of the National Retail Payments Strategy (2018–2023) is the main product of this
meeting.
The retail payments system is a vital component of: financial markets; the overall economy; and
every citizen as the end user. In this framework, the Bank of Albania prioritises the modernisation
of retail payments system. 
Banks  have  provided  a  significant  contribution  for  the  development  of  payments,  so  far.  They
have invested in: many new technological platforms; modern payment instruments; cards by the
renowned international brands. In recent years, non-bank financial institutions are also playing an
important  role  in  this  regard,  by  implementing  innovative  solutions.  Public  authorities  have
initiated and developed electronic platforms for the public payment services, such as taxes.
The progress is notable – if compared with 10–20 years ago. But, our benchmarks are visionary:
alignment with the standards of the countries we aspire to integrate with and the development of
a  society  with  a  broad  base  of  financial  inclusion,  where  the  use  of  electronic  payment
instruments are part of everyday life.
The  Bank  of Albania,  based  on  this  vision,  has  placed  at  its  focus  the  modernisation  of  retail
payments system to bring about a tangible change.   
In collaboration with all market stakeholders, and with the valuable expertise of the World Bank,
funded by SECO, the Bank of Albania finalised a set of analyses and studies on the situation of
payments in Albania. I would like to mention here three main reports, published on our website:
1.  The  so-called  PAFI  project  report  on  the  market  analysis  on  financial  inclusion,  which  is
implemented, in many other countries, and aims at reforming the retail payment systems
and promoting financial inclusion;
2.  Review of the Market for Remittances in Albania, a component of retail payment systems; 
3.  The study on measuring the costs of payment instruments. This study identified the costs
for each element, finding that cash is the most costly means to the Albanian economy. In
addition, it sets out scenarios for the replacement with various innovative instruments, which
reduce these costs. 
The findings from the market, needs assessment and scope for intervention were materialised
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
in a National Strategy on the Modernisation of Retail Payment 2018–2023)
The Strategy aims for improvements in the retail payment market to provide Albanian
citizens with more options to choose from for their daily transactions, more easily and
more cost-effective, by supporting the objective for a broader-based financial inclusion. 
The  strategy  lays  down  concrete  and  measurable  objectives,  such  as  the  doubling  of  the
population having a bank account (from 38% in 2018 to 70% in 2022), the increase in the number
of electronic payments per capita, from 4.3% in 2016, to 10 in 2022 (increase by 130%).  
The Strategy aims also legal and regulatory improvements, which lay the foundations for
innovative  initiatives,  and  a  level  playing  field.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Albania
finalised the drafting of the law “On Payment Services in the Republic of Albania”.  The
approval  and  implementation  of  this  law  will  provide  a crucial  contribution  to  establishing
services at low cost and easily accessible by the public, and promoting competition and
innovation also based on a prudential consumer protection regime. This will be the theme
of the first session of the Conference.
Also, the Strategy aims at infrastructural improvements. In this regard, a set of measures
are envisaged to promote interaction among various actors from the infrastructural point of view,
aiming at reducing costs, in particular, for end users.
The establishment of a national platform for processing card payments - would to provide a
direct impact on reducing high costs and improving the current card processing practices, due to
the extended cycles and involvement of more actors in the process. Such a platform would also
support innovative services, such as mobile payments and e-wallet.
The Bank of Albania is analysing the possibility to develop instant payment in our market as
well.  The  implementation  of  such  a  project  is  deemed  to  have  a  direct  impact  on  financial
inclusion  and  on  providing  services  at  low  cost.    I  invite  you  to  actively  participate  in
discussions,  in  order  to  benefit  as  much  as  possible  by  the  experience  of  other
countries,  and  to  analyse  the  possibilities  presented  by  service  providers  that  are  invited  to
discuss on these topic in the afternoon session. 
financial 
inclusion, 
the  strategy  pays  special  attention 
Furthermore,  regarding 
the
establishment  of  the  concept  of “basic”  bank  accounts  with  low  costs,  for  the  financial
inclusion of all levels of population, irrespective of their economic situation.  
Last  but  not  least, innovation in public services. The initiatives that digitalise and automate
public services need coordination and access to various data electronic platforms, such as data
of: citizens; addresses; and payments for these services. 
Any  development  should  be  accompanied  with financial education of the population,  as  a
precondition for success.
to 
The discussions in this Conference bring to the fore the views and experience of various actors
from different countries (regulators, developers, service providers, authorities and experts) and I
think this will shed light on the key topics of modernising the retail payment systems in Albania.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
