 M a y   2 4,   2 0 1 8 
Bank  of  Japan 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Gunma 
Makoto Sakurai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  I. Economic Activity at Home and Abroad: Recent Developments and the Outlook 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me start with developments in overseas economies. 
 
Overseas  economies  have  continued  to  grow  firmly  on  the  whole.  Trade  activity  was 
sluggish globally following the financial crisis of 2008, but it has been recovering markedly 
recently.  Under  these  circumstances,  as  favorable  effects  spill  over  from  advanced  to 
emerging  economies,  the  momentum  toward  recovery  is  spreading  to  broader  regions. 
Global  financial  markets,  which  became  somewhat  unstable  from  February,  have  been 
regaining calmness of late. 
 
Looking at developments in detail, the U.S. economy has been expanding. As exports have 
been  on  an  increasing  trend,  business  and  household  sentiment  is  improving  as  well. 
Expansionary  fiscal  measures  taken  by  the  U.S.  government  are  also  expected  to  push 
domestic demand upward in the short term. The European economy also has continued to 
recover  firmly  as  a  trend.  Although  several  economic  indicators  have  showed  signs  of  a 
slowdown recently, this is considered to be due to temporary factors such as a reaction to 
the high growth that continued until the end of 2017, unfavorable weather conditions, and 
industrial strikes. 
 
Among emerging economies, the Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on 
the whole. Exports have been increasing, and domestic demand has continued to be firm, 
underpinned by growth in public investment. In the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, exports 
have been following an uptrend, and domestic demand has been resilient on the back of the 
improvement in business and household sentiment and economic stimulus measures taken 
by  their  authorities.  Commodity-exporting  economies  such  as  Brazil,  Russia,  and  South 
Africa  have  been  recovering  moderately  as  their  central  banks  have  been  engaging  in 
monetary easing following the declines in their inflation rates. 
 
Since February 2018, global financial markets, mainly in the United States, have exhibited 
unstable movements. However, this is considered to represent a strong reaction to the steep 
stock price rise from the latter half of 2017, which was partly caused by expectations for 
 1 
 fiscal  expansion  in  the  United  States,  and  to  the  overheated  speculative  trading  in  some 
countries of financial products, betting on a decline in financial market volatility. Recently, 
as  these  developments  have  subsided,  global  financial  markets  seem  to  be  regaining 
calmness.   
 
As for the outlook, overseas economies are expected to continue growing firmly. As trade 
activity  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  stayed  firm  globally,  advanced  and  emerging 
economies are expected to grow in a well-balanced manner. According to the April 2018 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the 
global growth rate was projected at 3.9 percent in each of 2018 and 2019, up slightly from 
3.8 percent in 2017. 
 
B. Recent Developments in Japan's Economy 
Next, I will discuss developments in Japan's economy. 
 
Japan's  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  with  steady  growth  in  overseas  economies  as 
well as  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  government  spending.  A  virtuous 
cycle  operating  from  income  to  spending  has  become  stronger  in  both  the  corporate  and 
household  sectors,  and  the  economy  is  in  the  process  of  shifting  from  growth  led  by 
external  demand  to  more  self-sustaining  growth  accompanied  by  a  recovery  in  domestic 
demand. The economy recorded positive growth for the eighth consecutive quarter until the 
end  of  2017.  Although  it  marked  small  negative  growth  in  the January-March  quarter  of 
2018,  this  was  due  to  temporary  factors  such  as  unfavorable  weather  conditions.  As 
relatively  high  economic  growth  has  continued  as  a  trend,  the  positive  output  gap  --  an 
indicator  of  the  utilization  of  capital  and  labor  --  has  been  widening  steadily.  Amid  the 
growing supply-side constraints in some sectors of the economy, firms are taking measures 
to  enhance  supply  capacity,  such  as  increasing  their  labor  force,  making  business  fixed 
investment  that  is intended  to promote  labor  saving  and  expand  production  capacity,  and 
streamlining  their  business  processes.  As  a  result,  Japan's  economy  has  maintained 
well-balanced growth on both the demand and supply sides. 
 
 2 
 Looking at developments in more detail, in the corporate sector, exports have been on an 
increasing trend on the back of the firm growth in overseas economies. For example, here in 
Gunma  Prefecture,  exports,  particularly  of  transportation  machinery,  showed  strength.  A 
factor contributing to the strength in overall exports is the growth in inbound demand led by 
the  increasing  number  of  visitors  to  the  World  Heritage  site  Tomioka  Silk  Mill  and  to 
popular  hot  springs.  As  Japan's  economy  has  continued  to  grow  moderately,  corporate 
profits  and  business  sentiment  also  have  maintained  their  improving  trend.  While  labor 
shortages have continued and supply-side constraints gradually have become apparent, as 
evidenced by delays in procurement of some components in the manufacturing sector and 
an  increase  in  front-loaded  orders  placed  in  anticipation  of  future  delays,  firms  are 
becoming  more  active  in  making  business  fixed  investment  intended  to  promote  labor 
saving  and  expand  production  capacity.  According  to  the  Bank's  March  2018  Tankan 
(Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  the  diffusion  index  for  business 
conditions for all industries and enterprises improved for the seventh consecutive quarter, 
reaching the highest level since 1991.1  Business fixed investment plans for all industries 
and  enterprises,  including  financial  institutions,  showed  a  relatively  strong  year-on-year 
increase of 4.3 percent for fiscal 2017 and 2.0 percent for fiscal 2018. 
 
Let us turn to the household sector. Labor market conditions have tightened steadily as the 
number  of  employees  has  increased.  The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  has 
surpassed the peak level observed during the bubble period. The unemployment rate is 2.5 
percent, a level that essentially represents a situation close to full employment. Firms are 
making active efforts to secure their labor force while expanding the scope of workers who 
may  be  employed  and  are  promoting  a  shift  from  non-regular  to  regular  employment. 
Wages of part-time employees, which are responsive to labor market conditions, have risen 
markedly.  Although  wages  of  regular  employees  --  the  majority  of  employees  --  have 
continued to increase only moderately, there are signs of gradual yet stronger improvement 
in  wages.  For  example,  the  growth  in  base  pay  in  fiscal  2018  is  projected  to  exceed  the 
actual growth of a year earlier, as in the previous year, and the share of firms raising wages 
                                                   
1  The diffusion index for business conditions is calculated as the proportion of firms responding that 
business  conditions  were  "favorable"  minus  the  proportion  of  those  responding  that  they  were 
"unfavorable." 
 3 
 of regular employees is growing. With the employment and income situation improving, as 
I have mentioned, private consumption also has been increasing moderately. 
 
C. Outlook for Japan's Economy 
As for the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion, supported 
by the highly accommodative financial conditions and stimulative fiscal measures. In line 
with the firm growth in overseas economies, exports are likely to maintain their increasing 
trend. As a virtuous cycle operating from income to spending is being maintained in both 
the corporate and household sectors, business fixed investment and private consumption are 
also  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend.  I  believe  that  the  impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike 
scheduled for 2019 is highly uncertain, yet most likely to be smaller than the impact of the 
tax hike in 2014. At the time of the previous consumption tax hike, the last-minute rise in 
demand  before  the  hike  and  the  ensuing  fallback  in  demand  turned  out  to  be  strong, 
particularly with respect to high-priced products, not only because the margin of the hike 
was large but also because a second tax hike was expected down the road. Application of a 
reduced tax rate on some products and policies concerning the provision of free education 
will also contribute to lightening the burden on households. 
 
According  to  the  April  2018  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the 
Outlook Report) released by the Bank, the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts 
of the real GDP growth rate in fiscal 2018 was 1.6 percent. This represents a slight upward 
revision of the forecast made three months ago. In fiscal 2019 and 2020, the growth rate is 
expected to decline to around 0.8 percent, a level close to the potential growth rate, because 
of  such  factors  as  a  cyclical  slowdown  in  business  fixed  investment  and  a  fallback  in 
Olympic Games-related demand. 
 
Needless to say, the outlook is not free from uncertainty. Among the main risks, we must 
keep  a  watchful  eye  on  overseas  factors.  In  particular,  I  am  concerned  about  a  possible 
spread  of  protectionist  measures  in  trade  policy.  In  the  past,  trade  and  investment 
liberalization,  coupled  with  the  advances  in  technological  innovation,  has  driven  global 
economic  growth.  As  new  technologies  have  been  disseminated  through  trade  and 
investment  activities,  productivity  improvement  and  further  technological  development 
 4 
 the  government 
favorable  economic  conditions  continue  and 
have  been  promoted  across  the  regions.  If  the  protectionist  mood  gains  traction  and 
constrains trade and investment, the global economy could be deprived of its main growth 
engine.  Moreover,  uncertainty  over  the  U.S.  economic  policy  management  is  growing.  If 
the inflation rate accelerates or concerns over the deterioration of the fiscal balance grow 
while 
implements 
expansionary  fiscal measures, there is a risk that interest rates will shoot up, triggering a 
stock price plunge and changes in the global flow of  funds.  In addition, we must keep a 
watchful eye on the negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union 
(EU)  and  geopolitical  risks  related  to  North  Korea  and  the  Middle  East.  All  these  risk 
factors could significantly affect Japan; therefore, while continuing to pay due attention to 
them, the Bank will closely examine developments at home and abroad. 
 
II. Prices 
A. Current Situation 
Next, I will turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food for  April, which was released on May 18, 
2018, was 0.7 percent. The rise in energy prices has contributed considerably to the increase 
in the CPI. Meanwhile, the increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy for 
April remained only moderate, with the year-on-year rate of change standing at 0.4 percent. 
 
Despite the continued improvement in economic conditions, the growth in wages and prices 
has  been  sluggish,  and  various  factors  have  been pointed  out  as  the  causes.  I  am  paying 
particular attention to the changes in the economy's supply capacity. For example, while the 
tightness  in  labor  market  conditions  has  been  highlighted  by  the  media,  the  labor  force 
participation rate, which had been trending downward, has started to rise, partly as a result 
of  various initiatives conducted by the government and firms. In addition, the number of 
employees  who  have  reluctantly  accepted  non-regular  employment  --  due  to  a  lack  of 
opportunities  to  work  as  regular  employees  --  is  declining.  This  is  because  firms  are 
promoting  a  shift  from  non-regular  to  regular  employment  in  order  to  retain  their  labor 
force.  Firms  also  have  made  progress  with  such  activities  as  making  business  fixed 
 5 
 investment  intended  to  promote  labor  saving  and  streamlining  their  business  processes.2 
All  of  these  changes  lead  to  an  expansion  of  the  economy's  supply  capacity  in  terms  of 
labor input and labor productivity. I believe that such expansion appears to be easing the 
upward pressure on wages and prices associated with an increase in demand. 
 
B. Outlook 
That being said, I do not believe that the sluggish growth in wages and prices will continue 
forever.  There  are certain  limits to  the extent  of  such  activities as  raising  the  labor  force 
participation  rate,  promoting  a  shift  from  non-regular  to  regular  employment,  and 
streamlining business processes. In the longer term, the effects of the expansion of supply 
capacity in curbing growth in wages and prices are expected to decline in due course.   
 
Meanwhile, the expansion of the economy's supply capacity will strengthen the economy's 
growth potential. If expectations for growth increase on the back of the continued expansion 
of  supply  capacity,  thereby  increasing  expectations  of  households  regarding  permanent 
income  and  of  firms  about  future  earnings,  this  may  push  up  wages  and  prices  through 
active consumption and business fixed investment. 
 
As I explained so far, although the recent expansion of the economy's supply capacity may 
delay growth in wages and prices in the short term, it is unlikely to become a factor that will 
keep wages and prices at low levels in the long term. As wages and prices start increasing, 
the  public's  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  rise  through  the  adaptive  formation 
mechanism. Therefore, my judgment is that the momentum toward achieving the Bank's 2 
percent  price  stability  target  is  being  maintained.  According  to  the  April  2018  Outlook 
Report,  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  were  1.3  percent  for  fiscal  2018  and  1.8 
percent for fiscal 2019 and 2020, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike. 
 
                                                   
2  The  annex  to  the  Regional  Economic  Report  (available  only  in  Japanese)  released  in 
December  2017  presents  some  cases  of  firms'  initiatives  taken  toward  improving 
productivity. 
 6 
 III. Monetary Policy 
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control 
In  September  2016,  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  as  a  new 
framework  for  strengthening  monetary  easing.  This  framework  consists  of  two  main 
components. 
 
One of the two is yield curve control, whereby the Bank facilitates the formation of short- 
and long-term interest rates that are considered most appropriate in light of the 2 percent 
price stability target. In the Bank's current guideline for market operations, the short-term 
policy  interest  rate  is  set  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  for  yields  on  10-year 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) is set at around 0 percent. This is intended to support 
proactive economic activities by Japanese firms and households through maintaining highly 
accommodative financial conditions.   
 
The other main component is the inflation-overshooting commitment. This represents the 
Bank's  strong  commitment  to  continuing  to expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  observed 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI,  for  all  items  less  fresh  food,  exceeds  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  and  stays  above  the  target  in  a  stable  manner.  In  Japan,  the 
inflation  rate  has  remained  stable  at low  levels  over  a  long  period  of  time.  For  Japanese 
firms and households, the low inflation rate has become a quite natural condition that serves 
as a premise for conducting economic activities. Going forward, in order to raise prices in a 
stable manner, it is necessary to encourage firms and households to change their behavior 
patterns by making them actually experience an inflation rate higher than 2 percent. 
 
B. Future Conduct of Monetary Policy 
In light of the recent relative weakness of prices, I believe that it is appropriate for the Bank, 
for  the  time  being,  to  maintain  the  accommodative  financial  conditions  with  persistence 
under the current policy framework. While doing so, the Bank needs to keep in mind the 
following two factors. 
 
First,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  a  careful  watch  on  preventing  a  significant  supply-demand 
imbalance.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  pace  of  the  expansion  of  the  economy's  supply 
 7 
 capacity eventually may slow in the longer term. Meanwhile, yield curve control contains a 
mechanism  of  amplifying  its  own  easing  effect  as  inflation  expectations  rise  and  the 
economy's  growth  potential  increases.  In  this  respect,  it  is  possible  that  changes  in  the 
supply-demand balance will occur in line with the slowdown in the pace of expansion of the 
supply capacity and the strengthening of the effects of demand-stimulating measures taken 
on  the  monetary  front.  If  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  supply-demand  balance  is  left 
unattended  for  a  long  time,  this  may  unnecessarily  cause  sharp  economic  swings.  I  will 
discuss this point later in more detail. 
 
Second, it is necessary to pay due attention to not making the financial system unstable by 
maintaining accommodative financial conditions over a long period of time. According to 
the  Bank's  assessment  presented  in  the  April  2018  Financial  System  Report,  although 
Japan's financial system as a whole is not showing any sign of overheating, some indicators, 
such as the lending attitudes of financial institutions, are very close to a state of overheating. 
Furthermore,  if  the  low  interest  rate  environment  continues  and  downward  pressure  on 
financial institutions' profits becomes prolonged, the functioning of financial intermediation 
may be undermined.   
 
I believe that the Bank will need to review these points at each Monetary Policy Meeting 
and, as necessary, consider in earnest the most appropriate monetary policy.   
 
IV. Changes in the Economy's Supply Capacity and Conduct of Monetary Policy 
So  far,  I  have  mentioned  several  factors  associated  with  the  expansion  of  the  economy's 
supply  capacity  as  the  causes  of  the  delay  in  growth  in  wages  and  prices.  From  now, 
although  there  will  be  a  degree  of  overlap  with  some  of  the  points  I  have  touched  upon 
earlier,  I  will  discuss  somewhat  longer-term  changes  in  the  supply  capacity  of  Japan's 
economy and how monetary policy should be conducted in response to the changes.   
 
A. Changes in the Economy's Supply Capacity 
In  Japan,  various  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  economy's  supply  capacity  since  the 
1990s due to deficient demand and deflation that have lasted for a protracted period. Based 
on the experience of struggling to overcome excessive employment, firms tightened their 
 8 
 employment  stance  and  promoted  a  shift  to  non-regular  employment.  Consequently,  an 
increasing number of people gave up on seeking jobs or reluctantly accepted non-regular 
employment as they could not obtain their ideal jobs. In addition, because firms reined in 
new business fixed investment in order to reduce excess production capacity, their capital 
stock  became  obsolete  and  new  technologies  were  not  necessarily  introduced  actively. 
Moreover,  excessive  competition  among  firms  to  provide  extravagant  services  or 
excessively cut the prices of their services or products was seen everywhere, and this may 
have led in part to the decline in labor productivity. The mechanism by which an economic 
downturn, which fundamentally is a cyclical phenomenon, exerts downward pressure on the 
economy's  long-term  growth  potential  by  affecting  the  supply  capacity  is  called 
"hysteresis." In Japan, the hysteresis has indeed occurred under the successive and serious 
economic downturns. 
 
On the other hand, recently, the economy's supply capacity appears to be expanding rapidly 
with  the  waning  effects  of  hysteresis  that  occurred  in  the  past.  For  example,  there  are 
increasing  opportunities  for  those  who  potentially  have  the  willingness  to  work  to 
participate  in  the  labor  market  and  for  those  who  have  reluctantly  accepted  non-regular 
employment to obtain regular employment. Firms are also starting to undertake postponed 
business  fixed  investment,  and  are  proceeding  with  efforts  to  streamline  their  business 
processes  through  suspending  the  provision  of  extravagant  services  and  reassigning 
employees to new positions. As labor input has increased and labor productivity has risen 
through these changes, the long-term growth potential of Japan's economy, which declined 
substantially in the past, is gradually strengthening again. Currently, Japan's economy may 
be referred to as being in a rehabilitation process to regain its fundamental strength. 
 
The effects of hysteresis have been pointed out in overseas economies as well. These effects 
have  attracted  increased  attention,  especially  as  the  economic  growth  trend  has  shifted 
downward globally since the financial crisis in the latter half of the 2000s. Since the early 
1990s, however, the growth trend in Japan's economy has marked falls ahead of those in 
other economies following each successive and serious economic downturn. In this respect, 
there  is  a  possibility  that  the  effects  of  hysteresis  remain  relatively  strong  in  Japan.  For 
example,  Japan's  low  labor  productivity  is  well  known  as  being  lower  than  that  of  other 
 9 
 advanced economies. If we take a look at this situation from another perspective, it can be 
said  that  there  is  ample  room  for  Japan  to  expand  its  economy's  supply  capacity  as  the 
effects  of  hysteresis  dissipate.  Indeed,  Japan's  labor  productivity  recently  has  been 
improving at a relatively fast pace to catch up with other economies. 
 
The expansion of the economy's supply capacity, in the short term, has been working in the 
direction of easing the upward pressure on wages and prices associated with an increase in 
demand. However, there is no need to be unduly pessimistic about the current situation. As I 
mentioned  earlier,  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  is  being 
maintained.  In  addition,  we  should  not  focus  solely  on  raising  prices.  It  is  desirable  that 
prices  rise  moderately  as  the  quality  of  people's  lives  improves.  Recently,  an  increasing 
number of people are participating in the labor market in ways that meet their wishes, and 
firms are promoting a shift to more efficient and adequate work practices. As a result, the 
economy's  long-term  growth  potential  is  also  beginning  to  be  raised.  I  believe  that  these 
changes will indeed enrich people's lives.   
 
B. Framework of Monetary Policy 
Based on what I have presented, I would now like to reconsider the framework of monetary 
policy.  My  view  is  that  monetary  policy  should  aim  at  maintaining  somewhat  tight 
supply-demand conditions, which are currently in place, for as long as possible. 
 
As I have explained, I believe that Japan's economy at present, except for sluggish inflation, 
is  in  a  very  favorable  condition.  Driven  by  an  increase  in  demand,  various  benefits 
stemming from the expansion of the supply capacity have been brought about. It is possible 
that these benefits are relatively large as the adverse effects of hysteresis that occurred in 
the past have remained strong in Japan. 
 
Of course, this does not mean that a rise in prices is unwelcome. The Bank should achieve 
the  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  Note,  however,  that  we  should  not 
misunderstand the meaning of "at the earliest possible time." This does not mean that the 
Bank should try to achieve the target at whatever cost. Its mission, as stipulated in the Bank 
of Japan Act, is "achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of 
 10 
 the national economy." If sound development of the economy is hindered as a consequence 
of a rise in prices, this will confuse the essential with the unessential. 
 
For example, because of the relatively slow pace of change in the supply capacity, if the 
pace  of  increase  in  demand  accelerates,  prices  might  rise  significantly  due  to  increased 
supply-side constraints. However, if economic swings amplify in this way, there is concern 
that various harmful effects, such as a decline in the efficiency of resource allocation, might 
arise. The Bank will then be rushed into tightening its monetary policy, possibly resulting in 
the reversal of hysteresis left undone. Most of all, price rises attained in this way will not be 
stable over the long term, and nobody will want such a circumstance. 
 
With the understanding just described, it is essential to aim at achieving the price stability 
target while benefiting from the waning effects of hysteresis brought about by maintaining 
somewhat tight supply-demand conditions. I should add that there is no universal monetary 
policy measure that should be taken to this end. As I mentioned earlier, from a somewhat 
longer-term perspective, the room for expanding the economy's supply capacity will narrow 
in due course as the effects of hysteresis dissipate further. On the other hand, if inflation 
expectations 
the 
demand-stimulating  effects  of  yield  curve  control  will  strengthen.  On  this  point,  when 
conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  future,  I  believe  that  the  Bank,  as  necessary,  should 
consider without prejudgment the most appropriate policy while paying close attention to 
preventing  a  significant  supply-demand  imbalance that  might  be caused  by  the  described 
changes in the external environment. 
 
C. Uncertainty and Communication 
Lastly, I would like to point out that there is a certain degree of uncertainty over how the 
economy's  supply  capacity  will  change  in  the  future.  There  are  various  arguments 
concerning  the  extent  to  which  the  adverse  effects  of  past  hysteresis  can  be  reversed; 
apparently,  no  consensus  has  been  reached  in  academic  or  other  circles.  Moreover,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  changes  in  the  supply  capacity  of  Japan's  economy  are  attributable  not 
only to hysteresis but also to more structural factors, such as demographics. Therefore, it is 
difficult to accurately make a forecast on the extent to which the expansion of the supply 
long-term  growth  potential 
the  economy's 
increases, 
rise  or 
 11 
 capacity  of  the  economy  will  be  maintained  and  how  long  this  expansion  will  constrain 
price rises. 
 
In relation to this, the fact that the Bank deleted the description on the projected timing of 
reaching around 2 percent inflation in the April 2018 Outlook Report became an issue for 
the  public.  I  believe  that  indicating  the  projected  timing  itself  is  meaningful,  but  this 
"projection" tended to be perceived by  some market participants as a "deadline," thereby 
creating  unnecessary  speculation  about  the  Bank's  policy  conduct.  As  I  have  explained, 
monetary policy should be conducted by taking into consideration various uncertainties, and 
therefore  it  is  undesirable  to  attract  excessive  attention  merely  to  specific  timing  or  a 
numerical value. Based on these points, I have judged that deleting the description of the 
projection  in  the  Outlook  Report  is  unavoidable.  I  believe  that  providing  a  detailed  and 
articulate explanation on the mechanism of price rises and on the assessment of risks will 
lead to more appropriate communication with market participants. 
 
Today, I have expressed my views on changes in the supply capacity of Japan's economy 
and how monetary policy should be conducted in response to these changes. The Bank will 
persistently pursue monetary easing measures and provide its utmost support for the sound 
development of the national economy by ensuring price stability. Under such circumstances, 
I hope to see continued proactive initiatives and efforts by firms and the government. 
 
 12 
