Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Italy Day Conference
Italian Banks: where they stand  
and the challenges ahead
Remarks by Fabio Panetta
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
London, 19 February 2018
1. The macroeconomic picture
In 2017 Italian economic growth strengthened considerably more than had been expected 
at the beginning of the  year, while  economic expansion  became more balanced  across demand 
components and economic sectors. 
GDP  has  been  supported  by  domestic  demand.  Households’  consumption  has  benefited 
from steadily improving labour market conditions and rising confidence. Investment expenditure 
has grown at a robust pace, supported by positive demand developments and favourable economic 
policies,  as  well  as  by  reduced  uncertainty  and  growing  confidence.  Investment  in  productive 
capital has regained much of the decline recorded between 2008 and 2013; it is expected to attain 
pre-crisis levels next year. The recovery in the construction sector, while far from complete, has 
been continuing for some time.  
Exports,  which  have  been  expanding  at  or  above  potential  foreign  demand  since  2010, 
have continued to perform well, in spite of the appreciation of the euro since last summer. The 
current account surplus has been positive since 2013 and has exceeded 2.5 per cent of GDP in the 
last  two  years.  This  is  the  main  driver  of  the  significant  improvement  in  Italy’s  negative  net 
international investment position, from 27 per cent of GDP in 2014 to below 7.5 per cent at the 
end of 2017. Looking ahead, if the current account evolves in line with our projections, which are 
close to those of the IMF, Italy’s net international investment position will turn positive in three 
years from now. 
After increasing by more than 30 percentage points since the beginning of the crisis, in the 
last three years the debt-to-GDP ratio has remained broadly stable thanks to the pick-up in GDP 
growth and to persistent primary surpluses. In particular, according to preliminary estimates, in 
2017 the debt-to-GDP ratio declined by about half of a percentage point of GDP.1 Yet, public debt 
in Italy remains at a high level. The opportunity offered by the ongoing recovery must be seized to 
reduce  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  with  increasing  determination.  Progress  on  this  front  and  on 
structural reforms will help reduce the persistent growth gap with respect to the EU average. 
1
On February 15 the Bank of Italy released a first estimate of the general Government debt for 2017; the final 
figure will be released in April, with the Notification of the data on public finances to Eurostat. The National 
Statistical Office will release the 2017 figure for nominal GDP at the beginning of March.  
2.   Banks: the recent past and the current situation 
The Italian banking industry is emerging from a prolonged period of distress. The ongoing 
economic recovery and the resolution of important critical cases2 have drastically reduced tail risk 
and are helping to improve confidence.  
During  the  financial  crisis,  Italy’s  banking  system  proved  much  more  resilient  than 
expected  by  many  observers.  The  recession  suffered  by  the  Italian  economy  was  significantly 
deeper than for other European countries, yet the costs for the taxpayer – in the form of public 
support to ailing banks – have been much lower than elsewhere. The costs of the crises have been 
largely shouldered by bank shareholders and by the banking sector itself.3    
The  banking  system  is  now  on  a  recovery  path.  Improvement  is  becoming  visible  in 
several areas. Lending to the private sector has been growing again since the end of 2016 (Fig. 1); 
various  indicators  suggest  that  the  continued  slow  expansion  is  being  largely  driven  by  low 
demand for lending by firms, rather than by restrictions on supply by banks.4  
Credit risk is improving. The flow of new non-performing loans (NPLs) has been decreasing 
since 2014. It is now about 2 per cent of total loans, below the pre-crisis average (Fig. 2).5 Banks are 
also selling very large amounts of NPLs on the market: €30 billion in 2017 alone, while more than 
€25 billion are expected to be sold in the first half of 2018. This represents a sharp increase from 
annual sales recorded in the previous five years (about €5 billion on average).  
As a result of these trends, the NPL stock is diminishing at a remarkable pace (Fig. 3). 
Including the sales that will be completed in the next few months, by mid-2018 the volume of 
NPLs net of provisions will amount to less than €140 billion, almost one third below the peak of 
2015. The net NPL ratio will stand at 7.8 per cent, against 10.8 per cent in 2015. Considering only 
                                                           
2  
In  2017  the  Italian  State  intervened  to  recapitalize  Banca  Monte  Paschi  di  Siena  and  to  liquidate  Banca 
Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca. Moreover, the four banks put into resolution in November 2015 were 
eventually sold. 
3   At the end of 2017 Italian GDP was still almost 6 percentage points below its pre-crisis level, whereas for the 
euro area it was 5.6 points above. At the end of 2016 the impact of State aid on public debt amounted to 22 per 
cent of GDP in Ireland, 9.5 per cent in Austria, 7.2 per cent in Germany, 4.6 per cent in Spain, and 3.2 per cent 
in the Netherlands. The average for the euro area was 4.5 per cent. In Italy it is currently estimated at 0.8 per 
cent of GDP (this figure includes the public interventions listed in Footnote 2).  
Survey data collected from both banks and firms highlights that in recent years banks’ credit supply policies 
have been very expansionary. Moreover, firms’ liquidity buffers are at historically high levels.  
In the next few months the volume of new NPLs and provisions might be affected by one-off effects related to 
new accounting and prudential rules (IFRS9 and calendar provisioning; see below). 
4  
5  
 bad loans, the ratio amounts to 3.5 per cent. The coverage ratio has been increasing in recent years 
and, as I will remark later on, it is now in line with recovery rates.  
Exposure to the domestic sovereign is decreasing. The fall since the peak of 2015 amounts 
to €120 billion, almost one third of the initial stock. 
Gradual improvement is also observable on the liabilities side. In 2017 net bond issues in 
the  wholesale  market  turned  positive  for  the  first  time  since  2015,  driven  by  the  unsecured 
component (Fig. 4). Funding costs are declining, as are credit spreads over other leading banks 
(Fig. 5). The cost of equity has declined by three percentage points in 2017.  
In the first nine months of 2017 the annualized ROE of Italian Significant Institutions  
–  the  banking  groups  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM) – net of one-off revenues, was 4.4 per cent against 1.4 per cent in the same period of 
2016. Capital adequacy has increased: at end-September the common equity tier 1 of Italy’s 
banking  system  represented  13.6  per  cent  of  risk-weighted  assets,  up  from  12.6  per  cent 
twelve months earlier.  
The  Italian  banking  sector  is  making  significant  changes  to  its  industrial  organization. 
Following a reform of the mutual banking sector, more than 300 small cooperative banks (the 
so-called banche di credito cooperativo) will soon form three large banking groups. The largest 
cooperative banks (banche popolari) were transformed into joint stock companies, as required 
by  a  law  approved  in  2015.  Two  of  them  subsequently  merged,  forming  Italy’s  third  largest 
banking group. 
3.   The outlook for banks: key challenges and factors of change  
Against  this  overall  improvement,  there  are  still  vulnerabilities  to  be  addressed  and 
challenges to be met. I will focus on three key issues for banks and the Italian financial system as a 
whole: de-risking, profitability, and firms’ access to non-bank sources of finance.  
3.1 Bank de-risking 
De-risking is a key  factor  in banks’  efforts to contain the cost of funding and  to attract 
fresh capital. The sources of risk differ across jurisdictions and business models. For traditional 
lenders,  especially  in  economies  severely  hit  by  the  crisis,  the  main  source  of  risk  is  the  NPL 
legacy. Italian banks are among them.  
 Reducing NPLs is an uncontroversial policy objective, and  I fully support efforts by 
banks, supervisors, and national and European authorities to address the problem. Last March 
the SSM published its NPL Guidance, calling on Significant Institutions with high NPL levels 
to actively tackle the problem and produce NPL reduction plans. The Bank of Italy actively 
contributed  to  this  task  and  was  the  first  national  competent  authority  to  issue  a  similar 
Guidance  for  the  banks  under  its  own  responsibility  (the  so-called  Less  Significant 
Institutions).6 
The  issue  is  not  whether  to  address  the  high  NPL  ratio,  but  how  to  do  it.  Some 
commentators  have  been  advocating  the  imposition  of  a  swift  and  generalized  disposal  of 
NPLs.  This  policy  is  designed  to  rapidly  reduce  the  perception  of  riskiness  of  the  banking 
system. However, it would come at a potentially high cost, because of the gap between book 
values and market prices of NPLs.  
This  gap  does  not  imply  that  NPLs  are  under-provisioned  in  banks’  balance  sheets. 
First,  it  is  primarily  attributable  to  the  very  high  returns  required  by  the  buyers  and  to 
accounting rules.7 Second, in recent years for Italian banks recovery rates on bad loans have 
been around 35 per cent of the original loan value in net present value terms, broadly in line 
with the net book value of bad loans observed on average in banks’ balance sheets.8  
A generalized sale of NPLs on the market would imply a large transfer of resources 
from banks to buyers. While the secondary market for NPLs is showing signs of rapid growth, 
it is still opaque and relatively oligopolistic. Simultaneous, blanket sales would further depress 
market prices, magnifying the gap between the book and market values of NPLs. The result 
for banks would be significant losses and reduced capital. This could have unintended effects 
on individual banks as well as macroeconomic consequences through a contraction in credit 
supply in countries where high NPL stocks are a concern for several banks. 
                                                           
6  
The Guidance for Italian LSIs is available at: http://www.bancaditalia.it/compiti/vigilanza/normativa/orientamenti-
vigilanza/Guidance-NPL-LSI.pdf?language_id=1. 
7   Ciavoliello, L.G., F. Ciocchetta, F. M. Conti, I. Guida, A. Rendina, G. Santini (2016) ’What’s the Value of 
NPLs?’,  Notes  on  Financial  Stability  and  Supervision,  3  (https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/note-
stabilita/2016-0003/). 
8   Conti, F.M., I. Guida, A. Rendina and G. Santini (2017) ‘Bad loan recovery rates in 2016’, Notes on Financial 
Stability and Supervision, 11 (https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/note-stabilita/2017-0011/index.html). 
 These considerations suggest that there is a speed limit when dealing with NPL reduction. 
Banks and supervisors should aim for the maximum speed, but heed the limit. This concept should 
come as no surprise, and is not new.9 
In countries where the high NPL phenomenon is widespread, such as Italy, exceeding the 
limit might entail tensions on several banks at once. Such a problem could only be addressed by 
mobilizing public resources, a choice made by many countries10 during the financial crisis but one 
that is no longer contemplated under the current European legislative framework.  
The  Action  Plan  presented  by  the  European  Council  last  summer  goes  in  the  right 
direction, proposing measures to help banks improve their NPL internal management, to boost 
the efficiency of secondary markets for distressed assets, and to reduce the duration of judicial 
proceedings  for  the  credit  recovery  process.11  Following  the  Plan,  the  European  Commission 
issued for consultation an important proposal that envisages a gradual increase of provisioning, 
to a coverage ratio of up to 100 per cent in the steady state. The proposal would take the form of 
a regulation and would be a Pillar 1 measure. The measure would be applied to NPLs stemming 
from new loans, to allow banks to adjust their lending policies to the new rule and to grant them 
an adequate transition period. The SSM is working on a non-binding Guidance to address the 
same issue under a Pillar 2 framework. The two proposals, which will be finalized in March, 
should be adequately coordinated to achieve optimal results and to avoid generating confusion 
among banks and investors.  
The  European  Council  also  stressed  the  importance  of  public  Asset  Management 
Companies  (AMCs)  and  encouraged  the  European  Commission  to  develop  a  blueprint  for 
setting them up. Making banks’ participation voluntary is necessary to avoid possible instability 
due to a generalized surge in credit losses. The transfer price, while allowing the AMCs to be 
profitable,  should  not  be  far  from  the  real  economic  value  of  the  assets.  In  order  to  reduce 
uncertainty,  ex-ante  guidelines  should  be  provided  on  how  to  estimate  market  prices  and  real 
                                                           
9   More than 125 years ago the famous Austrian economist Carl Menger wrote: ‘Consider …  the owner of a 
stock  … who is obliged through sudden distress, or through pressure from creditors, to convert it into money. 
The  prices  which  it  will  fetch  will  be  highly  accidental  …  And  this  holds  good  of  all  kinds  of  conversions 
which in respect of time are compulsory sales’. In a footnote he continues: ‘Herein lies the explanation of the 
circumstance why compulsory sales, and cases of distraint in particular, involve as a rule the economic ruin 
of  the  person  upon  whose  estate  they  are  carried  out,  and  that  in  a  greater  degree  the  less  the  goods  in 
question are saleable. Correct discernment of the uneconomic character of these processes will necessarily 
lead to a reform in the available legal mechanism.’ Carl Menger, 1892, ‘On the Origin of Money’, Economic 
Journal, pp. 239-255. 
10   See Footnote 3. 
11   See http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2017/07/11/conclusions-non-performing-loans/pdf.  
 economic values, on the building blocks  of the  restructuring plans,  and on the  governance and 
funding of the AMCs. The blueprint should clarify to what extent the BRRD and State aid rules 
could be interpreted in a way that facilitates NPL disposals. Given the importance of this initiative, 
it is key to avoid the risk that overly tight criteria could end up preventing the creation of an AMC.   
But on the NPL front more can and must be done by banks themselves.  In many cases 
action has been slow. NPLs have been left to the back office. This attitude is now changing due to 
the application of the SSM Guidance addressed to Significant Institutions that I mentioned earlier, 
which requires banks to define precise NPL strategies and operational plans. Particular emphasis is 
placed on governance issues. As I have mentioned, the results of these efforts are already visible in 
the reduction of the stock of NPLs, but a lot remains to be done to optimize the management of 
these assets and speed up the solution to the NPL problem. 
A first crucial issue is information quality. Banks need high-quality, detailed information to 
maximize value extraction from NPLs and to develop consistent reduction strategies. NPL buyers 
also need it, to perform the necessary due diligence rapidly and at a low cost so as to reduce the bid-
ask spreads currently prevailing on the NPL secondary market. For this reason, in 2016 the Bank of 
Italy  introduced  a  new  system  for  reporting  bad  loans,  asking  for  detailed  data  on  the  status  of 
recovery procedures and the nature of the collateral. The quality of NPL databases is already better, 
but there is ample scope for further improvement. We will continue our action on this front. 
A second issue is the duration of judicial proceedings. It is well known that in Italy the credit 
recovery  process  is  long  (Fig.  6)  and  that  this  contributes  to  driving  up  the  stock  of  NPLs.  The 
legislative reforms introduced in 2015 and in 201612 are helping to shorten the recovery process, but 
further progress is necessary to converge to the EU average. The wide heterogeneity in the duration 
of proceedings across different  Italian courts13 suggests that progress is possible also without the 
intervention of the legislator, via efficiency-enhancing organizational changes at the individual court 
level.  The  benefits  of  these  changes  would  extend  well  beyond  the  issue  of  NPLs;  they  would 
improve credit allocation, reduce the cost of credit for borrowers, and improve the perception of the 
ease of doing business in Italy, with important benefits for economic growth.  
In countries such as Italy the introduction of mechanisms requiring a 100 per cent coverage 
of  NPLs  calls  for  an  aggressive  approach  by  the  Government  to  reduce  the  length  of  credit 
                                                           
12   For an analysis of the main measures taken in the past ten years, see: Giacomelli, S., S. Mocetti, G. Palumbo 
and  G.  Roma  (2018),  ‘Civil  justice  in  Italy:  recent  trends’,  Bank  of  Italy  Occasional  Papers,  401, 
http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/qef/2017-0401/index.html. 
13   The duration of insolvency procedures ranges from 4.8 years in the most virtuous districts to 10 years in the 
less efficient ones. The duration of real-estate foreclosures ranges from 2 to 8 years. 
 recovery  procedures.  Until  then,  the  implementation  of  these  mechanisms  will  need  close 
monitoring. 
I argued above that de-risking is a key factor for banks to contain the cost of funding and to 
attract  fresh  capital.  Some  commentators  link  de-risking  to  the  creation  of  a  European  Deposit 
Insurance Scheme (EDIS), the missing pillar of the Banking Union, arguing that regulators should 
tighten  prudential  rules  on  sovereign  exposures  to  break  the  link  between  banks  and  the 
sovereign.14  This  proposal  does  not  fully  consider  the  fact  that  the  microeconomic  and 
macroeconomic  costs  of  such  a  prudential  reform  could  be  sizeable,  while  the  benefits  are 
uncertain. The bank-sovereign nexus, in fact, goes well beyond simple direct credit exposures, and 
depends  above  all  on  the  impact  that  both  banks  and  sovereigns  have  on  the  real  economy. 
Furthermore, in some circumstances increasing banks’ sovereign exposures may actually play a 
stabilizing role.15 These considerations, shared by most global supervisors, recently led the Basel 
Committee to leave unchanged the prudential treatment of sovereign assets. The problem of high 
public debt should be  addressed by Governments directly,  with determination.  It should not be 
improperly tackled with prudential regulation.  
More generally, while it may make sense to start from a clean slate before going forward 
with EDIS, blind spots should be avoided. While NPLs or sovereign bonds may represent a source 
of risk for some banks, for others – such as large intermediaries engaged in investment banking – 
risks  take  the  form  of  a  high  incidence  of  complex  financial  instruments,  those  classified  for 
accounting purposes as Level 2 and Level 3. These are, to a large extent, assets and liabilities not 
directly traded in active markets or marked to model, whose value is difficult to assess. At the end 
of 2016 there were about €3.6 trillion of these instruments on the assets side and €3.2 trillion on 
the  liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheets  of  euro-area  Significant  Institutions.  The  total  is  €6.8 
trillion, about 12 times that of net NPLs of all euro-area banks.16 
                                                           
14   See  for  example  Wolff  (2016),  ‘European  Parliament  testimony  on  EDIS’  (http://bruegel.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/EDIS-EP-statement.pdf). 
15   See Lanotte, M., G. Manzelli, A.M. Rinaldi, M. Taboga and P. Tommasino (2016), ‘Easier said than done? 
Reforming  the  prudential  treatment  of  banks'  sovereign  exposures’,  Bank  of  Italy  Occasional  Paper,  326, 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/qef/2016-0326/QEF_326_16.pdf).  On  the  same  subject,  see  also: 
https://voxeu.org/article/recent-developments-regulatory-treatment-sovereign-exposures. 
16   The  reason  for  considering  this  total  rather  than  the  net  value  is  that  the  available  data  do  not  tell  
us if and to what extent the risk embedded in assets is effectively hedged by liabilities. See Roca, R. and  
F.  Potente  (2017),  ‘Risks  and  challenges  of  complex  financial  instruments:  an  analysis  of  SSM  
Italy  Occasional  Paper,  417  https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/qef/2017-
banks’,  Bank  of 
0417/index.html?com.dotmarketing.htmlpage.language=1. 
 Level 2 and Level 3 instruments play an important role in the functioning of the financial 
system.  However,  the  available  information  is  limited,  in  spite  of  their  huge  volumes.  Their 
complexity  and  opacity  create  substantial  room  for  discretionary  accounting  and  prudential 
choices  by  banks,  which  have  incentives  to  use  this  discretion  to  their  advantage.  As  a  result, 
valuation risks are unknown, but probably non-negligible. Overall, a serious debate on de-risking 
cannot ignore the risk posed by Level 2 and Level 3 instruments. 
One area where in my view the new European regulatory framework needs further work is 
crisis  management.  The  number  of  authorities  involved  at  European  level  has  grown  strongly; 
their responsibilities are not clearly attributed and the objectives assigned to them are not always 
aligned.  We  have  also  seen  in  practice  how  – in  the  absence  of  a  reserve  of  liabilities  able  to 
absorb losses in the event of a crisis (MREL) – this arrangement may lead to risks to financial 
stability,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  rules,  their  interpretation,  the  procedures 
themselves have become more complex. For banks subjected to TLAC and MREL requirements, 
this state of affairs will come to an end when the new equilibrium is achieved (requirements are 
fully phased in and respected by these banks). For the other, smaller banks, liquidation remains the 
only tool to address a crisis. I believe that this is unsatisfactory.  
3.2  Bank profitability 
Low profitability is a second challenge – in my view the key one – that Italian banks must 
face. It is not just an Italian issue: most European banks are still unable to create enough value to 
meet  investors’  expectations.  However,  the  gap  between  the  cost  of  capital  and  profitability  is 
larger on average for Italian banks, in spite of the recent improvements.  
The problem is partly cyclical. Provisions originating from the recession have been the main 
driver of ROE (Fig. 7). As the recovery strengthens and new NPLs ebb, provisions are diminishing 
and profitability is re-emerging. However, in the first nine months of 2017 provisions still absorbed 
almost two thirds of the operating profits of Italian Significant Institutions.17  
A second cyclical determinant of weak profits is the low net interest margin, which in turn 
is  driven  by  a  combination  of  low  interest  rates,  a  flat  yield  curve  and  anemic  credit  growth. 
Again,  the  economic  recovery  is  reducing  the  impact  of  these  factors.  We  expect  net  interest 
income to grow in the next two years, driven by credit growth and a steepening of the yield curve. 
                                                           
17   Over the last three years banks needed to increase the coverage ratios to sell impaired assets on the market. 
 This,  together  with  a  steady  increase  in  non-interest  income  (50  per  cent  since  2008,  mainly 
through fees and commissions; Fig. 8), will improve the outlook for profits.  
According to the plans of the Italian Significant Institutions, average ROE is expected to 
increase to 9 per cent by 2019, substantially closing the gap with the cost of capital. However, 
risks to this scenario are mostly on the downside. Various factors contribute to this assessment. 
The digital revolution is reshaping financial markets, creating opportunities but also risks 
for  banks  that  fail  to  adjust  rapidly.  New  players  are  entering  the  financial  services  market, 
offering  traditional  banking  products  at  a  lower  cost.  Banks’  payment  services,  brokerage  and 
asset management fees and even interest income are being tested by FinTech companies.  
Regulatory  changes  are  a  second  structural  shift  to  which  banks  need  to  adjust.  Recent 
reforms  have  increased  capital  and  liquidity  buffers;  the  new  resolution  and  liquidation  regime 
requires a large volume of liabilities with high loss absorption capacity. Furthermore, banks must 
also comply with additional requirements, such as those on anti-money laundering and consumer 
protection. The new Markets in Financial Instrument Directive (MiFID2) will enhance consumer 
protection, but at the same time it will increase the burden of compliance.  
The benefits of these regulatory changes are clear: banks are safer than in the past. At the 
same time, achieving pre-crisis profitability levels has become extremely challenging. Indeed, an 
industry with much lower risk levels should entail lower returns and cost of equity.  
To  face  these  challenges  banks  need  to  take  firm  action  to  reduce  costs  and  achieve 
efficiency  gains.18  Massive  investments  in  information  technologies  and  in  human  capital  are 
necessary. Progress is ongoing on this front.19  
Against  this  background,  a  key  avenue  to  improve  efficiency  and  profitability  is  bank 
consolidation. Indeed, some of the factors of change are having an impact on scale economies and 
the optimal bank size. Setting up the technological infrastructure needed to do banking business 
today requires conspicuous investment; in the face of negligible marginal costs, this is a factor 
increasing scale economies. Fixed compliance costs have also risen considerably in recent years, 
due to stricter and more pervasive regulation.   
                                                           
18  
In countries where a widespread adoption of new technologies has been coupled with large IT investments by 
banks, intermediaries tend to exhibit a higher ROE than elsewhere, sustained by a low cost-income ratio. 
Italian banks are reducing their branch network and are increasingly relying on digital resources. The number 
of branches at the end of 2017 was 20 per cent lower than in 2008. Ambitious programs of staff reduction and 
internal  restructuring  have  been  announced  (and  in  many  cases  are  being  implemented)  by  all  the  largest 
banking groups. 
19  
 Past experience suggests that mergers and acquisitions, if properly designed and based on 
sound  industrial  projects,  can  yield  material  efficiency  gains.20  Many  Italian  banks  can  obtain 
remarkable benefits from consolidation. They must explore this possibility in order to obtain the 
efficiency  gains,  the  technological  skills,  the  product  and  geographical  diversification  that  are 
necessary to compete successfully in the domestic and international market and to finance the real 
economy. 
3.3  Firms’ financial structure 
The  last  issue  I  wish  to  address  is  firms’  financial  structure.  The  regulatory  changes 
introduced in the aftermath of the global financial crisis are inducing banks in many countries to 
deleverage and to reduce their appetite for risk. In economies like the Italian one, where firms – by 
international  comparison  –  are  relatively  small  and  heavily  reliant  on  bank  credit,  the 
consequences of such reforms for the financing of the real economy must be analyzed carefully.  
In  order  to  mitigate  possible  unintended  consequences,  the  development  of  a  more 
diversified  financial  system  is  a  priority  for  the  Italian  economy.  In  recent  years  the  Italian 
authorities have introduced tax incentives and administrative simplifications to reduce the overall 
cost of IPOs, to incentivize bond issues and to stimulate investment in innovative startups. The 
legislation  on ACE (allowance  for  corporate  equity) is helping to improve firms’  capitalization 
levels. The adoption of consolidated international contractual practice has prompted the entry of 
foreign  specialized  operators  in  the  private  debt  placement  market.  Cooperation  between  the 
public and private sectors has stimulated the creation of venture capital funds.21 To encourage the 
demand for financial instruments issued by Italian companies, the 2017 budget law has introduced 
tax exemptions for long-term individual savings plans (Piani Individuali di Risparmio, PIR).  
These measures have produced encouraging results. Since 2011 the share of bonds among 
firms’  total  financial  liabilities  has  almost  doubled,  to  12.6  per  cent  last  September  (from  €90 
                                                           
20  
In Italy, between  mid-1995 and the mid-2000s, mergers and acquisitions triggered a restructuring process that 
allowed the banking industry to absorb excess capacity. In connection with the far-reaching consolidation that 
took place, between 1995 and 2004 large productivity gains were achieved: total assets and value added per 
employee  grew  respectively  by  4.6  and  2.4  per  cent  per  year  at  constant  prices  See  Focarelli,  Panetta  and 
Salleo  (2002)  “Why  Do  Banks  Merge”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and  Banking,  v.  34,  and  Focarelli  and 
Panetta  (2003)  “Are  Mergers  Beneficial  to  Consumers?  Evidence  from  the  Market  for  Bank  Deposits” 
American Economic Review, v. 93, 4. 
21   Thanks to a public-private partnership, the Fondo Italiano di Investimento between 2012 and 2016 created two 
venture capital funds of funds that invested €100 million in venture capital private funds; the size of the Italian 
funds involved in these transactions is equal to €400 million. 
  billion  to  more  than  €150  billion  in  absolute  terms).  The  number  of  firms  issuing  bonds  is 
increasing; moreover, while in the past only large industrial groups were active in the market, now 
recourse to bonds is spreading to smaller firms. Also the number of IPOs has been relatively high 
in recent  years. We need  to consolidate  and accelerate these trends, to stimulate the  growth of 
capital markets and improve the financial soundness of Italian firms. 
Significant progress on the capital market union, one of the objectives pursued at European 
level, would be an important move in this direction. Building a genuine capital market union does 
require far-reaching legal changes, such as EU-wide company and bankruptcy legislation. 
Banks can play an important role in helping firms access alternative sources of external 
finance  and  can  benefit  from  this  process.  The  shift  towards  a  less  bank-dependent  financial 
structure of corporates can provide banks with a valuable opportunity to broaden their revenues, 
by  focusing  on  the  provision  of  related  and  complementary  services  in  the  area  of  corporate 
finance  and  asset  management.  This  will  require  intermediaries  to  acquire  adequate  human 
resources and technological capacity in order to exploit the large pool of information on firms, to 
interact with investors and markets, and to avoid conflicts of interest.  
Conclusions 
 To  conclude,  now  that  the  economic  recovery  is  gaining  momentum,  banks  can  make 
further progress in strengthening their balance sheets. De-risking, via a rapid reduction of NPLs, is 
under  way.  Profitability,  though  still  low  and  affected  by  the  structural  shifts  imposed  by  the 
digital  revolution  and  by  the  recent  wave  of  regulatory  reforms,  can  benefit  from  bank 
consolidation. The conditions are there for Italian banks to face the challenges posed by the new 
regulatory and market environment. The improvements obtained in the recent past will allow them 
to  support  economic  growth  and  more  solid,  financially  diversified,  enterprises.  It  will  also  let 
them  face  the  challenges  of  the  next  decade:  cross-border  integration,  digitalization  and 
competition by FinTech companies.  
Thank you for your attention. 
   Figure 1. Bank loans to firms and households 
(yearly rate of change; per cent) 
Households
Firms
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
2014
2015
2016
2017
Source: Bank of Italy.  
  Figure 2. New non-performing loans to performing loans 
(quarterly data, annualized and seasonally adjusted; per cent) 
  Source: Bank of Italy, Central credit register. 
   Figure 3. Net non-performing loan ratio and coverage ratio 
(percentage of outstanding loans) 
(1) Expected mid-2018 data are calculated considering September 2017 data for banking groups and June 2017 
for stand-alone banks. NPL disposal by MPS (expected by mid-2018) is also taken into account. 
  Figure 4. Bonds issued and matured  
(yearly data; billions of euros) 
  Source: Based on Dealogic. 
  Figure 5. Bond yields 
(daily data; amounts and percentage points
Source: Based on Bloomberg. 
 Figure 6. Relationship between the NPL ratio and time for enforcing contacts 
(EU area; percentage points and number of days) 
  (
 
o
i
t
a
R
 
L
P
N
∆
 50
 45
 40
 35
 30
 25
 20
 15
 10
 5
 -5
Ireland
Cyprus
Greece
y = 0,023x - 4,7845
R² = 0,4175
Italy
Slovenia
  200
 400
 600
 800
 1.000
 1.200
 1.400
 1.600
 1.800
time for resolving a dispute through a local first-instance court  (# of days)
Source: ECB Consolidated Banking Data and World Bank Doing Business Database. 
   Figure 7. Cost of risk and ROE 
(annualized data; basis points and percentage points) 
Source: Bank of Italy. 
  Figure 8. Gross income: dynamic of interest and non-interest income 
(annualized data; indices, 100= December 2008) 
Source: Bank of Italy. 
     Figure 9. Sources of funding and leverage of Italian firms 
(annual flows in billions of euro and per cent) 
Source: Bank of Italy and Cerved. 
(1) Leverage is calculated as the ratio of financial debt to the sum of financial debt and net 
equity at market prices. (2) Adjusted leverage is calculated by removing the effects of changes 
in the market value of net equity. A value above (below) the solid line indicates, for a given 
year, a decrease (increase) in the market value of equity. 
     Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
