  A keynote address by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Asset and Risk Management Forum  
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
 15 June 2018 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this second day of the Asset and Risk 
Management Forum.  
 Yesterday’s sessions touched on some pertinent and topical issues, as well as on the 
risks  facing  us  as  central-bank  reserve  managers.    I  hope  that  you  have  found 
yesterday’s sessions informative, and I am sure today’s session will be equally so. 
 In  some  sense,  as  the  era  of  low  policy  rates  and  quantitative  easing  seems  to  be 
drawing to a close, we are entering new and unchartered territory. While the landscape 
in  front  of  us  appears  ever-changing,  complexities  continue  to  abound.  As  such, 
opportunities to engage with peers – opportunities such as this forum – are proving to 
be invaluable. 
 In keeping with information exchange and peer learning being one of the objectives of 
this forum, I thought that I should use my key note address this morning to focus on a 
topic  that  was  the  subject  of  one  of  the  panels  yesterday,  namely  strategic  asset 
allocation,  and  share  with  you  the  evolution  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s 
(SARB) approach to the SAA over the last few years, and what we are currently up to. 
The importance of an appropriate SAA framework cannot be overemphasised.  
  Page 1 of 13 
The  asset  allocation  decision  is  widely  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  important 
investment decisions to be made, and in support of this view, numerous studies have 
also  shown  that  the  asset  allocation  decision  is  one  of  the  key  determinants  of 
performance.1  
 For reserve managers, the asset allocation decision does not start with optimising for 
performance. Its first objective is to ensure capital preservation and liquidity. As such, 
the  SAA  process  becomes  ever  more  important  but  also  ever  more  complex.  Only 
once  capital  preservation  and  liquidity  have  been  adequately  provided  for,  will 
considerations of return be incorporated. The process governing the SAA becomes 
vital to ensure that this non-trivial and important tool is implemented efficiently. 
 The South African Reserve Bank’s strategic asset allocation framework 
 The  management  of  the  SARB’s  official  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  is 
governed by our Investment Policy, which provides a framework for our risk appetite 
and defines the criteria for the management of reserves. The policy specifies, among 
other things, the governance structures, the aggregate risk tolerance levels, and the 
eligible asset classes.  
 However, on its own the Investment Policy can be seen as nothing more than a wish 
list. The SAA is a process which aims to ensure that the Investment Policy’s objectives 
and targets are implemented successfully. In this sense, it serves as the key vehicle 
through which the investment policy is pursued. 
 At a high level, the SAA is presented as a set of long-term target currency and asset 
allocations with the highest likelihood of achieving long-term investment goals within 
certain risk constraints, as defined by the Investment Policy. In a way, this presents 
SAA as a pure optimisation problem. However, a purely quantitative solution does not 
always lend itself to practical implementations.  
                                                           
1 See, for example, Strategic asset allocation and other determinants of portfolio returns by 
Hoernemann et al. (2005) and The asset allocation debate: a review and reconciliation by Tokat et al. 
(2006). 
 Page 2 of 13 
Consequently,  the  SAA  process also  contains  an  important  qualitative  assessment, 
which can result in a portfolio construction that sits below the efficient frontier but which 
can efficiently be invested in – and which reflects practical considerations. 
 From  an  overarching  perspective,  this  seems  simple  enough:  run  an  optimisation 
across a set of benchmarks and select that portfolio which is as close to the efficient 
frontier  as  possible  but  is  also  practically  implementable.  However,  this  description 
masks  the  myriad  of  complexities  and  moving  parts  within  a  truly  successful  SAA 
process. As is often the case, theory and practice are not perfectly aligned! 
 For us at the SARB, SAA is an ever-evolving process, refined through experience and 
learning. As a result, our SAA process has developed over time, both in response to 
various crises but also as we have become more aware of the specific challenges and 
requirements that face us as managers of the country’s reserves.  
 Background  to  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  strategic  asset  allocation 
framework 
 As an introduction to our most recent SAA review, and to give some context, allow me 
to provide a brief history of reserves management in the SARB. It was not until 2004 
that the SARB actively managed parts of its own reserves through its internal portfolio 
management  team.  Prior  to  that,  we  had  exclusively  made  use  of  external  fund 
managers.  This  started  in  1999,  with  a  programme  of  US$500  million  managed 
between five private sector fund managers. Three years later, in 2002, the programme 
size would increase to US$1 billion. 
 It is important to note that, at this stage, we had not implemented an SAA yet and that 
a large portion of the reserves was borrowed funds. The goal was to preserve capital, 
including  the  cost of  holding  reserves.  At  the  time,  the  benchmark  was  the  London 
Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, plus 30 basis points to cover our borrowing costs, 
and another 20 basis points to cover fund management fees. We soon realised that 
achieving  this  target  of  LIBOR  plus  50  basis  points  was  not  possible  given  the 
conservative nature of the mandates we had provided to the external fund managers.   
  Page 3 of 13 
Around 2002, we started a rather informal relationship with the World Bank Treasury. 
It was  during this interaction  that initial steps were  taken to consider developing  an 
SAA, which was eventually implemented four years later, in 2006. Needless to say, 
this required a revamp of our systems’ capabilities and also led to our first Investment 
Policy  being  designed.  We  began  separating  the  reserves  into  two  tranches:  the 
investment tranche and the liquidity tranche.   
 With  more  insight  and  exposure  gained  through  the  interaction  with  external  fund 
managers and the World Bank, the SARB launched its first internally managed global 
government bond portfolio in 2004. At this stage, we had not yet formally joined the 
World Bank’s Reserves Advisory and Management Programme (RAMP), but we had 
come to the realisation that, with net reserves in positive territory and having gained 
knowledge from the external fund managers, we needed a much more objective and 
quantitative approach to our investment decisions. In view of this, the SARB, with the 
assistance of the World Bank Treasury, dedicated the most part of 2005 to capacity-
building initiatives around reserves management. That same year, we joined RAMP. 
The  aim  of  our  partnership  was  to  ensure  that  foreign  reserves  were  managed  as 
efficiently  as  possible.  RAMP  assisted  with  all  aspects  of  reserves  management, 
including  governance  structures,  reporting  lines,  risk  management  and  analytical 
capabilities, as well as the design of an SAA framework.  
 In fact, in the following year, the SARB would complete a comprehensive review of its 
Reserves  Management  Investment  Policy,  and  implemented  its  first  SAA.  At  that 
stage, reserves showed good growth and net reserves sat at approximately  US$25 
billion.  In  our  first  SAA,  we  had  begun  structuring  the  foreign  reserves  into  three 
tranches:  the  liquidity,  buffer  and  investment  tranches.  However,  given  the  good 
growth in reserves and the fact that the liquidity and buffer tranches were sufficient to 
cover both known and unexpected outflows, we started to increase our risk appetite 
by setting the investment tranche to target higher returns. 
 Of course, shortly thereafter, in 2008, the global financial markets would be roiled by 
a  global  financial  crisis.  Notwithstanding  this,  our  SAA  actually  enjoyed  good 
performance given the global investor flight to quality that ensued. 
  Page 4 of 13 
Securities lending 
 Although the robust SAA framework shielded the performance of the actively managed 
portfolios,  both  during  and  even  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  challenges  were 
experienced in the area we had viewed as the most conservative part of the reserves: 
the securities lending programme. 
 On  the  cash  collateral  reinvestment  part  of  the  programme,  we  had  limits  on  the 
duration of the instruments into which the securities lending  agent could deploy the 
cash  collateral  but  there  was  less  of  a  restriction  on  credit  quality.  Through  this 
reinvestment, and at the height of the global financial crisis, we found ourselves with 
some debt that would eventually trade at a few cents on the dollar. The losses, most 
of  which  were  valuation  losses  at  the  time,  raised  many  questions  and  provoked 
intense introspection on our part. However, we later recouped the bulk of the valuation 
losses and eventually settled for a small realised loss on the paper in question. This 
experience  led  to  an  overhaul  of  the  controls  around  our  securities  lending 
programme,  with  one  of  the  key  lessons  being  that  every  element  of  the  reserves 
management value chain should be actively monitored and stress-tested.  
 In  2015,  we  completed  a  formal  review  of  our  securities  lending  programme.  We 
concluded that the securities lending activity should be viewed as a value proposition 
in  its  own  right  and,  as  a  result,  in  2016  we  transitioned  to  a  third-party  securities 
lending agent model.  
 The South African Reserve Bank’s second and third strategic asset allocation 
 Returning to my discussion on the evolution of the SARB’s SAA, the gradual growth 
in reserves over the years created a need to review the SAA implemented in 2006. 
Taking  into  consideration  the  valuable  lessons  learnt  from  our  first  SAA,  and  the 
significant  amount  of  infrastructure  and  skills  development  picked  up  through  our 
partnership  with  RAMP,  we  drafted  our  second  SAA  in  2009,  which  preceded  the 
second review of our External Fund Management Programme.  
  Page 5 of 13 
The 2009 SAA performed relatively well but was not without its own challenges, this 
time in the form of the eurozone crisis. At the time, we had modelled Europe as one 
single entity in our SAA process and not as individual countries. As a result, and given 
our allocation to the eurozone as a whole, we had exposures to Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Portugal and Spain.   
 With spreads widening dramatically, a decision was made to exclude these countries. 
This resulted in a number of challenges. Firstly, a decision had to be made on whether 
to sell the existing positions or hold them to maturity. Secondly, all the benchmarks 
used  for  the  European  portfolios  had  to  be  customised,  a  process  which  took  a 
considerable time while spreads continued to widen daily. 
 This  event  also  started  an  important  discussion  on  when  and  how  a  breach  of  the 
investment guidelines would be handled. Eventually, a defined breach management 
process  was  deemed  necessary  to  be  included  in  the  investment  management 
agreements. 
 The SARB’s third SAA, implemented in 2013, marked an important turning point in a 
number of areas. At that time, gross reserves were close to US$50 billion and we now 
needed  to  seek  a  balance  between  accumulating  reserves  and  the  cost  of  holding 
foreign reserves. During this time, we had migrated to a much more defined approach 
to tranching, using the Jeanne-Ranciere model as a guide to the optimal amount of 
reserves to hold. 
 As a result, the three tranches were reduced to two tranches. The liquidity and buffer 
tranches were consolidated into one tranche, whose purpose was to provide insurance 
against  a  sudden  stop  in  capital  flows.  Any  excess  reserves  were  allocated  to  the 
investment tranche, the purpose of which was to recoup the cost of holding the now 
singular  buffer  tranche.  The  investment  tranche,  however,  remained  subject  to  the 
constraints of capital preservation and liquidity.  
 A  number  of  other  important  changes  were  made  in  our  third  SAA  framework.  We 
expanded the investment universe for internal portfolio managers to include Australia, 
China, Japan, South Korea and Sweden.  
 Page 6 of 13 
The  aim  of  these  changes  was  to  include  higher-yielding  assets  and  high-quality 
commodity currencies. Furthermore, we introduced new asset classes: United States 
(US)  mortgage-backed  securities,  dollar-denominated  supranational  bonds,  euro-
covered  bonds,  and  the  use  of  bond  futures  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  internal 
portfolios as global yields normalised.  
 At  that  stage,  however,  the  existing  systems  could  not  effectively  support  the 
expansion of the reserves into additional asset classes and markets. The new asset 
classes also came with a requirement for more sophisticated risk analytics. As a result, 
the SARB commenced a process of systems renewal, which also included a total end-
to-end solution supporting reserves management, treasury operations and third-party 
payments. The first phase was rolled out a few years later. 
 We had come a long way at that point, both in terms of the size of our reserves and in 
terms of the approach and processes around how we managed those reserves. As a 
sign  of  this  improvement,  in  2015  the  SARB  was  given  the  CentralBanking.com 
‘Reserve Manager of the Year’ award in recognition of the measures  it had taken to 
ensure  resilience  during  a  challenging  year  for  the  emerging  markets  and  in 
addressing  the  fundamental  change  in  perceptions  of  risk  and  return  under  which 
reserve managers operate in a post-crisis world. 
 As alluded to during my earlier remarks on our securities lending programme, we also 
undertook a complete review of our custody model after the roll-out of the 2013 SAA. 
At that stage, we were making use of two custodians, but this led to some efficiency 
challenges  when  it  came  to  risk  and  performance  reporting.  This  review  was 
completed in 2015 and resulted in the appointment of a single custodian, with a second 
custodian  acting  as  a  shadow  custodian  should  the  active  custodian  become 
inoperative. This review provided us with great new insights into custodian services 
and  led  to  a  much-improved  overall  service  offering.  We  concluded  that  custodial 
services should also be subjected to a regular  review exercise. However, given the 
complexities of transitioning between custodians, the cycle  would be longer than for 
external fund managers or securities lenders. 
   Page 7 of 13 
 The selection of fund managers 
 I would now like to take a moment to touch on the process we follow when selecting 
our fund managers.  
 At a strategic level, we believe that we should maintain a combination of internal and 
external  fund  managers.  This  provides  benefits  such  as  greater  diversification  of 
portfolio returns, the transfer of key skills and expertise, and a means to benchmark 
internal portfolio managers. 
 Internally, portfolios are allocated according to their complexity, size and intended level 
of  active  management.  More  passively  managed  portfolios  are  allocated  to  junior 
portfolio  managers  under  the  supervision  of  a  senior  portfolio  manager.  More 
complicated  and  more  actively  managed  portfolios  are  allocated  to  senior  portfolio 
managers. 
 Our external mandates, however, typically aim to generate alpha. As a consequence, 
almost  no  external  mandates  are  passively  managed.  Given  the  focus  on  active 
management,  external  fund  managers  are  usually  given  slightly  more  freedom,  in 
terms of credit and currency allocations for example, than internal portfolio managers. 
Our  External  Fund  Management  Programme  is  also  aimed  at  diversifying  reserves 
into asset classes which we do not have the required resources to manage internally, 
in  terms  of  both  systems  and  human  capital.  This  includes  specialist  asset  classes 
such as corporate bonds, asset-backed securities and mortgage-backed securities. 
 In line with our most recent SAA review, which started in 2016, we also decided on a 
different  approach  to  enhance  the  way  in  which  we  selected  our  external  fund 
managers.  This  time  around,  we  decided  to  focus  more  intensely  on  the  value 
proposition  and  value-add  the  fund  manager  presented  on  a  specific  investment 
mandate. While the final selection was based on the value proposition in managing a 
specific mandate, capacity building remained a key consideration in our fund manager 
selection.   
  Page 8 of 13 
We have maintained our three-stage selection process. In the first step, a ‘Request for 
Information’ is used to survey the landscape of fund managers and to identify  those 
fund managers that have sufficient experience in the required asset classes as well as 
in the management of central-bank portfolios. The second stage, which takes the form 
of a  ‘Request for Proposal’, is considerably more detailed. Here, we conduct an in-
depth  investigation  of  fund  manager  suitability  with  regards  to  organisational 
capabilities in areas such as risk management and organisational stability. We also 
request participants to select the mandate or mandates which suit their strongest skill 
set. Importantly, we ask them to submit detailed performance track records in those 
areas.  These  track  records  are  then  analysed  in  detail  by  our  risk  managers.  The 
subsequently shortlisted candidates are asked to present only on the mandates that 
they had proposed as their strongest and where we felt, given their track record, they 
could add the most value. In the panel interviews, the candidates are asked to present 
their value proposition in their respective mandate in very specific terms, and also to 
comment on and commit to an outperformance target within a proposed risk limit.  
 This approach has been followed to enhance the efficiency of our selection process 
and to expose ourselves to those managers who have real and verifiable specialities. 
This is important not only in terms of optimising performance, but also in terms of skills 
transfer between the external fund managers and ourselves. 
 The South African Reserve Bank’s current strategic asset allocation framework 
 As  I’ve  mentioned,  the  most  recent  appointment  of  external  fund  managers  was 
concluded  with  the  implementation  of  the  current  SAA  in  2017.  If  you  recall,  in  our 
previous  SAA,  developed  in  2013,  we  had  started  following  the  Jeanne-Ranciere 
model  as  a  guide  to  the  optimal  amount  of  reserves  to  hold.  As  a  result,  we  had 
implemented  a  tranching  methodology  which  consisted  of  two  tranches:  the  buffer 
tranche  and  the  investment  tranche.  The  buffer  tranche  is  invested  in  a  highly 
conservative  manner,  while  the  investment  tranche  is  aimed  at  generating  excess 
returns, albeit subject to the same constraints of capital preservation and liquidity. 
   Page 9 of 13 
In developing our latest SAA framework, we were, however, faced with a completely 
different  set  of  circumstances  to  those  that  had  prevailed  in  2013.  The  end  of  the 
quantitative easing programme in the US, their move to tighter monetary policy and 
the  consequential  rising  rates  presented  us  with  a  new  set  of  risks.  However,  the 
divergent macroeconomic policy stances of the developed markets, the volatility in the 
emerging  markets,  other  risky  assets  which  seemed  overvalued  at  the  time,  the 
uncertainty around China’s soft landing, and the possibility of  the Brexit all posed a 
myriad of other, also significant, risks. 
 As such, this most recent SAA was constructed to prioritise capital preservation and 
to reduce tail risks rather than to focus on return enhancement. To encapsulate this, 
we placed greater emphasis on the conditional value at risk, or CVaR. Unlike the often-
used value at risk (VaR) metric, CVaR is the expected return given that the portfolio 
has failed to achieve even the lowest return as per the VaR metric. In other words, the 
CVaR aims to estimate the average loss in extreme events which fall below the VaR 
threshold.  Our  optimisation  goal  was  focused  on  those  portfolios  that  satisfied  the 
capital preservation criteria or, more specifically, those that defined as the probability 
of zero negative returns with a 99% confidence level. 
 This resulted in a number of changes, the most important of which was a significant 
reduction in overall portfolio duration and the introduction of a new asset class at an 
SAA level, namely the US Treasury Inflation Protection Securities.  
 Strategic asset allocation simulation 
 Our  most  recent  SAA  involved  a  tremendous  amount  of  rigor  and  numerous 
engagements, both internally and externally, to ensure that it encapsulated the latest 
developments  in  investment  management.  However,  every  process  has  room  for 
reflection and improvement. With this in mind, we have this year embarked on an SAA 
simulation exercise. 
 The purpose of this exercise is to re-engineer the full value chain of the SAA through 
a  simulated  but  abbreviated  SAA  process  to  ensure  that  the  process  itself  is 
appropriately structured and meets the right governance standards. This value chain 
 Page 10 of 13 
starts with the formulation of the Investment Policy and runs through a review of market 
identification,  asset  optimisation,  the  expression  of  risk  appetite  in  Investment 
Guidelines,  and  the  ultimate  roll-out  of  the  portfolios.  Among  other  things,  the 
simulation  aims  to  ensure  that  each  subcomponent  of  the  greater  SAA  exercise  is 
owned,  that  timelines  are  accurate  and  effective,  and  that  each  procedure  is  well 
documented by owners in a complete and up-to-date procedure manual. 
 In doing this, we hope to create a separate environment and process where we can 
focus solely on the SAA process itself, removed from the overarching deadlines which 
are present in real-life SAAs. In this way, we aim to create a more robust operational 
framework for future SAAs. 
 Governance 
 As I approach the end of my speech, I would like to take a moment to discuss the role 
of  governance.  Not  only  do  reserve managers  have  to  contend  with  the  challenges 
and  complexities  of  managing  foreign  exchange  reserves  efficiently;  it  is  also 
imperative  that  we  do  so  with  an  appropriate  level  of  transparency  and  with 
accountability. Sound governance structures go a long way to ensuring that we meet 
these  high  standards. The  Governor  briefly  touched  on  this  in  his  opening  remarks 
yesterday. 
 The governance structure surrounding foreign exchange reserves management at the 
SARB is separated at different levels. At the highest level, the Governors’ Executive 
Committee  (GEC),  which  is  responsible  for  overall  risk  tolerance  at  the  SARB, 
approves the Investment Policy, the Financial Risk Management Policy and SAA. 
 The Risk Management Committee plays another vital role in the SARB’s governance 
structure. The committee, which reports to the GEC, oversees the risk management 
process in the SARB and reviews the Financial Risk Management Policy to ensure its 
relevance to current business activities. Furthermore, the Risk and Ethics Committee 
of the SARB’s Board of Directors also reviews the status of risk management in the 
SARB as well as the effectiveness of risk management activities, key risks, and the 
mitigating measures to address them. 
 Page 11 of 13 
 Certain elements of the risk oversight role, however, are delegated to the Reserves 
Management Committee (RESMANCO), which is chaired at Deputy Governor level. 
RESMANCO approves investment guidelines and allocates the active risk budget to 
portfolios in order to limit deviations from the benchmarks. In addition, the committee 
also  has the delegated authority to appoint and/or remove external fund  managers, 
custodians and securities lending agents.  
 While  RESMANCO’s  role  is  one  of  oversight,  portfolio  management  activities, 
however,  are  conducted  within  the  Financial  Markets  Department  and,  in  line  with 
principles  of  sound  internal  governance,  the  Bank  has  separated  the  activities  of 
portfolio management, financial risk management, and operational risk management. 
While these activities all reside within the Financial Markets Department, the Head of 
Financial  Risk  has  a  dotted  reporting  line  to  the  Deputy  Governor:  Markets  and 
International  and  the  Head  of  the  Risk  Management  and  Compliance  Department. 
These  measures  ensure  adequate  segregation  of  duties  to  prevent  any  conflicts  of 
interest while at the same time allow for operational efficiency. 
 Furthermore,  in  an  effort  to  promote  and  improve  transparency  around  reserves 
management, in 2016 the South African Reserve Bank began publishing the  Official 
Gold and Foreign Exchange Reserves Management Investment Policy on the Bank’s 
website.  
 These governance structures are vital to ensure that the Investment Policy, through 
the SAA in this instance, is implemented effectively and lends credibility to the SAA 
process itself. 
 Conclusion  
 To conclude, I would like to paraphrase a quote attributed to Saint Francis of Assisi: 
“Start  by  doing  what’s  necessary.  Then  do  what’s  possible.  And  suddenly  you  are 
doing the impossible.” 
  Page 12 of 13 
Looking back at where we started in 1999 to where we are now, we have progressed 
considerably in terms of our approach to investing our reserves. We have achieved 
what might have seemed impossible back then. Our current SAA simulation initiative 
is  a  combination  of  the  latest  thinking  in  investments,  lessons  learnt,  and  all  the 
challenges we have faced along the way. Of course, as with any process, there are 
areas for improvement, and I am sure that, through future iterations, our SAAs will be 
even more robust and more effective.  
 I hope that this journey through the history of the SARB’s foreign exchange reserves 
management, and the SAA’s vital role therein, has been informative, and that it has 
given you an idea of the challenges and opportunities we have faced along the way. 
 I look forward to engaging with you all in the session that follows, and hope that you 
enjoy the remaining sessions today. 
 Thank you. 
    Page 13 of 13 
