Yannis Stournaras: The future of money
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  International
Conference  &quot;The  Future  of  Money:  Trend-Alternatives-Potentials&quot;,  The  American
School of Classical Studies (Gennadius Library), Athens, 24 May 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Thank you very much for the kind invitation to this event. I am very happy to be here today and
address such a distinguished audience.
Most people assume that all issues pertaining to “money” are an easy task for a Central Bank
Governor.  On  the  contrary.  Some  issues  are  very  challenging,  including  present  emerging
technologies in the field of finance and mushrooming cryptocurrencies. Addressing such issues
presents  a  great  opportunity  for  all  interested  to  revisit  the  fundamental  concepts  surrounding
money and how best to shape the monetary space in the future.
More than 20 years ago Bill Gates stated: “Banking is essential, banks are not”. Please, allow me
to disagree. Banks are of utmost importance, but what is true about this quote is that the distrust
that emerged towards some banking systems after the 2008-2009 global financial crisis and the
development of a society-wide taste for decentralized, peer-to-peer, facebook-type, interactions
across  powerful  computer  networks,  has  dramatically  altered  the  landscape  in  the  financial
services. And central banking in the age of digitalization is an interesting issue for reflection in the
realm of monetary economics.
In  my  speech  I  will  try  to  explore  some  key  issues  in  how  money  evolves,  what  is  the  key
innovation  in  private  digital  currencies,  what  would  a  central  bank  digital  currency  be  like  and
what might be the impact of introducing one for the central bank monetary policy.
***
“Monetary space”
To assess the possible paths that means of payment, and consequently monetary policy, may
take in the coming decades, discussions often focus on the definition of money, its functions and
forms.
So what is money?
A simple answer would probably involve Adam Smith’s example of “the butcher, the brewer and
the  baker”,  where  money  is  a  solution  that  arose  to  address  the  inefficiencies  of  the  barter
economy.  Money  is  quite  simply  an  asset  that  everyone  wants.  The  Greek  word  for  money,
“chríma”, means something that one uses or needs. So money as a means of payment must be
efficient and safe to use.
Money,  as  we  know  it  today,  is  the  result  of  a  long  process.  The  world’s  first  coins  were
produced in Lydia over 2500 years ago. They were made from electrum, an alloy, and a roaring
lion  head  was  engraved  on  one  side,  a  symbol  of  the  ruling  dynasty.  This  innovation  quickly
spread to the city-states of ancient Greece. During the classical period, Greek coinage reached
an exceptional technical and artistic level. As anyone who has visited the Numismatic Collection
at the Bank of Greece knows that money has evolved to meet society’s needs. As economic
activity increased, it became apparent that money supply needed to expand beyond the limits of
holding precious metals. Centuries later, with the circulation of paper money, minting of metal
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
coins was restricted to lower values.
In classical economic theory, money fulfils three functions. First, it is a means of payment and
therefore has a key role in all financial transactions. Second, it forms a unit of account. Third, it is
a store of value. People will only accept money as a means of payment if they believe it can be
used  again  in  the  future.  For  all  these  to  work,  money  assumes  a  broad  trust  in  the  issuing
institution. The first central bank was founded to build additional trust in the currency, since the
issuance  by  private  entities  led  to  an  unstable  system.  Hence,  the  role  of  the  central  bank  is
related to trust.
There  are  three  types  of  money  in  the  economy:  a)  physical  cash,  i.e.  banknotes  and  coins.
Banknotes  is  the  form  of  central  bank  money  that  can  be  held  by  the  general  public.  b)  The
second is electronically recorded deposit account liabilities on the ledgers of commercial banks.
c) The third is reserves, that is, deposits of commercial banks with the central bank.
Cash  nowadays  is  displaced  in  many  ways  and  the  “demonetization”  of  transactions  has
become  a  commonplace.  However,  the  question  arises:  Will  there  be  an  increased  need  for
cash in the near future? The answer is clearly positive. For, here is the paradox of the coming
“cashless economy”. According to the ECB, in 2016 around 79% of all payments at Points of
Sale (PoS) in Europe were made with cash . Therefore, although nowadays most money has
been already digitized, cash is still world’s quintessential means of payment. Cash still remains
an important and a very popular component of money supply.
Digital Currencies
1
Preserving  the  two  distinguishing  attributes  of  cash,  namely  anonymity  and  peer-to-peer
exchangeability  within  a  digitized  platform,  had  proven  to  be  significantly  challenging  until  the
distributed ledger technology offered in 2008 the key to assure in a decentralized way than one
could never spend twice her withholding (the “double spending problem”).
There is a lot of excitement in the air about cryptocurrencies. Everyone has heard about Bitcoin,
whose market capitalization as of the first quarter of 2018 exceeded 110 billion US$, increasing
by a factor of ten within a year. The above observation raises many questions, while it is true that
cryptocurrencies represent only a negligible fraction of all world payments.
There has been a raging debate about the effects on the financial system of introducing virtual
currencies,  digital  currencies  and  related  innovations.  The  IMF  has  recently  recognized  that
digital currencies might offer potential benefits, including greater speed and efficiency in making
payments and transfers – particularly across borders .  Offsetting  the  promised  benefit  of  low
payment processing costs, which is expected when the technology in this field matures, is the
extreme volatility of cryptocurrencies’ prices. “Crypto” means anonymity and anonymity can be
abused in a world of crime, terrorism and evasion.
2
The ECB has been considering monetary policy implications resulting from the introduction of
cryptocurrencies since at least 2012. In its recent study, it suggested that due to its high price
volatility and low acceptance rate, the bitcoin could not be regarded as a full form of money from
an economic perspective . More recently, the issue has been discussed in the G-20 meeting and
in the latest communiqué of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (Buenos Aires 19-20
March  2018)  where  it  was  stated  that  crypto-assets  lack  the  key  attributes  of  sovereign
currencies, although at some point they could have financial stability implications.
3
So,  in  the  current  state,  digital  currencies  leave  monetary  transmission  mechanisms  largely
unaffected.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, it is almost a cliché to say that the only certainty about the future of cryptocurrencies is
uncertainty.  Risks  to  financial  stability  may  eventually  emerge  since  the  impact  of  the  digital
currencies on the monetary transmission mechanism ultimately depends on whether firms and
households  broadly  accept  them.  Therefore,  supervisory  authorities  are  monitoring  all
developments in the crypto-ecosystem, occasionally issuing warnings for crypto-exchanges and
brokers, Initial Coin Offerings, futures, exchanged traded funds etc. To this date, some countries
have  tried  to  ban  crypto-assets  altogether  (e.g.  Morocco)  while  others  are  fostering  their
development (e.g. Malta).
On the other hand, the distributed ledger technology (DLT) underlying some digital currencies
schemes, offers potential benefits that go far beyond digital currencies themselves. A distributed
ledger technology is used as a decentralized minting and transaction processing platform, with
copies  of  all  the  transactions  ever  performed  distributed  on  a  public  network  of  computing
servers. A transaction on such a network is completed when the majority of the servers in the
network achieve consensus that it is valid, using cryptographic identification techniques (private-
public keys and hash functions), thus eliminating the need for a trusted party (e.g. central bank).
DLT  is  likely  to  change  mainly  securities  clearing  and  settlement  operations. A  key  feature  of
distributed  ledger  networks  as  payment  platforms  is  that  the  entire  history  of  transactions  –
which is immutable - is available to all transactions verifiers in real time. A copy of the transaction
ledger is stored in all participating agents Data Centers and thus cannot be easily compromised;
at the same time it is easily verifiable and readily auditable.
Bank  of  Canada  experimented  on  a  DLT-based  wholesale  payment  system  (the  so  called
“Project Jasper”) and concluded that core wholesale payment systems function quite efficiently
but there could be some benefits from the interaction with a larger DLT ecosystem of financial
market infrastructures, including cross-border transactions . In a recent speech, the IMF states
that DLT could be applied to various processes in cross boarder payments and gains would be
most  evident  in  efficiency .  Bank  of  England  has  expressed  the  view  that  there  is  scope  for
6
central banking and the financial system more broadly to benefit from the settlement technology .
But many colleagues stress that the DLT is not perfected yet as technology and it has not been
adequately tried. To central banks it remains at an experimental stage at present.
Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC)
4
5
I will now move to an interrelated discussion that focuses on the desirability of central banks to
provide digital currencies through distributed ledger technologies in a decentralized fashion.
Lately, the prospect of central bank cryptocurrencies is attracting attention. Central banks are
drawn  to  the  idea  of  issuing  a  fast,  efficient,  digital  currency  that  does  not  carry  the  cost  of
securing, distributing and processing physical banknotes and coins and that can be tracked in
real time as it moves through the financial system. The development of DLT in recent years now
provides  the  possibility  of  a  supplement  to  physical  cash  in  the  form  of  central  bank  digital
currencies.  The  Bank  of  England  was  among  the  first  central  banks  to  take  notice  of  the
7
feasibility of a central bank digital currency, and other monetary authorities have since followed .
CBDC is a potential new form of digital central bank money. In the current banking system, only
commercial banks hold digital money in deposit at the central bank, i.e. reserves. By introducing
an universally accessible CBDC, every household and business would be enabled to hold direct
claims against the central bank. In practice, the central bank would guarantee free convertibility at
par (i.e. 1:1). This practice would make the digital currency a secure store of value, incentivizing
individuals and businesses to hold the CBDC. One major issue, however, is whether the CBDC
should be an interest bearing asset or not.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are two cases:
A) CBDC pays no interest, just like paper currency.
In this case, households and companies would be incentivized to hold most of their liquid funds
in interest bearing deposit accounts at commercial banks, keeping the use of the digital currency
fairly modest. However, this form of digital currency would constrain the ability of central banks to
push interest rates below zero during periods of weak aggregate demand and deflation because
depositors  would  swiftly  move  their  funds  into  digital  currency  paying  zero  interest. Thus,  the
effective  zero  lower  bound  on  interest  rates  would  become  a  more  binding  constraint  for
monetary policy.
B) CBDC is introduced as an interest bearing currency.
In this case, the central bank would pay interest for digital currency accounts held at the central
bank by individuals, companies and banks, similar to the deposit facility for commercial banks. If
the  digital  currency  bears  interest,  it  will  likely  affect  the  demand  for  physical  cash  out  of
circulation, at least to a large extent. In a recent working paper of Bank of England, CBDC is
defined  as  “a  central  bank  granting  universal,  electronic,  24x7,  national-currency-denominated
8
and interest-bearing access to its balance sheet” .
Furthermore, with an interest bearing CBDC, still only if we assume that zero-interest bearing
paper currency eventually disappears, the constraint of an effective lower bound will be removed
and thereby there will be no need for alternative monetary tools such as quantitative easing or
9
fiscal interventions .
Introducing  CBDC  as  an  interest  bearing  security  has  its  merits,  as  explained  above,  but  it
comes also with great risks. One major question is the following: if money users have access to
risk free central bank money, why would they hold risky commercial bank deposits?
This gives rise to Gresham’s law, namely that “bad money drives out good money”, particularly
during periods of banking crises. Therefore, the impact on the balance sheets of the commercial
banks would be the same as in a classical bank run. Banks would increasingly lose the ability to
attract deposits, creating a potential for more destructive financial crises. Moreover, without the
ability to attract deposits, banks would lose their ability to provide credit; hence they would lose
their core function as financial intermediaries in the economy.
There are other reasons why some central banks, for example in the Scandinavian countries,
might view CBDC particularly favourably. At a time of rapidly declining paper currency circulation,
this could maintain the central bank’s seignorage revenues while preserving some public, trust-
enhancing,  element  in  money.  The  advent  of  digital  currencies  can  help  increase  financial
inclusion and thereby expand the size of the formal economy. On the other hand, the real-time
traceability  of  digital  ledger  transactions  can  combat  effectively  money  laundering,  fiscal  and
social fraud and help in the expansion of the tax base.
Payment  system  efficiency  seems  to  be  also  an  objective  in  considering  CBDC.  Money  and
payment  systems  are  intrinsically  linked.  They  evolved  together  and  this  connection  remains
evident in the responsibility of the central banks to ensure the stability of the payment systems.
Some potential benefits include a) less concentration of liquidity in payment systems which make
large  banks  less  systemically  important  and  b)  enhanced  stability  for  the  overall  payment
ecosystem, depending on the type of the distributed ledger technology.
 Innovation is something that powers development in the financial sector, has contributed to the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
high standard of living we now enjoy and has made finance more “democratic”. For example,
crowdfunding  has  enabled  access  to  finance  to  a  greater  part  of  the  society,  while  using
smartphone apps we can now make mobile payments.
Yet, digital currency is something else.
I am not sure whether digital currency will become a substitute of cash in the near future since
many  important  questions  remain  unanswered.  Cryptocurrencies  have  no  intrinsic  value,  only
value in exchange. Their value derives from the hope, to quote Yves Mersch, “of finding a greater
fool  to  sell  to  before  the  inevitable  crash”
  .  There  is  also  the  crucial  point  which Augustin
Carstens makes   that usage of crypto-assets “relies on the oxygen provided by the connection
to  standard  means  of  payments  and  trading  apps  that  link  users  to  conventional  bank
accounts…  [We  must]  not  allow  such  tokens  to  rely  on  much  of  the  same  institutional
infrastructure that serves the overall financial system and freeload on the trust that it provides...”.
10
11
Today,  banks  face  a  strategic  dilemma  with  the  emergence  of  DLT.  Just  as  the  Internet
decentralized the flow of information, so has the emergence of crypto instruments decentralized
value. And just as postal services have not disappeared, banks are not about to disappear either.
DLT  might  have  many  positive  outcomes  for  banks,  from  reducing  settlement  risk  and
associated  capital  costs,  to  reducing  costs  associated  with  back  office  functions,  to  the
possibility of reducing core banking system costs as the DLT may replace much of the need for
a banking general ledger in the future. But we remain still far from this point.
Digitalization in finance opens up bewildering opportunities. Central banks should capitalize on
them  but  without  losing  sight  of  the  potential  risks.  The  Bank  of  Greece  and  the  ECB  have
several reasons to be interested in developments in digital currencies. We cannot predict the
exact direction the innovations will take but we will certainly continue to monitor developments
and assess their implications.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
(1) Esselink, H. and L. Hernandez (2017), “The Use of Cash by Households in the Euro Area”, No201, European
Central Bank.
(2) Lagarde, C. (2017), “Central Banking and FinTech – A Brave New World?”, Speech at the Bank of England
Conference, London.
(3) ECB (2015), Virtual Currency Schemes – A Further Analysis, European Central Bank.
(4) Chapman, J., Garrat, R., McCormack A. and W. McMahon (2017), “Project Jasper: Are Distributed Wholesale
Payment Systems Feasible yet?”, Financial System Review, Bank of Canada.
(5) Dong, H. (2017), “FinTech and Cross-Border Payments”, Speech at the Ripple – Central Summit, New York.
(6)  Carney  M.  (2018),  “The  Future  of  Money”,  Speech  to  the  Inaugural  Scottish  Economics  Conference,
Edinburgh.
(7) Ali,  R.,  Barrdear,  J.,  Clews,  R.  and  J.  Southgate  (2014),  “Innovations  in  payment  technologies  and  the
emergence of digital currencies”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 54, No. 3, pages 262–75.
(8) Barrdear, J. and M. Kumhof (2016), “The Macroeconomics of Central Bank Issued Digital Currencies”, No.
605, Bank of England.
(9) Agarwal, R. and M. Kimball (2015), “Breaking Through the Zero Lower Bound”, International Monetary Fund
Working Paper, No 15/224.
(10) Mersch, Y. (2018), “Virtual or Virtueless? The Evolution of Money in the Digital Age”, Speech at the Official
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London.
(11)  Carstens A.  (2018),  “Money  in  the  Digital Age:  What  Role  for  Central  Banks?”,  Speech  at  the  Goethe
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
University.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
