  An address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the 5th Business Management Conference  
of the College of Law and Management Studies  
of the University of KwaZulu-Natal 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban  
 23 August 2018 
 Economic and policy challenges in Africa 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 Allow me to thank you for the opportunity to address this conference that explores a 
very important issue facing the economies of Africa today: ‘The role of urbanisation, 
and how the cities of the future will be structured and managed amid economic and 
policy  challenges  in  Africa’.  Of  course,  the  growth  and  future  of  African  cities  is 
interdependent with the economic evolution of the continent in the next few decades, 
and how policies will shape that economic outlook.  
 I therefore propose to discuss the external and internal challenges that the continent’s 
economy faces as it strives to move to a stronger, more inclusive pace of growth, and 
how policy  – in particular monetary policy  – can assist in that respect. Finally, I will 
look at whether the South African experience can inform future choices  of the other 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa.  
 Africa’s performance in the global context 
 The 2000s was a rather good period for the continent. After several decades when it 
had  generally  failed  to  ‘catch  up’  with  the  more  advanced  regions  and  therefore 
converge towards the technological frontier, sub-Saharan Africa outpaced the world 
 Page 1 of 11 
economy and other emerging regions, save East Asia and the Pacific.1 According to 
data published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the region’s economy grew 
by  an  annual  average  of  5.7%  versus  3.9% for  the  world  economy  and  6.1%  for 
emerging markets during that period.  
 Furthermore,  economic  growth  became  more  diversified.  The  services  sector  in 
particular  contributed  strongly  to  the  overall  expansion,  including  retail,  financial 
services and telecommunications.  
 More  generally,  the  private  sector  played  a  growing  role  in  driving  investment  in 
productive capacities, while the sources of international financing became increasingly 
diverse too. Importantly, what some analysts described as ‘a continent on the mend’ 
proved fairly resilient to the global financial crisis of 2008-09, even if this was (in part) 
due to the relatively loose linkages of African countries to the world’s major financial 
centres. In 2009, growth in sub-Saharan Africa slowed to ‘only’ 3.9% versus 2.8% for 
the emerging world as a whole and a 0.2% contraction for the global economy. 
 As  the  present  decade  started,  the  region  continued  to  grow  strongly,  helped  by  a 
rebound in commodity prices and strong growth in China, which had over the previous 
decade turned into Africa’s largest and fastest-growing trading partner. However, this 
pace of growth hit a ‘snag’ in 2016, when real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 
by  a  mere  1.4%,  thus  decoupling  from  emerging-market  and  global  norms.  The 
negative  impact  from  the  2014-15  collapse  in  oil  prices  on  some  of  the  continent’s 
major oil exporters played an important part. However, the deceleration was relatively 
broad-based2  and  exposed  several  underlying  fragilities  that  had  accumulated  in 
earlier years, including the rise in external or fiscal account constraints. 
 Where do we stand now? 
 Economic  growth  has  recovered  since  the  abrupt  deceleration  of  2016,  and  major 
international  institutions  now  forecast  a  moderate  pickup  into  2019.  For  example, 
the World  Bank,  in  its  June  2018  Global  Economic  Prospects,  projects  real  GDP 
                                                           
1 If one excludes China, sub-Saharan Africa actually outpaced growth in all the other major regions 
in the 2000s.  
2 Out of 43 countries, 23 witnessed a deceleration in growth in 2016, according to World Bank data. 
 Page 2 of 11 
growth of 3.5% next year, after 3.1% in the current year and 2.6% in 2017. However, 
this gradual pace of expansion still falls short of what the continent experienced, on 
average, in the previous decade. Furthermore, economists agree that, with per capita 
GDP growth rising by only about 1% a year, it will not make a major dent in poverty 
and inequality. 
 The imbalances that have built up over the past decade have not disappeared.  The 
region’s current account deficit, which had peaked at an elevated 6% of GDP in 2015, 
narrowed to 2.6% last year. However, the IMF expects that it will widen moderately 
again this year and the next, to around 3% of GDP. Furthermore, this aggregate hides 
the disparate performances across countries. The recovery in Brent crude prices has 
helped  to  alleviate  the  external  pressures  for  oil  exporters,  but  in  countries  whose 
strong  growth  has  been  heavily  dependent  on  import-intensive  public  infrastructure 
investment, current account deficits remain high and, in many cases, are rising.  
 In any event, external debt (expressed as a share of GDP) for sub-Saharan Africa as 
a whole is rising, with the servicing cost of that debt representing a growing chunk of 
export earnings – a clear sign that there is no room for complacency. 
 ‘Twin deficits’ have become the norm across the region over the past decade. Sub-
Saharan Africa’s government balance was in surplus, on average, between 2004 and 
2008,  but the region posted a deficit in excess of 4.0% of GDP from 2015 to 2017. 
Admittedly, most of the countries have now taken steps towards fiscal consolidation, 
and official forecasters expect a narrowing of that public deficit. Nonetheless, public-
debt  ratios  are  projected  to  continue  rising  in  2018,  and  the  IMF  has  recently 
highlighted  the  concerning  rising  trend  in  debt-servicing  costs  as  a  percentage  of 
national budgets. There are indications already that public deficits are, in some cases, 
starting to ‘crowd out’ financing for private-sector projects. 
 The 2016 slowdown in the region’s economies was  compounded by a broad-based 
depreciation in most of its free-floating currencies, which triggered faster inflation and 
forced central banks to raise rates, sometimes aggressively. Thankfully, such negative 
forces largely reversed in 2017: in an environment of rising global investor appetite for 
risk, recovering commodity prices and softness in the United States (US) dollar, most 
of  the  liquid,  tradable  African  currencies  either  stabilised  or  recovered  against  the 
 Page 3 of 11 
dollar. This improved performance, helped in some cases by a shift to a tight monetary 
stance – in particular, in the large oil exporters like Angola  and Nigeria – allowed a 
broad-based decline in inflation rates. 
 In fact, in most of the largest economies of the continent, inflation in the early part of 
2018 has been close to central banks’ targets, or within such targets, when the central 
bank  targets  an  inflation  range  as  opposed  to  an  inflation  point.  This  has  allowed 
several central banks to reduce interest rates in the past year or so – in some cases 
by  a  moderate  amount  (Angola,  Kenya),  and  in  others    more  substantially  (Ghana, 
Mozambique, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia). It is encouraging to note that many in the 
latter group of countries had in earlier years been forced to hike aggressively to combat 
inflation pressures; this policy tightening thus appears to have borne fruit. 
 The ongoing challenges of development 
 Several  factors  point  to  a  moderately  improved  short-term  growth,  inflation  and 
monetary outlook for sub-Saharan Africa. Nonetheless, as I have mentioned earlier, 
the growth levels projected for the next year or two remain insufficient to engineer a 
serious reduction in poverty as well as the other social or economic ills that typically 
accompany it, such as crime, malnutrition and illiteracy. The strong growth over 2000-
2014 did help to alleviate both the incidence and the depth of poverty. For example, 
statistics compiled by the World Bank show that the percentage of people living below 
US$1.9 a day fell from 58% in 1999 to 42% in 2013, the latest year for which data are 
available. Nonetheless, this indicator has not declined near as fast anywhere else, and 
remains well above the similar indices for Latin America, South Asia and East Asia – 
even though, in the last-mentioned, poverty incidence was higher than in sub-Saharan 
Africa back in 1990. 
 This  unfavourable  comparison  highlights  the  urgent  need for  sub-Saharan  Africa  to 
restart  the  ‘high  growth  spells’  which  had  characterised  the  pre-2015  period  –  yet 
which,  according  to  IMF  research,  tended  to  be  shorter  in  duration  and  more 
vulnerable  to  an  eventual  crash  than  in  other  regions.3  According  to  that  same 
research, both exogenous and internal factors influence the shift to a higher growth 
                                                           
3 See the article titled ‘Restarting sub-Saharan Africa’s growth engine’ in the IMF’s Regional 
Economic Outlook published in May 2017 (Chapter 2). 
 Page 4 of 11 
path and  the  duration of  these  growth  spells.  These  factors  include  global  financial 
conditions, changes in the terms of trade, low inflation, flexible exchange rates, and 
policy  stability,  including  prudent  fiscal  management  and  well-managed  debt 
dynamics.  
 I  would  therefore  like  to  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  external  environment  that  sub-
Saharan Africa is likely to face in the coming years, as well as on the role that domestic 
policies can play in fostering renewed development. 
 However, before I move on to these  topics, allow me to highlight the importance of 
economic growth for African cities – for this is, after all, the subject of this conference, 
and the economic implications of and for urbanisation need to be better understood.  
 Many economists point out the long-term benefits of urbanisation for economic growth: 
by living in a large city, individuals can access the type of job opportunities, and can 
participate in such business networks, that are not available in a rural setting, or much 
less so. Economies of scale are also generally understood to be larger in urban areas. 
Hence,  it  may  not  come  as  a  surprise  that,  in  most  countries,  a  higher  degree  of 
development generally coincides with a higher share of the population living in large 
conurbations. 
 However, those of us who frequently travel to African cities are also appalled at the 
problems that seem to come with the continent’s fast rate of urbanisation, namely the 
prevalence  of  slums,  poor  sanitation,  squalor,  traffic  congestion,  and  high  levels  of 
insecurity. Why does this happen? An exhaustive study published by the World Bank 
last year offers some explanations.4 According to the authors, Africa’s cities suffer from 
poor spatial organisation that raises the costs of both living and doing business – and, 
as  a  consequence,  businesses  remain  ‘trapped’  in  low-value-added,  non-tradable 
economic activities. In a word, African cities are not ‘economically dense’ and hence 
fail  to  benefit  from  those  regional  or  global  growth  opportunities  which,  in  other 
continents, become available to new urban dwellers.  
                                                            
4 See Africa’s cities: opening doors to the world published by the World Bank in 2017. 
 Page 5 of 11 
How can these problems be remedied? If, as the report’s authors suggest,  they can 
be  traced  to  poor  spatial  organisation,  lack  of  proper  urban  infrastructure  and 
excessive  costs,  it  would  appear  that  those  policies  which  encourage  higher 
investment in both physical capital (including public infrastructure) and human capital, 
which  lower  the  costs  and  risks  associated  with  doing  business,  and  which  allow 
economies of scale should take priority. Facilitating access to networks, in particular 
information  technology  (IT)  networks  (including  the  roll-out  of  broadband  access  to 
individual homes and small businesses), will need to receive special attention.  
 While all layers of government will have to be involved in the reforms that facilitate the 
economic growth of cities, it is the municipal authorities that should be at the forefront 
of  spatial  development,  the  provision  of  infrastructure,  and  educational  or  social 
cohesion programmes. This stresses the need for African municipalities to create the 
necessary fiscal space for the provision of such services – and highlights, in turn, the 
crucial role that both fiscal and monetary policy can play in facilitating economic and 
urban  development,  which  I  will  elaborate  on  shortly.  While  not  the  focus  of  our 
interaction today, we should not neglect the development challenges that rural areas 
face, which also deserve attention. Appropriately designed and targeted policies for 
rural development are similarly important. 
  Potentially, a more challenging external environment 
 First,  though,  let  me  discuss  how  the  global  outlook  is  likely  to  influence  Africa’s 
economic and policy framework in the next few years.  
 At  present,  as  I  have  indicated  earlier,  most  official  and  private  forecasters  appear 
confident of a moderate acceleration in economic growth in the coming two to three 
years. However, several ‘warning bells’ suggest that the unusually benign environment 
that the world faced in late 2017 – with a combination of upside growth surprises in 
most of the major economies, supportive global financial conditions, moderately rising 
commodity prices, and low financial market volatility – has already started to fade. 
  Page 6 of 11 
First, global economic growth is becoming less synchronised. While the US economy 
registered  strong  growth  of  4.1%5  in  the  second  quarter  of  2018,  buoyed  by  fiscal 
stimulus  and  a  continued  strong  performance  of  the  labour  market,  activity  in  the 
eurozone and Japan failed to return to the surprisingly strong pace seen late last year, 
despite  the  rebound  from  a  poor,  weather-affected  first  quarter.  High-frequency 
confidence indicators confirm that shift to a slower, albeit still-dynamic, pace of growth.  
 In the eurozone, the political risks which most market participants thought had faded 
have,  to  some  extent,  come  back  after  this  year’s  Italian  election.  In  the  United 
Kingdom, the elevated uncertainties around the Brexit process seem to be weighing 
on corporate investment decisions. In China, activity lost some momentum in the first 
half of the year amid lesser fiscal support and tighter financial  regulation, and while 
Chinese authorities now seem more willing to relax the policy stance somewhat, the 
potential conflict between ensuring a stable growth path and allowing highly leveraged 
sectors to reduce debt will continue to pose some risks to growth in the years to come. 
 Second,  growing  trade  tensions  –  not  just  between  the  US  and  China,  but  also 
between  the  former  and  other  key  trading  partners  such  as  the  European  Union, 
Canada and Mexico – have the potential to undermine global expansion. So far, it is 
too early to tell whether the selected imposition of tariffs has had an impact on trade 
flows.  However,  survey  evidence  already  suggests  that  businesses  are  becoming 
more  circumspect  in  investing  and  hiring,  especially  in  those  sectors  that  rely  on 
international  demand.  And  while  sub-Saharan  Africa  is  not  directly  involved  in  the 
present trade conflicts – in large part because it is not a strong direct competitor to US 
manufacturing  producers,  and  also  because  its  countries  do  not  run  large  bilateral 
surpluses with the US – the region would still be vulnerable to a structural shift in global 
trade growth, as are most small economies with limited internal markets that rely in 
part on exports for development. Greater restrictions to global trade  would also limit 
the ability of African countries to become more integrated in global value chains, and 
hence gradually reduce their dependence  on commodity exports – which remains a 
source of vulnerability. 
                                                            
5 Seasonally adjusted, annualised 
 Page 7 of 11 
Third, the current global financial conditions are not as loose as they were at the start 
of the year. Following a strong performance in the latter part of 2017, most of the major 
equity  markets  are  down  from  their  January  2018  peaks,  and  dividend  yields  have 
increased. At the same time, while benchmark government bond yields remain quite 
stable despite the higher US policy rates, investment-grade corporate bond spreads 
in the US and some of the other advanced economies have widened from the early-
year  levels,  as  have  emerging-market  sovereign  spreads. While  this  move  remains 
muted  for  the  time  being,  and  while  measures  of  market  volatility  like  the  widely 
watched Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) index are still at low 
levels,  its  impact  on  emerging-market  financing  is  being  compounded  by  US  dollar 
appreciation, with the US Federal Reserve’s broad trade-weighted dollar index up by 
3.8% from the start of the year. 
 Tighter global financial conditions can be a particular challenge for those sub-Saharan 
African  countries  which  have  relied  on  private  offshore  investors,  and  especially 
Eurobond investors, to finance their ‘twin deficits’ in recent years. In 2017, following a 
period  of  declining  investor  appetite  for  ‘frontier  markets’,  African  Eurodollar  bond 
issuance rose to US$7.9 billion6, second only to the record of US$8.5 billion in 2014. 
The  trend  gathered  pace  in  the  first  seven  months  of  2018,  with  no  fewer  than  six 
African  sovereigns  tapping  the  market  for  a  combined  amount  of  US$13  billion. 
However, sovereign Eurobond spreads  have widened again since March 2018, and 
while they remain relatively low by recent historical standards, African sovereigns may 
find it harder, or at least more costly, to cover their external funding needs if global risk 
aversion rises significantly further. 
 What should the policy response be? 
 It  would  therefore  appear  that  sub-Saharan  African  countries  cannot  solely  rely  on 
external dynamics to shift to a higher, more durable pace of growth. Domestic policies 
will have to play an important part too. However, as I have already discussed, the room 
for manoeuvre for fiscal policy has become very limited. While the debt-to-GDP ratios 
have not reached crippling levels yet, countries in the region will want to avoid a repeat 
of the over indebtedness of the 1970s and 1980s, which had forced many of them into 
                                                           
6 This is equivalent to 0.5% of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP. 
 Page 8 of 11 
socially  and  economically  painful  adjustment  programmes.  It  is  more  likely  that  the 
challenges for fiscal policymakers in the coming years will be of a structural nature, 
such as broadening the tax base and improving taxpayers’ compliance, reducing fiscal 
revenue dependency on natural resources, and re-prioritizing expenditure away from 
wasteful, inefficient interventions. 
 But can monetary policy step in and provide support? Before attempting to answer this 
question, I would first like to stress what monetary policy cannot do – and that is: run 
an overly stimulative stance for a prolonged period of time in the hope of engineering 
a sustained pickup in growth. Such an approach would only result in excess demand, 
and as it could not be met by the domestic supply of goods and services, it would only 
generate inflation, external imbalances and, in the end, an economic crisis. Of course, 
in recent quarters, lower inflation in many African countries has allowed central banks 
to  reduce  interest  rates.  However,  history  shows  that  inflation  can  pick  up  quickly 
again. In fact, the average volatility of inflation in the region’s countries is rather high 
by international standards, owing in part to the large weight of volatile items like food 
and fuel in consumer price index baskets. 
 This suggests that the central banks in the region need to further focus on reducing 
both the volatility and the average level of inflation, the latter also remaining high by 
global standards. Such an approach is likely to prove beneficial to long-term growth: 
in the IMF report cited earlier, the authors estimate that a durable reduction in inflation 
can increase the expected length of a ‘growth spell’ by up to 5.5 years. Intuitively, one 
can  understand  how  a  greater  anchoring  of  price  expectations  can  reduce 
uncertainties for decision-makers and savers alike, how it can reduce the risk premium 
required by investors in both financial assets and the real economy, how it can help 
develop financial instruments available for development, and how it can lead to more 
stable employer-labour relations. 
 Looking at the South African experience 
 Can anything be learnt from the South African experience  in that respect? Some of 
the  constraints  I  reflected  on  earlier  –  of  poor  spatial  development,  inadequate 
infrastructure  provision,  and  barriers  to  entry  for  emerging  entrepreneurs  –  have 
presented major challenges for South Africa and its major metropolitan areas. In fact, 
 Page 9 of 11 
in addition to the ‘normal’ issues faced by an emerging economy, our country has also 
had to deal with the legacies of the apartheid system which had, for decades, and for 
political  reasons,  contributed  to  raising  these  constraints.  South  Africa’s  post-1994 
democratically  elected  government  thus  had  to  place  particular  emphasis  on  the 
alleviation  of  spatial  and  infrastructure  constraints  in  the  previously  disadvantaged 
areas. 
 South Africa has registered tangible progress in many areas, including electrification, 
water  and  sanitation,  mobile  telephony  or  Internet  access,  health  and  literacy 
improvement.  To  give  a  few  examples,  the  share  of  households  with  access  to 
electricity rose from 64% in 1984 to 84% by 2016. Similarly, between 2000 and 2016, 
cell phone subscriptions jumped from 18 to 147 per 100 people.  
 However, progress in these development indicators has slowed – and in some cases 
stalled  –  over  the  past  decade,  as  a  structural  slowdown  in  economic  growth  has 
undermined  private  investment  in  future  productive  capacities  and  has  reduced 
(together  with  a  sub-optimal  allocation  of  resources)  fiscal  space  for  the  roll-out  of 
better  infrastructure,  education  and  health  facilities.  One  cannot  deny  that  recent 
economic growth in South Africa, which averaged only 1.5% over the past five years, 
is far too low to deal with the country’s long-lasting problems of high unemployment, 
poverty and inequality. 
 The  answer  to  these  growth  challenges  often  lies  in  structural,  long-term  policy 
approaches.  Clearly,  many  of  these  are  outside  the  remit  of  monetary  policy. 
Nonetheless, for the past few decades, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has 
strived to ensure a more stable monetary and financial environment, so as to facilitate 
the attainment of longer-term growth and development goals.  
 Following decades of high and volatile inflation, the adoption in the early 2000s of a 3-
6% inflation  target has allowed, first, the sustained decline of consumer price gains 
into single-digit territory, and then, over time, increased compliance with price stability 
goals. Inflation expectations have also become better anchored over the years, albeit 
at levels that are still uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range.  
  Page 10 of 11 
Over time, not just inflation but also economic growth and, importantly, policy rates as 
set by the SARB have become less volatile, while greater transparency of monetary-
policy  decisions  –  including,  in  recent  times,  the  publication  of  the  SARB’s 
macroeconomic  projections  –  has  increased  policy  predictability.  A  more  stable 
monetary environment has also contributed to the soundness of the banking system, 
the liquidity of financial markets, and the ability of government to lengthen the maturity 
of its liabilities. 
 Conclusions 
 To  conclude,  let  me  say  that  the  challenges  being  faced  by  the  continent,  and  in 
particular by its cities, are real – and that policy answers cannot be deferred. Africa’s 
population  is  growing,  and  within  the  next  few  decades,  a  growing  share  of  that 
population  will  be  migrating  towards  its  already-large  urban  areas.  Infrastructure, 
education and network development needs will continue to grow.  
 The answer to these inevitable challenges does not just lie in betting on a strong global 
environment, even if Africa’s increased integration into the world economy will bring 
benefits. The answer also lies in an appropriate  policy environment underpinned by 
strong political will. And, perhaps more than ever, sound fiscal and monetary policies 
form a crucial part of that framework. 
 Thank you. 
    Page 11 of 11 
