Benoît  Cœuré:  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European
Financial Infrastructures
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  the  second  meeting  of  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European
Financial Infrastructures, Frankfurt am Main, 7 December 2018.
 It is a pleasure to welcome you back to Frankfurt. Since our last meeting in March, we have been
very busy at the ECB and across the Eurosystem, and we have made considerable progress in
our work to enhance the cyber resilience of the financial sector.
The cyber threat facing the financial sector continues to be a challenge. From banking trojans
affecting individual customers to systemic threats posed by ransomware and targeted attacks
from advanced persistent threat (APT) groups, the landscape is evolving on a daily basis.
1
At our previous meetings, we shared with you the Eurosystem cyber strategy for financial market
infrastructures  (FMIs) .  This  strategy  rests  on  three  pillars:  individual  FMI  resilience,  sector
resilience and strategic regulator-industry collaboration. I am pleased that in the last few months,
the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  have  made  significant  progress  in  putting  in  place  the  building
blocks  for  enhancing  the  cyber  resilience  of  the  European  financial  ecosystem  and
operationalising the strategy.
We  have  developed  two  key  tools  to  improve  FMI  resilience:  the  cyber  resilience  oversight
3
expectations (CROE)  and the TIBER-EU Framework .
2
the  CPMI-IOSCO  Guidance  on  cyber 
The  CROE  serves  three  key  purposes:  (i)  it  provides  FMIs  with  detailed  steps  on  how  to
operationalise 
financial  market
4
infrastructures ,  ensuring  they  are  able  to  make  improvements  and  enhance  their  cyber
resilience  over  a  sustained  period  of  time;  (ii)  it  provides  overseers  with  clear  expectations
against  which  to  assess  FMIs  under  their  responsibility;  and  (iii)  it  provides  the  basis  for  a
meaningful discussion between the FMIs and their respective overseers. The public consultation
on the CROE provided some very useful feedback, which we carefully considered, and the final
version was published earlier this week. The central banks of the Eurosystem will work closely
with  the  various  financial  infrastructures  to  enhance  their  cyber  resilience,  with  the  CROE
serving as a good basis for this work.
resilience 
for 
5
Enhancing  cyber  resilience  is  of  crucial  importance.  Equally  important,  however,  is  to  test
whether the enhancements that have been introduced by individual entities are effective. To that
end, we published the TIBER-EU Framework in May and the TIBER-EU Services Procurement
Guidelines   in August.  In  due  course,  we  will  also  be  publishing  the  TIBER-EU  White  Team
Guidance, to further complement the testing framework. The feedback on the testing framework
has been very positive, and we are in close dialogue with a number of authorities across the EU
that are in the process of adopting it. Our hope is that over time, this sophisticated level of testing
will help strengthen our financial infrastructures and raise standards among threat intelligence
and red team testing providers.
In terms of sector resilience, we believe that exercises are a key component of building market-
wide preparedness for a cyber incident. In March, we told you about our forthcoming market-wide
exercise, which we held in June. The exercise, UNITAS, took the form of a facilitated discussion
among market participants – many of whom are here today – on a cyber scenario. The scenario
involved a cyberattack on a number of financial infrastructures, resulting in a loss of data integrity
and  a  knock-on  effect  on  other  financial  infrastructures.  Today  we  will  discuss  how  we  can
proceed in 2019 to follow-up on this exercise.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
With regard to strategic regulator-industry collaboration, our third pillar, we formally established
the Euro Cyber Resilience Board (ECRB) for pan-European Financial Infrastructures in March
2018, as a forum for strategic discussions between financial infrastructures and authorities. As
you  know,  our  objectives  are  to  raise  awareness  of  the  topic  of  cyber  resilience;  to  act  as  a
catalyst for joint initiatives to develop effective solutions for the market; and to provide a place to
share  best  practices  and  foster  trust  and  collaboration.  Today  we  will  discuss  what  concrete
steps we can take as members of the ECRB to develop meaningful solutions and foster this
trust and collaboration.
Of course, cyber risk is borderless and it is an international issue. So the Eurosystem’s initiatives
are  part  of  a  growing  international  effort  to  combat  cyber  threats.  In  October  this  year,  G7
ministers  and  central  bank  governors  published  the  “Fundamental  Elements  for  Threat-Led
Penetration  Testing”,  which  complements  the  TIBER-EU  Framework,  and  the  “Fundamental
Elements for Third Party Cyber Risk Management in the Financial Sector”. In 2019, the G7 Cyber
Expert  Group  will  move  ahead  with  conducting  the  first  global  cross-border  cyber  crisis
simulation exercise.
In November, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) published a Cyber Lexicon. Having a common
set  of  definitions  in  non-technical  language  will  support  the  work  of  the  FSB,  standard-setting
bodies, authorities and financial institutions to address cyber security and cyber resilience in the
financial sector. The ECB continues to participate in these international fora, ensuring that global
initiatives are aligned with our work in Europe.
From  an  operational  perspective,  the  Market  Infrastructure  Board,  which  is  in  charge  of  the
Eurosystem-operated financial infrastructures, continues to scale up its activities to ensure the
continued cyber resilience of its systems and platforms.
6
At our meeting in March , we identified four key areas for further focus: 1) crisis management
and incident response; 2) information sharing; 3) awareness and training; and 4) third-party risk.
There was general agreement that these key areas warranted further thought and focus. The
UNITAS exercise further confirmed that these areas require attention. Today we will reflect on
how to address them collectively on the basis of proposals made in close cooperation with the
experts at your institutions.
 Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Eurosystem cyber resilience strategy
Cyber resilience oversight expectations
TIBER-EU Framework
CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures
TIBER-EU Services Procurement Guidelines
ECRB public summary March 2018
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
