Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Reimagining the regulatory landscape for
payment systems
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Payments Week 2018 &quot;Reimagining the
regulatory landscape for payment systems&quot;, Kuala Lumpur, 4 December 2018.
 Making a payment used to be an ordinary affair. You’d fill up your cart, head on to the cashier,
and reach for your wallet. Today, that cart could be a screen, the cashier a machine, and the
wallet  a  phone.  In  a  span  of  about  10  years,  digital  innovation  has  radically  transformed
payments. Digital technologies now enable payment services to be easily replicated and rapidly
scaled, often at a small incremental cost and increasingly by new and non-traditional players.
Geographical and time constraints are becoming less relevant when transferring funds especially
with the advent of real-time payment services. Mobile money and e-wallets have brought millions
more individuals into the financial fold. ‘Super apps’ combined with payments functionalities have
created entirely new ecosystems – these enhance user convenience and offer new opportunities
for businesses beyond the area of payments. Cash and cards are no longer the only ways to pay
– soon, we may no longer even need to present our physical or digital wallet. Last year, a global
fast food chain started accepting facial recognition as a mode of authorising payment in China.
This is – quite literally – the new face of payments.
It is thus an opportune time to be gathered at this year’s Global Payments Week (GPW). Indeed,
Bank Negara Malaysia is deeply honoured to host the first GPW in Asia-Pacific. This is fitting for
the times, given the growing pervasiveness of digital payments in Asia in recent years. The 2018
World Payments Report estimates that the growth of non-cash transactions in emerging Asia
has outpaced Europe and North America by at least four to five times between 2012 to 2016. The
trend is expected to continue – emerging Asia is forecasted to record roughly 250 billion non-
cash  transactions  by  2021,  making  this  region  the  market  leader  by  volume  of  electronic
payments for the first time.
Indeed, the future of payments look brighter than ever. Digital payments adoption is growing. The
technological advancements supporting it show no signs of slowing down. Yet, no matter how
optimistic everyone else is – it is in our DNA as regulators to think about what could go wrong.
For today’s keynote address, allow me to therefore highlight the key challenges and risks that
may lie ahead. I will then share a few perspectives that I believe are crucial for the regulatory
agenda for payments going forward.
The  first  key  challenge  is  the evolving landscape  of  technologies  and  the  resultant  risks  for
payment  systems.  The  rapid  development  and  adoption  of  technology  in  recent  years  has
brought about greater efficiency and productivity.
However, the pace of change itself can be a key challenge, if not managed well. Not too long ago,
the  advent  of  the  Internet  heralded  a  new  era  for  payments  by  enabling  transactions  to  be
conducted  remotely  using  online  banking  services  and  payment  cards.  Today,  payment
technologies have evolved rapidly to include an alphabet soup of different modes of payment –
for example RFID, NFC and QR just to name a few. At the same time, new use cases leveraging
on  biometrics,  open API,  artificial  intelligence  and  blockchain  are  also  being  developed.  While
such technological innovations demonstrate great potential, the full impact and resultant risk may
yet to be fully understood.
Cyber security is also a fast-growing area of concern, given the sophistication of cyber threat
actors and as more consumers and businesses are plugged into digital payments. This is further
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
compounded  by  the  interconnectedness  of  payment  systems  which  heightens  contagion  risk.
While sources of risks are borderless, the non extra-territorial nature of most payment regulation
and supervision presents a key challenge to effective regulatory oversight. 
Concentration risks also require close attention, given the largely centralised model of prevalent
payment systems. Network effects are a double-edged sword. As a payment system becomes
more widely used, the implications of operational disruption would also be more far-reaching. In
2018,  we  have  seen  two  global  card  networks  face  service  disruptions,  affecting  at  least  five
million transactions in Europe and the US. If the frequency and magnitude of such disruptions
increase, there is a real risk that public confidence in digital payments would be undermined.
The second challenge is market fragmentation. Across domestic markets, incumbent banks,
technology  companies  and  telco  firms  –  among  others  –  are  all  vying  for  a  share  of  the  pie,
leading to a proliferation of payment service providers. Although a more diversified market can
reduce some of the concentration risks that I highlighted earlier, there are trade-offs that need to
be managed. In 2018 alone, the UK saw its number of e-money players increased from roughly
400 to 600 companies. A country that has a high number of proprietary networks is likely to face
challenges  for  interoperability  across  payment  providers.  This  in  turn  could  weaken  network
effects and economies of scale for domestic payments. Meanwhile, on the ground, merchants
may cope by putting up a dizzying array of signs and stickers to indicate the range of accepted
payment  options.  The  sheer  amount  of  choice  –  each  with  differing  benefits  and  limitations  –
could be confusing for consumers, and frustrating for merchants especially when it comes to
reconciliation.  For  countries  striving  to  encourage  the  adoption  of  e-payments,  these  issues
could be a major stumbling block.
Similarly,  market  fragmentation  is  a  growing  challenge  at  the  international  level,  especially  as
individual countries and firms embark on their respective initiatives in the payments landscape.
This  could  lead  to  substantive  cross-border  differences,  such  as  in  the  technical  standards,
business  rules  and  regulatory  requirements.  While  these  differences  are  not  insurmountable,
overcoming them can entail significant costs – such as when a web of intermediaries is needed
to facilitate a cross-border transaction.
If not managed well, cross-border differences may hamper efforts to support bilateral or regional
integration, such as where local payment companies look to expand or integrate to enable cross-
border connectivity.
Shifting market expectations  is  the  third  key  challenge,  which  can  lead  to  a  gap  between
customer demand and payment services available. Consumers today are increasingly used to
on-demand  services  that  are  instant  and  seamless.  To  this  end,  retail  payments  are  making
good progress – increasingly, more countries have developed real-time payment infrastructure
that support instant peer-to-peer (P2P) payments. However, the same experience is increasingly
expected – but not necessarily delivered – for other segments, such as in consumer-to-business
(C2B) and business-to-business (B2B) payments. Gaps also remain on the cross-border front in
terms of speed, transparency and cost.
The  growing  complexity  and  depth  of  global  financial  markets,  such  as  in  securities  and
derivatives markets, also has implications on large value payment systems. Financial institutions
and large corporates are gradually facing more difficulties in handling multiple types of financial
instruments  across  multiple 
their
organisations.  Perhaps there may be demand going forward for payment systems to support
greater sophistication in user functionality, such as liquidity optimisation facilities for banks and
automated treasury services for corporate clients.
jurisdictions  and  across  multiple 
functions  within 
Keeping in mind these challenges, a few questions come to mind. First, what is the appropriate
role for regulators when it comes to digital innovation in payments? Second, should regulators be
proactive in leading the agenda of change or keep an active watching brief and intervene only
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
when necessary? Third, how do we balance between oversight and developmental objectives?
And the fourth, what are the right set of guiding principles?
I would like to turn to these questions for the second half of my speech. Importantly, I believe that
regulators have to play a driving role to foster an enabling environment for an efficient and vibrant
payment landscape, whilst actively managing the associated risks. Innovation should be industry-
led. Regulators should instead focus on building the right preconditions for the payment systems
to develop in a resilient and progressive manner. In this regard, I would like to share four key
focus areas for the payments regulatory agenda moving forward:
First, to preserve trust to safeguard the resilience and integrity of payment systems;
Second,  to  apply proportionate regulation  to  effectively  manage  risk,  whilst  not  stifling
innovation;
Third,  to  enable connectivity  through  collaboration  towards  greater  standardisation  and
interoperability; and
Fourth, to promote efficiency and innovation through greater competition.
Preserving trust
Let me start with the first focus area of preserving trust. Trust is at the heart of any effective
payment  system.  Consumers,  businesses  and  governments  must  be  able  to  trust  that  a
payment made is final, that it reaches the intended beneficiary, and that the value transferred is
accurate.
Without these elements, a payment system or service cannot serve its purpose. To that end,
regulations must seek to ensure that payment systems are secure, reliable and resilient.
Given the increasingly unpredictable sources of risk, regulatory initiatives would benefit from an
‘assumed-breach’ philosophy. Systemically important payment systems must be set up to be
able  to  withstand  disruption.  This  would  entail  requiring  adequate  financial  buffers  and  robust
business  continuity  arrangements  to  preserve  the  continuity  of  key  payment  services  under
stressed conditions.
With  increasing  digitalisation,  cybersecurity  incidences  have  the  potential  to  not  only  cause
significant  business  disruptions  and  monetary  losses,  but  also  undermine  the  trust  and
confidence in the global financial system. Due to the interconnectedness of the global economy,
cyber resilience is only as good as the strength of the weakest link. It is important therefore for
regulators  to  formulate  and  promote  the  adoption  of  holistic  cybersecurity  strategies  that  are
constantly enhanced. This should be complemented by strong public-private collaboration at both
domestic and international level to strengthen collective resilience.
With  payment  systems  becoming  more  efficient  and  interconnected,  it  is  also  important  to
prevent  their  abuse  by  illicit  actors,  such  as  for  money-laundering  and  terrorism  financing
(ML/TF).  Notably,  the  availability  of  instant  payments  poses  challenges  to  traditional  AML
monitoring  tools  that  operate  on  a  batch  mode,  rather  than  on  a  real-time  basis.  Regulations
should  thus  focus  on  continuous  enhancement  of  AML  controls  among  industry  players,
supported  by 
improved  AML  compliance  procedures  and  more  advanced  monitoring
approaches. This may include the use of machine learning and artificial intelligence capabilities
to mitigate ML/TF risk, while preserving the speed and convenience of faster payment systems.
Proportionate regulation
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  next  regulatory  priority,  which  is  proportionate  regulation.  Importantly,
efforts to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework for payments oversight must seek
to  uphold  a  key  principle:  proportionality.  More  than  ever,  regulators  will  have  to  make  tough
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
judgment  calls  on  the  appropriate  trade-offs  between  competing  regulatory  demands.  For
example, open data initiatives that seek to democratise access to customer information would
need  to  consider  implications  to  data  security  as  well  as  cultural  attitudes  to  data  privacy.
Providing a seamless user experience to on-board customers for digital payments could also run
counter to AML/CFT controls that are traditionally held up as best practice. These are but a few
of the examples of the dilemmas that we will have to grapple with.
In this regard, a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach is tempting because it is simple. But its simplicity is
precisely  why  regulators  must  avoid  it.  Effective  regulation  today  demands  differentiated
regulatory requirements that cater for a spectrum of risk profiles.
This should be ascertained after undertaking a granular assessment of these risk profiles, and
identifying the necessary areas that continue to require risk mitigation measures. Of note, this
goes beyond having sandboxes,  which  are  already  more  common  in  the  regulator’s  toolkit.  In
Malaysia,  for  example,  the  regulatory  regime  for  e-wallets  is  differentiated  by  size.  This  is
supported  by  a  tiered  approach  to  managing  AML/CFT  risks,  where  limits  on  account
functionalities  serve  as  safeguards  where  more  simplified  customer  due-diligence  (CDD)
methods  are  applied.  This  reflects  the  differentiated  level  of  risks  across  different  types  of  e-
wallet accounts.
While such efforts are intrinsically more complex, they can accommodate a richer spectrum of
business structures and operating models, which in turn can spur innovation. Importantly, this is
not  about  regulations  adopting  a  ‘light  touch’;  it  is  about  having  the  right  touch,  guided  by  the
degree of risks involved.   
We also should not shy away from exploring nascent technologies that could contribute to the
overall resilience of payments infrastructure. As regulators, we should explore pilot programmes
to test the potential of emerging technologies. Examples of this include the EU and Japan’s joint
project ‘Stella’, as well as Canada’s project ‘Jasper’ that aim to study the possible use cases of
distributed  ledger  technology.  Even  if  these  programmes  do  not  immediately  deliver  scalable
solutions, the experience can confer valuable lessons for future initiatives.
Enabling connectivity
The third area for regulatory focus would be to enable connectivity. A payment system is only
useful if it has a wide network reach, be it across products or players, within a nation’s borders or
beyond. In this regard, regulators can play a key role in fostering collaborative efforts towards
greater standardisation and interoperability.
At  the  domestic  level,  a  few  initiatives  come  to  mind  –  all  of  which  seeking  to  leverage  on  a
common network. The UK is undergoing a consolidation of key retail payment systems under a
single New Payments Architecture (NPA), aimed at addressing the lack of a common entry point
for  access  and  different  on-boarding  processes  for  participants  across  the  different  systems.
Similarly, Australia launched the New Payment Platform earlier this year, which is seen as a key
payments infrastructure for the domestic market.
Of significance, these developments share common outcomes – to avoid duplication of industry
resources, widen network reach and enable economies of scale.
Here  in  Malaysia,  pooling  of  resources  at  the  infrastructure  level  has  been  a  longstanding
strategy  for  the  payment  system. As  early  as  1997,  Malaysia  had  consolidated  its  three ATM
networks  to  eliminate  fragmentation  in  that  segment.  More  recently,  we  saw  the  formation  of
PayNet  which  serves  as  a  shared  payment  infrastructure  to  facilitate  domestic  payments.  Of
note, PayNet will be launching the Real-time Retail Payments Platform (RPP) next week. This
will  be  supported  by  a  National  Addressing  Database  (NAD)  that  enables  users  to  pay
seamlessly and securely using simple identifiers such as their mobile phone, national registration
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
or business registration numbers.
At the international level, regulators should also seek to collaborate towards promoting greater
harmonisation or centralisation of legal, technical and operational arrangements for payments.
These  include  exploring  the  adoption  of  international  standards  such  as  the  ISO  20022
messaging  standard.  These  standards  would  enhance  compatibility  across  different
infrastructures  and  pave  the  way  towards  greater  cross-border  interoperability.  To  take  this
further and fully realise the benefits, cross-border coordination will be key to promote uniformity in
how the standards are interpreted and operationalised.
Promoting competition
The fourth perspective for the regulatory agenda relates to the need to promote efficiency and
innovation through greater competition.
Given  the  importance  of  scale  and  network  effects  in  delivering  payment  services,  it  is  no
surprise  that  the  payments  industry  tends  towards  an  oligopolistic  structure.  These  market
dynamics  are  amplified  in  the  digital  payments  market.  ‘Winner-takes-all’  dynamics  are
synonymous with digital platforms, which often aim to build as large of a network as possible.
After all, this facilitates a virtuous cycle of more data, leading to better and cheaper services,
which in turn leads to more customers – so on and so forth.
To  this  end,  regulators  must  ensure  that  these  market  dynamics  do  not  result  in  perverse
outcomes for the payments ecosystem as a whole. Such perverse outcomes could include the
abuse of a dominant market position to erect undue barriers to entry, or to impose exorbitant
prices on end-users.
Encouragingly,  regulatory  authorities  are  increasingly  playing  an  active  role  in  mitigating  such
risks.  Of  significance  are  efforts  to  promote  open  access  regimes  to  key  payment
infrastructures, regardless of whether the payment service provider is an incumbent bank or a
non-bank player. In Hong Kong, the Faster Payments System (FPS) was launched in September
2018 with a total of 21 banks and 10 non-bank e-money issuers participating in the scheme. The
UK went even further in April 2018, with the Bank of England allowing a non-bank to access both
clearing and settlement facilities in the RTGS system. Enhanced transparency expectations can
also  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  infrastructure  suppliers  and  payment  service
providers continue to maintain high service levels and deliver services that create value for end-
users. 
Slowly  but  surely,  initiatives  like  these  are  rewriting  the  rules  of  the  game  in  the  payments
industry towards heightened competition through lower barriers to entry. This is further reinforced
by a gradual move towards greater sharing of customer data, such as through the EU’s Payment
Services Directive (PSD2), the UK and Australia’s respective open banking initiatives.
Malaysia too welcomes greater openness in its payments ecosystem and the broader financial
services sector.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  allow  me  to  reiterate  that  regulators  should  uphold  a  commitment  to  support
payments  innovation.  The  focus  would  be  to  lay  the  foundations  for  market-led  innovation,  by
focusing on the elements of trust, connectivity, efficiency and innovation of the payment system.
This will ensure that the power of digital payments is harnessed towards value creation for the
real economy, while navigating the emerging risks and challenges on the horizon.
Looking  ahead,  the  pace  of  change  in  payments  is  only  set  to  intensify.  Payment  system
regulators  will  have  to  be  agile  in  considering  new  ideas,  while  remaining  steadfast  in
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
safeguarding the public interest. To this end, continuous engagement will be key – both among
regulators as well as between regulators and industry players. With that, I wish you all a fruitful
discussion in the week ahead and hope you have a good time in Malaysia.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
