  	
	
	
“The	Dutch	recovery	and	resolution	regime	for	insurers”	
  Speech	by	Nicole	Stolk	at	the	EIOPA	Seminar	“Recovery	and	Resolution	in	Insurance”		
Amsterdam,	25	October	2018	
		At	the	EIOPA	seminar	on	recovery	and	resolution	in	insurance,	Nicole	Stolk	gave	an	overview	of	the	new	
Dutch	regime	for	recovery	and	resolution	for	insurers.	Before	an	audience	of	many	other	European	
resolution	authorities,	she	sketched	the	toolkit,	the	public	interest	test	and	the	governance	De	
Nederlandsche	Bank	has	set	up.	
				
	
1	
  this	new	reality.		
	
New	task:	resolution	for	insurers	
The	timing	of	this	seminar	could	not	have	been	better.	That	is	because	the	Dutch	Parliament	is	just	about	
to	pass	the	new	Act	on	Insurance	Recovery	and	Resolution.	At	the	same	time,	we	at	De	Nederlandsche	
Bank	still	have	many	details	to	work	out	in	how	we	implement	this	Act.	And	the	clock	is	ticking.	The	Act	
is	expected	to	come	into	force	on	the	first	of	January	2019.	So	we	only	have	a	short	time	to	prepare	for	
	And	I	am	also	new.	A	new	Director.	With	a	new	task.	It	is	special	to	be	here	at	the	start	of	this	new	
resolution	regime.	And	to	help	this	new	reality	take	shape.		
	The	Netherlands	is	one	of	the	first	countries	in	Europe	to	implement	a	resolution	regime	for	insurers.	
Why	did	we	decide	to	move	forward	on	a	national	level?	One	of	the	reasons	was	that	our	old	toolkit	had	
several	shortcomings.	Some	instruments	were	not	available,	or	could	only	be	used	in	limited	ways.	
These	shortcomings	became	very	clear	when	Dutch	financial	group	SNS	REAAL,	ran	into	problems	in	
2013.	The	government	had	to	step	in,	and	the	banking	and	insurance	group	was	nationalized.	But	if	
we’d	had	the	new	insurance	resolution	regime	back	in	2013,	the	outcome	might	have	been	different.		
With	a	better	toolkit,	and	the	possibility	to	conduct	resolution	planning,	there	might	have	been	
alternative	solutions.		
	However,	SNS	REAAL	was	not	the	only	case.	During	the	crisis,	several	Dutch	insurers	needed	state	
support.	This	showed	that	not	only	banks,	but	also	insurers,	could	be	“too	big	to	fail”.	However,	the	
insurance	sector	also	faces	difficulties	today.	Life	insurers	are	under	pressure	from	low	interest	rates.	
2	
  And	from	changes	in	Dutch	fiscal	policy.	That	is	why	this	new	regime	is	needed.	It	will	prevent	future	
bail‐outs,	and	offer	policyholders	better	protection.	
	But	the	development	of	this	new	regime	has	also	sparked	new	debate.	Debate	on	whether	
policyholders	should	pay	for	the	mistakes	insurers	make.	Debate	on	which	insurers	should	fall	under	the	
regime.	And	debate	on	whether	a	national	framework	threatens	the	level	playing	field.		
	Today,	I	want	to	give	you	a	bit	more	insight	into	how	the	Dutch	recovery	and	resolution	regime	for	
insurers	works.	Those	of	you	familiar	with	the	BRRD	–	the	Bank	Recovery	and	Resolution	Directive	–	
might	recognize	some	of	these	resolution	tools	and	practices.	However,	practical	implementation	for	
insurers	can	sometimes	be	very	different	than	for	banks.	
	I’d	like	to	focus	on	three	features	in	particular:		
‐	the	resolution	toolkit	
‐	the	public	interest	test	
‐	and	governance	under	the	new	regime.		
These	three	aspects	should	provide	a	good	overview	of	the	new	regime,	and	how	it	works.		
	If	you	would	like	me	to	clarify	any	points	during	this	presentation,	feel	free	to	ask.	But	if	you	have	more	
general	questions,	please	save	them	until	the	end.	There	will	be	plenty	of	time	for	discussion	afterwards.		
	
So	let’s	first	look	at	a	couple	of	items	in	our	resolution	toolkit.	Some	of	the	resolution	instruments	are	
not	new	to	DNB,	as	they	were	also	part	of	our	previous	regime.	However,	they	may	have	gone	under	a	
different	name.	Or	their	use	may	have	been	subject	to	more	limitations.		
	
The	four	resolution	instruments	are	basically	the	same	as	in	the	BRRD:	bail‐in,	sale	of	business,	bridge	
institution	and	asset	separation.	With	a	bail‐in,	we	can	write	down	
or	convert	equity	or	debt,	or	restructure	insurance	policies.	This	
instrument	is	not	completely	new,	as	DNB	could	already	change	
insurance	contracts	and	pass	losses	on	to	shareholders.	But	there	
are	some	differences.		
	For	instance,	in	the	past	we	were	only	able	to	change	insurance	
contracts	in	combination	with	a	portfolio	transfer.	The	new	Act	
makes	it	possible	to	change	insurance	contracts	within	an	insurer.	
Another	difference	is	that	an	ex‐ante	judicial	review	is	no	longer	
Part	I:	The	Dutch	Resolution	toolkit	
Resolution	instruments	
3	
   needed	before	we	can	use	resolution	instruments.	As	of	next	year,	DNB	can	use	resolution	instruments	
without	Court	permission.		
	A	bail‐in	can	be	a	controversial	instrument,	especially	when	it	is	possible	to	bail‐in	policyholders.	There	
is	one	important	point	to	remember	here	though.	And	that	is,	it	is	only	possible	to	use	a	resolution	
instrument	when	no	creditor	will	be	worse	off	than	in	insolvency.	With	a	bail‐in,	the	insurance	product	
can	be	continued,	so	policyholders	can	retain	their	product	and	their	coverage.	Tomorrow,	the	Dutch	
Ministry	of	Finance	will	provide	more	details	on	the	bail‐in.		
The	second	instrument,	the	sale	of	business,	enables	us	to	sell	the	shares	of	an	insurance	group.	Or	the	
shares	of	a	troubled	entity	within	the	insurance	group.	Or	to	sell	an	insurance	portfolio,	without	the	
shareholders’	consent.	This	was	already	part	of	DNB’s	toolkit.		
	However,	the	bridge	institution	is	an	instrument	we	have	never	used	before.	It	allows	us	to	transfer	an	
insurer,	or	an	insurance	group	entity,	or	part	of	that	entity,	to	a	semi	public	company.	During	this	time,	
the	insurer	is	not	allowed	to	compete	on	the	market.	The	bridge	institution	is	only	a	temporary	solution,	
and	it	buys	us	time	for	a	Sale	of	Business.	When	setting	up	the	bridge	institution,	we	can	also	benefit	
from	our	experience	in	bank	resolution.	
	The	last	instrument	is	asset	separation.	This	allows	us	to	transfer	assets,	rights	or	liabilities	to	a	semi‐
publicly	owned	asset	management	vehicle.	In	the	banking	sector,	this	vehicle	is	also	known	as	the	“bad	
bank”.	The	toxic	assets	or	liabilities	can	be	removed	from	the	balance	sheet,	to	limit	the	risk	and	make	
the	insurer	more	attractive	to	other	buyers.	This	instrument	is	only	allowed	in	combination	with	one	of	
the	other	instruments,	because	the	insurer	also	has	to	bear	some	of	the	losses.	
	
Next	to	the	four	resolution	instruments,	the	resolution	toolkit	also	provides	another	crucial	feature:	
the	possibility	to	conduct	resolution	planning.	We	will	prepare	a	resolution	plan	for	insurers	that	pass	
the	public	interest	test.	I’ll	go	into	more	detail	about	this	test	later	on.		
	The	resolution	plan	identifies	possible	impediments	to	resolution.	And	the	new	resolution	regime	gives	
us	powers	to	remove	these	impediments,	if	necessary.	This	contributes	to	a	resolvable	insurance	sector.	
Resolution	planning	ensures	that	any	failures	result	in	lower	costs	for	society,	and	reduces	the	risks	for	
financial	stability.		
	Finally,	it	is	good	to	point	out	some	key	differences	from	the	bank	resolution	toolkit.	First,	the	
absence	of	loss‐absorbing	capacity.	In	bank	resolution,	there	is	a	major	focus	on	loss‐absorbing	capacity.		
Other	resolution	toolkit	features	
4	
  The	bank	resolution	experts	among	you	will	be	familiar	with	the	European	and	international	standards	
in	this	respect	‐	MREL	and	TLAC.		
	However,	the	Dutch	Finance	Ministry	has	decided	not	to	require	insurers	to	have	an	additional	layer	of	
loss‐absorbing	debt.	Traditionally,	this	layer	is	very	thin	for	insurers.	That	means	that	a	bail‐in	could	
affect	policyholders	sooner.		
	On	the	other	hand,	introducing	loss‐absorbing	capacity	could	drastically	change	the	business	models	of	
Dutch	insurers.	This	could	in	turn	lead	to	higher	costs	for	policyholders.	
	The	second	difference	is	the	absence	of	a	guarantee	scheme.	Where	we	have	a	Deposit	Guarantee	
Scheme	for	bank	customers,	there	is	no	such	Insurance	Guarantee	Scheme	for	Dutch	policyholders.	This	
means	that	a	resolution	instrument	can	have	a	direct	impact	on	society.	We	have	to	clearly	explain	why	
resolution	is	still	better	for	that	policyholder	than	insolvency.		
	To	sum	up,	the	resolution	toolkit	contains	four	resolution	instruments,	and	the	possibility	to	conduct	
resolution	planning,	including	the	removal	of	impediments.	But	it	lacks	two	of	the	features	that	are	a	
central	part	of	banking	resolution.		
	
This	new	resolution	toolkit	is	very	powerful,	but	also	needs	to	be	handled	with	caution.	That’s	why	the	
regime	is	based	on	proportionality.	The	default	option	for	an	insurer	is	always	insolvency,	unless	this	
causes	severe	negative	effects.		
	For	banking	resolution,	there	is	a	public	interest	test	that	determines	whether	resolution	tools	should	be	
applied	to	individual	firms.	A	comparable	approach	is	developed	for	the	resolution	of	insurers.	The	
public	interest	test	determines	which	insurers	cannot	go	into	insolvency	without	severe	negative	
consequences.		
Part	II:	Public	Interest	test	
5	
  resolution	in	the	public	interest?	
	
This	test	is	different	from	the	public	interest	test	in	bank	resolution.	That	is	because	the	effects	of	a	
failed	insurer	are	also	different.	Insurers	that	pass	the	public	interest	test,	will	be	subject	to	resolution	
planning.		
	As	you	can	see	here,	the	starting	point	of	the	resolution	decision	is	similar	to	the	BRRD.	Insurers	can	
only	be	put	into	resolution	when	they	are	failing	or	likely	to	fail,	when	market	solutions	have	been	
exhausted	and	when	resolution	is	in	the	public	interest.	Now	the	important	question	is:	When	is	
	There	are	four	criteria	that	guide	the	public	interest	but	the	first	one,	the	protection	of	policyholders,	
needs	to	be	combined	with	at	least	one	of	the	other	three.	These	other	three	objectives	are:	
‐	avoiding	severe	disruption	to	society	
‐	preventing	significant	severe	impact	on	financial	markets	or	the	real	economy	
‐	and	protecting	public	funds.		
	In	practice,	the	impact	on	society	and	the	economy	will	create	the	most	discussion.	To	provide	some	
guidance,	the	explanatory	note	to	the	new	Act	states	that	the	public	interest	will	depend	on	the	size	of	
the	insurer,	the	number	of	policyholders,	the	type	of	product	offered	and	the	current	economic	situation.		
It	adds	two	criteria	for	applying	the	test:	technical	provisions	of	at	least	one	billion	euros,	or	at	least	one	
million	policyholders.	Of	course,	this	is	just	general	guidance	and	the	public	interest	needs	to	be	
determined	case	by	case.		
	At	first	glance,	it	seems	that	between	ten	and	twenty	insurers	in	The	Netherlands	could	be	eligible	for	
resolution	and	resolution	planning.	It	also	means	that	the	scope	of	the	resolution	regime	not	only	
6	
  focuses	on	systemic	insurers.	But	also	on	the	insurers	that	can	have	an	impact	on	the	Dutch	society,	
financial	markets	and	economy.	
	
Instruments,	rules	and	tests	are	important.	But	they	could	become	dead	letters	when	it	isn’t	clear	who	
should	do	what	at	what	moment.	So,	I’m	glad	the	new	resolution	regime	also	introduces	a	specific	
governance	model.	This	is	the	third	feature	that	may	be	of	interest	to	you.	In	this	respect	I	will	first	
discuss	the	decision‐making	process,	and	then	proceed	to	the	internal	organization.		
	
Part	III:	Governance	
 	As	you	may	know,	our	governing	board	is	a	collegial	body	that	takes	decisions	by	consensus.	When	it	
comes	to	resolution	planning,	all	board	members	have	equal	voting	rights.	However,	in	terms	of	
decisions	regarding	resolution	execution,	the	board	member	for	resolution	has	a	casting	vote.	Although	I	
do	of	course	hope	and	trust	I	will	never	have	to	use	that	casting	vote…	
	The	board	member	for	resolution	cannot	also	be	the	board	member	in	charge	of	supervision.	At	DNB,	
we	have	decided	to	make	one	board	member	responsible	for	bank	and	insurer	resolution,	and	for	the	
deposit	guarantee	system.	And	that’s	me.	
	Below	board	level,	we	discussed	whether	insurance	and	banking	resolution	tasks	should	be	two	
different	departments.	Or	whether	they	could	be	combined.	Because	of	the	similarities	in	the	resolution	
regime,	and	the	experience	that	bank	resolution	has	gained,	we	decided	to	combine	the	two	resolution	
tasks	into	one	directorate.	The	combination	of	bank	and	insurance	expertise	also	benefits	the	resolution	
planning	for	bank‐assurance	institutions.	This	is	because	it	brings	together	different	perspectives	at	an	
early	stage.			
7	
  Within	the	resolution	division,	we	have	started	setting	up	a	designated	unit	for	insurance	resolution.		
The	unit	will	ultimately	consist	of	fifteen	people.	Some	of	them	will	focus	more	on	horizontal	topics,	such	
as	the	resolution	toolkit.	Others	will	focus	more	on	the	verticals.	Or	in	other	words,	the	resolution	
planning	of	individual	insurers.	This	is	the	same	setup	as	for	bank	resolution,	and	has	proven	to	be	an	
effective	approach.		
	After	figuring	out	the	basics	for	insurance	resolution,	we	aim	to	further	integrate	the	task	with	bank	
resolution.	Bank	resolution	already	works	within	a	matrix	organization	with	the	DGS	function.	There	is	
quite	some	overlap	on	certain	topics.	Good	examples	are	crisis	management,	setting	up	a	bridge	
institution,	and	the	Sale	of	Business	procedures.	On	other	topics,	such	as	valuation	techniques,	it	is	very	
likely	we	will	team	up	the	functions	much	earlier.	
		To	conclude,	the	governance	is	similar	to	bank	resolution.	This	is	not	surprising,	given	the	features	of	the	
resolution	Act,	and	the	potential	benefits	from	cooperation	between	the	two	resolution	tasks.	
	
To	sum	up,	I	have	tried	to	give	you	a	bird’s	eye	view	of	the	new	resolution	function.		However,	there	is	of	
course	much	more	to	explain.		
Summary	
	
With	respect	to	the	resolution	toolkit,	it	has	become	clear	that	DNB	will	have	four	resolution	tools.	These	
can	of	course	can	be	combined.	Insurers	will	be	subject	to	recovery	and	resolution	planning,	with	the	
possibility	to	remove	impediments	to	resolvability.	But	of	course,	there	is	a	safeguard	to	this	regime,	
which	is	the	public	interest	test.	Because	insolvency	should	always	remain	the	default	option	for	an	
8	
  Closing	remarks	
insurer.	In	addition,	creditors	can	never	be	worse	off	in	resolution	than	in	insolvency.	And	governance	is	
similar	to	bank	resolution,	in	terms	of	decision‐making	and	internal	organization.			
	
Although	this	resolution	regime	is	a	big	step	forward,	there	is	still	a	lot	to	gain	from	a	European	
perspective.	Different	countries	have	shown	an	interest	in	a	resolution	regime.	Some	of	them,	such	as	
the	Netherlands,	have	started	to	build	one.		
	This	potentially	creates	differences	between	countries.	At	the	same	time,	large	insurers	have	cross‐
border	activities	and	regulation.	Solvency	II	aims	to	establish	a	level	playing	field	within	Europe.	The	
challenge	we	face	is	ensuring	European	citizens	are	equally	protected,	despite	different	national	
approaches	within	the	EU.	Ultimately,	I	am	very	excited	about	the	Dutch	resolution	regime.	And	I	still	
hope	we	will	make	progress	on	a	European	level	as	well.	
	So	let’s	discuss	your	ideas	and	experiences	so	far,	and	learn	from	each	other.	And	keep	building	together,	
towards	more	equal	and	adequate	protection	within	the	EU.	
	
 9	
 