ACRI
Association of Italian Savings Banks
2018 World Savings Day
Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 31 October 2018
The  protection  of  savings  calls,  in  the  first  place,  for  economic  policies  to 
ensure balanced financial conditions, stabilize cyclical fluctuations in the economy, 
and improve growth potential. Supervising financial intermediaries contributes to 
the protection of savings; it acts to contain crises and their repercussions on the 
economy, although it cannot eliminate them entirely.
In Italy the long and severe recession was exacerbated by some instances of 
malfeasance within the banking system which, though few in number, had serious 
consequences at local level. The deployment of government resources in support 
of the financial sector was much lower than in the other main European countries. 
The latest Eurostat data show that its impact on the public debt reached a high of 
1.3 per cent of GDP at the end of 2017, while in France, Spain, Germany and the 
Netherlands, the peaks in the crisis years were around 4, 5, 12 and 13 per cent.
At  first,  the  Italian  banking  system  was  relatively  shielded  from  the  global 
financial crisis thanks to its traditional business model centred on lending to the 
economy  and  to  supervisory  actions  aimed  at  reducing  exposure  to  risks  from 
structured financial products. Later on, when the recession recurred at the time of 
the sovereign debt crisis, banks’ close ties with firms and households meant there 
was a greater impact on loan quality. Despite the adverse economic conditions, 
the Bank of Italy felt it was vital to ask the banks to significantly strengthen their 
capital bases, to build up resilience and maintain public trust in their soundness: 
last June, the common equity tier 1 ratio had risen on average to 13.2 per cent, from 
7.0 per cent at the end of 2008. 
The  economic  and  social  cost  of  even  relatively  small  bank  crises  can  be 
high, given the role of such banks in collecting deposits and funding investments 
and consumption. The new European crisis management rules, which were also 
motivated by a determination to avoid giving further public support to the banks, 
were  introduced  somewhat  abruptly,  making  it  complicated  to  manage  cases  of 
banks in difficulty. In Italy in particular, it was hard or even impossible to employ 
the tools that had been used in the past, sometimes also because of the interpretation 
of the new rules adopted by the European institutions.  
To mitigate the effects of this situation, the financial sector made voluntary 
contributions  to  help  resolve  the  most  problematic  cases.  Measures  were 
introduced to encourage more active management of non-performing loans and 
accelerate the recovery process; reforms were made to strengthen the governance 
and capitalization of the popolari banks and the mutual banks (banche di credito 
cooperativo, BCCs), in different ways according to the size and type of bank. 
Public funds were employed, where necessary and possible, including to maintain 
business continuity in cases of liquidation. 
Financial conditions
The yields on Italian government bonds have increased steadily since mid-
May; those on ten-year bonds reached 3.7 per cent, the highest figure since 2014; 
with  respect  to  the  equivalent  German  bond,  the  spread  currently  fluctuates 
around 300 basis points, compared with the average of about 130 basis points 
recorded in the first four months of this year (Figure 1). 
Between  May  and  August,  foreign  investors  made  net  sales  of  Italian 
securities for a total of €82 billion, of which €67 billion concerned public sector 
securities. This is high, even taking account of the fact that in June and August 
the net Treasury issues were negative (by €17 billion overall). Net purchases of 
foreign securities on the part of Italian residents (€18 billion, mostly in August) 
contributed to the net outflow of capital.
These  trends  do  not  reflect  a  deterioration  in  the  fundamentals  of  our 
economy, even if the current cyclical slowdown is more marked than in the rest 
of the euro area. Unemployment has fallen. The banks’ capital and profitability 
conditions  and  credit  quality  have  continued  to  improve.  The  surplus  on  the 
current account of the balance of payments remains high and has led to a further 
reduction  in  Italy’s  net  international  debtor  position,  which  is  now  close  to 
balance.  
The uncertainty over the fiscal and structural policy stance and the evolution 
of  relations  with  the  European  institutions  has  contributed  to  the  increase  in 
the risk premium on government bonds. The concerns of domestic and foreign 
investors  about  rising  public  debt  and  the  risk  of  its  redenomination  have 
resurfaced. 
4
The trend of the spread between the premium on credit default swap contracts 
on Italian public sector securities stipulated after the sovereign debt crisis (which 
also protect against the risk of debt redenomination) and those written before that 
crisis (which do not offer such protection), indicates that the increase in the spread 
reflected, in almost equal parts, the increase in the risks of default and redenomination 
(Figure 2) – risks that feed off one another. Contrary to what happened at the peak of 
the crisis, when fears had spread about the possibility of a euro break-up, the increase 
in the risk premium almost exclusively concerned Italy (Figure 3); in the rest of the 
euro area, investors perceived the risk of redenomination as being very low.
The consequences of a prolonged and large increase in the yields on government 
bonds  can  be  very  serious. An  increase  reduces  the  value  of  household  wealth 
and  may  lead  to  a  worsening  of  economic  growth  prospects.  High  premiums  to 
cover  sovereign  risk  make  it  more  difficult  to  control  the  dynamics  of  the  debt-
to-GDP ratio. This ratio tends to rise in tandem with an increase in the difference 
between the average interest burden on the debt and the nominal GDP growth rate, 
compromising  the  ability  of  fiscal  policy  to  stabilize  the  economy;  there  is  then 
very little room for public investment. The rise in risk premiums on the public debt 
produces capital losses that worsen banks’ balance sheets; it affects the cost and 
availability of the funding that financial intermediaries raise on the market and thus 
their capacity to lend to the economy.
Directly or indirectly, sovereign risk affects Italian households. Not only do 
they hold public sector securities with a nominal value of almost €100 billion, but 
on the asset side of the balance sheets of the financial intermediaries to which they 
entrust their savings − in the form of bank deposits, insurance policies, shares in 
pension funds and managed assets − there are public sector securities amounting to 
about €850 billion.
Since mid-May, the market value of government securities has decreased: for 
those with a maturity of more than one year, losses have totalled 8 per cent on 
average. The tensions have inevitably spread to the entire Italian financial market, 
with a strong depreciation of the indices relating to private sector bonds and to 
shares; for all the listed companies combined, the stock market index fell by about 
20 per cent. 
The rise in the yields on government securities negatively affects the public 
accounts as well. Should it not be reabsorbed, the increase recorded so far would 
5
mean  that  interest  payments  would  be  higher  by  about  0.3  percentage  points  of 
GDP next year (i.e. more than €5 billion). This additional burden would increase to 
0.5 points in 2020 and 0.7 points in 2021. This would increase the primary surplus 
necessary just to stabilize the public debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Since the end of May, the cost that banks incur to raise funds by issuing bonds 
− approximated by the yields on the secondary market − has more than doubled; by 
2020, bank bonds amounting to €110 billion will reach maturity, namely about 40 
per cent of those currently outstanding. The increase in sovereign risk is reflected 
in bank share prices which, after growing by 13 per cent between the beginning of 
the year and mid-May, have subsequently fallen by 35 per cent. 
Such trends ultimately have a negative impact on the cost and availability of 
credit for households and firms. So far, banks’ higher capitalization and a more 
stable funding structure have helped to dampen the transmission of these tensions 
to bank lending. 
An  assessment  of  the  overall  impact  on  the  economy  of  the  increase  in 
sovereign  risk  is  an  exercise  that  is  subject  to  wide  margins  of  error. Yet  it  is 
difficult to imagine that a reduction in household wealth, greater difficulties for 
firms in accessing credit and investing, and a reduced capacity for public sector 
intervention would not have significant consequences on economic activity. 
Italy’s public debt is sustainable, but there must be a clear determination to 
keep  it  so,  by  putting  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  on  a  credible  path  towards  lasting 
reduction. Any uncertainty about Italy’s committed participation in the European 
Union  and  in  the  single  currency  must  be  dispelled,  as  it  fuels  volatility  in  the 
financial markets. On these conditions hinge the protection of household savings 
and the ability to support Italy’s economic growth. 
Cyclical conditions
In recent months the outlook for the world economy has become less favourable. 
Compared with April, the IMF has reduced its global economic growth forecast 
for both 2018 and 2019 by 0.2 percentage points. The worsening in the forecasts 
for world trade is more marked and equal to almost 1 percentage point this year 
and two thirds of a point for next year. The deterioration in the macroeconomic 
6
scenario  reflects  the  tensions  in  trade  as  well  as  those  that  have  broken  out  in 
emerging countries such as Argentina, Brazil and Turkey. 
The  risks  have  increased,  especially  those  that  could  stem  from  new 
protectionist measures on the part of the United States. Those implemented so 
far  have  affected  a  limited  share  of  the  goods  traded  at  world  level,  but  the 
reactions  of  the  financial  markets  have  been  significant;  the  repercussions  on 
global  economic  activity  could  be  amplified  by  a  revision  of  firms’  spending 
plans.
According to the latest data, GDP growth in Italy will be in the order of 1 
per cent this year and will then slow in 2019, net of the effects of the budgetary 
provisions for which detailed information is not yet available. Business surveys 
continue to be favourable overall, but there are signs that the trade tensions could 
lead to a revision of investment plans. This is also why a deterioration of funding 
conditions in the economy stemming from higher interest rates on public debt 
must be avoided. In a country such as Italy, where the pace of growth is already 
slow  and  has  been  below  that  of  the  euro  area  for  many  years  now,  a  further 
slowdown in economic activity would be felt more deeply than elsewhere. 
Fiscal policy has limited room for manoeuvre to compensate for a possible 
contraction in private demand. In this context, priority should be given to measures 
that incentivize investment in infrastructure, both material and immaterial, and 
labour market participation. Resources should be concentrated on measures that 
are clearly directed at supporting economic activity effectively.  
The common monetary policy responds to the situation of the euro area as a 
whole. Last week the ECB’s Governing Council, in view of ongoing economic 
growth  and  of  the  gradual  increase  in  inflationary  pressures,  reiterated  its 
intention to end the net asset purchases at the end of this year. However, taking 
into  account  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy 
and for financial markets, as well as the need to support price dynamics in the 
medium term, the Council has confirmed that it intends to continue to provide 
significant  monetary  stimulus.  Even  after  the  end  of  the  net  purchases,  this 
support will arise from the sizeable stock of assets in the Eurosystem’s portfolio, 
the reinvestment of the principal as these securities mature and the indication 
that the key ECB interest rates will remain at their present levels for as long as 
necessary.
7
Monetary policy normalization is a very delicate process, as the experience of 
other countries has shown. As I have observed in the past, the Italian economy can 
withstand an end to the low interest rate regime with no risk to economic activity 
or the public finances, provided that fiscal policy remains anchored to stability and 
that the reform process aimed at strengthening the economy continues. 
Growth potential 
The  growth  gap  between  Italy  and  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  is  a  structural 
problem that cannot be resolved through monetary stabilization policies or by an 
expansionary fiscal stance. Its main cause is the low productivity of firms which 
have lagged behind in responding to the drastic technological changes that began 
a  quarter  of  a  century  ago.  In  this  period  Italian  firms  have  generally  not  been 
sufficiently innovative and have grown very little. In addition, Italy has an older 
population  than  other  countries  and  a  lower  rate  of  labour  force  participation; 
young people and adults have lower levels of knowledge and skills compared with 
other Europeans. General government is not very efficient and conditions for doing 
business are less favourable than in the rest of Europe. There is less investment, 
both public and private.
This lag is more pronounced in the southern regions, where firms are smaller 
and less productive on average, where the working-age population has declined 
over  the  last  ten  years,  against  an  increase  in  the  Centre  and  North,  and  where 
the labour force participation rate is over 15 percentage points lower. It is vital to 
improve the quality of institutions at local level, foster the growth of business and 
boost education and training: around one third of young people aged 15 to 29 in the 
South neither study nor work, against just over one sixth in the Centre and North.
The  measures  adopted  over  the  last  few  years  to  support  innovation  and 
investment  have  gone  hand  in  hand  with  the  restructuring  of  the  production 
system launched after the global financial crisis, and the euro-area sovereign debt 
crisis, which had serious effects on the Italian economy. The rebalancing of the 
pension system has made an important contribution to the increase in labour force 
participation of those aged 55 to 64. Rules have been introduced to simplify the red 
tape for setting up new firms and improving relations between general government 
and the production sector. There has been a marked reduction in the number of civil 
litigation cases. The timeframe for the pre-sale phase in foreclosure procedures has 
8
been reduced. The liberalization of professional services has led to a more efficient 
allocation of resources across different occupations. 
The  road  to  structural  reform  requires  a  significant  commitment,  as  results 
mature slowly. Yet reform is essential. Changes to measures that have already been 
implemented should be assessed very carefully and the need to provide stability to 
the institutional and regulatory framework must be borne in mind. Past reforms must 
be supplemented by further measures to promote innovation, enhance the quality 
of human capital, increase employment (especially for young people and women), 
raise the degree of competition in the service sector, improve infrastructure, both 
material and immaterial, and make government action more effective. The analysis 
of these problems is shared at national and international level. 
 Against a backdrop of increasingly stringent regulations, Italy’s banks have 
long  been  committed  to  capital  strengthening  to  make  them  more  resilient  and 
expand their capacity to provide loans to households and firms. However, the costs 
they bear in raising funds on the markets are high. 
The role of banks and other financial intermediaries is to support and encourage 
the economy to change and grow. To do this in full they must respond effectively 
to the challenges posed by technological developments by updating products and 
production processes, keeping costs down, increasing efficiency and investing in 
knowledge and staff training. They must continue to nurture their customers’ trust 
through transparent and virtuous behaviour, thereby proving that banks and finance 
are not the ‘enemies’ of saving and savers, but rather support them both, for the 
benefit of the economy.
At  the  same  time,  banks  must  not  be  placed  at  a  disadvantage  vis-à-vis 
international  competition.  Financial  tensions  over  public  debt  would  ultimately 
damage banks’ capital adequacy and compromise their access to capital markets, 
with serious consequences for the economy, for savings and for the well-being of 
Italians.
The protection of savings, like the fight against poverty, calls for the economy to 
return to lasting growth. The necessary reforms and changes may incur social costs 
in the short term that have to be alleviated, including through public intervention. 
9
This can be discussed at European level: where applicable, all the margins available 
under the current rules and procedures can be used. Nevertheless, differences of 
opinion  should  not  lead  to  an  institutional  conflict.  The  financial  consequences 
of  a  temporary  increase  in  the  budget  deficit  can  be  mitigated  if  the  necessary 
adjustment path is drawn up and managed in a climate of open and constructive 
dialogue, within the framework of the existing procedures. In 2019, almost €400 
billion of government bonds will have to be placed on the market to finance those 
coming to maturity and to cover the deficit for the year.
Reciprocal trust is essential if the reform of European economic governance 
is to be resumed and completed. Problems and challenges have taken on a global 
dimension in the third millennium and it is unrealistic to think they can be faced 
within the close confines of individual countries. It is for this reason that Italy’s 
future cannot be separated from that of Europe as a whole.
10
FIGURES
Sovereign risk premium: Italy, Spain and Greece
(yield spreads for ten-year government bonds with respect to the German Bund; 
basis points; daily data)
Figure 1
2200
1800
1400
1000
600
600
500
400
300
200
100
Italy
Spain
Greece
0
Jan. 15
July 15
Jan. 16
July 16
Jan. 17
July 17
Jan. 18
July 18
Source: Based on Bloomberg data.
2200
1800
1400
1000
600
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
and redenomination risks on Italian government bonds
Premiums for default 
(credit default swaps; basis points; daily data; 5-day moving averages)
Figure 2
Default and redenomination risks (1) 
Default risk (2)
Differential: redenomination risk (3)
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Jan. 15
July 15
Jan. 16
July 16
Jan. 17
July 17
Jan. 18
July 18
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Source: Based on Thomson Reuters data.
(1) Premium on the Italian sovereign CDS ISDA 2014 contract with 5-year maturity. – (2) Premium on the 
Italian sovereign CDS ISDA 2003 contract with 5-year maturity. – (3) Spread between the premiums on the 
CDS ISDA 2014 and the CDS ISDA 2003 contracts with 5-year maturities.
13
on the government bonds of some euro-area countries (1)
Redenomination risk premium 
(credit default swaps; basis points; daily data; 5-day moving averages)
Figure 3
Italy 
France 
Spain 
Portugal
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Jan. 15
July 15
Jan. 16
July 16
Jan. 17
July 17
Jan. 18
July 18
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: Based on Thomson Reuters data.
(1) Spread between the sovereign debt premiums on the CDS ISDA 2014 and the CDS ISDA 2003 contracts 
with 5-year maturities.
14
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed
