Mohd 
Hisyam 
Nazrul 
#IDAREYOUChallenge2017 Grand Finale
Opening remarks by Mr Nazrul Hisyam Mohd Noh, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  #IDAREYOUChallenge2017  Grand  Finale,  Kuala
Lumpur, 3 September 2018.
Opening 
remarks 
Noh: 
  It is indeed an honour for me to be here today at the grand finale of #IDAREYOUChallenge 2017.
Within the theme of today’s event, I would like to take this opportunity to pose three dares for
everyone here today:
1.    Firstly, to the university undergraduates present here, I dare you to break the myth that the
young generation are not financially savvy and do not plan financially for the future.
2.    Secondly, again to the millennials and post-millennial Gen-Z present today, I dare all of you to
break the myth that you are the “me me me” generation, one that only cares about yourself, and
to prove that all of you have a much wider and richer perspective, that you actually care about
being financially protected for the sake of your future and your loved ones.
3.    Finally, I dare the chiefs and captains of the insurance industry seated here today: I dare the
industry  to  break  the  myth  that  insurance  is  unexciting,  but  instead,  to  demonstrate  through
engagements with the emerging generation of today that insurance is filled with opportunities for
meaningful and exciting careers.
I  cannot  emphasize  more,  especially  to  the  millennials  and  post-millennials  present,  that  you
have much ahead of you. In the journey to find purpose and passion in life, always be curious,
take risks and differentiate yourselves from everyone around you.
The fact that ‘change is the only constant’ tells us that the world is ever evolving and all of us
are  constantly  addressing  curve  balls  and  wildcards  that  life  throws  at  us.  The  talk  of  job
displacements,  the  rise  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  FinTech,  InsurTech  and  the  New  Industrial
Revolution will certainly change the world that we live in. In those, there are challenges, but there
are opportunities as well. Thus, no matter in what stage of life you are in – you need to stay
relevant, always strive to be different by innovating yourself. Above all, I must say, savour the
experience and find personal meaning, purpose and enrichment along the way.    
While  many  of  you  embark  on  your  journey  of  discovery,  it  is  important  to  take  heed  of  the
wisdom of the wise on what may appear as uninteresting lectures on financially planning for your
future. As the saying goes failing to plan, is planning to fail. It is alarming that although 40% of
Malaysians  consider  themselves  financially  ready  for  retirement,  a  retiree  would  need  an
estimated minimum of RM228,000 in today’s value upon retirement to generate sufficient income
to live above the poverty line for the next 20 years. It is even more worrying to see only 18% of
Malaysians, that is less than one fifth, actually have that exact sufficient amount of EPF savings.
In fact, more than 75% of Malaysians find it difficult to raise even RM1,000 of immediate cash for
emergencies. The ability to plan for the future and exercise self-control is a crucial life skill that
needs to be cultivated and nurtured. In fact, a key predictor of success in life, is to be able to take
the longer term perspective.
Let’s  move  on  to  the  issue  of  debt.  Not  all  debt  is  bad  as  any  economist  would  tell  you,  for
borrowing  to  invest  in  productive  assets  or  purposes  will  make  one  better  off  in  the  future.
However,  when  the  level  of  one’s  borrowings  is  too  high,  it  is  a  cause  of  concern.  Let  me
illustrate, a significant proportion of youth today are surviving on high borrowings. The statistics
are telling, 38% of youths take up personal loans, 47% have expensive credit card borrowings
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  more  than  3,400  borrowers  between  the  ages  of  20–30  years  have  sought  out AKPK’s
financial assistance in 2017, which would likely mean that the actual numbers facing financial
difficulties are higher.
To those of you today who are making early forays in the working world, it is our collective hope
that you will take all active measures to not be part of those statistics. The future ahead of you is
bright  and  the  burden  of  being  weighed  down  by  excessive  debt  is  a  hindrance  to  your
development and success. Thus, my dare to you is to get yourselves financially educated, and
from thereon to be financially prepared for your future.
Elon Musk, of PayPal, SpaceX and Tesla electric car fame, was once quoted to say that and I
quote “It is OK to have all your eggs in one basket,as long as you control what happens to
that basket”. Now, obviously Elon Musk is not in the insurance industry. And putting all your eggs
in  one  basket  seem  to  be  the  anti-thesis  of  diversification  and  proper  risk  management.
Nevertheless,  as  someone  known  to  be  a  successful  serial  risk  taker,  he  may  be  up  to
something.  Think  about  it.  There  may  be  times,  especially  so  during  your  youth  to  take
exceptional risks, to be bold in new ventures and move out from your comfort zone.
But always remember, life does occasionally deal you with its challenges. Contingencies such
as illnesses, accidents and personal tragedies can and will challenge you in the future in your
pursuits of your dreams. Financial shocks can occur to any of us, at any stage of our lifecycle. In
such situations, smart options like insurance and takaful are perhaps the only way to ‘control
what happens to your basket’. With all these in mind, we must dare to make that leap in life to
be financially protected, for the sake of our loved ones.
Moving on to my last dare to our esteemed industry leaders present here today. I would like to
record Bank Negara Malaysia’s appreciation to this bold initiative by LIAM together with academia
and  the  Ministry  of  Education  through  the  #IDareYouChallenge  to  educate  and  increase
awareness among the younger generation on the importance of long-term financial planning and
insurance.  It is an unconventional collaboration between industry and academia, which allows
the industry to benefit from new ideas and perspectives, build brand awareness among these
university students and indirectly connect to a future talent pipeline.
Likewise,  universities  and  the  student  population  benefit  by  having  more  of  their  students
exposed to the industry and being prepared for their post-academic career. But my dare is also
for the industry should go further in the age of digital disruption, to be at the forefront of innovation
and to be an employer of choice for today’s graduates. A survey conducted among students and
graduates of Malaysia’s 100 leading graduate employers, only had two insurance companies on
the list, compared to a total of 18 banking institutions in Malaysia. Whether this is borne out of
reality or lack of outreach, there is a need to promote and to brand the industry with a culture of
innovation and a more visible consumer presence including via digital means, from which it will
naturally grow into an exciting and engaging place for new generations to build a career in.
To the competing teams today, all the very best to all of you. In my mind all of you are winners.
To  the  winners  of  today,  congratulations  for  a  well  deserved  victory  to  what  must  be  an
exhaustive  yet  creative  venture.  This  experience  could  be  life  changing.  To  the  others,  the
materials you have created and presented here will likely put our life insurance companies on
notice, in terms of new ideas on what motivates and excites the generation, and as they respond
to them over time, you are also winners of the future.
Closing
In closing, I would like to repeat my 3 dares today. To our youth, dare to be financially prepared
for  the  future  and  dare  to  be  financially  protected.  To  our  industry,  dare  to  be  an  exciting
workplace for the future generations. I shall leave you with this thought from Winston Churchill,
and I quote – ‘Success is not final, failure is not fatal, it is the courage to continue that counts’.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
