Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Reshaping Malaysia's future - setting
the goal for greater governance and transparency
Keynote address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 10th International Conference on Financial Crime and Terrorism
Financing "Malaysia's Future – Setting the goal for greater governance and transparency", Kuala
Lumpur, 30 October 2018.
 A  very  good  morning  to  all  of  you.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  address  all  of  you  today  at  this  very
important conference.
Financial crime. Terrorism financing. Corruption and money laundering. These are heavy words
that carry the feelings of outrage and displeasure, amongst others. The United Nations Office of
Drugs and Crime estimates that every year globally, a staggering amount of USD2.6 trillion is
stolen through corruption.
Yet, I suspect, in reality, figures like these are so large that many may find it hard to relate to it. To
put it in perspective, the figure is around eight times larger than the Malaysian economy. Let us
also  take  the  UN  Sustainable  Development  Goals  that  aims  to  improve  the  lives  of  the  poor,
improve  governance  and  address  inequality.  Some  estimate  that  it  will  take  around  USD5-7
trillion to meet all the SDGs. This represents 2-3 years’ worth of money lost to corruption. In other
words, the money lost  through  financial  crimes  is  a  devastating  opportunity  cost,  draining  the
resources that could have been used to permanently uplift the lives of billions in this world.
Thus, the human and societal cost is very real. It is pervasive and destructive, rippling across
society, and if left unattended, will accumulate over time. Imagine the thousands of schools that
could have been built, numerous hospitals with the best care and the strongest social safety nets
that  can  help  those  most  in  need.  The  persistence  of  financial  crimes  will  disproportionately
impact  the  most  vulnerable  section  of  society.  It  erodes  trust  and  leads  to  a  breakdown  in
society.
We  in  the  financial  sector  have  an  instrumental  role  to  play  in  this  area.  Our  job  involves  the
intermediation  of  money  flows.  We  have  the  ability  to  prevent  and  facilitate  investigations  and
prosecution of these crimes.
In light of this, allow me to make three points on how we can achieve greater governance and
transparency in the financial sector, which will reshape Malaysia’s future for the better.
Shared responsibility to enhance compliance and prevention
The  first  point  that  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  combating  financial  crime  is  a  shared
responsibility. It is not the sole responsibility of central bank supervisors, financial intelligent units,
banks or even the compliance function within financial institutions.
Just as individuals, all of us have a collective responsibility to contribute to nation building, it is the
responsibility  of  each  player  in  the  financial  system,  law  enforcement  agencies,  prosecution
agencies and the judiciary to look out for potential abuses, stamp out financial crimes and not let
the perpetrators get away.
For  financial  crimes  do  not  occur  in  isolation.  They  are  a  conduit  for  other  forms  of  serious
crimes. Almost all forms of serious crimes, such as human trafficking, drug trade and organised
syndicates fund their activities through some form of financial crime. As such, financial crimes
are inherently complex, and often will involve multiple enforcement agencies, sometimes even
across borders. This reinforces the call for greater shared responsibility to shine a light on these
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
dark areas of the financial system.
One of the key ways to exercise this responsibility is through the sharing of information. More
effectively,  this  means  putting  in  place  an  effective  and  mutually  reinforcing  ecosystem  or
platform where the relevant parties are able to partner together to report and investigate financial
crime.
In Malaysia, this is a burgeoning area that we are looking to deepen. We are encouraged by the
early results that explores adapting the public-private partnership model of other countries such
as the United Kingdom and Australia. So far, partnerships between the Royal Malaysian Police,
selected  financial  institutions  and  money  services  businesses  have  resulted  in  9  successful
cases being prosecuted in the area of terrorism and terrorism financing.
The idea behind these partnerships is to make intelligence sharing more meaningful and create
an ecosystem where various pieces of the ‘jigsaw puzzle’ can be put together. Different parties
will  have  different  access  to  information  and  different  comparative  advantages.  Fusing  and
complementing them will add to the number of cases that can be detected and prosecuted. This
will  also  act  as  a  deterrent  as  it  signals  the  commitment  and  extent  to  which  the  relevant
authorities and the industry will go to stamp out crime. Hence, we are looking forward to expand
this partnership for different types of crimes.
Organisations such as the Compliance Officers Networking Group of Malaysia (CONG) and the
industry associations can also play a role in enhancing the professionalism and capacity building
of compliance officers in Malaysia. The development of human capital is essential in our efforts
to combat financial crime. It is our biggest asset, more than any technology.
For  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  we  will  also  play  our  role  by  ensuring  that  the  regulatory  and
supervisory framework will provide the necessary environment to prevent, detect and prosecute
financial crimes. For us, fighting financial crime is not just about increasing the compliance cost
of banks through greater reporting requirements.
Instead, we are committed to ensure that the financial sector is well-equipped to support our law
enforcement agencies in order to avert these threats. Since the beginning of this year, we have
published  Red  Flag  and  Typologies  reports  on  several  type  of  crimes  including  terrorism  and
proliferation financing, corruption and fraud.
These reports aims to provide insights and create awareness, amongst the reporting institutions,
of the trends, methods, and techniques used in these crimes. Enhanced understanding of such
risks would assist reporting institutions in identification and early detection in order to assist law
enforcement agencies to combat such crimes. While improving understanding is crucial, it also
needs  to  be  complemented  with  concrete  actions  that  would  improve  the  effectiveness  of
preventive  and  enforcement  actions.  For  example,  this  could  be  done  by  incorporating  and
overlaying these insights into the transaction monitoring process and customer profiling.
The implementation of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations will allow more
effective  actions  to  be  undertaken.  Both  aspects  of  compliance,  that  is,  technical  and
effectiveness,  are  equally  important.  The  philosophy  behind  the  intended  outcomes  is  the
integrated  manner  in  which  countries  should  combat  financial  crimes.  This  would  require
cooperation  from  all  parties  involved  and  encompass  the  whole  eco-system  of  combating
financial crime: investigation, prosecution, conviction and confiscation. No stone should be left
unturned. FATF in its 2015 evaluation, recognised Malaysia as having high technical compliance
but called on Malaysia to ensure greater effectiveness in producing the desired outcomes of our
system especially in the area of investigation, prosecution, and forfeiture of laundered properties.
Understanding of new and emerging risks and having a comprehensive toolkit
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
My second point is the need to have a deep understanding of new and emerging risks and a
comprehensive toolkit to effectively execute our shared responsibility to eradicate financial crime.
All of you may have heard this many times, but it is worth restating that the rapid advancement in
technology is a major running story for our age. While this presents wonderful opportunities for
economic development, it also creates attendant risks and fresh set of challenges.
As such, it is important for the industry to be aware of the trade-offs that come with adoption of
these technologies. In pushing the boundaries of innovation, the industry needs to understand the
risks that they pose.
One example is the rise of mobile banking, e-payments and virtual assets. In Malaysia, mobile
banking  transactions  have  multiplied  greatly,  from  around  500  million  transactions  in  2016  to
almost 1.3 trillion transactions in August this year. The ubiquity of mobile internet and increasing
dependency on our smartphones is expected to increase the importance of this medium.
This technology fosters financial inclusion and offers potential for greater customer engagement.
One  such  potential  is  in  meeting  and  strengthening  know-your-customer  requirements.  By
leveraging  on  technology,  financial  institutions  will  be  able  to  conduct  e-KYC  with  greater
efficiency while making the customer experience more seamless. One such solution is being
tested in the Bank’s FinTech sandbox.
Another  area  of  growth  comes  from  virtual  assets.  Between  the  end  of  2016  to  date,  market
capitalisation of virtual assets have grown by an extraordinary rate of over 1000% from around
USD 20 billion to around USD 200 billion.
While the technologies behind virtual assets may present great potential to revolutionise the way
we  conduct  finance,  the  risks  associated  with  virtual  assets  is  an  area  that  deserves  much
scrutiny. Features that may allow anonymous or pseudonymous transactions and easier cross-
border transfers of values carry money laundering and terrorism financing risks that need to be
addressed. The fact that the reason for many virtual currencies is to skirt the formal financial
system adds further to the reservations of many.
On this front, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has published a number of reports on risks
and  guidance  for  risk-based  approach  in  mitigating  money  laundering  risks  associated  with
technology  such  as  virtual  assets  and  internet-based  payment  services.  Understanding,
monitoring  and  supervising  virtual  assets  would  require  development  of  new  techniques  and
methods.
Last but not least, in watching out for new and emerging risks, we must not forget that old risks
may rear its head in new ways. There are two issues in relation to this:
Firstly, while the number of terrorist attacks have declined over the past few years, the nature of
terrorism and terrorism financing have evolved. New modus operandi such as lone-wolf attacks
and remote terrorist cells, as well as availability of new products in the financial sector, such as
prepaid  cards  and  mobile  banking,  has  given  rise  to  new  patterns  and  methods  of  financing
terrorism  that  are  different  from  a  decade  ago.  We  must  not  forget  that  dealing  with  these
financial  crimes  should  remain  a  high  priority  due  to  the  direct  and  immediate  human  costs
involved.
Secondly, we must also not forget that even with the emergence of the technologies described
earlier, we are still very much reliant on cash. Demand for cash worldwide continues to rise. For
Malaysia, currency in circulation has increased by around 150% over the past decade. However,
if we scale it to the country’s GDP, it was in the range between 6.1 to 6.9% over the past five
years. Thus, despite the headway we have made in advancing e-payments, the persistency of
cash among the public and small and medium sized businesses remains high. This opens up
the economy to risks as cash is still being used by criminals to launder illegal proceeds, as we
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
have seen from some high-profile cases over the past year or so. Similarly, this is the preferred
mode to finance terrorist activities, which will involve transacting in cash.
Therefore, it is timely for us to look at ways to strengthen the controls to mitigate financial crime;
namely  the  cash  threshold  reporting  requirement.  When  we  compare  Malaysia  with  other
countries,  our  current  threshold  is  too  high  and  disconnected  from  the  size  of  our  economy,
especially relative to our purchasing power. Hence, it needs to be updated. In this regard, we
would  like  to  announce  that  we  will  be  lowering  the  daily  cash  threshold  report  to  RM25,000
effective 1 January 2019.
This will bring the cash threshold report in Malaysia to be more at par with other countries. We do
not anticipate any impact in terms of economic activity but an increase in effectiveness in taming
the black economy that is still heavily reliant on cash transactions.
Robust compliance function
The compliance function of a financial institution is an important element in mitigating risks of
abuse of the financial system, especially financial crime and terrorism financing risks. To this
end, financial institutions are expected to ensure that the compliance function is independent and
have sufficient authority, stature and resources to perform its function effectively.
The required AML/CFT compliance program of each institution must clearly describe and outline
the roles and responsibility of different segments of the institutions with respect to its compliance
function. In this regard, the principle of collective responsibility between senior managements and
compliance officers should be upheld in the case of failure.
In  compliance,  continued  vigilance  is  necessary  and  required.  The  2017  National  Risk
Assessment,  by  the  National  Coordinating  Committee  for  Money  Laundering  (NCC)  and  the
financial sector, showed that the banking sector continues to face high money laundering risk
and  medium  high  terrorism  financing  risk.  The  sector  records  the  highest  value  of  cash
transactions  and  high  risk  customers;  and  provides  the  highest  number  of  high  risk  products
compared  to  other  sectors  within  the  financial  industry.  This  reflects  the  central  role  of  the
banking sector in intermediating money flows within an economy.
One  important  compliance  function  that  needs  to  be  undertaken  is  the  identity  of  the  ultimate
beneficial owner of companies, assets and financial transactions. Financial institutions need to
have controls and procedures to identify, verify and conduct due diligence on the beneficiaries.
This must be complemented by a rigorous monitoring process. Adherence to this requirement
will  inject  transparency,  accountability  and  ensure  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  It  will
prevent  criminals  from  hiding  their  ownership  of  companies  and  assets  through  complex
methods and vehicles.
I last spoke at this conference in 2011. The theme of the 2011 conference was “Raising the bar
in enforcement and compliance”. Looking back and taking stock of the present state, I am glad to
see  that  the  whole  industry  has  matured  and  progressed  in  such  a  significant  way.  This  is
validated by the NCC report that the sector’s control measures for both money laundering and
terrorism financing are strong. Further, fines imposed by the Bank on financial institutions has
decreased  over  the  past  few  years,  reflecting  the  progress  made  by  institutions  in  ensuring
adequate controls. I hope the industry continues to strengthen its capability to fight crime.
focus  of 
Another area in which progress has been made is the priority accorded within each institution to
compliance.  The 
to  become  more
comprehensive  as  financial  institutions  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  threats  and  risks
involved.  With  increasing  awareness  of  the  direct  and  indirect  costs  of  non-compliance,  the
compliance  function  is  no  longer  viewed  only  as  adherence  to  rules  set  by  regulators,  but  is
instead,  an  integral  part  of  the  organisation’s  culture.  The  very  fact  that  the  theme  of  this
function  has  developed 
the  compliance 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
conference is on reshaping the future, governance and transparency is a testament to this.
Conclusion
I spoke at length today about the responsibility that we have to combat crime and the ways to do
so. Let me end by saying that eradicating financial crime makes good business sense. Financial
crime is a cost and burden to all of society.
Robust governance and greater transparency is good for business. It creates an environment of
trust and a level-playing field for businesses to flourish. This is important as we seek to ensure
longevity and continuity of businesses and the health of the economy as a whole.
Therefore,  let  us  be  united  in  working  for  a  better  and  brighter  future  for  Malaysia.  Greater
governance and transparency will get us there. Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
