Yannis  Stournaras:  Welcome  speech  -  "Crisis  and  structural
reforms"
Welcome speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the event "Crisis
and structural reforms", organized on the occasion of the publication of the study on "Structural
reforms  in  Greece  during  the  crisis  (2010-2014)",  commissioned  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  and
executed by ELIAMEP, Athens, 27 November 2018.
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to today’s event, where we will examine the key findings
of the study on “Structural reforms in Greece during the crisis (2010–2014)”, commissioned by
the Bank of Greece and executed by ELIAMEP.
The  study  attempts  to  provide  a  well-documented  assessment  of  the  impact  of  reforms  that
Greece implemented during the first two adjustment programmes. In more detail, it provides an
overview of the planned and adopted reforms, followed by an assessment of the Single Wage
System i.e. the first attempt to create a long-overdue unified wage structure for public servants. It
then explores the economic impact of selected product market reforms and examines the impact
of labour market reforms on unemployment. It concludes with policy recommendations.
 During  the  crisis,  Greece  implemented  a  number  of  structural  reforms  that  helped  bridge  the
competitiveness  gap  and  create  a  favourable  investment  environment.  Reforms  have  been
implemented in almost all areas of economic activity, and most importantly in the labour market,
the pension system, healthcare, public and tax administration and the financial sector. It is worth
noting  that  over  the  past  several  years,  according  to  OECD,  Greece  ranks  as  the  member
country  that  had  the  highest  response  rate  to  reform  recommendations,  even  more  so  when
adjusting for the difficulty to undertake these reforms in a recessionary environment and in such
a short time span.
Indeed, when embarking on the reforms, Greece faced two major challenges: (i) its economy
was already in recession, whereas difficult reforms should be best undertaken during upswings
[especially  if  they  have  adverse  short-term  effects];  and  (ii)  the  timeframe  envisaged  for  the
implementation  of  significant  reforms  was  very  tight.  Due  to  the  complexity  of  these  reforms,
their spillover effects, and the stakeholder consultation, governments usually require many years
of preparation to assess the potential impact of such reforms on the economy and choose the
best possible policy instruments.
Moreover, prioritizing was not given sufficient consideration, resulting in a lack of focus in the
reform  agenda  and  a  difficult  relationship  with  stabilization  policies.  For  example,  strong
emphasis was put on reducing fiscal deficits via tax increases while neglecting reforms to the tax
administration, to support the fight against tax evasion and broaden the tax base, both of which
are admittedly of utmost importance in the case of Greece. Last but not least, sequencing of
reforms  played  a  crucial  role,  in  the  sense  that  labour  market  reforms  were  prioritized  over
product and services market reforms, contrary to analysis that suggested that reforms in product
1
markets tend to facilitate or drive reforms in the labour market .
According  to  OECD,  the  existing  reforms,  along  with  those  envisaged  in  the  programme,  are
expected to lead to a cumulative increase in real GDP of around 13% within a decade. This effect
mainly works via an increase in the total factor productivity.
However, there is a fundamental inconsistency relating to time when it comes to the cost-benefit
analysis of reform measures: cost is immediate, whereas benefits are only realized in the long
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
term.
Thus,  the  time  horizon  over  which  reforms  yield  measurable  outcomes  usually  exceeds  a
government’s time horizon. This is a major disincentive for reforms internationally and has played
a major role in Greece in recent years. This also explains why some reforms, although legislated,
were effectively not fully implemented. In addition, the cost is beared by few but the benefits are
reaped by many. However, those few that are directly affected from a reform are vocal in their
opposition, while those who benefit in the long run do not advocate the benefits with the same
tenacity. These opposing forces may explain the inertia of the status quo.
 Greece completed the financial support and adjustment programmes with a favourable legacy of
adopted  reforms. And  although  many  things  have  changed,  several  reforms  still  need  to  be
reinforced, given the poor initial conditions. In other words, the performance has been impressive
in terms of first differences but, given the initial low level of structural competitiveness, Greece
still  lags  behind  its  peers.  Hence,  the  reform  process  must  be  pursued  until  the  final  goal  is
achieved,  i.e.  a  competitive  and  dynamic  economy  that  is  able  to  stand  on  its  own  two  feet.
Political and social awareness that the Greek economy cannot return to the previous status quo
is widely accepted, after the implementation of three adjustment programmes. I hope that this will
suffice  to  bring  about  sustained  support  to  reforms  among  Greek  policy  makers  and  Greek
citizens.
Before giving the floor to the distinguished speakers, please allow me to thank the researchers
who have worked for this study, ELIAMEP and its President, Professor Loukas Tsoukalis, and
last but certainly not least, Professor Jean Pisany Ferry, who is the keynote speaker today.
1
See, among other, Blanchard and Giavazzi 2003, Boeri 2005,Fiori et al. 2007.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
