REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “ATTACKS  OF  TARIFFS:  WHAT  ABOUT 
CURRENCIES?”. EURO50 GROUP & CIGI MEETING. Bali, October 12, 2018.1 
I thank the organizers, and especially Nina Massis and Edmond Alphandéry, for 
the invitation to join you in this event.  
Ten  years  after  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  global  economic 
recovery appears to have peaked, with GDP growth rates for this and the next 
couple  of  years  projected  to  stabilize  at  levels  similar  to  those  recorded  in 
2017, and to decline subsequently to a less vigorous pace in line with lower 
potential rates of growth in many economies. Further to the envisaged loss of 
momentum  going  forward,  a  number  of  remaining  legacies,  as  well  as  new 
perils, continue to tilt the balance of risks for the outlook to the downside. 
Chief among the latter is the rising trend of protectionism, evidenced by more 
restrictive  trade  policy  stances,  both  actual  and  intended,  in  a  number  of 
countries, leading in turn to heightened tensions or outright conflict between 
governments. Of course, the specific nature and extent of  these tensions is 
varied and broad-ranging, and while there has been some relief in virtue of 
progress achieved in some particular cases, such as the recently announced 
agreements in the North America region and between the United States and 
Korea, ongoing hostilities in other fronts remain a major source of concern.  
Of particular note is the clash between China and the United States, which is 
widely regarded as the one with the potentially direst consequences, not only 
for the economies directly involved but, also, globally. In fact, the performance 
                                                           
1 The  views and opinions  expressed in this document  are the sole responsibility of the  author  and  do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
1 
 throughout this year of a number of variables points to the effects that such a 
situation may already be exerting on the world economy.  
For instance, international trade volumes have notably slowed down relative 
to the upward trend they had displayed since 2015, while other indicators on 
the output side, such as export orders in global manufacturing PMIs, sentiment 
indexes for trade oriented sectors, and  capital goods orders  in some of the 
main economies, are showing a declining trajectory that, if sustained, would 
eventually be reflected in international trade figures.  
Why is such a potential setback in global openness to trade so worrisome? 
Naturally,  the  complexities  of  the  trade  and  financial  networks  and 
interlinkages  embedded  in  the  global  production  framework,  give  rise  to  a 
multiplicity of channels through which higher tariffs and other protectionist 
measures can affect the world economy.  
Directly, the cross-border flow of goods and services (a long-standing engine 
of  growth  for  both  national  and  the  world  economies)  would  be  severely 
hindered by the increased costs resulting from such policies. The situation is 
particularly worrisome in the case of intermediate goods and services, given 
the relevance they have come to acquire in the current context of global value 
chains (GVCs).  
Indirectly, the uncertainties derived from such a retreat from globalization and 
free trade may have an adverse impact on business and household confidence, 
thereby leading the former to postpone or scale back investments plans for 
new or expanded production, and the latter to follow suit in regards to their 
planned  consumption  expenditure  paths.  Furthermore,  an  environment  of 
 2 
heightened protectionism has the potential to impinge on financial conditions, 
given  the  resulting  increase  in  the  perception  of  risk  among  market 
participants.  
Arriving  at  an  accurate,  exhaustive  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic 
implications  of  a  more  restrictive  environment  for  international  trade  is  a 
complex task. However, some of the potential implications are evident. 
First, activity levels in both countries directly involved and the global economy 
would take a significant hit from an escalation of trade conflicts. In the case of 
tariff-imposing countries, and their retaliating trade partners,  higher import 
prices  harm  firms  by  increasing  their  production  costs,  and  households  by 
decreasing  their  purchasing  power  and  disposable  income.  Thus,  GDP  is 
weighed down by the combined declines in both consumption and investment. 
Further to this, aggregate demand from these sources can also be affected by 
the above-noted detrimental consequences deriving from a loss of confidence 
and tighter financial conditions. As for countries not directly involved in a trade 
dispute, the impact on their economies would depend on a number of factors, 
including their size, openness to trade, exposure to countries imposing tariffs, 
and degree of integration into GVCs, among others. Although it may be argued 
that some of these countries could be in a position to reap benefits from a 
potential  diversion  of  trade  flows,  the  net  effects  from  such  a  restrictive 
environment are most likely to be negative. 
Secondly, further to the short-term effects on the level of GDP noted above, 
trend growth over the long run is likely to fall as well, once the global economy 
adjusts  to  a  higher-tariff  environment.  This  is  explained  partly  by  the 
 3 
undermined  efficiency  with  which  labor,  capital,  and  other  factors  of 
production are allocated under conditions of lessened competition and more 
restricted access to global markets, thereby inhibiting the innovation process 
and the consequent gains in productivity, a fundamental driver of growth. In 
addition,  higher  trade  barriers  also  hamper  to  a  significant  extent  the 
international transfer of technology, know-how and best business practices, 
foundations  on  which  emerging  and  developing  economies  are  particularly 
reliant.  To  the  above  one  must  add  the  adverse  effects  on  confidence  and 
financial conditions. In this respect, it may be useful to note that one of the 
main reasons behind the stagnation of private investment in my country for a 
significant period already, is precisely uncertainty related to trade negotiations 
with the United States and Canada. 
Thirdly, notwithstanding weakened demand pressures arising from subdued 
levels  of  activity,  inflation  is  likely  to  adjust  to  the  upside  under  a  more 
protectionist  environment.  Further  to  the  direct  effects  on  imports  prices 
brought  about  by  higher  tariffs,  less  competition  from  abroad  in  labor  and 
goods markets pushes domestic prices and wages upwards, while the above-
noted  efficiency  losses  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  (including  those 
resulting from the potential disruption of GVCs) should act in a similar way. In 
fact, we must not forget that the effect of international trade on competition 
and production costs is one of the major explanatory forces for the period of 
low inflation that we have seen at the global level in recent years. 
As noted earlier, the hard evidence that to date can be gathered regarding the 
impact  of  the  ongoing  episode  of  increased  protectionism  in  the  global 
economy is still scant. If any conclusion can be drawn, it is that said effects 
4 
 have  been  relatively  small,  albeit  not  insignificant  and  definitely  not  to  be 
overlooked. 
Emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  faced  tighter  (and  tightening) 
external  financial  conditions  over  the  last  several  months,  which  have 
translated into declining capital inflows and the consequent pressures on their 
exchange rates. In addition to specific, idiosyncratic factors that have been at 
play, especially in instances where episodes of acute stress have been present, 
this  has  reflected  fundamentally  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  by  the 
Federal  Reserve,  in  an  environment  of  global  uncertainty  deriving  from  a 
combination of factors.   
Obviously, a more restrictive trade policy stance in the United States and other 
countries has been one of them, although the extent to which this has affected 
different economies is varied. In this regard, it is again relevant to refer to the 
Mexican experience, where the trajectory of the exchange rate of the peso has 
been heavily influenced by news and expectations about NAFTA (now USMCA), 
in  some  episodes  the  single  most  important  factor  driving  the  value  of  our 
currency.    In  any  case,  trade  policy  shifts  remain  far  from  being  the  main 
determinant of exchange rates in EMEs in general. Nevertheless, it is also true 
that  their  potential  to  affect  EME  currencies  and  other  financial  variables 
should not be underestimated.  
For the already explained reasons, trade-related events can severely distress 
the  economic  and  financial  prospects  of  EMEs.  Furthermore,  through  its 
potential  impact  on  inflation,  protectionism  may  accentuate  the  challenges 
resulting from the ongoing normalization of monetary policy in a number of 
 5 
advanced  economies.  More  generally,  the  potential  for  an  increase  in 
protectionism to a level implying systemic risks at the global level is a scenario 
that cannot be discarded.  
The exercises carried out by a number of institutions on the impact of higher 
levels of protectionism depict a grim picture. For instance, recent simulations 
by  the  IMF2  suggest  that,  in  a  high-tariff  scenario  compounded  by  adverse 
confidence effects and tighter financial conditions, the net negative impact on 
the  level  of  global  GDP  peaks  at  about  0.8  percent  below  the  baseline 
trajectory in 2020. The accumulated output losses over 2018-2023 amount to 
around 3.2 percent of world GDP. To have an idea of the order of magnitude 
of this figure, suffice to say that it compares with the G20 objective of raising 
these countries’ collective GDP by 2 percent above baseline over the five years 
to 2018, and that it is roughly equivalent to the size of Germany at present. 
Additionally, it is worth highlighting that, according to these results, none of 
the considered countries or regions benefits from such a situation, although 
some lose more than others.3  
Notwithstanding the rigor with which these models are devised, we must not 
forget that they face severe limitations when trying to capture the effects of 
high levels of uncertainty. Furthermore, it is also important to bear in mind 
                                                           
2 See International Monetary  Fund (2018): “Global  Trade  Tensions”, Scenario Box  1 in Chapter 1 of  World 
Economic Outlook, October. 
3  Additional  estimates  of  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  more  restrictive  trade  policy  stances  can  be 
found  in  Allan  Gloe  Dizioli  and  Björn  van  Roye  (2018):  “Macroeconomic  Implications  of  Increasing 
Protectionism”, ECB Economic Bulletin Issue 6/2018, 26 September; Mark Carney (2018): “From Protectionism 
to Prosperity”, Speech given at the Northern Powerhouse Business Summit, 5 July; Zornitsa Kutlina-Dimitrova 
and Csilla Lakatos (2017): "The Global Costs of Protectionism", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 
8277,  December;  and  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2016):  "The  Impact  of 
Changes in Global Trade Costs", Box 1.3 in Chapter 1 of Economic Outlook, November. 
6 
 that a burst of protectionist actions would hardly take place in isolation. Most 
likely,  it  would  be  accompanied  by  other  negative  events,  such  as  currency 
wars,  the  implementation  of  inward  looking  policies  in  other  areas  and  an 
additional  backlash  against  globalization.  In  light  of  these  considerations,  it 
would  be  reasonable  to  take  quantitative  exercises  like  the  ones  described 
above as conservative estimates, or rough qualitative guides  as  to what we 
may face going down this path.  
Indeed, it is difficult to understand why the world economy is again facing such 
high  stakes,  after  the  experience  with  protectionism  during  the  Great 
Depression  of  the  20th  century,  and  with  the  burden  of  the  global  financial 
crisis still present in many economies.  
 7 
