Yi Gang: Global economic developments, the outlook for China and
the need for IMF reform
Statement by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the Ministerial Meeting of
the 38th Meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC), Bali, Indonesia,
14 October 2018.
*   *   *
I. Global Economic and Financial Development
The global economy has continued to recover but the pace has become less synchronized, and
growth momentum has weakened. Growth and inflation dynamics in major advanced economies
have diverged recently. In the United States, growth has been strong. In the Euro Area, Japan,
and the United Kingdom growth has slowed down. In the Euro Area and Japan, inflation is lower
than expected, while in the United States and the United Kingdom, inflation is close to or above
targets. Emerging markets and developing countries have generally registered rapid growth, but
performance has continued to vary across different groups of economies. In energy exporting
countries, growth has strengthened due to rising oil prices. Tighter financial conditions, increased
risk  aversion,  certain  domestic  factors,  and  geopolitical  uncertainties  have  resulted  in  slower
growth and mounting pressures in the foreign exchange and financial markets in some emerging
economies.
Downside risks to global growth warrant close attention, with trade protectionism and
rising  trade  tensions  being  major  risks  facing  the  global  economy. As  countries
become  increasingly  integrated  and  interconnected  against  the  backdrop  of  economic
globalization, their industrial and financial systems have closely linked to each other. The rising
trade  protectionism,  friction  and  policy  uncertainties  have  begun  to  dampen  global  business
confidence and resulted in increased financial market volatility. Investment and trade as well as
economic growth have also  been  dragged.  In  the  medium  and  long  term,  trade  protectionism
could  also  disrupt  global  production  chain,  supply  chain  and  value  chain,  hampering
technological innovation, and ultimately suppress growth potential. Therefore, continued efforts
are  needed  to  strengthen  macroeconomic  policy  coordination,  oppose  all  forms  of  trade  and
investment protectionism, and jointly promote global investment and trade liberalization.
Abrupt tightening of global financial conditions could have a negative impact on financial
markets. With  relatively  ample  global  liquidity,  asset  prices  have  been  at  record  high.  Should
financial  conditions  tighten,  asset  prices  may  fall  abruptly,  triggering  disorder  portfolio
realignment  as  well  as  more  volatile  exchange  rate  movement  and  capital  flows.  Countries
should continue to push forward financial sector reforms, enhance global safety net, and improve
the stability and resilience of the international monetary system in a coordinated manner.
While the global economy has continued to recover, the window of opportunity to push forward
reforms has been narrowing. Countries should take advantage of the still favorable environment
to  press  ahead  with  monetary,  fiscal,  and  structural  reforms,  so  as  to  maintain  the  recovery
momentum, enhance growth potential, and make their economies more resilient and inclusive.
Fiscal policy should focus on rebuilding buffers while accommodating growth needs. Monetary
policy  normalization  in  major  advanced  economies  should  be  data-dependent  and  well
communicated. The IMF should stand ready to provide necessary liquidity support. At the same
time,  efforts  should  be  made  to  strengthen  financial  resilience,  reduce  leverage,  and  mitigate
financial risks, so as to safeguard financial stability. Emerging market and developing countries
should take steps to control contingent liabilities and balance sheet mismatches, curb financial
market  risks,  monitor  foreign  currency  debt  exposures,  and  enhance  resilience  to  financial
tightening, capital outflows and commodity price volatility.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
II. Economic and Financial Development in China
The Chinese economy has continued to grow steadily in 2018, with progress achieved in
structural  upgrading  and  efficiency  improvement. In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  GDP  grew
by 6.8 percent, and consumption and investment grew steadily. In August, total retail sales of
consumer goods increased by 9.0 percent year-on-year; the manufacturing PMI registered 51.3;
the nationwide survey-based urban unemployment rate stood at 5.0 percent, and CPI rose by 2.3
percent year-on-year. In the first eight months of this year, import and export maintained steady
growth, and the total value of import and export of goods increased by 9.1 percent year-on-year,
of which imports increased by 13.7 percent and exports increased by 5.4 percent. From January
to August, China’s trade surplus had narrowed by 33.4 percent. As of end-August, broad money
M2 increased by 8.2 percent, and RMB loans grew by 13.2 percent. The authorities have focused
more on the quality of economic growth, and growth has become more balanced. In the first half
of  the  year,  consumption  contributed  78.5  percent  to  GDP  growth,  an  increase  of  14.2
percentage points over the same period of the previous year; contribution of the service sector to
growth  increased  further  to  60.5  percent,  1.4  percentage  points  higher  than  that  in  the  same
period  of  last  year.  At  the  same  time,  the  use  of  clean  energy  has  increased,  and  energy
consumption per unit of GDP has been further reduced.
The  financial  sector  as  a  whole  is  sound,  and  overall  risks  are  in  control. China
has  continuously  taken  measures  to  strengthen  financial  supervision  and  regulation.  In  the
second half of this year, the State Council’s Financial Stability and Development Committee has
focused  on  the  prevention  and  resolution  of  financial  risks.  The  regulatory  authorities  have
strengthened  coordination  to  ensure  orderly  deleveraging. At  the  same  time,  the  regulation  of
wealth  management  product,  shadow  banking,  and  internet  finance  has  been  significantly
enhanced. As a result, risks are well contained and risk awareness and market discipline have
been strengthened.
In 2018, China has continued to pursue prudent monetary policy stance, kept liquidity
appropriate and ample, further improved the dual-pillar framework with focus on both
monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy,  and  actively  pushed  forward  with
financial reform and opening up. Since the beginning of this year, China has  announced  a
series of important opening-up measures in the financial sector, including relaxing foreign equity
caps  on  banks,  securities  firms,  and  insurance  companies,  easing  restrictions  on  the
establishment of foreign financial institutions in China with expanded scope of business. Most of
the measures have been implemented, and the remaining ones are expected to take effect by
the end of this year. Compared with efforts in the past, these measures are more intensive and
broad-based.  Foreign  financial  institutions  will  have  greater  presence  in  China,  and  China’s
financial  industry  is  expected  to  be  more  competitive.  In  line  with  the  principle  of  pre-entry
national treatment with a negative list, China will take further steps to open up the financial sector
in  a  proactive  and  orderly  manner,  and  create  a  fair,  friendly,  and  predictable  business
environment.
Looking ahead, China’s monetary policy is expected to remain neutral with more focus on guiding
expectations.  Proactive  adjustment  and  fine-tuning  are  needed  to  ensure  that  the  monetary
stance  will  remain  appropriate  in  a  changing  economic  and  financial  environment,  both
domestically and externally. It is expected that a well designed and implemented monetary policy
will  create  a  conducive  financial  environment  for  the  supply-side  structural  reforms  and  high-
quality economic growth. At the same time, China will continue to push ahead with the market-
based reforms of interest rate and exchange rate regimes, and keep the RMB exchange rate
broadly  stable  at  an  adaptive  equilibrium  level.  China  will  continue  to  let  the  market  play  a
decisive  role  in  the  formation  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate.  We  will  not  engage  in  competitive
devaluation, and will not use the exchange rate as a tool to deal with trade frictions. Since the
beginning  of  this  year,  China  has  continued  to  implement  proactive  fiscal  policies,  and  has
adopted a series of measures to ease the burden on market participants. Fiscal policies have
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
been playing a greater role in expanding domestic demand and promoting structural adjustment.
Supported by robust external and domestic demand, the Hong Kong SAR economy sustained
strong momentum with real GDP expanding by 3.5% year-on-year in the second quarter of 2018,
marking  the  seventh  quarter  of  above-trend  growth.  The  labor  market  tightened  further  with
unemployment rate edging down to 2.8%, the lowest level in more than 20 years. Overall inflation
pressure remained moderate, and underlying consumer price inflation remained unchanged at
2.4%  in  Q2  2018.  Notwithstanding  the  increased  uncertainties  in  the  external  environment,
domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  largely  resilient  and  the  Hong  Kong  SAR  economic
growth is forecasted to maintain at 3-4% for 2018 as a whole. Supported by service exports and
private  consumption,  the  Macao  SAR  economy  grew  by  7.6  percent  in  the  first  half  of  2018.
Private  consumption  increased  by  5.1  percent  and  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  1.9  percent
while  inflation  rebounded  to  2.7  percent.  The  fiscal  account  continued  to  record  surplus.  The
Macao SAR economy is expected to maintain its positive growth trend in 2018 and 2019.
III. Reform of the IMF
The IMF should continue to support an open, inclusive, rules-based multilateral trade
system. The  recent  rise  of  global  protectionism  highlights  the  importance  of  maintaining  a
strong multilateral trade system. Having in place a system of well-designed international rules is
in  the  interest  of  all  countries.  China  stands  ready  to  enhance  cooperation  with  all  parties  to
support  the  liberalization  and  facilitation  of  trade  and  investment.  Countries  should  jointly  take
measures  against  trade  protectionism  and  strive  to  make  economic  globalization  more  open,
inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
Continued efforts should be made to promote multilateral cooperation and strengthen
policy  coordination. Trade  tensions  need  to  be  resolved  in  a  rules-based  multilateral  trade
system  and  in  a  constructive  approach,  promoting  global  trade  and  investment  integration.
Unilateralism and protectionism will in fact only exacerbate domestic imbalances and undermine
the necessary structural adjustments, which will not only have a negative impact on the countries
concerned, but also weigh on global growth. At the current juncture, multilateral mechanisms are
particularly needed to play an active role in promoting global growth and safeguarding financial
stability. With its near-universal membership of 189 countries, the IMF is well positioned to make
unique contributions to this process. We expect the IMF to play a greater role.
The IMF should continue to push ahead with quota and governance reforms to ensure
that the institution remains strong, quota-based, and adequately funded to preserve its
central  role  in  the  global  financial  safety  net  (GFSN).  Quotas  are  the  building  blocks  of
the IMF’s  financial  and  governance  structure.  They  not  only  form  the  basis  of  the  institution’s
lending capacity, but are also closely related to the institution’s representativeness, governance,
and legitimacy. If quota reviews fail to achieve the above objectives, the IMF’s credibility will be
compromised, and its ability to help member countries will be weakened. China is open to any
constructive approach to complete the 15th General Review of Quotas in time, including general,
selective, or ad hoc quota increases to reduce misalignment. The quota formula serves only as a
tool to achieve our goal. It is important to set a goal that is less controversial and can garner
broad  political  support  to  reach  consensus.  In  addition,  countries  need  to  make  continuous
efforts  to  implement  the  agreed  financial  sector  reforms  in  a  coordinated  manner,  so  as  to
improve the stability and resilience of the international monetary system.
The IMF should continue to help low-income countries improve their debt management.
The past decade after the global financial crisis has actually been a period of relatively strong
economic performance in low-income countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. China stands
ready  to  strengthen  coordination  with  the  international  community  on  debt  issues.  We  will
support  the  IMF’s  efforts  to  help  low-income  countries  strengthen  their  debt  management
capability and improve institutional frameworks and governance structure. There is still room for
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
improvement in the IMF’s Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) framework. Debt issues related to
infrastructure should be properly addressed, as this type of debt could generate future economic
returns. Therefore, it is advisable to take a balance-sheet approach, to analyze net debt, rather
than gross debt, in order to provide better analysis on whether and how this type of debt should
be restructured.
We welcome the IMF’s work in the area of fintech, the Bali Fintech Agenda jointly developed by
the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  in  particular,  and  support  the  IMF  in  using  this  Agenda  as  a
framework for its work on fintech. To maximize the benefits brought by fintech while minimizing
the  associated  risks,  due  consideration  should  be  given  to  specific  situations  and  needs  of
individual  countries.  We  welcome  the  IMF’s  review  of  the  AML/CFT  Strategy  to  strengthen
AML/CFT more effectively while ensuring the financial sector operating effectively. We support
the IMF’s efforts in strengthening its work on big data, cyber risks, and tax systems. Steps should
be taken to promote international taxation cooperation and to jointly address the challenges of
cybersecurity  and  climate  change,  promoting  a  more  open,  inclusive,  balanced,  and  win-win
global economy.
In recent years, the IMF has made significant progress in capacity building and continued efforts
should be made in this regard. We support the IMF’s work on capacity building to broaden its
influence, including through the upcoming review. Capacity building should be better aligned with
surveillance  and  lending  activities,  strategic  partnerships  with  member  countries  should  be
strengthened. China will continue to deepen its cooperation with the IMF in capacity development.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
