   Governor Lesetja Kganyago’s address at the ABSIP National Conference Johannesburg 
Lessons from the economics of populism 
Friday 19 October  
 At the  end  of the  road  one  cannot  avoid  wondering  whether  the mistakes  of past  populist 
regimes  can  be  internalized  by  policymakers,  politicians,  and  the  population  at  large  and, 
thus, be avoided in the future. Quite clearly, [history] suggest[s] that, in general, there is very 
little capacity (or willingness) of learning from other countries’ experiences. Indeed, one of 
the most striking regularities of these episodes is the insistence with which the engineers of 
the  populist  programs  argue  that  their  circumstances  are  unique  and  thus  immune  from 
historical lessons from other nations.  
-  Rudiger Dornbusch & Sebastian Edwards 
My speech today is about populism, about its appeal and its weaknesses. Populism wins supporters 
in part because it speaks to ordinary people about real problems – problems other leaders can be 
too embarrassed or nervous to confront. For instance, when Hugo Chávez attacked corruption and 
inequality  in  Venezuela,  he  wasn’t  just  making  trouble.  He  was  confronting  some  longstanding 
problems of Venezuelan society.  
But populism also has a bad side: it pretends there are easy solutions, even where there are none 
– where the problems are in fact very difficult.  Often the easy solutions have unintended effects, 
impacts that populists ignore or are unaware of.  It is these unintended effects that usually end up 
hurting  the  people  those  easy  solutions  were  meant  to  help.  Populist  governments  tend  to  be 
especially  weak  on  economics,  which  is  a  common  reason  why  their  projects  fail.  In  my  speech 
today, I will explore what it is about economics that populism get wrong, and what we can learn from 
that. 
The  knowledge  I  will  detail  is  mostly  drawn  from  Latin  America,  a  place  where  populism  has 
flourished over the past century. This experience is relevant for us because these economies closely 
resemble  ours.  In  particular,  they  are  middle  income  countries  with  high  levels  of  inequality.  Of 
course, every country is different. But the populist experience has been so similar, across so many 
countries and time periods, that we can pull together a few clear lessons relevant to our times and 
circumstances. 
  Economic populism starts with deep dissatisfaction.1 Too much unemployment, too much inequality, 
too much poverty. The populist solution is to start spending  – push as much demand as possible 
into  the  economy,  without  consideration  of  constraints.  The  argument  is  that  more  spending  will 
make  people  better  off.  More  demand  encourages  more  supply,  meaning  more  jobs  and  more 
investment. It’s supposed to be a virtuous circle. So the government starts spending money  – as 
much  as  possible.  It  borrows  from  people’s  pension  funds.  It  borrows  from  the  central  bank  and 
demands it buys its debt – which means printing money. It spends the foreign exchange reserves.  
And at first sight, it works. As scholars of populism have noted, the immediate consequence of these 
policies tends to be an economic boom. People who warn that populism is a disaster will look foolish. 
There is more growth and big wage increases and more jobs. 
But  it  doesn’t  last.  Time  and  time  again,  the  boom  turns  to  bust.  Inflation  shoots  up  and  growth 
collapses.  Some  populists  realise  their  strategy  has  failed  and  change  course.  Others  put  their 
countries  through  even  greater  pain.  During  the  1950s,  the  Argentine  president  Juan  Perón 
effectively  aborted  his  populist  programme  when  inflation  neared  50%.2  In  Peru,  Alan  García 
abandoned his stimulus programme in 1988, with inflation well over 1000%.3 In Venezuela, inflation 
is expected to reach one million percent this year,4 and people are fleeing the country to find food, 
but the policy direction still hasn’t changed.  
What  is  it  about  the  populist  recipe  that  goes  wrong?  The  literature  focuses  on  two  kinds  of 
constraints: inflation and the balance of payments. Now these are things populists probably don’t 
see coming. They don’t understand the causes of inflation very well. And they may not even know 
what the balance of payments is. But these are powerful forces, and ignoring them doesn’t mean 
they will leave you alone.   
The inflation problem is fairly simple. If a government wants to stimulate demand, it will  want low 
interest rates, and it will demand that the central bank print money to buy its bonds. This extra money 
does a couple of things. It raises demand, and with the economy running hot, firms and workers put 
up their prices. It causes the exchange rate to depreciate. And because people see the government 
is printing money, they start to put a lot of time and effort into figuring out where inflation is going, 
and raising their prices to keep ahead of it. This process then gets worse over time. In the first year, 
you  get  a  fair  amount  of  growth  and  a  bit  more  inflation.  In  the  second  year,  you  get  even  more 
inflation and less growth. A few years in, inflation is running at very high levels – there are cases of 
inflation exceeding several thousand per cent a year, including Peru and Brazil, and as Zimbabwe 
showed us, there are many more zeroes that can be added after that. This is poison to an economy 
– it destroys people’s savings and shuts down longer-term credit markets. It also interferes with the 
                                                           
1 This discussion of populist macroeconomics draws on the seminal essay by Rudiger Dornbusch and 
Sebastian Edwards (1990) “The Macroeconomics of Populism” in The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin 
America, University of Chicago Press  
2 Paul H. Lewis (1990). The Crisis of Argentine Capitalism, University of North Carolina Press 
3  John  Crabtree (1992)  Peru  Under  García:  An  Opportunity  Lost, University of Pittsburgh Press 
4 Alejandro Werner (2018, July 23) “Outlook for the Americas: A tougher recovery” Available at: 
https://blogs.imf.org/2018/07/23/outlook-for-the-americas-a-tougher-recovery/ 
  everyday business of buying and selling goods and services. So what starts with a nice growth bump 
ends in a deep depression, and a large increase in poverty.  
The  other  constraint  is  the  balance  of  payments. When  a  populist  government  starts  to  push  up 
spending, it increases domestic demand. That doesn’t change foreign demand so you don’t get more 
exports.  In  fact,  local  producers  will  probably  be  so  worried  about  policy  consistency  and  rising 
inflation that exports will stagnate. But the import bill still rises as demand booms, and that import 
bill  needs  to  be  paid  somehow.  Populists  may  hope  that  new  demand  will  all  go  into  domestic 
production,  but  they  are  invariably  proved  wrong.  There  are  no  modern  economies  that  produce 
everything they need locally, from oil to machinery to food to smartphones. And foreigners like to be 
paid in hard currency, not an inflation and depreciation-prone currency. 
The shortage of forex therefore becomes a constraint – a bottleneck. No matter how much demand 
you push into the economy, you don’t get more supply because you can’t finance enough imports. 
In  economic  terms,  the  import-intensity  of  demand  means  an  economy  can  overheat  even  when 
other  factors  of  production  are  lying  idle,  with  high  unemployment  or  factories  operating  below 
capacity.  
The  symptoms  of  this  foreign  exchange  constraint  will  be  a  widening  current  account  deficit  and 
strong depreciation pressure on the currency. So long as there are foreign exchange reserves left, 
or there are people willing to lend you dollars, the boom can go on. But as financing dries up, the 
government ends up going to the only lender who will still take its calls, the IMF. Of course, the IMF 
isn’t interested in funding an unsustainable spending programme.  So this means accepting the kind 
of spending cuts populists started out rejecting.  
There is also a third kind of constraint on populism, which moves a bit slower but may be the most 
dangerous of all. I’ll call it the “know-how” constraint, and it is fundamentally about the sources of 
wealth. In the populist narrative, that story is simple. They say, our country is rich. If the people are 
poor, that must be because someone else has hoarded these riches – like foreigners, or elites. The 
solution, then, is to redistribute the wealth to the people.  
In practice, however, although populists reliably point to sources of great wealth that they plan to 
redistribute – oil, land, gold, or something else – they invariably run into macroeconomic trouble. The 
wealth doesn’t cover the extra spending they want to do. And they don’t appreciate that their anti-
market rhetoric and policies disrupt production and kill off investment. As a result, they can deliver 
temporary consumption booms, but not lasting improvements in welfare. Redistributing an existing 
stock of wealth does not mean that that stock of wealth can be built again. 
Perhaps  the  most  profound  meditation  on  why  this  happens  comes  from  Ricardo  Hausmann,  a 
Venezuelan  economist  and  former  finance  minister  currently  teaching  at  Harvard.  Professor 
Hausmann has, of course, had personal experience of a country that seems rich but whose people 
  are nonetheless persistently poor. Accordingly, his analysis emphasises the value of know-how, of 
expertise.5 Lasting wealth, by this account, isn’t in a country’s soil but in its citizen’s heads.  
Countries  get  rich  because  people  develop  specialised  skills,  and  because  they  find  ways  to 
cooperate so they can do things much too complex for any individual to do alone. To handle all this 
complexity and specialisation, people gather in firms, and firms interact in markets. The state can 
help with this whole process, for instance through investing in education, guaranteeing security and 
providing other public goods. But if the state declares war on market mechanisms and condemns 
rich  people,  it  starts  to  break  the  machine  that  generates  wealth.  It  kills  off  investment.  It  scares 
skilled  people  away.  In  this  world,  natural  resources  don’t  get  used  effectively,  no  matter  how 
abundant they are, and the economy doesn’t develop other kinds of industries either.   
This  theory  helps  explain  why  resource  wealth  does  not  always  generate  national  prosperity. 
Certainly, there are countries with natural resources that are either very rich, like Norway, or that are 
reasonably prosperous, like Botswana. But there are also countries with the exact same resources 
that are poor, like Angola with oil or Sierra Leone with diamonds. And while there are countries that 
lack extraordinary natural resource endowments and are poor, like Malawi,6 there are also countries 
that are resource-poor but highly developed, like South Korea or Germany. Clearly, there is more to 
wealth than winning the commodity lottery. 
This message doesn’t appeal to populists. For instance, populists do not want to hear about how a 
resource like oil is difficult to extract, that it requires highly qualified people and carefully maintained 
infrastructure and well-organised firms to manage the whole process.  
More broadly, populists aren’t really interested in the hard work of development, the patient progress 
whereby  you  grow  incomes  by  a  few  per  cent  a  year,  until  after  a  generation  you’ve  become  a 
developed country. For them, the country is already rich, and because the country is rich, the problem 
must be that someone is stealing the wealth.  
Unfortunately, people fall for ‘get rich quick’ schemes all the time, and countries can fall for them too. 
There is abundant evidence that the economic strategy of populism leaves people worse off than 
they were before. Yet somehow, the same ideas show up time and again, as if no-one ever learned 
from past mistakes. The disaster playing out in Venezuela at the moment is no surprise to anyone 
who knows anything about Latin American history. We have seen the same basic story in Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile, Peru and elsewhere. But all these economic disasters on Venezuela’s doorstep couldn’t 
spare that country from doing the same terrible things to itself.  
Yet it is perhaps too strong to conclude humans never learn. Venezuela aside, other countries have 
learned  from  populist  mistakes,  and  constructed  defences  against  repeating  those  errors.  The 
fundamental  mistake  of  economic  populism  is  failing  to  understand  constraints.  Accordingly,  the 
                                                           
5 Hausmann, R., (2016). Economic Development and the Accumulation of Know-how. Welsh Economic 
Review. 24, pp.13–16. Available at: http://doi.org/10.18573/j.2016.10049. See also Hausmann (2017, March) 
“Das Knowhow Kapital” available at: https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/south-africa-zuma-
knowhow-shortage-by-ricardo-hausmann-2017-03 
6 For a discussion of the Malawian example, see Paul Collier (2007) The Bottom Billion, Oxford University 
Press 
  fundamental  solution  countries  have  adopted  is  building  constraints  into  their  policy  framework. 
Instead of madly insisting there are no limits, no constraints, that everything is possible, policymakers 
look for what freedom of manoeuvre they enjoy within economic reality. In a sense, they design their 
macroeconomies to have brakes and airbags, not just accelerators. 
Of course, accelerators are still useful. Modern policymakers almost universally acknowledge that 
there are times and places where policy stimulus is appropriate. But those tools are for smoothing 
output over the cycle. They can’t deliver long-run development, and they won’t work in the presence 
of bottlenecks. If a government is facing rising inflation and a binding balance of payments constraint, 
stimulus is precisely the wrong strategy  – as Turkey’s financial crisis is once again reminding us. 
Denying this reality just makes reality more painful.  
So  what  are  the  policy  frameworks  countries  use  to  accommodate  reality?  Latin  American 
economists like to talk about a policy tripod, comprising inflation targeting, a floating exchange rate, 
and measures to protect fiscal sustainability. 
The first part of the tripod, inflation targeting, directly tackles the problem of the inflation constraint, 
without sacrificing flexibility. If an economy is struggling and inflation is low, it’s an easy call to cut 
rates.  If  inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored  in  line  with  the  target,  it’s  easy  to  look  through 
temporary  supply  shocks,  such  as  oil  or  food  price  spikes.  And  if  inflation  is  rising  and  inflation 
expectations are getting out of control, the policy framework will tell you it’s time to tighten, and an 
independent central bank will have the means to do so. If twenty years ago Venezuela had embraced 
inflation targeting and central bank independence, today they would have low and stable inflation, 
not hyperinflation. And they would be richer for it, even though they would at some point had to raise 
rates and made themselves unpopular. It is better to have unpopular central bankers from time to 
time than hyperinflation and expanding poverty.  
The second leg of the policy tripod is a floating, market-determined exchange rate. Again, this sends 
everyone the right signals. If the currency is depreciating, it tells importers to cut back, and it tells 
exporters to raise production. By contrast, a fixed exchange rate helps everyone hide from economic 
realities  too  long  –  leading  an  economy  to  rely  too  much  on  imports,  and  to  borrow  too  much  in 
foreign currency. Fixed exchange rates create the appearance of stability, but they are so brittle that 
when they fail, they fall apart completely, doing tremendous damage. By contrast, floating exchange 
rate regimes are volatile, but resilient – they give you bad news immediately and help you deal with 
it, instead of storing it up for later.  
The final leg of the tripod is some kind of fiscal rule, to protect government’s solvency even when 
short-term pressures to spend more and borrow more are very high. Chile, for example, has built 
systems to save copper income in good times, so when bad times come they don’t have to slash 
spending  at  the  worst  possible  moment.  Brazil  has  a  fiscal  responsibility  law,  which  is  meant  to 
guarantee  a  primary  budget  surplus  except  in  emergencies,  so  debt  levels  stabilise  over  the 
economic cycle.  
  Unfortunately, fiscal rules have proven easy to break. The result is that countries can slip back into 
unsustainable fiscal policies, as has happened in Brazil, even as the other parts of the tripod stay 
standing. In South Africa, we have implemented a policy of fiscal transparency, so everyone can see 
what fiscal policy is doing and what we expect it to do. This has prompted a clear message from 
analysts,  investors,  the  ratings  agencies,  international  organisations  and  others  that  South  Africa 
needs to maintain budget responsibility and get State-Owned Enterprise risks under control. This is 
a priority government has reiterated in successive Budget documents. 
This macroeconomic tripod is not perfect. Unfortunately, there is no constitutional autopilot that can 
be  written  into  law  and  will  then  produce  national  prosperity.  That  said,  a  sound  macroeconomic 
framework can prevent a lot of pain. This is important, because the temptation to do the wrong thing 
is clearly strong. This is evident from all the economic mistakes countries have made in history, and 
continue  to  make  today.  But  I  also  know  it  is  true  because  I  often  hear  people  in  South  Africa 
contemplating  these  temptations.  People  ask,  wouldn’t  it  be  worth  taking  big  risks,  having  more 
inflation, borrowing as much as we can get away with, if only we could get some growth and some 
jobs? They even say, in a highly unequal country like South Africa, wouldn’t it be politically safer to 
take macroeconomic risks to try and get poverty and unemployment lower? But this is wrong, for two 
reasons. 
First, this only seems attractive until you’ve actually tried it. Macroeconomic stability is like oxygen. 
You don’t miss it until you haven’t got it, and then it’s all you can think about. People who want to 
engineer a short term boom and ignore the long term costs won’t like it when the long-term shows 
up, which history suggest normally starts after about two years. If you don’t think inflation matters, 
go try some. Or ask all the Zimbabweans or Venezuelans who had to leave their countries when 
their  economies  collapsed.  Unorthodox  policies  have  totally  orthodox  consequences,  as  those 
people can confirm.  
Second,  countries  with difficult  social foundations  need to  be  more  careful  about macroeconomic 
stability, not more reckless. That’s because a macroeconomic crisis is an incredibly wrenching social 
experience, and you need a very strong society to get through one peacefully. When a country blows 
up its own macroeconomy, its policy options narrow, to the point where all the choices are bad ones. 
If you can get anyone to lend to you, it will be the IMF. One way or another, you will end up doing 
real and brutal austerity. What we have had in South Africa over the past few years isn’t anything 
like  this. We  have  interest  rates  close  to  all-time  lows  –  the  repo  rate  is  at  6.5%  currently  –  and 
government spending has been increasing every year, faster than inflation. Real austerity is having 
interest  rates  at  65%,  as  in  Argentina  at  present,  and  cutting  pensions  and  grants  and  firing 
government employees. We should avoid reckless economic policies unless we want to risk putting 
our society through that pain and stress. 
This brings me to end of my speech. In conclusion, I would like to leave you with four principles for 
confronting populist economic policies, drawn from the ideas I have discussed today. 
  First, rich countries don’t make rich people. If your development strategy is to return the wealth of 
the country to the people, you don’t have a development strategy. Real, lasting wealth is about know-
how, not natural resources. 
Second, if you hear someone urging stimulus and going for growth, ask how they plan on dealing 
with the macroeconomic constraints. What’s the plan for inflation? How are they going to meet the 
import bill to avoid a balance of payments crisis? If they don’t have a serious answer, they aren’t 
serious. If they do have a serious answer, expect it to include policies like inflation targeting, a floating 
exchange rate and measures for keeping the fiscus solvent. These things cannot be ignored. South 
Africa’s stimulus and recovery package does take these into account.  
 Third,  acute  challenges  of  inequality,  poverty  and  unemployment  are  not  reasons  to  gamble  on 
macroeconomic stability. South Africa’s social challenges mean we need to be extra careful about 
managing the system carefully so it doesn’t blow up – not that we need to run the system as hot as 
we can get it and hope for the best.  
Finally, don’t ignore populists completely. They are very good at tapping into social frustrations – in 
a way, they are uncannily good instruments for detecting where society is hurting most. They aren’t 
very  good  at  economics,  so  their  ideas  routinely  end  in  disaster,  but  that  doesn’t  mean  they  are 
altogether  foolish.  Rather,  they  are  a  reminder  to  better  informed,  more  responsible  people  that 
things have to change. We cannot just say the populist path will end in disaster. It will. But we still 
have to point out another path.  
You cannot just be against populism – you need to be for something too. We need to talk about how 
we are going to get back to real and sustainable growth in South Africa. 
  Thank you. 
  