       October  20,  2018 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
The Future of Money 
Speech at the 2018 Autumn Annual Meeting of   
the Japan Society of Monetary Economics 
Masayoshi Amamiya 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
（English translation based on the Japanese original） 
 I. Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor to  have this opportunity to deliver a speech at  the Japan Society of 
Monetary Economics. 
Today's  topic  is  "The  Future  of  Money."  Indeed,  this  topic  is  now  gaining  great 
attention  and  being  lively  discussed  among  various  entities,  due  to  on-going  IT 
innovation,  global  developments  of  various  cashless  payment  means  including  mobile 
payments, the emergence of crypto-assets and the idea of central bank digital currency. 
Money  is  the  core  of  financial  services  and  economic  society,  and  central  banks  were 
born to play a key role in the fundamental infrastructure regarding money. Accordingly, 
thinking  about  the  future  of  money  inevitably  makes  us  reconsider  the  future  of 
financial  services,  the  economy  and  central  banks.  Moreover,  as  we  can  see  with  the 
global  "data  revolution"  behind  the  recent  developments  of  cashless  payments,  the 
future of money is closely linked to how information and data will be used in economic 
society in the coming era. 
In  this  speech,  please  allow  me  to  use  the  word  "money"  as  a  general  term  covering 
various payment and settlement means, and which is not limited to central bank money 
and bank deposits.   
 II. The Function of Money 
Money and Credit 
Before going into the issues regarding the future of money,  I would like to touch upon 
the origin and fundamental function of money. 
Money  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  greatest  inventions  of  humans,  comparable  to 
"language"  or  "fire."  Money  enabled  people  to  exchange  goods  and  services  across 
space  and  over  time,  and  to  build  an  economic  society.  Indeed,  it  would  have  been 
extremely difficult for humans to  barter  goods or services  without using  money, since 
such direct exchanges can only be implemented by a "double coincidence of wants."   
Economics textbooks describe the three functions of money as "a measure of value," "a 
1 
 store of value," and "a medium of exchange," and credit is the foundation of all of them. 
Money  can  perform  these  functions  because  people  believe  that  all  other  people  will 
accept  money  in  the  future.  Humans  became  able  to  share  such  intangible  credit  with 
unknown others by building a "chain of trust," and with that built an economic society. 
Until now various materials such as sea-shells and pieces of metals had been used. The 
core value of money, however, does not lie in the utility of its materials. If the material 
of  money  itself  has  use  value,  it  would  be  consumed  without  being  circulated,  and 
would not function as money. Yap Island's famous stone money, known as Rai or Fei, 
was difficult to find any value in its use. Moreover, it was difficult to even carry around 
huge  stone  money.  Indeed,  Yap  Island's  people  found  value  in  the  stone  money  not  in 
the  utility  of  its  materials,  but  in  the  "information"  or  "story"  embedded  in  the  stone 
money.  By  looking  at  the  stone  money,  Yap  people  imagined  how  hard  it  had  been  to 
carve out and transport it. Yap people even found value in stone money which had sunk 
to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  as  the  ship  transporting  it  was  shipwrecked.  They  trusted  the 
story  of  the  hard  work  and  the  tragic  shipwreck,  and  traded  using  the  stone  money 
which they had never seen but believed to be lying at the bottom of the sea. This  case 
vividly illustrates that the functions of money lie in credit. 
Money and Information Processing 
From  the  perspective  of  information  processing,  money  has  transformed  the  value  of 
various  goods  and  services  with  "prices"  by  its  common  units,  and  enabled  price 
mechanisms to function effectively. 
Indeed, money is  indispensable to the concept  of "general  prices"  and  "inflation." The 
measure  of  value  in  a  barter  transaction  remains  to  be  a  relative  value  between 
individual goods and services, such as "1 kg of meat for 10 kg of rice." The invention of 
money  made  it  possible  to  denominate  all  the  goods  and  services  by  a  single  unit  of 
value, and aggregate the measured value of them in a standardized methodology. 
As such, money has made information processing regarding various economic activities 
significantly  more  efficient.  The  creation  of  money  was  definitely  one  of  the  main 
drivers that enabled humanity to build an economic society. The cases of hyperinflation 
in  recent  history  always  led  to  extreme  malfunctioning  of  the  economies,  because 
2 
 hyperinflation  destroyed  people's  "chain  of  trust"  and  price  mechanisms,  and  thereby 
made information processing through money extremely inefficient. 
However, if many different types and units of money circulate in the economy, people 
would need to assess the credibility of each issuer, determine whether they could accept 
it or not, and agree with each other on the exchange rates between multiple numbers of 
units at each transaction, accordingly the efficiency of information processing would be 
substantially  impaired.  Central  banks,  being  assigned  the  duty  of  issuing  banknotes  as 
the single issuer, were established to overcome such turmoil. 
The Establishment of Central Banks and "a Two-Tiered System" 
In order for central banks to obtain sufficient credibility to function as a single issuer of 
banknotes,  many  conditions  must  be  fulfilled,  such  as  establishing  an  institutional 
framework to make them sufficiently credible. Central banks therefore, were born after 
modern national states were established which is where these conditions were likely to 
be  met.  Indeed,  the  history  of  many  central  banks  is  less  than  200  years  old.  Some 
central banks, such as the Riksbank in Sweden and the Bank of England in the United 
Kingdom, were born in late 17th century. These central banks,  nevertheless, originally 
performed  the  functions  that  were  close  to  those  of  commercial  banks,  and  they  were 
only  gradually  transformed  into  modern  central  banks.  For  example,  the  Bank  of 
England,  which  was  born  in  1694,  was  exclusively  assigned  the  role  of  issuing 
banknotes by the Bank Charter Act in 1844, 174 years ago, and it became the model of 
modern central banks. 
From the perspective of the supply of money, the establishment of modern central banks 
has led to a two-tiered system, which consists of the central bank and commercial banks. 
In this system, the central bank exclusively supplies the public the central bank money 
or  base  money  (i.e.  banknotes  and  central  bank  deposits),  and  commercial  banks 
provide deposits through credit creation based on the base money. 
This  two-tiered  system  has  various  advantages  regarding  information  processing  and 
resource  allocation.  This  is  why  almost  all  countries  in  the  world  have  adopted  this 
system,  although  it  has  only  been  200  years  since  modern  central  banks  were 
established. As the central bank exclusively issues base money using a single sovereign 
3 
 unit,  people  no  longer  carry  the  burden  of  evaluating  and  converting  multiple  units  of 
currency.  At  the  same  time,  commercial  banks  contribute  to  efficient  allocation  of 
financial resources to the economy through their financial intermediation by private-led 
initiatives. Furthermore, as credit creation  by  commercial banks reflects funding needs 
and economic conditions, the supply of broad money can be flexibly adjusted to some 
extent. 
Commercial  banks'  credit  creation  and  maturity  transformation  could  sometimes 
become a risk to financial stability. Indeed, deposit insurance and central banks' lender 
of  last  resort  (LLR)  functions  are  needed  because  of  commercial  banks'  maturity 
transformation.  Some  in  academia  proposed  the  idea  of  "narrow  banking,"  which 
virtually  prohibits  commercial  banks'  credit  creation  and  maturity  transformation. 
Despite  these  arguments,  almost  all  countries  in  the  world  have  so  far  maintained  the 
above-mentioned two-tiered system. This fact seems to prove that the advantages of the 
two-tiered system are still greater than its disadvantages.   
 III. IT Innovation and Digitization of Payment Instruments 
Digitized Payment Instruments 
Under the two-tiered system, private entities, including banks, have developed a range 
of innovative payment instruments, incorporating the available technologies of the time. 
For example, credit cards and debit cards allow their users to make and settle payments 
by submitting instructions to transfer deposits held in banks. Card users therefore do not 
have  to  carry  around  large  amounts  of  cash.  Another  example  is  electronic  money. 
People can charge a certain amount in mediums of electronic money such as IC cards, 
and  thereby  avoid  making  small  cash  payments  every  day.  Electronic  money  has 
particularly developed in Japan. 
Furthermore,  digitized  payment  instruments  based  on  the  liabilities  of  non-banks  have 
developed  along  with  the  popularization  of  e-commerce.  A  typical  example  is  PayPal 
developed in the United States. 
4 
 The Global Expansion of Cashless Payments 
Today  with  rapid  IT  innovation,  cashless  payments,  especially  mobile  payments,  are 
growing on a global scale. I would like to point out two big changes behind this.   
First,  the  number  of  people  using  mobile  phones  or  smartphones  has  sky-rocketed 
recently. Since the birth of the iPhone in 2007, smartphones have rapidly spread across 
the globe in just a decade. According to an estimate by the World Bank Group, around 
two-thirds of the 1.7 billion unbanked adults in the world have access to mobile phones 
or  smartphones.  This  change  has  promoted  the  rapid  growth  of  mobile  payments, 
especially in emerging and developing economies. In some countries such as China, the 
share of mobile payments is greater than that of traditional means of retail settlements. 
A  mobile  payment  does  not  require  bricks  and  mortar  branches  or  ATMs  to  provide 
financial  services.  Instead  it  uses  digital  information  technology  to  reach  out  to 
emerging  and  developing  economies  and  provide  financial  services  globally  through 
leapfrogging  physical  infrastructure.  As  such,  digital  technologies  are  also  gathering 
much attention as a great instrument to promote "financial inclusion." 
The other change is the global "data revolution." Indeed "fintech" can be understood as 
a financial aspect of the on-going data revolution. People around the world are creating 
a  gigantic  amount  of  data  every  second  by  using  smartphones  for  SNS  posting, 
browsing websites and issuing location data through playing games in their daily lives. 
Some estimate that over 90 percent of the data produced in the history of humanity have 
been  created  in  the  last  two  years  alone.  Data  processing  capabilities  have  also 
improved  substantially.  The  importance  of  data  is  increasing  in  a  wide  range  of 
economic  activities  and  businesses,  and  it  is  becoming  a  new  asset  which  can  create 
added value. In such an environment, cashless payments are gathering great attention as 
platforms to collect and utilize a variety of data associated with economic transactions. 
Many  data-giant  companies  known  as  BigTechs,  which  have  grown  rapidly  in  recent 
years,  are  starting  to  provide  cashless  payment  services  with  a  view  to  collecting  and 
utilizing big-data. 
Crypto-Assets and Central Bank Digital Currencies 
Meanwhile,  we  have  also  witnessed  the  emergence  of  new  mediums,  that  is,  "virtual 
5 
 currencies" or "crypto-assets." 
After  the  birth  of  the  first  crypto-asset,  "bitcoin"  in  2009,  there  has  been  a  torrent  of 
newly  issued  crypto-assets.  Nowadays  there  seems  to  be  around  2,000  types  of 
crypto-assets.  Crypto-assets  have  the  following  common  characteristics:  they  use 
"distributed"  types  technologies  such  as  blockchain  and  distributed  ledger  technology 
(DLT),  they  do  not  have  a  specific  issuer,  and  they  are  not  denominated  in  sovereign 
currency units such as yen, dollar and euro. 
Recently,  there  are  proposals  in  academic  and  international  forums  that  central  banks 
should also utilize new technology and issue digital currencies which could be used as 
alternatives  to  banknotes.  Some  central  banks  are  now  seriously  considering  whether 
they  should  issue  such  digital  currencies.  For  example  Sweden,  where  the  use  of 
banknotes  is  rapidly  decreasing,  and  some  emerging  and  developing  countries,  where 
the  infrastructure  supporting  banknotes  has  not  yet  fully  developed,  are  now  making 
extensive studies about the issuance of central bank digital currencies. 
 IV. The Future of Money 
Now, the question arises as to how money will evolve in the future. In view of the rapid 
pace  of  technological  progress  and  the  drastic  change  in  the  environment  surrounding 
payments,  settlements,  financial  services  and  the  economy,  it  would  be  difficult  for 
anyone to predict how money will evolve in the future. Bearing such constraints in mind, 
I  dare  to  present  my  own  views  on  the  future  of  money  for  discussion,  and  I  will  be 
touching upon the fundamental nature and functions of money discussed in the previous 
sections. I would like to summarize my remarks into five key messages. 
Credit in Money and Crypto-Assets 
First,  it  seems  unlikely  that  crypto-assets,  without  a  particular  issuer  and  not  being 
denominated  in  sovereign  currency  units,  will  be  widely  used  for  payments  and 
settlements, as long as sovereign currencies maintain their credibility and utility. 
Whatever the forms future money takes, money continues to depend on people's credit, 
6 
 as in the case of Yap stone money. Building such credit will incur certain costs. In the 
case of Yap stone money, the costs were the efforts to carve out the stones and transport 
them  across  the  ocean  (sometimes  in  a  storm).  As  for  sovereign  currencies,  the 
institutional framework to ensure central bank independence, as well as the track record 
of credible policy conduct and operations, play key roles in maintaining the credibility 
of  central  banks  and  sovereign  currencies.  Once  people  lose  trust  in  the  central  bank, 
even sovereign currencies are not acceptable, as evidenced in the cases of hyperinflation. 
As  long  as  people's  trust  in  the  central  bank  is  firmly  maintained,  the  central  bank  is 
able to issue sovereign currencies for its liabilities at low marginal costs. 
To  make  crypto-assets  more  acceptable  for  payments  and  settlements  than  sovereign 
currencies, they need to compete with the trust that exists in central banks. However, to 
build  trust  from  scratch,  crypto-assets  need  to  bear  substantial  costs  associated  with 
mining,  which  requires  a  huge  amount  of  calculation  and  electricity.  It  would  not  be 
easy  for  crypto-assets  with  such  constraints  to  be  widely  used  for  daily  payments  and 
settlements. Indeed, crypto-assets are now mainly purchased as speculative investments 
and are rarely used for daily payments and settlements. 
However,  the  background  technologies  behind  crypto-assets,  such  as  blockchain  and 
DLT, may have great potential. If these technologies are successfully combined with the 
existing trust and credit of sovereign currencies, they could contribute to enhancing the 
efficiency  of  economic  transactions  and  payments.  In  this  regard,  many  central  banks 
have  embarked  on  research  and  experiments  of  these  new  technologies.  The  Bank  of 
Japan  has  also  engaged  in  the  joint  DLT-related  research  "Project  Stella"  with  the 
European Central Bank. 
Further Progress Toward a Cashless Society 
Second,  unlike  crypto-assets,  digital  payment  instruments  denominated  in  sovereign 
currency  units  will  continue  to  expand,  leading  to  the  further  promotion  of  "cashless" 
payments. 
As  any  payment  instrument,  including  cash,  has  strong  "network  externalities,"  it  is 
difficult to argue that new digital payment instruments will become widely used instead 
of  cash  in  the  very  near  future.  Especially  in  countries  where  cash  is  already  widely 
7 
 used, it would take time for digital payment tools to overwhelm cash and  to be widely 
used  instead.  Moreover,  especially  in  countries  with  low  interest  rates,  strong  demand 
for cash for the storing of value could persist, and consequently the outstanding amount 
of  cash  in  circulation  would  not  decrease  despite  the  growth  of  cashless  and  digitized 
payment instruments at the transaction level. 
While the pace of progress varies across countries and regions, the general trend of the 
growth of cashless and digitized payment instruments is expected to continue, due to the 
following reasons. 
First, as the core value of money rests with credit and not with its materials, money does 
not  have  to  take  the  form  of  physical  metal  or  paper.  In  the  Yap  Islands,  even  the 
invisible stone money deep down in the ocean functioned as money. It is therefore not 
surprising  to  find  that  digitalized  data  without  physical  form  can  function  as  money. 
Paper, which has been widely used as the material of money, is undoubtedly one of the 
greatest inventions of humanity, in a sense that it can "record," "convey," and "display" 
information  and  data  (hence  paper  has  been  widely  used  as  a  medium  of  money  and 
securities).  These  days  however,  information  and  data  can  now  be  recorded  and 
conveyed  through  digital  technologies,  and  displayed  on  smartphones  and  PC  screens 
more easily. 
Second,  along  with  technological  innovation  and  the  developments  of  digital  trade, 
cashless  payments  have  already  improved  people's  daily  lives  in  many  aspects.  For 
example,  the  spread  of  e-money  train  cards  and  ETC  cards  has  substantially  eased 
congestion at ticket vending machines and toll gates in Japan. There are various hurdles 
in  the  process  of  transitioning  from  cash  to  digital  payment  instruments.  Nonetheless, 
once  people  come  to  realize  the  benefits  of  digital  payment  instruments,  such  as 
eliminating the need to  queue for payments, people will never come back to cash, and 
the movement from cash toward digital payments can be accelerated. 
Third, data, as the "oil of the 21st century," is increasing in its importance, as new assets 
which  can  create  added  value,  digital  payment  instruments,  are  now  gaining  great 
attention also in this respect. Indeed, digital payment instruments are able to record and 
convey much more data and information than paper attached to economic transactions. 
In  this  regard,  the  data  revolution  itself  may  also  become  the  driving  force  for 
8 
 promoting cashless payments.     
Money and Data are Getting Closer 
Third, money and data will become more interlinked and closer to each other.   
Most  economic  transactions  are  accompanied  by  payments  and  settlements.  Digital 
payment instruments, unlike cash, can carry much more detailed data such as who buys 
what, when and where. Now many giant IT firms, known as BigTechs, have embarked 
on providing cashless payment services at low cost or sometimes for free. These firms 
tend to use payment services as a platform to collect big data, and utilize these data for a 
variety  of  businesses.  In  such  businesses,  users  provide  their  own  data,  instead  of 
paying monetary fees, in exchange for the use of these services. 
Likewise, firms which offer discounts to customers using e-commerce or loyalty cards, 
virtually purchase their data. Customers, who use these rewards to purchase a variety of 
goods and services, exchange their own data  for money-like purchasing power. As the 
development  of  cashless  payments  accelerates  the  accumulation  and  utilization  of 
customer data, money and data will be more and more interlinked and become closer to 
each other. 
The advancement of digital information technologies enables digital money to serve as a 
medium of exchange of information and data. Indeed, digital payment instruments can 
store  and  convey  various  types  of  information  and  data,  and  which  are  not  limited  to 
value  data.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  users  of  digital  payment  instruments,  how  to 
ensure  privacy  and  anonymity  is  becoming  a  big  challenge.  In  such  an  environment, 
money  in  the  future  will  be  required  to  strengthen  its  function  to  manage  or  limit  the 
data  and  information  attached  to  it,  reflecting  merchants'  and  customers'  requests.  For 
example,  firms  are  now  trying  to  collect  useful  customer  information  by  offering 
discounts  or  rewards  to  customers  who  newly  acquire  loyalty  cards,  or  provide 
additional  information  such  as  their  age,  hobbies  and  other  characteristics  in 
e-commerce  transactions.  As  such,  various  companies  will  continue  making  efforts  to 
collect customer information through providing economic incentives when payments or 
settlements are being made. On the other hand, customers will require digital payment 
instruments  to  protect  their  rights  and  privacy  by  separating  sensitive  data  or  limiting 
9 
 the use of it. 
Also, stronger links between money and data are expected to influence the economy and 
financial structures in various ways. 
For  example,  global  IT  innovation  and  data  revolution  have  enabled  firms  to  have  the 
opportunity  to  purchase  customer  data  through  offering  discounts  and  rewards.  Since 
these  discounts  and  rewards  are  usually  subtracted  from  the  sales  prices  of  goods  and 
services, IT innovation and data revolution might work as downward forces to general 
prices measured by traditional statistics in many countries. 
Also,  commercial  banks  have  so  far  been  providing  both  payment  services  and  credit 
intermediation services by making use of deposits as a core. On the other hand, IT firms 
and e-commerce  firms,  which  have newly  entered financial services, provide a variety 
of  services  including  financial  ones,  by  making  use  of  big  data  and  platforms  for 
collecting data as a core. As such, stronger links between money and data are expected 
to alter the structure for providing financial services. 
Firms and individuals, which are users of financial services, can be regarded as bundles 
of information and data. Firms provide their own information and data, regarding their 
strength and the risks and returns of their businesses, to financial institutions, and then 
receive  financial  services  such  as  loans.  As  such,  financial  services  are  inherently  a 
series  of  information  processing.  IT  innovation  will  encourage  financial  service 
providers  to  function  also  as  "information  banks"  or  "data  banks,"  which  keep 
customers' data and information, protect  it, and make effective use of it  to provide the 
best possible services to satisfy customers' needs. Also in this respect, financial service 
providers  are  more  required  to  take  appropriate  measures  for  protecting  data  security 
and privacy for customers. 
Moreover,  recently  more  and  more  non-bank  entities  have  entered  financial  services. 
They  often  provide  their  own  liabilities  as  payment  instruments.  Financial  authorities 
are  now  asked  to  consider  how  they  should  monitor  and  deal  with  these  non-bank 
entrants,  and  what  kind  of  frameworks  should  be  prepared  for  them.  This  issue  is 
ultimately linked to the issue of how to define banks. 
10 
 Rationales of Two-Tiered System 
Fourth, the two-tiered system consisting of the central bank and private entities such as 
commercial banks will be maintained. 
Regarding  the  debates  on  central  bank  digital  currencies,  some  in  academia  see  their 
benefits also in terms of overcoming the zero lower bound of nominal interest rates, in 
addition to their enhancing the efficiency of economic transactions and their payments. 
Moreover, some argue that if central bank digital currencies completely replace demand 
deposits issued by commercial banks, deposit insurance and central banks' lender of the 
last resort functions may become unnecessary, since commercial banks will not perform 
the  function  of  maturity  transformation  any  more.  They  believe  that  the  issuance  of 
central  bank  digital  currencies  would  contribute  to  financial  stability.  In  this  respect, 
such arguments are very similar to the idea of "narrow banking" proposed decades ago. 
Nonetheless,  there  remain  many  issues  to  be  assessed  before  evaluating  whether  the 
issuance  of  central  bank  digital  currencies  could  contribute  to  enhancing  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy and financial stability. 
Regarding the effectiveness of monetary policy, if we want to overcome the zero lower 
bound of nominal interest rates, we need to completely eliminate cash. Even if we lower 
the interest rates on central bank digital currencies below zero, the fund shift from them 
into cash will occur as long as cash is used. Nonetheless, if the central  bank abolishes 
cash,  which  is  widely  used,  it  would  make  payment  and  settlement  infrastructures 
inconvenient.  Moreover,  cash  has  its  own  resiliency  as  a  payment  instrument,  since  it 
does not rely on the electricity supply. Indeed, cash was effectively used even during the 
large-scale blackout on the island of Hokkaido which was caused by the earthquake in 
September.  Since  the  central  bank's  duty  is  to  contribute  to  economic  society  by 
providing efficient infrastructure for payments and settlements, abolition of cash at this 
stage is not an option. 
Also, the central bank needs to carefully consider the possible impacts of central bank 
digital  currencies  on  financial  stability  and  financial  intermediation,  especially  if  they 
could substitute for not only cash but also bank deposits. 
For example, if the central  bank issues its own digital  currencies to  the general  public 
11 
 and makes them accessible through mobile instruments, stresses in the banking system 
might  cause  a  "digital  bank  run,"  in  which  people  move  their  funds  from  deposits  to 
central  bank  digital  currencies.  In  cases  of  traditional  bank  runs,  depositors  physically 
come to bank branches to withdraw their deposits. On the other hand, in the situation of 
digital  bank  runs, since  people can easily move  their funds without even  go to  a bank 
branch, liquidity problems could accelerate very rapidly. 
Moreover, if central bank digital currencies replace not only cash but also bank deposits, 
they could squeeze banks' credit intermediation and influence the supply of credit to the 
economy. In other words, the issuance of central bank digital currencies could make the 
existing  two-tiered  system  into  a  single  tiered  system  if  they  replace  bank  deposits. 
Nonetheless, a single tiered system may have disadvantages, especially in terms of the 
allocation of financial resources to support economic growth led by private initiatives. 
We  may  need  to  consider  this  issue  also  from  the  viewpoint  of  effective  use  of 
information and data. In the current two-tiered system, the central bank does not obtain 
the detailed data attached to people's daily transactions. In other words, the use of those 
data  is  primarily  at  the  disposal  of  private  entities.  Meanwhile,  the  central  bank  can 
obtain  the  data  necessary  for  maintaining  overall  payment  and  settlement  stability 
through operating large-value payment systems. 
In  this  regard,  if  the  issuance  of  central  bank  digital  currencies  transforms  the  current 
two-tiered system into a single tiered system, it could also influence the private sector's 
use  of  information  and  data  attached  to  payments  and  settlements.  Also,  from  the 
perspective of efficient use of information and data related to payments and settlements, 
the  current  two-tiered  system  consisting  of  the  central  bank  and  private  entities  may 
have some advantages and rationales. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  does  not  have  a  plan  to  issue  its  own  digital  currency  that  can  be 
widely  used  for  payments  and  settlements  at  this  juncture.  Meanwhile,  there  are  some 
central  banks  which  are  seriously  considering  whether  they  should  issue  digital 
currencies. According to their official statements they see the potential value of central 
bank  digital  currencies  for  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  transactions  or  providing 
risk-free payment instruments to the general public. None of them aims to replace bank 
deposits with central bank digital currencies. Viewing also these developments, I think 
12 
 that  the  current  two-tiered  system,  which  is  based  on  the  central  bank  and  private 
entities,  is  likely  to  be  maintained  even  with  the  progress  of  digitization,  although  the 
characteristics of private entities may change. 
The Roles and Functions of Central Banks 
Fifth, even if digitization progresses, and cashless payments become more widely used, 
monetary  policy  and  the  lender  of  last  resort  functions  of  central  banks  are  likely  to 
remain effective. 
First, let me elaborate on the possible impacts of cashless payments on monetary policy. 
One  imaginable  case  is  that  crypto-assets,  which  are  not  denominated  by  sovereign 
currency  units,  become  widely  used  for  daily  payments  and  settlements  instead  of 
domestic sovereign currencies. Theoretically, this situation is similar to "dollarization," 
where  foreign  currencies  are  widely  used  instead  of  domestic  currencies,  and  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  could  be  substantially  impaired.  Nonetheless, 
crypto-assets  are  unlikely  to  be  widely  used  for  daily  payments  and  settlements,  as 
previously discussed. 
The  second  case  is  that  cashless  payment  instruments  are  issued  as  the  liabilities  of 
banks or they issue instructions to transfer bank deposits. In this case, the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy  may  not  be  impaired.  Indeed,  there  have  emerged  many  payment 
instruments  in  this  category  such  as  checks  and  credit  cards,  but  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy has not substantially been affected by them. 
The  third  case  is  that  non-banks,  which  are  different  from  incumbent  banks,  provide 
their  liabilities  denominated  in  sovereign  currency  units  as  payment  instruments  for 
wider use. Indeed, payment instruments in this category are growing rapidly worldwide, 
as shown in the cases of AliPay and WeChatPay in China and M-Pesa in Kenya. These 
instruments  are  similar  to  cases  in  which  non-bank  entities  provide  large-scale  netting 
services. 
There  are  several  new  issues  regarding  these  instruments.  For  example,  the  growth  of 
these  new  instruments  might  cause  fluctuations  in  velocity  of  monetary  aggregates, 
which  are  the  sum  of  banks'  liabilities  in  principle,  and  further  destabilize  the 
13 
 relationship  between  monetary  indicators  and  economic  activities.  Moreover,  financial 
authorities and central banks will be required to consider how they should monitor the 
activities  of  these  non-bank  entrants  in  payment  and  settlement  services  in  order  to 
maintain  payment,  settlement  and  financial  stability.  Nonetheless,  these  issues  are 
manageable,  at  least  theoretically,  through  the  review  and  refinement  of  statistics, 
institutional frameworks and the way to conduct monetary policy. 
In sum, the possible impacts of cashless payments on monetary policy are manageable, 
and monetary policy will remain effective in the era of digitization. 
Also  the  lender  of  the  last  resort  function  of  central  banks  will  still  be  needed  if  the 
current two-tiered system is maintained, and private entities continue playing the role of 
maturity transformation. Moreover, as long as domestic sovereign currencies are widely 
used  for  payments  and  settlements,  central  banks'  provision  of  sovereign  currencies 
would continue to be effective in alleviating liquidity problems. 
At the same time, due to the recent increase in new entrants, the players in payment and 
settlement  services  have  become  much  more  diversified  than  before.  In  these 
environments, central  banks are required to  consider how they should work  with them 
and  monitor  their  activities,  in  order  to  maintain  payment,  settlement  and  financial 
stability.   
In addition, more data are being accumulated by financial businesses, and various new 
instruments,  such  as  mobile  phones  and  tablets,  are  now  used  to  access  financial 
services. The tactics of  cyber-attacks are becoming increasingly sophisticated.  In these 
environments,  it  is  becoming  more  important  to  take  sufficient  measures  in  terms  of 
data  security  and  resiliency  against  cyber-attacks.  Central  banks  are  required  to  deal 
with these issues in an appropriate manner. 
 V. Closing Remarks 
This  is  my  current  "best  effort"  to  predict  the  future  of  money.  I  would  like  to 
summarize my prediction as follow. 
Although  it  is  very  unlikely  that  crypto-assets  are  widely  used  for  payments  and 
14 
 settlements, digitized cashless payment instruments will continue to grow and be more 
widely  used.  In  accordance  with  such  a  trend  of  digitizing  payments,  money  will  also 
play a greater role as a medium of information and data. The link between money and 
data  will  be  strengthened  further,  and  the  closer  link  between  them  will  influence  the 
structure  of  financial  services  and  the  economy.  Meanwhile,  the  two-tiered  system 
consisting  of  the  central  bank  and  private  entities  will  be  maintained,  and  monetary 
policy and the lender of last resort function of central banks will remain effective. 
Having  said  that,  I  have  one  important  reservation.  The  views  I  have  just  shared  with 
you will probably only last for two to 30 years at the most. There is no clear scientific 
basis  for  the  maximum  duration  of  30  years,  but  some  in  academia  argue  that  the 
"technological  singularity"  will  occur  in  2045,  which  is  27  years  later  from  now. 
Unfortunately,  I  do  not  have  sufficient  knowledge  to  determine  the  adequacy  of  this 
specific  figure.  What  I  would  like  to  emphasize  here  by  referring  to  this  figure  is  the 
astonishing speed of IT innovation. 
In  2008,  which  was  only  a  decade  ago,  we  were  in  the  midst  of  the  global  financial 
crisis. At that time neither crypto-assets nor blockchain existed. Devices like iPhone and 
Kindle, as well as businesses in the sharing economy, were still in their very early stages. 
Neither the "Like button" of Facebook nor Instagram had yet to appear. 
Since  then  the  number  of  smartphones  has  sky-rocketed.  During  this  decade  IT  firms 
such as "GAFA" of the United States and "BATJ" of China have grown very rapidly, are 
now  top  global  firms  in  terms  of  market  capitalization,  and  are  now  also  entering  the 
financial business. No one in 2008 could surely have expected these developments. Now, 
smartphone  apps,  digitized  books,  the  "Like  button"  of  Facebook  and  "instagramable" 
photos are deeply embedded in people's daily lives, but all of them have developed very 
rapidly  within this decade.  In view of these  developments, it would be safer to  expect 
that the changes in the coming 10 years would be more rapid and drastic than those that 
have occurred in the last 10 years. 
How  will  the  advances  of  quantum  computing  and  artificial  intelligence  change 
financial services, the economy and society in the future? To address this question, we 
need to continue our efforts to keep up with fast and on-going innovation and evolution. 
As a thought experiment, we can even imagine the case in which money will no longer 
15 
 be  needed  in  the  distant  future,  where  dramatic  progress  in  the  capacity  and  networks 
for processing information and data enable people to directly and instantly agree on the 
exchanges  of  needed  goods  and  services,  and  also  to  secure  the  execution  of  these 
agreements. 
Needless to say it may not be realistic to expect that money will disappear in the near 
future, since there remain many uncertainties in the economy. Meanwhile, in the history 
of  humanity,  money  has  always  played  a  key  role  in  information  processing  in  the 
economy. Now the on-going IT innovation and data revolution are influencing money in 
various ways. In view of these developments, we can be sure that the future of money is 
closely linked with the future of finance, and the utilization of information and data in 
the overall economy in the future. 
From  an  academic  perspective,  money,  finance  and  monetary  economics  are  now  at  a 
very  dynamic  stage.  Indeed,  many  new  phenomena  are  arising  from  complicated 
interactions  between  money,  finance,  information  technologies  and  data  revolution.  In 
these environments, I am very much interested in watching how research and studies on 
money and finance will develop in the coming years. 
The Bank of Japan, in close cooperation with academia, will continue to closely follow 
the development of money and finance, and take appropriate measures if necessarily. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 16 
