Olli Rehn: Monetary policy and bank supervision in Europe after the
last  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  challenges  for  the
future
Remarks by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, in the governors' panel discussion at
the Bank of Greece Economic History Conference "The birth of inter-war central banks: building
a new monetary order", Athens, 2 November 2018.
Dear colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
 I want to thank the organizers and particularly Governor Yannis Stournaras for the invitation to
this  conference.  I  also  want  to  congratulate  the  Bank  of  Greece  for  its  90th  anniversary.  The
Hellenic  central  bank  has  always  been  a  highly  professional  and  reliable  European  partner,
renowned for its expertise in economics and economic policy.
The theme of this conference – focused as it is on lessons from economic history – is indeed
quite  timely. As  some  of  the  more  intricate  macroeconomic  theorizing  of  the  last  decades  is
currently  subject  to  a  lot  of  criticism  and  even  reconsideration,  the  voice  of  historians  is  now
listened much more closely than some years ago – and rightly so. History may not repeat itself,
but it certainly rhymes, as the saying goes.
In this vein, a comparison of the latest international financial crisis with the Great Depression of
the 1930’s yields some important lessons.
The first is the paramount importance of international policy cooperation for sustainable growth
and employment. In the 1920s and 1930s, this cooperation failed, which paved the way for the
rise  of  totalitarian  regimes  and  global  economic  depression  with  large  human  and  societal
damage. Since the Second World War we have had international institutions that are – more or
less – capable of facilitating policy coordination in economic and monetary affairs, to manage
financial crises and, in effect, to protect growth and jobs. I refer to the IMF and GATT, now the
WTO,  in  particular.  These  institutions  and  their  capacity  to  act  should  be  protected  and
developed  even  today. As  I  see  it,  the  EU  now  has  a  heightened  responsibility  as  a  leading
guardian of the multilateral economic order.
A second lesson from the comparison of the economic crises is how important is the central
banks’ responsibility for maintaining price stability, to prevent deflation in crises and inflation in
boom periods. In the 1930’s, the prevention of deflation was not taken seriously enough, which
led  to  a  fatal  deflation  spiral  and  mass  unemployment  on  a  world  scale.  Without  denying  the
many problems at all, the performance of monetary policy was much better this time around.
It  terms  of  discharging  this  task,  European  monetary  policy  still  has  some  way  to  go.  The
European economy continues to need a degree of monetary policy support in order to converge
sustainably  to  a  state  of  price  stability.  The  task  is  complicated  by  uncertainties  regarding,  in
particular, the current level of the neutral rate of interest, and the strange behaviour of the Phillips
curve,  which  seems  to  have  flattened  in  a  way  that  makes  it  hard  to  gauge  the  appropriate
duration  of  our  monetary  support.  In  my  judgement,  these  uncertainties  speak  for  a  patient,
persistent  and  prudent  approach  to  monetary  policy  normalization,  as  President  Draghi  has
expressed our tactics.
This  is  a  balancing  act,  where  we  must  ensure  the  sustainable  converge  of  inflation  to  our
definition of price stability and simultaneously protecting the on-going recovery of employment
and the repair of balance sheets. Because of the nature of this balancing act, I would emphasize
the  data  dependency  of  the  appropriate  “normalization”  strategy  of  monetary  policy,  without
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
compromising our forward guidance which is a necessary commitment as long as the current
situation prevails.    
The third lesson is that the financial industry, banks and the other financial institutions are special
and have a huge impact on macroeconomic stability in the broad sense. Failures of banks can
be  extremely  disruptive  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  authorities  have  a  particular
obligation to preserve financial stability – both in a preventive way by regulation, and by taking
their  crisis  management  responsibility  seriously.  It  must  be  ensured  that  banks  and  other
financial  institutions  are  well  managed  so  that  under  stress  they  will  not  destabilize  the  real
economy.
The severity of the euro crisis galvanized the EU into action and, under pressure, some very
important achievements were made. I think that the unification of banking supervision under the
auspices of the ECB and the creation of the single resolution mechanism are enormous steps
forward.
But three essential things are still lacking from a well-balanced reconstruction of the euro area
financial  system.  They  are,  firstly,  a  common  deposit  insurance  scheme,  which  would  make
deposits equally safe across the euro area and would prevent the very dangerous cross-border
runs. Secondly, the promise of the EU council to create a credible liquidity backstop for the single
resolution fund; this needs to be followed through. Thirdly and finally, the legacy problems in the
form of non-performing assets in European banks must be treated more effectively than now.
This is a package which I believe could benefit not only the EMU as a whole but each member
state as well.       
I will conclude by stating the obvious: the reinforcing of the euro area is still work in progress.
While institutional reforms in banking and finance are important, they are only a means to an end.
Europe needs to work towards sustainable growth and job creation on many fronts. Putting the
real economy and reforms truly center-stage means that we should build the kind of Europe that
opens up our citizens’ opportunities to innovate and create new businesses and therefore jobs.
The reform of the euro area is closely linked to the overall future of Europe and its Union. The
enlightenment  values,  which  underpin  the  European  social  and  political  model,  are  now
challenged both politically and socially, both from inside and outside. Politically, a populist and
nationalist  agenda  is  tempting  to  many.  Socially,  the  values  of  tolerance,  civil  liberties  and
inclusion  are  increasingly  under  threat.  In  defending  these  values,  the  monetary  union  is  not
irrelevant. It is the core of the EU – and if the euro does not work, the EU is weakened.
Consequently, in this context, the task of reinforcing the EMU can be seen as a part of a broader
endeavour to strengthen Europe, not only in the financial but also in the economic and political
sphere. As Europeans, we should recognize the urgency of this effort, especially now as the role
of Europe as the standard-bearer for liberal democracy has become even more critical than it
may have been some years ago.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
