Cleviston Haynes: The right mix of solutions to our challenges is
within our reach
Welcome address  by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor  of the Central Bank of Barbados,  at 
the 33rd Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture, Bridgetown, 8 November 2018.
 It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  on  behalf  of  the  Management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Barbados to welcome all of you this evening to this 33  Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture, which is
being  held  during  the  50  Anniversary  of  the Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference.  Dr. Adlith
Brown, in whose name this series of lectures is dedicated, began her academic journey in 1968,
the same year the Regional Programme of Monetary Studies was established. Dr. Browne would
eventually become the fourth Coordinator of this Programme from 1980–1984.
rd
th
I did not know her personally, but there is an image in my memory of a slender, active lady at my
first  conference  back  in  1981.  Many  complimentary  remarks  about  her  contribution  to  the
profession and to this conference have been made by those who truly knew her. 
As this year marks the golden anniversary of the Annual Monetary Studies Conference, I am sure
that all of you will agree that she would have been justly proud of this momentous achievement.  
Tonight’s  lecture  will  be  delivered  by  the  noted  Caribbean  economist  Dr. Arnold  McIntyre.  Dr.
McIntyre has built-up over three decades of regional experience in macroeconomic policy and
economic  research  in  small  open  economies,  international  trade  policy  and  development  and
regional  integration,  as  well  as  working  with  the  regional  institutions,  namely  the  Caribbean
Development Bank, the Organisation of the Eastern Caribbean States Secretariat, the Caribbean
Export Development Agency, the Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery (now the Office of
Trade  Negotiations,  CARICOM  Secretariat)  and  the  Caribbean  Regional  Technical Assistance
Centre  (CARTAC).  His  current  post  is  Deputy  Division  Chief,  Caribbean  Division  1,  Western
Hemisphere Department, International Monetary Fund.
His training, exposure and academic acuity renders him more than adequately qualified to speak
authoritatively on Caribbean economies.
Although, knowing Arnold as I do, he may have been tempted to speak on our shared passion –
West  Indies  cricket.  In  several  of  our  conversations  about  economic  developments,  he  often
says,  “OK.  Let’s  now  discuss  what  is  truly  important.”  Tonight,  however,  it  is  Caribbean
economies that take centre stage.
The  focus  of  tonight’s  lecture  will  be  on  the  critical  issues  and  challenges  of  strengthening
economic growth and resilience in the Caribbean. This topic is relevant and timely, given the sub-
par performances of many Caribbean economies in the wake of global economic and financial
crisis. I am confident that finding the right mix of solutions to these challenges we face is within
our reach, notwithstanding the structural rigidities imposed on our economies associated with
small size, the high degree of openness to external trade and financial shocks, as well as the
destructive effects of natural disasters.
As  you  are  all  aware,  Barbados  is  currently  in  the  process  of  implementing  a  home-grown
programme of renewal and transformation supported by an Extended Fund Facility arrangement
with  the  IMF.  Therefore,  I  am  sure  we  will  be  listening  intently  not  only  to  the  nature  of  the
challenges, but also the viable opportunities and solutions that may be pursued to enhance our
economic circumstances.
In closing, it would be remiss of me if I didn’t mention that Sir Alister McIintyre, a distinguished
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
regional  academic,  development  economist  and  statesman  in  his  own  right,  was  the  first
Coordinator of the Regional Programme of Monetary Studies and fate would have it that his son
is  delivering  this  distinguished  lecture  in  the  50   year  of  that  ground  breaking  programme.  It
appears the stars are aligned for what is expected to be a stimulating and provocative lecture.
th
Therefore, without further ado, I invite our distinguished speaker Dr. Arnold McIntyre to address
you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
