Philip R Lane: The "Culture Report" and the macro financial outlook
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, before the
Joint Oireachtas (National Parliament) Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform,
and Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 4 October 2018.
Chairman, Committee members,
 I welcome the opportunity to meet with you this morning for our regular engagement. I am joined
today  by  Derville  Rowland,  Director  General  for  Financial  Conduct,  and  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy
Governor for Prudential Regulation.
I divide my introductory statement into two parts. In part A, I provide an update on the Tracker
Mortgage Examination and the outcome of our recent Report into the Behaviour and Culture of
Irish  Retail  Banks  (the  ‘Culture  Report’).  In  part  B,  I  turn  to  a  broad  overview  of  the  macro-
financial  outlook  and  outline  the  main  issues  and  risks  we  see  on  the  horizon,  including  non-
performing loans and Brexit.
The Culture Report
The Culture Report builds on our conviction that consumers are best protected if firms not only
comply  with  our  regulatory  requirements  but  also  invest  in  organisational  cultures  that  reward
consumer-focused behaviour and penalise harmful behaviour that seeks to skirt around the duty
to treat customers fairly.
Conduct and Tracker Mortgage Examination
The last decade has uncovered financial misconduct scandals in many countries. At home, the
mistreatment  by  banks  of  so  many  tracker  mortgage  customers  has  shown  that  financial
misconduct is a substantial risk to households and firms that rely on the domestic system for the
provision of financial services.
The Central Bank launched the Tracker Mortgage Examination – the largest, most complex and
significant  customer  protection  review  we  have  undertaken  to  date  –  to  ensure  that  lenders
identified  those  customers  harmed  by  this  mistreatment  and  paid  appropriate  redress  and
compensation.
As  of August  31st,  lenders  have  identified  circa  38,400  affected  customers  (including  cases
resolved pre-Examination following Central Bank intervention), and paid €580 million in redress
and compensation.
The redress and compensation phases of the Examination are now significantly advanced: 93
percent  of  affected  customer  accounts  already  identified  and  verified  had  received  offers  of
redress and compensation by August 31st. Four of the five main lenders are close to completing
their  redress  and  compensation  phases,  and  we  are  exerting  significant  pressure  on  the
remaining lender to finish its process. Our bank-by-bank supervisory review of conduct of the
Examination is also significantly advanced, but will not conclude until lenders complete remaining
work. We will continue to challenge them where necessary in order to confirm that all groups of
affected customers have been identified and included for redress and compensation.
Separately, enforcement investigations in respect of six lenders are in train.
As  we  have  said  before,  while  the  numbers  involved  give  a  sense  of  the  scale  of  the
Examination,  statistics  cannot  give  the  full  picture  of  the  detrimental,  and  in  some  cases,
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
devastating effect that the failures of lenders have had on customers, up to and including the loss
of homes and properties.
In that regard, the Examination exposed a clear lack of a consumer-centred culture in lenders.
For instance, we found some banks adopted a narrowly legalistic approach in conducting the
Examination rather than embracing a customer-focused perspective, with some offering initial
compensation  proposals  that  fell  well  short  of  our  expectations.  While  such  issues  were
addressed through the Examination, they raised serious questions about the current – and not
just historic – culture in the banks. This led in turn to our Culture Report that was published in
July.
Regulatory Focus on Culture – The Context
The Central Bank has evolved its supervisory approach in recent years to strengthen its focus on
conduct and cultural issues, and the Culture Report is another important step in that process.
In tandem with regulators globally, our immediate focus in the wake of the financial crisis was on
strengthening  the  solvency  and  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  enhancing  protections  for
consumers. The response addressed many of the weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory
frameworks that contributed to the depth of the crisis. Banks (and other financial institutions) are
now  required  to  hold  more  and  better  quality  capital,  to  be  more  sustainably  funded,  better
governed and more strongly equipped to deal with difficulties as they emerge. Firms are also
subject to macro financial measures, and both the system and individual firms are subject to
regular and more robust stress testing. They are subject to more extensive conduct regulation, in
order to protect consumers and investors.
However, the Central Bank shares the view of the international financial regulatory community
that  rules  and  regulations  should  be  reinforced  by  an  additional  focus  on  the  organisational
cultures  of  regulated  firms.  The  boards  and  the  senior  managers  of  regulated  firms  are
responsible  for  ensuring  that  organisational  cultures  are  focused  on  enhancing  consumer
protection and ensuring that risks are well understood and managed. Accordingly, how best to
achieve this has become an increasing area of focus for regulators.
From a supervisory perspective, the fundamental importance of risk management in achieving
the  necessary  shift  in  culture  has  been  recognised,  inter  alia,  by  our  recently  introduced
Consumer Protection Risk Assessment (‘CPRA’) Model, which is designed to assist supervisors
in assessing how risks to consumers are being identified and managed within firms.
In addition, the Central Bank has placed a specific focus on improving the levels of diversity at
senior levels in financial services firms. The aim is to improve decision-making with these firms,
reduce  the  risk  of  groupthink,  improve  risk  management,  and  in  doing  so,  ensure  that
organisations give sufficient priority to the experience and treatment of their customers.
Culture Report – Findings
In our view, effective organisational culture builds on a shared purpose and standards such as
professionalism, honesty, integrity and accountability to deliver fair outcomes for consumers –
and we expect to see it in all the firms that we regulate.
The Culture Report assessed the current culture at the five retail banks: AIB, Bank of Ireland,
permanent tsb, Ulster Bank and KBC. In summary, the report finds that banking system still falls
short in terms of embedding a truly consumer-focused culture.
To undertake the assessment, we worked with our counterparts in the Dutch central bank (the
‘DNB’), a recognised leader in the assessment of bank cultures. The review team was diverse in
composition,  comprising  conduct  and  prudential  supervisors,  governance  risk  experts  and
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
organisational  psychologists.  The  reviews  involved  both  on-site  and  off-site  assessments  in
order  to  ensure  the  necessary  breadth  and  depth.  We  undertook  1,400  hours  of  desk-based
review,  ran  more  than  500  surveys  and  conducted  75  interviews,  in  addition  to  observing
meetings and assessing decisions in each bank.
Our assessment focused on the executive committee of each bank, since the senior leadership
is responsible for driving the behaviour and culture in an organisation, under the direction of the
board.
An  effective  consumer-focused  organisational  culture  is  one  in  which  consumer  needs  are
adequately identified, discussed and taken into account.
The reviews identified that all banks have recently taken steps to reinforce the consideration of
the consumer interest in strategy, decision-making and procedures.
While all five banks are working to embed a consumer-focused organisational culture, some are
more  advanced  than  others.  Furthermore,  the  reviews  revealed  behavioural  patterns  in
leadership, strategic decision-making and outlook that could jeopardise the successful transition
to a consumer-focused culture.
As a result, it is clear that consumer-focused cultures in the banks remain under-developed and
will only be embedded successfully if banks work to overcome obstructive patterns of behaviour.
To  give  a  flavour  of  such  patterns,  we  saw  executives  continuing  to  operate  in  a  ‘firefighting’
mode  remnant  of  the  crisis.  We  saw  too  much  focus  on  short-term  and  legacy  issues,  with
insufficient attention paid to consumer interests. We discovered some reversion to ‘command
and control’ in leadership styles. Additionally, the banks have much more work to do to ensure
their  organisations  are  sufficiently  diverse  and  inclusive,  particularly  at  senior  level,  to  prevent
group-think, guard against over-confidence and promote internal challenge.
The Required Response
Following on from the report, we have required the board of each bank to: investigate and assess
potential  drivers  of  these  behaviours;  consider  what  its  executive  committee  needs  to  do  to
address  these  problems;  and  create  an  action  plan  to  address  the  concerns  identified  and
mitigate the associated risks.
We expect banks to be proactive in promoting an effective risk culture and have fully embedded
conduct risk frameworks in place.
Additionally,  banks  can  expect  further  changes  in  how  we  supervise  them  –  through  further
enhancement  of  our  supervisory  approach,  including  more  intrusive,  targeted  conduct
supervision of those firms that pose the greatest potential harm to consumers.
As the report makes clear, a failure to address these issues would damage banks in the long-
term. Accordingly, it is in their own interests for banks to address comprehensively the findings of
the report and, in doing so, continue working to embed a truly consumer-focused culture within
their organisations.
In seeking to do this, it is critical that banks understand the distinction between seeking people’s
trust and actually establishing trustworthiness through their culture. If banks wish to restore trust
in their organisations, it must be earned.
Culture is, of course, a matter for each individual bank in the first instance, and no two cultures
will be precisely the same. It is globally recognised that regulators cannot prescribe culture for
individual  firms.  However,  supervisors  can  monitor  and  assess  culture  within  firms,  and
intervene as required, in order to guard against conduct and prudential risk and ensure firms are
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
financially resilient, well managed and deliver fair outcomes for consumers.
Individual Accountability Framework
In  the  Culture  Report,  we  recommend  the  introduction  of  a  new  Individual  Accountability
Framework,  to  apply  to  banks  and  other  regulated  financial  services  providers.  Such  a
framework would go significantly beyond the current requirements for staff to be fit and proper,
would  set  conduct  standards  for  staff,  and  would  ensure  clearer  lines  of  accountability  within
firms.
The objective of these proposals is to act as a driver for positive behaviours and the recognition
of  responsibilities  of  individuals.  Many  regulated  firms  and  their  leaders  behave  ethically  and
honestly, and seek to drive effective cultures.
However, where that is not the case, these reforms will constrain the ability of senior executives
to escape accountability for wrongdoing. The reforms will require Oireachtas consideration and
approval, and we would welcome any questions you may have on our recommendations.
The Macro Financial Outlook
During economic upswings, it is vital to build up financial and fiscal buffers: easing policies during
downturns require corresponding restraint during expansion phases.
The Macroeconomic Cycle
Ireland is currently in a phase of strong economic performance, which is driving a broad-based
expansion  in  employment  and  an  increase  in  earnings.  Our  projections  for  the  labour  market
indicate that the economy is moving towards full employment, although some extra capacity is
possible through broader participation in the labour market. Importantly, recent growth has not
been fuelled by unsustainable increases in domestic credit or net financial inflows.
While the current environment is positive, there are clear downside risks to the economy at both
European and domestic levels. Ireland is especially exposed due to the legacy of high public and
private sector debt levels and the sensitivity of small and highly open economies to international
shocks.  An  unexpected  tightening  in  international  financial  conditions,  relative  to  the  benign
environment that has been in place for an extended period of time, could induce an international
slowdown  in  investment  and  consumption.  Shifts  in  international  trade  and  tax  regimes  could
adversely  affect  the  Irish  business  model,  while  a  disorderly  Brexit  would  pose  immediate
challenges for the Irish economy and financial system. As I stated in my pre-Budget letter, the
potential  adverse  impact  on  the  Irish  economy  and  Irish  financial  conditions  if  any  of  those
scenarios were realised calls for the accumulation of financial and fiscal buffers that would help
to limit the damage.
In relation to financial sector buffers, in line with our mandate, the Central Bank is working to
ensure that the capital positions of banks are sufficiently strong to withstand the losses that could
be triggered by a negative shock. In particular, we recently activated the counter-cyclical capital
buffer,  which  will  require  banks  to  maintain  an  extra  buffer  in  relation  to  Irish  exposures.  In  a
future cyclical downturn, this buffer can be released, which will help to avoid a damaging credit
squeeze.
In relation to fiscal buffers, the running of budget surpluses during strong economic conditions is
a pre-condition for the Government to be able to implement a stabilising, counter-cyclical fiscal
expansion in the event of a future downturn.
Housing
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Central  Bank  shares  the  consensus  analysis  that  a  substantial  expansion  in  supply  is
required  if  the  high  demand  to  own  and  rent  homes  is  to  be  satisfied.  The  limited  supply  of
housing in recent years has contributed to the increase in rents and house prices, in combination
with the positive demand factors such as rising employment, increasing earnings and supportive
monetary conditions.
Our framework of loan-to-value and loan-to-income rules in the mortgage market has helped to
avoid the amplification of pricing pressures in the housing market by restricting credit dynamics.
Furthermore, these mortgage measures are designed to enhance the resilience of banks and
borrowers to negative financial shocks by limiting over-lending by banks and over-borrowing by
households.
We  conduct  an  annual  review  of  the  calibration  of  these  measures  to  ensure  continued
effectiveness at meeting these objectives: the outcome of this review will be announced in late
November.
Non-Performing Loans
Ten years on from the onset of the crisis, and five years since their peak, non-performing loans
(NPLs) in Ireland are still a cause of considerable distress to borrowers and vulnerabilities in the
banking system.
Elevated levels of NPLs impinge on the capacity of both lenders and debtors to weather future
downturns. Reducing NPLs in a sustainable way that provides strong protections for borrowers
therefore remains a priority.
Considerable progress has been made. The approach taken by the Central Bank and other parts
of the State framework have ensured that the reduction in the level of non-performing mortgages
has  been  primarily  achieved  through  the  restructuring  of  loans.  The  Code  of  Conduct  on
Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), in particular, has played a critical role in ensuring that borrowers are
protected. To end-June this year, more than 116,000 principal-dwelling house (PDH) mortgage
accounts  have  been  restructured,  with  87  per  cent  meeting  the  terms  of  the  restructured
arrangement.  Overall,  the  number  of  arrears  cases  has  declined  for  nineteen  consecutive
quarters, while the number of long-term arrears cases has fallen for twelve consecutive quarters.
Notwithstanding this progress, it is a cause for concern that, of the remaining arrears cases, a
greater proportion are in the long-term arrears category. Of the 66,479 PDH accounts remaining
in arrears, 28,237 – or 42 percent – have very deep arrears, with arrears balances of more than
720  days  past  due.  It  is  important  to  stress,  in  this  regard,  that  engagement  by  borrowers  is
critical in order to avail of the statutory safeguards available through the CCMA and the Mortgage
Arrears Resolution Process (MARP).
To have a functioning secured lending market in Ireland, security must mean something when
borrowers default. Notwithstanding the extensive use of forbearance and restructuring, there will
continue to be cases where the lender will need to make alternative choices. The sale of NPL
portfolios is an option that has been employed by banks to this effect. The reduction in the size of
bank  balance  sheets,  particularly  through  holding  a  lower  stock  of  NPLs,  reduces  financial
stability risks in the event of a future downturn. In terms of national risk management, the transfer
of credit risk and funding risk to investment funds that buy loan portfolios constitutes a national
reduction in macro-financial risk, given that investors in these funds are primarily overseas.
It is critical to stress, however, that the sale of such portfolios does not affect statutory consumer
safeguards. The Central Bank applies itself equally to its dual mission of safeguarding stability
and  protecting  consumers.  Accordingly,  the  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  the
consumer protection framework governing mortgages continues to cover loans that are sold. In
particular, loan owners must use a regulated credit servicing firm to manage the loans and these
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
firms are subject to the same codes of conduct as banks and retail credit firms, including the
CCMA. In other words, the protections for the borrower travel with the loan.
Regulated  entities  must  comply  with  the  CCMA  as  a  matter  of  law.  The  CCMA  includes
requirements that arrangements are appropriate and sustainable for borrowers based on a full
assessment of individual circumstances. Regulated entities must make every reasonable effort
under the CCMA to agree an arrangement and repossession can be used only as a last resort.
As requested by the Minister for Finance, we are currently undertaking a review of the CCMA to
ensure it remains appropriate specifically in the context of loan sales. We expect to provide that
report to the Minister later this year.
Finally,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  Central  Bank  represents  one  part  of  the  wider  State
consumer protection and debt resolution framework. In addition to the CCMA and MARP, there
are other services and supports available to assist borrowers in mortgage arrears. These include
the national Mortgage Arrears Resolution Service (Abhaile), the Insolvency Service of Ireland, and
schemes such as the Mortgage to Rent scheme.
Brexit
Brexit will be negative for the Irish economy and financial system.
Financial stability risks are being closely monitored and addressed to the extent possible. A ‘hard
Brexit’ with no deal and no transition period would be disruptive, notwithstanding the work the
Central Bank is undertaking at a national and European level both to mitigate such risks and to
ensure Irish-resident financial firms are suitably prepared. Authorities are preparing for plausible
worst-case scenarios in order to safeguard stability in the event of a disorderly Brexit.
Supervisors across the EU continue to prepare for these challenges through a coordinated and
consistent approach. The Central Bank is working as part of the Single Supervisory Mechanism,
the Eurosystem and the European System of Financial Supervision to ensure consistent, shared
approaches to mitigate Brexit-related risks. Supervisory expectations have been developed and
communicated  to  firms  in  a  number  of  areas.  These  include:  booking  models;  internal
governance; risk management; and the design of internal risk models.
Preparedness and contingency planning on the part of firms is imperative. This holds for firms
that are already present in the EU27, as well as those that intend to move to the EU27 as a result
of Brexit. The transition period is not guaranteed and would only become a certainty if it were
reflected  in  a  signed  Withdrawal  Agreement.  We  at  the  Central  Bank,  in  line  with  other  EU
supervisors, are urging all firms to prepare for all plausible worst-case scenarios, including a no-
transition scenario.
Whilst we recognise the challenges that firms face when making preparations for Brexit, the only
way to minimise disruption is for firms and regulatory authorities to work together to consider and
take all necessary mitigating actions in a timely fashion.
Brexit is also driving an expansion in both the size and complexity of the internationally orientated
section of the Irish financial services sector: even under ‘soft’ Brexit scenarios, the UK and EU27
will constitute separate financial systems.
We have received more than 100 Brexit-related applications for authorisation, across a number
of  sectors.  These  include  applications  both  for  new  legal  entities  and  from  existing  entities
seeking  to  extend  their  current  authorisation.  The  applicants  intend  to  sell  directly  to  Irish
customers  or  sell  from  Ireland  into  the  European  Union.  The  potential  activities  range  from:
banks; investment firms; trading venues; electronic money institutions; commercial insurance;
and retail insurance.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our  approach  in  assessing  the  plans  of  existing  firms  and  new  authorisations  is  focused  on
ensuring  we  deliver  our  important  gatekeeper  and  supervisory  role  in  a  proactive,  predictable,
transparent and consistent way. While there has been some focus on potential attractiveness of
Ireland for firms choosing to relocate and on the numbers of firms coming to Ireland, the Bank’s
clear objective is to deliver financial stability through assertive risk-based supervision. We have
engaged effectively with our colleagues across the European ecosystem to ensure that we are
operating to, and influencing, the European norms of authorisation and supervision. In doing so,
we are mitigating the risks of regulatory arbitrage being a basis for firms’ relocation decisions.
 In summary, the Central Bank has a number of key objectives as we look towards 2019 and
beyond. In line with the fundamental regulatory overhaul since the crisis, we will continue to focus
on  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  so  that  it  is  better  able  to  withstand
external  shocks  and  future  crises.  We  will  seek  to  mitigate  the  risks  posed  to  the  economy,
financial system and consumers by Brexit. And, building on sustained work over the last decade,
we will seek to further strengthen our approach to financial conduct regulation, in order to protect
consumers and investors from a systemic perspective.
I hope the above has been useful in terms of the topics that the Committee wishes to discuss.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
