  Remarks by Ms Caroline Abel  
Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles   
Launching of the CBS Strategic Plan 2019-2023  
Monday 19 November 2018 
Venue: Central Bank of Seychelles 
 
 
Minister  for  Finance,  Trade,  Investment  and  Economic  Planning, 
Ambassador Maurice Loustau – Lalanne, 
Board Members, Management and Staff of CBS 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Good afternoon. 
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here today, to witness the launching 
of the new strategic plan of the Central Bank of Seychelles. 
 The 1st of December of this year will mark 40 years of the existence of a central 
banking institution in our island nation.  And today’s official launch of our new 
Strategic Plan for 2019 to 2023, highlights the progress made by the Bank, after 
standing decades of trials and triumphs. 
   We have indeed come a long way and witnessed significant evolution in the face 
of  various  challenges  both  locally  and  on  the  external  front,  while  striving  to 
remain  true  to  our  mandate,  which  is  to  contribute  towards  the  sustainable 
economic growth and development of Seychelles through monetary policy and 
maintenance of a sound financial system.  Guided by a solid set of objectives, we 
have been able to discharge our responsibilities and make significant strides in 
achieving  our  vision.  Over  the  past  few  years,  the  institution,  backed  by  its 
workforce, has worked tirelessly to maintain domestic price and financial system 
stability, strengthen the payment systems, enhance financial consumer protection, 
promote greater engagement with external stakeholders and continuously engage 
in capacity building.  And as we stand here today, we can rightly be proud of our 
progress. 
 Nevertheless,  we  are  not  going  to  be  complacent.  We  are  now  a  more  mature 
institution  and  we  need  to  take  on  more  responsibilities,  if  we  are  to  continue 
improving. This responsibility rests on all of us, from our Board, Management, 
staff, our stakeholders - from both the public and private sector - and the public 
in general. 
 This is our third strategic plan and it builds on the  successes of previous ones. 
The  Strategic  Plan  2019  to  2023  has  been  prepared  so  we  can  enhance 
achievements made thus far and to continue focusing on achieving our mandated 
goals and objectives. 
 The global economy is ever changing and we have to take a proactive stance, if 
we  are  to  keep  in  pace  with  the  developments.  We  need  to  ensure  that  our 
  monetary  policy  implementations  are  effective,  that  we  keep  abreast  with 
innovation, including the continuous modernization of our payment systems, and 
equally  important  is  to  ensure our  population  is  empowered to make  informed 
and sound financial decisions.  Planning for the future, although time-consuming, 
is  vital  to  ensuring  that  our  work  will  bring  ongoing  benefits  not  only  for  our 
organization, but for the country as a whole. 
 The strategic planning process has actively sought the input of everyone across 
the  Central  Bank,  cognizant  of  the  fact  that  an  effective  consultation  process 
establishes the solid foundation for the success of the plan over the coming years. 
We went through a bottom-up planning process, engaging in discussions with all 
staff of each division and unit to formulate departmental plans. The Board then 
joined  the  Management  team  to  set  expectations  and  provide  guidance  on  the 
formulation of this important document. 
 I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  team  involved  in  the 
consultations,  discussions  and  drafting  of  the  plan,  who  have  ensured  that  we 
have a document that serves as a roadmap that will guide our endeavours over the 
next five years.  
 On  this  note,  I  would  like  to  also  thank  and  convey  my  appreciation  to  Board 
Director, Professor William Ogara, and the Second Deputy Governor, Ms Jenifer 
Sullivan, for spearheading the process, ever since we embarked on the strategic 
review exercise over a year ago. 
   As Governor of the Central Bank, I look forward to the ongoing commitment and 
professionalism of all staff to continue upholding the credibility of our institution 
and to achieve the strategic objectives set out in the plan. I also look forward to 
building  on  the  good  collaboration  that  we  have  with  all  our  stakeholders 
represented here today, in taking this plan forward. 
 On this note, I am pleased to announce the official launch of the Strategic Plan 
2019 – 2023 of the Central Bank of Seychelles. 
 Thank You. 
  