François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Exiting  unconventional  monetary
policies in an uncertain world
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Euro 50 –
CF40 – CIGI Roundtable, Paris, 25 October 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Bienvenue à Paris. It is a pleasure to welcome you to the Banque de France for this conference
on “exiting unconventional monetary policies”. I must say that you have picked the right moment
for such a discussion: I have just returned from Frankfurt, where the Governing council of the
ECB  held  a  monetary  meeting.  Like  other  central  banks,  we  are  now  pursuing  a  course  of
gradual normalisation in an uncertain world. Allow me to begin by giving some highlights on our
domestic strategy for the euro area, before elaborating on the challenges that we collectively
face at the global level. 
 1.  Monetary policy in the euro area: where are we heading?
st
The  euro  area  is  experiencing  a broad-based economic expansion.  Q2  2018  was  the  21
successive quarter of economic growth. 9.2 million jobs have been created since 2013 and the
unemployment rate has fallen from 12.1% to 8.1%, although this figure is still too high. The output
gap was probably closed by the end of last year. Recent survey data on the growth outlook have
been somewhat weaker, although less so in France.
But our outlook for inflation is still firming. There are increasing signs that the labour market is
tightening and nominal wage growth is picking up: the Phillips curve is back to work, albeit a bit
later than expected; and this should pass through to core inflation which has been lagging behind
due to the temporary effects of the appreciating terms of trade and declining corporate margins.
We  at  the  Governing  Council  are  thus  increasingly  confident  in  the  sustained  adjustment  in
inflation  back  to  our  objective,  with  our  forecast  for  1.7%  in  each  of  2018,  2019  and  2020,
vindicating our unanimous decisions in June.
Alongside these positive developments, there are, however, growing uncertainties: protectionism
– I will come back to this later; rising oil prices; the US policy-mix – a warranted monetary policy
normalisation and a less warranted fiscal stimulus – with which many EMEs are struggling; and
equity  market  valuations,  that  may  appear  more  in  line  with  economic  fundamentals  and
corporates earnings after the latest correction, but remain volatile in part due to geopolitical risks
as well. Within Europe, Italian fiscal policy is under investor scrutiny. And there is Brexit, although
its direct effect on the euro area macroeconomy is likely to be small.
How  should  we,  as  euro  area  central  bankers,  respond  to  this  economic  environment?  By
combining two apparently contradictory aims: clarity and flexibility.
As regards clarity, our first duty as policymakers is to provide markers to help guide economic
actors  and  financial  markets  in  the  increasing  fog  of  uncertainties.  For  our  guidance  to  be
reliable, we need to be as clear, credible and consistent as possible. We cannot be clear like a
train timetable but more like how a captain sets a course and adapts to the wind and the waves.
So our sequence of steps for policy normalisation is very predictable:
First, we halved our net asset purchases to 15 billion this month and will very probably end
them in December;
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, we set down a guide post with our long-dated forward guidance: we will maintain
interest rates at current levels until at least through the summer of 2019;
And third, we will retain our stock of assets for as long as necessary to maintain favourable
liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation. Let me insist on this:
the end of the net asset purchases will not be the end of our monetary stimulus, far from it.
Moreover, this sequence doesn’t depend on the fiscal uncertainties that can appear in member
states. The Governing Council is clear about the fact that there is no fiscal dominance in the euro
area and no influence of any national fiscal policy on our common monetary policy.
In addition, our past consistency forges our credibility for the future. Since March 2016, we took
decisions on the evolution of our net asset purchases at intervals of approximately 9 months.
Each  time,  we  gave  visibility  over  the  next  twelve  months;  and  we  stuck  to  the  provisional
indicative timetable that we set without extending the time limits.
I turn now to flexibility. Our sequence is clear but the details of implementation are flexible and
state-dependent.  We  have  included  several  options,  such  as  the  precise  timing  of  the  first
increase in interest rates and the path of policy rates thereafter, or the pace of our reinvestments.
There is much speculation for instance on the future trajectory of our interest rates; but at this
stage,  I  don’t  see  any  value  in  trading  off  our  flexibility  tomorrow  against  more  clarity  today.
Beyond  that,  as  Mario  Draghi  mentioned  today,  the  question  of  TLTROs  will  need  to  be
considered.
1
2
In the face of uncertainty, one often hears reference to the celebrated Brainard  ‘conservatism
principle’ (as reinterpreted by Alan Blinder . This is not, as the impression is sometimes given, a
general  warning  to  move  cautiously  when  the  world  is  uncertain.  The  Brainard  ‘conservatism
principle’ says only that you should move cautiously if you are uncertain about the effect of your
policy instrument on your objective. But we should go beyond a static view of Brainard’s principle
(which focuses on one single small step): a dynamic view would include the time dimension and
consider how to manage and communicate a sequence of incremental steps.
2.  How can we collectively respond to global tensions?
There are increasing tensions in the global environment, starting with protectionism. Beyond the
direct trade policy shock resulting from a rise in import tariffs, two factors at least may amplify
the  decline  in  global  GDP:  a  decline  in  investment  demand  caused  by  firms’  falling  business
confidence due to uncertainty, and a rise in the financing cost of capital due to an increase in
actual or perceived borrower risk. According to Banque de France model estimates, the negative
impact on GDP of higher import tariffs is 2 to 3 times larger when we account for these indirect
channels. And this increase in uncertainty can produce front-loaded negative effects, even before
the  effective  implementation  of  protectionist  measures.  That  said,  protectionism  is  first  and
foremost  a  negative  supply-shock,  with  stagflationary  effects. As  such,  the  adverse  effects  of
protectionism cannot and should not be accommodated by monetary policy.
In spite of protectionist threats, the global economy continues to expand strongly, at 3.7% this
year.  We  have  used  a  lot  in  our  latest  IMF  meetings,  the  nice  French  word  «  plateau  »  to
describe global growth. But this “plateau” is not even: the strong acceleration in the US, even if it
is  temporary  and  fragile,  is  offset  by  a  moderation  elsewhere.  In  short,  we  are  moving  from
synchronized growth to economic divergence.
3
Consequently, countries might be suffering from the ongoing rise in US interest rates. Helene
Rey’s  famous  paper  in  2013   argued  that  floating  exchange  rates  are  not  sufficient  to  give
countries  independence  from  US  monetary  policy  if  they  have  an  open  capital  account.  If  the
trilemma  is  in  fact  a  dilemma,  then  countries  will  have  to  choose  between  monetary
independence and closing their capital accounts.
 
2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would question the generality or starkness of this dilemma. For example, I do think that the euro
area can determine its own course. Our asset purchase programme has contributed to a spread
exceeding 250 basis points between the 10 year yields in the US and in Germany. Likewise, the
gap between policy rates in the US and the euro-area is the widest since 2009. More technically,
an  estimated  Taylor  rule  for  the  euro  area  that  includes  US  monetary  policy  as  one  of  the
explanatory factors finds only a very modest co-movement between the two.
What  is  more,  countries  seem  to  be  arranged  along  a  continuum,  with  some  exhibiting  total
independence at one end to those with exchange rates pegged to the US dollar at the other. So
they don’t have to choose one of the two polar positions but can pick an intermediate position.
For  example,  putting  some  temporary  restrictions  on  cross-border  movement  of  capital  could
give some but not complete independence of monetary policy.
But is there more that central bankers can do to manage the tensions created by this economic
divergence?  Put  another  way,  how  do  we  reconcile  yet  another  paradoxical  couple:
independence and co-operation? In my view, we can and should act to enhance co-operation
between central banks, based on four building blocks:
Mutual predictability of policy making. We will achieve the closest to a co-operative solution if
we  avoid  large  surprises  between  policy  makers.  While  trade  multilateralism  is  at  risk,
monetary  and  financial  multilateralism  stands  fast,  fortunately.  This  means  continuing  to
favor dialogue and exchange of information among central banks, and to be very clear about
our  monetary  policy  regime  choice.  We  should  cherish  the  “great  convergence”  of  policy
objectives  of  the  last  fifteen  years.  Among  major  advanced  economies,  we  now  have
domestic inflation targeting around a 2% medium-term objective.
We are ruling out any currency war, as clearly stated in the unanimous communiqué of our
Bali  meeting  earlier  this  month:  “We  will  not  target  our  exchange  rates  for  competitive
purposes”.
On capital flow management (CFM) measures, we should support the ongoing reflections
undertaken  within  the  relevant  international  bodies  and  give  priority  to  practical  and
pragmatic solutions – IMF type – rather than dogmatic purity.
Last, as the G20 Eminent Persons Group (EPG), led by Tharman Shanmugaratnam, rightly
stressed in its recent report, we need to put in place a reliable Global Financial Safety Net
before  the  next  crisis  and  co-ordinate  its  different  layers.  This  should  include  an  “IMF
standing liquidity facility”. The global financial safety net is the best insurance we can get
against the risks created by economic divergence and it comes at a limited cost.
 Let me conclude by quoting Voltaire, who wrote in 1770: “Doubt is an uncomfortable condition,
but  certainty  is  a  ridiculous  one.”   In  these  times  of  doubt,  we  as  central  bankers  should  be
predictable  without  being  pre-committed  –  or,  as  Voltaire  would  say,  we  should  give  clarity
without pretending to certainty. This is precisely the objective of Governing Council of the ECB:
we  are  committed  to  give  as  much  clarity  as  possible;  clarity,  not  certainty,  which  is  neither
possible nor desirable. Thank you for your attention.
4
1
2
3
4
Brainard, W. (1967), « Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy » the American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No.
2, Papers and Proceedings of the Seventy-ninth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, May, pp.
411–425.
Blinder, A. (1999), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, the Lionel Robbins lectures, MIT Press, Cambridge
Massachusetts.
Rey, H. (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”,Jackson
Hole conference proceedings, Kansas City Fed.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
Letter to Frederick William, Prince of Prussia (28 November 1770).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
