Gent  Sejko:  Albanian  economic  progress  in  2018  and  banking
industry challenges for 2019
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the year-end function organised
by the Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 13 December 2018.
Honourable AAB Chairman,
Your Excellency, Minister of Finance and Economy,
 Dear senior representatives and colleagues from the banking system in Albania,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a special pleasure for me to participate and address this year-end function organised by the
Albanian Association of Banks. In my brief address, I would like to bring to your attention some
highlights of 2018, regarding the contribution of the banking sector and the financial system, as
well  as  some  milestones  set  for  2019.  Let  me  first  focus  on  the  overall  performance  of  the
Albanian economy.
The  overall  performance  of  the  Albanian  economy  in  2018  was  positive. Economic
recovery  is  tangible  across  all  of  its  dimensions.  The  pace  of  growth  picked  up,  employment
increased,  internal  and  external  balances  were  strengthened,  while  the  main  indicators  of  the
banking sector’s soundness have been improving.
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  the  sources  of  economic  growth  are  both  increasing  and  well
diversified.  From  the  aggregate  demand  perspective,  growth  in  the  exports  of  goods  and
services  and  in  the  domestic  consumption  and  investments  continued  to  underpin  economic
growth. In the meantime, from a sectorial perspective, economic activity expanded, reflecting a
more  notable  contribution  from  output  in  the  industry  sector  and  the  services  sector.  Lastly,
judging from the performance of macroeconomic factors, economic growth was also sustained
by  a  stimulating  financial  environment,  more  favourable  performance  of  our  trading  partners,
improved  balance  sheets,  and  a  more  optimistic  view  of  enterprises  and  households  on  the
outlook.
All the above reasons fuel the optimism on the perspective of economic growth in the next year
and  onward.  Albania  has  reached,  among  others,  an  important  milestone  on  its  path  to
development and integration: the expected opening of accession negotiations with the European
Union. These negotiations should surely be viewed as an important development anchor and an
additional guarantee for both domestic and foreign investors.
The year just ending confirmed the stability of the Albanian banking sector.  It  may  be
considered as a special year in view of important structural changes in the system, which are
expected to be finalised in the next year. Banking activity continued to expand, and the banking
sector continued to be well capitalised, liquid and profitable. The NPL ratio continued to improve,
hitting a new record low for the last eight years, standing at 12.89%, in September. Meanwhile,
deposit  growth  was  channelled  mostly  into  investments  in  securities  and  less  into  lending.
Certainly, the appreciation of the exchange rate and the lost loans write off provided a statistical
effect on the indicators of credit performance. Also, credit in the national currency continued to
prevail over the foreign currency credit.  Nonetheless, the overall level of credit to the economy is
still far from its potential and the opportunities for expanding lending abound.
I understand that this phenomenon entails a number of problems arising from sluggish demand
as  well  as  from  supply,  which  is  conditioned  by  tight  credit  standards.  Nonetheless,  beyond
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
structural factors, I reckon that we should react so as to prevent a stagnant credit situation in the
economy. For an economy that needs to develop rapidly, in order to converge with European
Union levels, the situation should be changed and the levels of crediting should be higher, though
still showing continual prudence concerning credit health.
Moreover, it is in your financial interest to address this phenomenon with determination, in order
to  put  it  on  track  for  a  sustainable  solution.  The  financial  resources  you  have  and  the
considerable  space  that  exists  for  financing  the  economy  show  that  financial  efficiency  in  the
banking activity could improve significantly.
The  financial  infrastructure  of  the  banking  sector  was  enhanced  further  in  2018.  The
Bank of Albania and the National Payment System Committee have implemented the national
strategy for enhancing the small value payment market and increasing the financial inclusion of
the population. The first results are promising and they will be followed by other steps by the
Bank of Albania and the banking sector, aimed at achieving a quantitative objective, that is, to see
the number of bank account holders doubled by 2022.
The financial inclusion of the population is one of the most important current priorities.
In 2018, the Bank of Albania and the banking sector paid particular attention to financial inclusion
and financial education. It is a proven fact now that improvement in financial inclusion contributes
to the improvement of the welfare of the population in a harmonised way. In this regard, we have
designed and implemented, among others, a series of educational projects that are adapted to
various segments of the population. Financial education, tailored publications with information on
bank products and services, as well as developments in the payment infrastructure and payment
services  are  concrete  steps  for  providing  more  opportunities  for  access  to  finance  by  all
segments of the population.
Dear representatives of the banking sector,
 The  outlook  for  Albania’s  development  remains  positive.  This  means  that  Albania  offers  the
banking  sector  solid  premises  for  business  and  growth.  But,  growth  and  development  do  not
materialise out of nothing. They reflect the commitment, the hard work and the dedication of all
actors.
Let me now identify three challenges that we need to tackle together.
First, the pace of economic growth needs to be supported by the dynamics of banking credit.
We have discussed relevant reasons and factors in many forums and analyses. Today, I would
like to emphasise that the economy may not grow sustainably without bank credit recovery. Your
role  becomes  crucial  in  this  regard.  The  banking  sector  safe-keeps  the  savings  of Albanian
citizens. It is its duty, however, to make such savings available to the growth and development of
Albania. There is no growth without credit, and without growth, savings lose their value.
Therefore, it is imperative that short-term goals do not prevent the adoption of a strategic and
longer-term vision. Banks should invest with a view to developing functions related to financial
consultancy services for their clients. They need to persistently seek to explore the market, to
identify potential clients – especially households and small enterprises – and, most importantly,
to  help  them  design  bankable  proposals  and  projects.  At  this  phase,  the  reduction  of
concentration and the diversification of credit portfolios are key elements. This requires that you
design and set up relevant structures, processes and products, and plan for adequate financial
resources.  In  parallel,  you  should  continuously  assess  the  surrounding  environment,  which
certainly  affects  your  activity.  Thus,  if  there  are  concrete  proposals  for  additional  legal
amendments or supervisory practices, I invite you to formulate and submit them officially to us
and other relevant public authorities, so that we can, together, make a swift decision on them. In
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
this  process,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  always  support  initiatives  that  lead  to  an  eventual
improvement of financial intermediation levels and safeguard the stability of the banking sector
and of the financial system. 
Second, our ambition should aim higher than the 3, 4 or 5% annual growth rate. The country
needs  more  optimism,  which  means  higher  growth  rates  and  more  structural  reforms.  The
banking sector has both a direct and an indirect role to play in this regard. The direct role pertains
to the further development of the banking market and products – in line with the best international
experiences.  Likewise,  insistent  work  on  further  reducing  the  level  of  non-performing  loans
should  not  be  neglected,  and  should  be  considered  by  all  of  us  as  a  key  factor  for  further
strengthening financial stability in Albania and providing an impetus to the economy.  On the other
hand, the indirect role consists in the cooperation that you may offer to many structural reforms
across all the sectors of the economy and in all the dimensions of the business setting. Your
expertise is not insignificant. It must assume an authoritative place in the economic debate.
Third, while  acclaiming  the  cooperation  between  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  Albanian
Association of Banks and commercial banks in educational activities, I would also like to iterate
the importance of financial education and financial inclusion. As financial services and products
develop and become more complicated, financial education helps users to understand and use
them;  it  also  helps  preventing  financial  crisis  and  contributes  to  the  financial  stability  and
economic  growth  of  a  country.  We  need  to  continue  to  be  key  promoters  in  designing  and
implementing financial education programmes. Financial education is an investment in the future
and it should be an integral part of our agendas, engaging more intensively in the implementation
of alternative and innovative methods for enhancing financial education among the public.
In  conclusion,  let  me  assure  you  once  again  that  you  will  find  in  the  Bank  of Albania  a  loyal,
supportive  and  serious  partner,  adherent  to  its  legal  mandate.  Our  decision-making  will  be
transparent and all our initiatives will be guided by a spirit of cooperation with the banking sector,
aiming at ensuring highest efficiency.
I wish you a successful and prosperous year for you and your families.
Thank you for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
