29th (EC)2 Conference on  
“Big Data Econometrics with Applications”
Opening remarks by Salvatore Rossi  
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
and President of the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance (IVASS)
Rome, 13 December 2018
It is my great pleasure to open this conference and to welcome all the speakers 
and  participants.  I  thank  the  organizers  for  designing  such  a  broad  and  topical 
programme.
With the increasing digitalization of the economy, data has become central in all 
the social sciences, and economics is no exception. In fact, some have talked about 
data being the new oil of today’s world. Econometrics and statistics are therefore 
becoming increasingly dependent on the availability of huge and heterogeneous 
datasets.
Only few years ago, the econometric profession was rather cautious about Big 
Data. Classical econometrics is based on theory and so relies on approaches that 
differ significantly from those of Big Data analytics. Econometricians have been 
taught for decades to start with a theory and then use data to prove or disprove it. 
Big Data and machine learning work in the opposite way: they allow one to 
look for patterns simply by processing huge amounts of data, regardless of possible 
underlying models. It’s important to note that most econometricians have expressed 
concern about the reliability and representativeness of such vast datasets.
However,  it’s  becoming  evident  that  Big  Data  could  disrupt  traditional 
econometrics.  Data  collection  from  social  media  has  produced  unprecedentedly 
large and complex, though unstructured, datasets on economic agents’ behaviour 
and interactions, and these are proving to be a goldmine of economic information.
We have been working with data analysis for many years, but it is now time to 
adapt our computational approaches to the new context. 
The Bank of Italy, because of its multiple functions, follows the evolution of 
Big Data very attentively. We will discuss this topic in a workshop organized with 
the Bank of International Settlements next 15 January here in Rome. 
In the last few years we have progressed along our learning curve. We have 
combined  skills  in  economics,  econometrics,  statistics  and  computer  science  to 
deal with the increasing volume, variety and velocity of data, which we have then 
used to estimate unemployment and inflation, to improve our economic forecasts, 
and to measure consumer and business sentiment.
We,  like  all  central  banks,  must  also  be  ready  to  cope  with  the  increasing 
public demand for access to granular data. As a data producer, the Bank of Italy has 
always strived to make its statistics available to the widest possible audience. We 
already share some data with researchers and other institutions, while protecting 
confidentiality. We have also started to design a Research Data Centre that will 
provide a safe haven for processing different kinds of microdata.
The number of possible applications of Big Data for central banks is huge, but 
some are critical.
The financial services sector handles sensitive information about individuals 
and firms. More data available in digital format makes life easier for analysts but 
increases exposure to security breaches.
As more services go online, data ubiquity, and hence data security, are proving 
to be a major challenge for both private companies and central banks. Financial 
operators are able to gather massive amounts of data about customers and visitors, 
which are then analysed to generate insights into buying behaviour. Some of this 
data is personal, and deserves to be protected against inappropriate use. That is a 
goal that the whole of society must pursue.
  Another  important  aspect  of  these  innovative  technologies  is  financial 
stability. New entries have arrived in the landscape of financial services; Fintech 
is a portmanteau word meaning any application of digital technologies to finance. 
Under this label we can include both giants of the digital world wanting to enter 
the financial market and tiny start-ups whose ambition is to erode the market power 
of the incumbents.
 All this is beneficial to competition and productivity in the financial industry, 
provided that the new entrants are properly supervised. Technology can help to 
innovate financial products and services currently provided by the traditional industry 
to the benefit of consumers. However, given all the well-known interconnections 
4
between operators in the market, the repercussions of technological innovation on 
the system’s stability are not clear. Public institutions like central banks and other 
financial supervisory authorities should examine the matter carefully.
The Bank of Italy has created an internal multidisciplinary team on Big Data, 
Machine  Learning  and  Artificial  Intelligence.  The  team  includes  economists, 
statisticians and computer scientists from different departments, working in close 
cooperation with the Information Technology Department. IVASS, the insurance 
supervisory authority working under the umbrella of the Bank of Italy, has opened 
a regulatory sandbox for some aspects of Fintech/Insurtech. 
To conclude, I am confident this conference will be an important occasion to 
review the most recent findings on Big Data econometrics and its application to 
national institutions, in particular central banks, and international organizations. 
Bringing together researchers from central banks and academia, as we do on this 
occasion, can provide a broad variety of contributions and perspectives. I am sure 
we will have two productive and interesting days.
5
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
