Olli  Rehn:  Don't  delay  Eurozone 
uncertainties
Remarks  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  distributed  in  writing  (as  he  was
unable  to  attend  the  event)  for  the  visit  of  the  EU  Heads  of  Mission  to  the  Bank  of  Finland,
Helsinki, 27 November 2018.
reform  due 
to  political
 Political fortunes in the member states of the European Union have been quite cyclical recently.
This  should  not  delay  the  euro  area  reform  that  is  necessary  to  reinforce  the  institutional
foundations of the single currency. While there is political turmoil in several member states, at
the same time there is broad support for the euro among citizens.
This  fact  is  highlighted  by  the  results  of Parlemeter2018,  the  latest  Eurobarometer  survey
measuring  public  attitudes  to  the  EU  across  the  member  states.  The  survey  contains  some
reassuring results. It indicates that the confidence of Europeans in the EU and in their common
currency  is  on  the  rise,  and  is  now  actually  higher  than  for  many  years:  77  per  cent  of  the
respondents residing in the euro area countries say that they are for the monetary union, the
highest figure recorded since 2004.
These results are welcome, but do not justify any complacency. A look at the time series reveals
that  the  support  for  European  unification  much  depends  on  the  economic  situation  of  the
citizens. The recent positive results are probably driven by the improved performance of the euro
area economy, in particular employment. The number of jobs in the Eurozone has now passed
the 2008 peak, and unemployment is still falling. Political risks, emanating from the continuing
global trade disputes, the badly scripted Brexit drama and the worries about the Italian budget,
have not derailed the European recovery, at least not yet.
Despite  the  major  reforms  in  2010–2014  to  reinforce  economic  governance  and  build  up  the
banking union, we should not close our eyes from the remaining systemic weaknesses of the
euro  area  architecture.  The  lessons  learnt  from  the  crisis  should  be  remembered,  and  the
breathing space created by the recovery as well as the support of the electorate should be used
for completing the institutional and functional reform of the monetary union.
It is clear that financial stability was grossly neglected when the Economic and Monetary Union
was created – it proved to be the ”neglected stepchild” of Maastricht, as has been said. The work
for correcting those mistakes is still incomplete.
It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  financial  stability  requires  a  banking  system  that  can  better
withstand  shocks;  the  severing  of  the  doom-loop  linkage  between  banks  and  sovereigns;  and
that we need efficient mechanisms to manage and resolve banking and sovereign debt crises
that may emerge even despite strong preventive action. And obviously we need macroeconomic
policies  that  limit  excessive  volatility  of  assets  prices  and  indebtedness.  There  is  a  danger,
however, that the political momentum to achieve these goals is weakened before the resilience
of the EMU is sufficiently improved.
Going forward, there are several reform initiatives on the table. In my view the manifesto of 14
French  and  German  economists,  published  earlier  this  year,  is  a  particularly  important
contribution.  It  outlines  a  functional  synthesis  of  the  core  principles  of  ”German”  economic
thinking, which calls for sound incentives and rules, and those of ”French” economic thinking,
which in turn emphasizes insurance and stabilization.
This kind of a genuinely European synthesis could pave the way to a solid stability union, where
the main responsibility for economic policies should rest with the member states, balanced with
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the insurance provided by common structures designed to safeguard financial stability.
The  most  urgent  task  is  the  finalization  of  the  banking  union.  The  Eurozone  Summit  in  June
decided on a credible backstop for the European Resolution Fund, so that any bank resolution
can be effectively managed with bail-in, without returning to the politically damaging bank bailouts
and turning again to taxpayers’ pockets. Moreover, ensuring financial stability calls for building a
common European Deposit Insurance Scheme, to prevent any bank runs that can be very costly
to the taxpayers and the society.
These remaining elements would require convincing measures of risk reduction parallel to the
founding of enhanced risk-sharing arrangements – possibly with some co-insurance features.
Legacy problems in the banking sector, especially the still large stock of non-performing loans in
some  countries,  should  be  worked  out  in  the  member  states,  without  shifting  them  to  the
Eurozone level.
Fiscal  rules  of  the  European  Union  are  there  to  support  macroeconomic  stability.  Several
reforms – of which I have first-hand experience – were agreed during the crisis, and they have
helped to stabilize public debt. Yet further reforms are necessary to put in place simpler, more
transparent  and  less  pro-cyclical  rules  to  safeguard  the  medium-term  sustainability  of  public
finances. Shifting the emphasis on medium-term expenditure rules, instead of structural deficits
(which are notoriously difficult to measure) seems to me a reasonable way forward.  
While institutional reform is important, Europe needs to work towards sustainable growth and job
creation on many fronts. Putting the real economy truly center-stage means that we should build
such Europe that opens up opportunities to innovate and create new businesses and thus jobs.
Better institutions to prevent and manage crises, including stabilization policies, are no substitute
for structural reforms that are needed to improve Europe’s productivity and real competitiveness.
Finally,  let’s  recall  that  Eurozone  reform  is  closely  linked  to  the  overall  future  of  Europe
and its Union. The values of the Enlightenment, which underpin the European social and political
model, are now challenged both politically and socially, both from the inside and the outside.
In this context the Eurozone reform is an essential element of a broader endeavor to strengthen
Europe.  As  Europeans,  we  should  recognize  the  urgency  of  this  effort,  especially  now  as
Europe’s duty as a standard-bearer for liberal democracy and multilateral international order has
become even more critical than it was still some years ago.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
