   The Foreign Exchange Constraint on Monetary Policy: The Bahamian Context 
 Remarks by 
Governor John A Rolle1 
 
Forum on the Past, Present and Future of Monetary and Fiscal Policy 
 
The Government and Policy Institute 
University of The Bahamas 
 
Harry C Moore Library 
20 November 2018. 
 
 Good evening. 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  bring  opening  remarks  for  this  distinguished  panel  of  past  Central  Bank 
Governors, all of whom I know and have worked with in some professional capacity.2 The common 
theme in these professional encounters was the appreciation of the scope for which monetary policy 
could  be  effective  in  either  a  Bahamian  or  Caribbean  setting;  what  contributed  to  making  policy 
effective; and the understanding of what constrained policy makers. 
In The Bahamas, we have a commitment to maintain a fixed exchange rate, at one to one against the 
US dollar.  The exchange rate peg is supported by the foreign reserves of the Central Bank.  By law, 
the currency liabilities of the Bank must be matched, at all times, by at least half the equivalent amount 
of foreign reserves.  At present, the Central Bank tries to target this coverage in the range of 90% to 
100%.  
                                                             
1 As prepared for delivery. 
2 I was introduced to Sir William Allen in 1988 in my first tour as a summer intern at the Central Bank of The 
Bahamas.  After Governor James Smith joined the Bank, I remember detailed comments he provided on a policy 
paper I wrote about options for monetary integration in the Caribbean.  Those comments are still relevant today.  
During Governor Julian Francis’ tenure, I interacted on many occasions with him about adjustments to exchange 
controls  and  monetary  policy,  including  policies  which  we  embraced  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the 
September  11,  2001,  terrorist  attacks  on  the  US.    In  fact,  Governor  Francis’  queries  motivated  most  of  my 
research on dollarisation and exchange control liberalisation. Governor Wendy Craigg and I have had the longest 
relationship of all, as she managed the Research Department, where my central bank career began, and we both 
attended  regional  conferences,  where  I  present  papers  on  the  pressing  monetary  policy  themes  facing  the 
Caribbean. 
For the peg to be credible, the Bank must always be able to supply foreign exchange at the guaranteed 
rate.  Under our exchange control regime, this guarantee is binding for all trade and current account 
transactions.3    To  ensure  credible  access  to  foreign  exchange,  the  Bank  seeks  to  balance  inflows, 
principally  from  export  earnings  against  demand  stimulated  outflows  from  income,  drawdown  of 
savings and domestic  credit financed activities.    The  lever  most  controlled  by the  Bank is domestic 
credit.  It is focused not on whether credit can stimulate economic activity, but on whether the credit 
generated can be sustained, given the first imperative to maintain adequate external reserves. 
In the aftermath of the September 2001 attack on the US, the optimal policy response was to freeze 
the  supply  of  domestic  credit,  and  to  tighten  lending  standards.  This  was  a  contractionary  or 
procyclical  policy  response.    When  the  foreign  exchange  inflows  improved,  credit  conditions  were 
relaxed,  also  in  a  procyclical  fashion.  This  episode  illustrated,  what  is  generally  the  case  for  The 
Bahamas-- protecting the value of the Bahamian Dollar, leaves little sustainable space for monetary 
policy to be growth enhancing in the short-run. 
Developments in the fiscal domain also affect the monetary policy space.  As a general proposition it 
is neither advisable nor sustainable in a fixed exchange rate regime to have unchecked deficit financing 
by the monetary authority.  These can perpetuate currency base expansion without the corresponding 
increase in foreign reserves that provide the coverage for the currency.4  Fiscal deficits can also can 
fuel increased imports, which drawdown on foreign reserves. 
At the instance of a deficit, monetary policy is therefore most concerned about how the deficits will 
be  financed.    The  reference  point  is  not  the  amount  of  domestic  liquidity  against  which  the 
government might borrow, but the amount of foreign exchange that the economy would require to 
pay for the resulting increase import demand.  Given this consideration, the Central Bank’s advice is 
usually that deficits must be financed with some amount of foreign borrowing.  Otherwise, the effect 
would be a drawdown in foreign reserves and undermined support for the currency.  
The preventive measure is limiting the occurrence of deficits, in the first instance, as often the choice 
of how the deficit will be financed is an artificial one. 
There is nevertheless a medium-term concern about the level of liquidity in the Bahamian financial 
system.    To  address  this,  the  Central  Bank’s  forward  looking  strategy  is  to  gradually  reduce  the 
outstanding lending to the government.  This would absorb any excess liquidity that had its origin in 
accumulated past central bank financing of the government.5 
Where does all of this leave us in terms of improving the environment for monetary policy, and making 
it less procyclical? 
First, over the medium and longer term, the economy has to do a better job of retaining the foreign 
exchange that it earns.  More bank  lending has to  reach  productive enterprise  activities that forge 
                                                             
3 Over time, liberalisation of the regime has also allowed greater access to foreign exchange to support more 
outlets for savings and investments that expand the country’s longer-range capacity to earn foreign currency.   
4 The other instances that drive expansion in the currency base are purchases of foreign exchange from public 
and private sector activities.  These produce a one to one growth in the reserves and create no tension in the 
external reserve backing for the domestic currency. 
5 Liquidity is also created when the private sector takes in more foreign exchange than it uses. Such excesses 
flow from commercial banks to the central bank. In the process, the central bank issues new domestic currency 
liabilities.    This  is  liquidity  that  can  support  demand  and  credit  growth  without  unease  about  the  cover  for 
exchange rate stability. 
linkages with tourism, provide competitive substitutes for imports and expand our export reach.  The 
Central  Bank’s  targeted  liberalisation  of  capital  controls,  has  also  allowed  such  categories  of 
enterprises direct access to financing in foreign exchange. We believe that it is a strategy that will bear 
fruit over the medium-term. 
Second, the fiscal policy framework has to bolster support for the currency.  Deficits, when they arise, 
should anchor public investments with positive net returns to economic growth, and have a positive 
foreign  exchange  bias.  More  fundamentally,  for  our  present  circumstances,  deficit  reduction  and 
eventually budget surpluses should become the order, with more public investments sustained from 
savings on recurrent expenditures.  Fiscal deficits and debt accumulation, can make it difficult to wean 
the  government  off  borrowing  from  the  monetary  authority;  and  in  parallel,  can  expand  foreign 
currency debt in ways that cannot be easily repaid.  
Better foreign exchange retention and confidence engendered by fiscal policy, takes us to the topic of 
exchange controls.  Some rebranding is necessary to make this more of a conversation about capital 
controls and capital flow management.  This is essentially where our policies are more binding, but 
where scope for very gradual targeted easing is possible over the medium-term. The limit though is to 
understand that liberalisation cannot happen out of a sequence of first having in place lasting policy 
and accountability frameworks that bolster investor confidence.  Where these frameworks are missing 
or  nascent,  liberalisation  must  impose  a  distinction  between  how  we  deal  with  direct  investments 
versus very liquid, and highly sensitive portfolio flows.  
If the end goal is to have fully liberalised capital flows, then we must accept that it would come with 
a floating Bahamian dollar.  If we float, we should want to avoid the exchange rate volatility that arises 
when investors become jittery. 
If  we  dollarise  to  eliminate  currency  volatility  concerns,  then  fiscal  and  private  sector  savings  will 
remain important to provide the buffers needed to make our economy resilient. Dollarisation will not 
provide a shortcut out of reforms that are needed--in terms of utilising less direct means of influencing 
credit  and  investment  behaviour  to  safeguard  financial  stability;  having  more  comprehensive  real-
time data on economic activity, including fiscal indicators; having a larger stock of foreign reserves to 
cushion against shocks, and the like.  Dollarisation would still be premised on a target value for the 
exchange rate at the time of the domestic currency’s abandonment.  This again raises the question of 
whether such an outcome could be achieved absent an effective capital flow management regime. 
There is much more than can be said on this topic and on other dimensions of the Central Bank’s role, 
beyond the protection of the currency. The Bank has been working tirelessly in all of those dimensions: 
strengthening  the  quality  of  our  regime  for  supervised  financial  institutions;  accelerating  the 
modernisation  of  the  domestic  payments  system;  laying  foundations  for  use  of  more  indirect 
monetary policy instruments and building more capacity for macro-prudential supervision.  We realise 
that it is only through lasting structural reforms that there would be progress in making the monetary 
and  financial  system  a  stable,  more  resilient  and  a  less  procyclical  component  of  our  growth  and 
development. 
It is fitting therefore to have this esteemed panel assembled, and I look forward to hearing their views 
on this important topic. 
