Peter  Praet:  Preserving  monetary  accommodation  in  times  of
normalisation
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
UBS Conference, London, 13 November 2018.
Introduction
 In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  have  successfully  fended  off
deflationary forces and supported economic recovery. They have brought down policy rates to
their  effective  lower  bound  and,  importantly,  have  made  use  of  a  broad  set  of  unconventional
monetary  policy  measures  in  pursuit  of  their  statutory  objectives.  In  advanced  economies,
monetary policies have borne fruit, but their monetary policy cycles clearly differ substantially,
reflecting  different  stages  of  recovery  and  degrees  of  progress  towards  achieving  the  central
bank’s statutory objectives.
In  a  number  of  places,  central  banks  have  already  tightened  their  monetary  policy  stance;
unconventional monetary policy measures have been wound down and policy rates have been
gradually  increased.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still
needed  to  support  the  further  build-up  of  inflationary  pressures  and  headline  inflation
developments over the medium term. At the meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council in June, we
gave an important signal  of  a  normalisation  of  our  policy  instruments.  We  communicated  our
anticipation that, subject to incoming data confirming our medium term inflation, we would end
net purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) after December 2018.
Today I would like to address our key challenge in normalising our monetary policy instruments:
preserving monetary accommodation while switching back from net asset purchases to forward
guidance on policy rates as the main instrument to steer our monetary policy stance. While this
rotation  proceeds,  we  will  continue  to  operate  with  multiple,  complementary  instruments,
including our policy of reinvesting the principal payment of securities purchased under the APP.
The state of the euro area economy
Following  more  than  five  years  of  increasingly  broad-based  economic  expansion  in  the  euro
area, recent developments point to some slowdown in the pace of economic growth. Preliminary
data show that euro area real GDP expanded by 1.7% year on year in the third quarter of 2018,
down from 2.2% in the second quarter. The slowdown in euro area economic growth since the
start of the year primarily reflects a loss of momentum in global activity, amid heightened policy
uncertainty and tighter financial conditions globally. While some retreat from the strong growth of
2017 was to be expected, it was compounded by short-term country-specific or sector-specific
factors in the euro area. Euro area domestic demand has however remained resilient. Sentiment
indicators,  despite  softening,  remain  in  expansionary  territory  and  are  still  above  long-term
averages  for  most  sectors  and  countries.  Moreover,  domestic  demand  continues  to  be
supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  a  robust  labour  market  and  steady  income  and
profit growth.
Since we announced a combination of unconventional measures to provide additional monetary
policy  accommodation  in  June  2014,  financial  conditions  have  eased  considerably.  Risk-free
interest  rates  have  shifted  downward  at  all  maturities  (Chart  1),  reducing  the  basis  used  by
banks and financial markets in determining financing conditions.
Chart 1: EONIA forward curves estimated from OIS (percentages per annum)
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: ECB.
Latest observation: 7 November 2018 for realised EONIA.
This has been reflected in the sizeable reduction in bank lending rates for euro area non-financial
corporations  (NFCs)  and  households  since  June  2014  –  which  have  declined  by  around  130
basis  points  and  110  basis  points,  respectively  –  as  well  as  in  the  decline  of  NFCs’  cost  of
market-based debt financing (Chart 2).
Chart 2: Nominal cost of debt financing for euro area NFCs by component (percentages
per annum)
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: Thomson Financial DataStream, Merrill Lynch, and ECB calculations.
Latest observation: September 2018.
NFCs  have  also  benefited  from  an  increasingly  diversified  financing  structure,  with  debt
securities  issuance  and  other  forms  of  market-based  financing  substituting  for  bank-based
1
sources of financing (Chart 3 and Chart 4).
Chart 3: Share of bank and non-bank financing in total non-financial corporation debt
financing in the euro area and the United States (outstanding amounts; percentages)
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: ECB, Federal Reserve System.
Notes: Bank financing includes only loans granted to NFCs by banks.
Latest observation: Q2 2018.
Chart 4: Total debt financing of NFCs and MFI loans to NFCs in the euro area (annual
changes in percent)
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: ECB.
Notes:  MFI  loans  to  NFCs  have  been  adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  and  cash
pooling. Total debt financing is based on quarterly data.
Latest observation: September 2018 for loans and Q2 2018 for total debt financing.
Such diversification in financing sources is good for the economy, making business investment
more resilient throughout business cycles.
Supported by this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand is expected to
remain  the  key  driver  of  euro  area  growth.  At  the  same  time,  uncertainties  related  to
protectionism,  financial  market  volatility  and  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  have  overall
weighed on business confidence and contributed to weaker external demand.
The underlying strength of the euro area economy continues to support our confidence that the
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed. Euro area annual HICP inflation has
continued to increase, and preliminary estimates put it at 2.2% in October 2018, mainly reflecting
higher energy price inflation. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is
likely to hover around current levels in coming months. While measures of underlying inflation
remain  generally  muted,  they  have  been  increasing  from  earlier  lows,  amid  high  levels  of
capacity utilisation and tightening labour markets. Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  increase  further  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the
ongoing economic expansion and rising wage growth.
Overall,  though,  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still  needed  to  support  the  build-up  of
domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over the medium term.
The rotation from the asset purchase programme to forward guidance on rates
At our June monetary policy meeting, we initiated a rotation of our policy instruments from the
asset purchase programme (APP) towards more conventional instruments of monetary policy –
the policy interest rates and forward guidance on their likely future evolution. We expressed our
anticipation  of  a  gradual  winding-down  of  net  asset  purchases,  subject  to  incoming  data
confirming our outlook for inflation. And we updated and enhanced our forward guidance on the
path for interest rates, which is now expressed in terms of the expectation that key ECB interest
rates will remain at their present levels “at least through the summer of 2019 and, in any case,
for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that
are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”. In addition, we re-affirmed our intention to
reinvest principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP “for an extended
period  of  time  after  the  end  of  our  net  asset  purchases  and,  in  any  case,  for  as  long  as
necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation”.
This combination of policy measures aimed to preserve the degree of monetary accommodation
that is necessary to ensure sustained convergence of inflation towards our aim. Clearly, the end
of net asset purchases is not tantamount to a withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation.
The rotation from net asset purchases towards our conventional monetary policy instruments,
together with our stock of assets and the related reinvestment policy, ensure an ample degree of
monetary policy accommodation. In particular, our enhanced rate forward guidance provides a
strong  anchor  for  policy  rate  expectations.  And  the  reinvestment  policy  will  ensure  that  the
favourable liquidity conditions and duration extraction associated with the large stock of assets
on our balance sheet remain in place for a long period and thereby exert downward pressures on
term premia.
The  mechanisms  underlying  the  combination  of  instruments  are  duration  extraction,  liquidity
creation and expectation management.
Starting  with  duration  extraction,  our  reinvestment  policy  implies  that  the  bonds  we  have
purchased will remain on our balance sheet for an extended period of time after the end of net
purchases. Asset  purchases  affect  interest  rates  mainly  through  the  market  price  of  duration
risk, which is the interest rate risk borne by price-sensitive investors holding long-term bonds. If
the  central  bank  wants  to  exert  downward  pressures  on  long-term  interest  rates,  then  it  can
absorb duration risk from the market by purchasing securities with a relatively longer maturity.
This frees up more risk-bearing capacity for investors, which they can re-allocate towards other
types  of  risk,  including  investment  in  productive  capacity.  For  a  central  bank  to  set  this
mechanism in motion, it needs to hold a large stock of long-dated securities embodying duration
risk.
As a result of our reinvestment policy, these stock effects will continue to substantially compress
term premia over time, even as our portfolio is set to remain constant.
Turning to liquidity creation, the roll-over of the portfolio resulting from our reinvestment policy will
also  continue  to  preserve  abundant  liquidity  over  the  coming  years.  In  the  absence  of
reinvestments,  and  assuming  that  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  are
repaid at maturity, the level of excess liquidity would decline significantly over the coming years
(Chart 5).
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart 5: Evolution of excess liquidity under no re-investment counterfactual hypothesis
(EUR billions)
Sources: ECB.
Notes: The projected excess liquidity is based on a comprehensive simulation of the evolution of
the Eurosystem balance sheet. For the APP it is assumed that net purchases are conducted at
a  monthly  pace  of  €15  billion  a  month  until  December  2018  and  then  ended.  In  addition,  the
projection is constructed under the counterfactual hypothesis that there will be no reinvestments
of APP maturing securities. For TLTROs it is assumed that repayments are made at the point of
maturity of the respective operations. Banknotes are assumed to continue to grow in line with
historical relationships. Other non-monetary policy assets and liabilities are held constant.
Latest observation: September 2018.
Our  reinvestment  policy  will  contribute  to  maintaining  favourable  liquidity  conditions  for  an
extended period of time, which helps anchor expectations regarding the evolution of very short-
term  interest  rates  at  the  deposit  facility  rate.  This,  together  with  forward  guidance  on  the
expected evolution of our policy interest rates, reduces rate uncertainty across maturities and
thus adds further to the compression of term premia brought about by the duration extraction
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
channel.
Of  course,  our  portfolio  –  even  if  kept  constant  –  will  tend  to  lose  duration  over  time,  as  the
securities held gradually mature. At some point, this passive loss of duration will begin to exert
increasing upward pressures on the term premia. Over time, this gradual process will tend to
steepen the yield curve, with our forward guidance on policy rates keeping the front end of the
curve well-anchored.
Our  enhanced  rate  forward  guidance  is  a  two-pronged  statement.  There  is  the  date-based
element that interest rates are expected to remain at their present levels “at least through the
summer  of  2019”.  In  addition,  there  is  a  state-contingent  element  that  rates  will  remain
unchanged  “in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”. The
date-based element ensures that our stimulus is not weakened by premature expectations of a
rate hike. The state-contingent element, in turn, ensures that the stance will continue to evolve
gradually and in a data-dependent manner.
The  anchoring  effect  of  our  enhanced  rate  guidance  was  highly  visible  in  June,  when  the
Governing  Council  announced  that  we  anticipated  a  gradual  winding-down  of  our  net  asset
purchases. Our enhanced forward guidance helped reduce the uncertainty around future short-
term  rates  (Chart  6  and  Chart  7).  Rate  expectations  aligned  immediately  to  the  Governing
Council’s rate guidance; no financial market volatility ensued.
Chart  6:  EONIA  forward  curves  around  June  2018  Governing  Council (percentage  per
annum)
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Chart  7:  Standard  deviation  of  three-month  EURIBOR  option-implied  density  in  one
year’s time (percent)
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: LIFFE and Bloomberg, ECB calculations.
Notes: Standard deviation of option-implied density of three-month EURIBOR in one year’s time.
Latest observation: 29 October 2018.
But  let  me  turn  to  the  next  steps  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  The  latest  surveys  of
market participants’ expectations regarding the most likely date for a first rate increase indicate
that  the  “at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019”  formulation  has  been  solidly  internalised  by
market participants.
Looking ahead, the rotation implies that our key policy rates and forward guidance about their
evolution will become an anchor for monetary policy as the end of our net asset purchases is
nearing. Our communication, and the rate path itself, will be calibrated to ensure that inflation
remains on a sustained adjustment path. Our policy will remain predictable, and we will proceed
at a gradual pace that is most appropriate for inflation convergence to consolidate. In addition, as
proved in the past, our forward guidance remains an effective firewall to insulate the euro area
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
from unwarranted tightening pressures originating elsewhere. This protection will be crucial to
ensure  that,  as  we  move  along  the  normalisation  path,  euro  area  financial  conditions  remain
consistent with continued progress towards our policy objective. Finally, our APP portfolio and
our  unconstrained  provision  of  liquidity  will  continue,  for  the  time  being,  to  provide  an
accommodative environment.
I would like to make a final comment on the effects of our APP portfolio on bond yields. While,
overall,  our  APP  portfolio  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  euro  area  long-term
interest rates, other factors such as economic fundamentals and the creditworthiness of issuers,
as assessed by market participants, remain key determinants of the levels of bond yields and
spreads.
Conclusion
The winding-down of net asset purchases is not tantamount to a withdrawal of monetary policy
accommodation.  The  ongoing  rotation  from  net  asset  purchases  towards  enhanced  forward
guidance  on  key  ECB  interest  rates  has  preserved  the  ample  degree  of  monetary  policy
accommodation that is necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Prudence, patience and persistence will continue to inform our policy decisions. The sizeable
stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated  reinvestments,  as  well  as  the  strong  anchor  for
policy rate expectations provided by our enhanced forward guidance, will continue to deliver the
monetary  policy  stimulus  necessary  for  inflation  convergence.  In  any  event,  all  our  policy
instruments  can  be  adjusted  to  ensure  that  inflation  moves  towards  our  aim  in  a  sustained
manner.
1
Non-MFI loans include debt securities issued indirectly via NFC financing subsidiaries resident in other euro
area countries.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
