BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks Delivered by Deputy Governor, Dr. Louis Kasekende,  
on behalf of 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda,  
  At the Closure of the Financial Inclusion Week Get-Together 
  Pearl of Africa Hotel, KAMPALA 
 October 31, 2018 
  0 
Representatives of our Development Partners, 
Our guest speaker, Ms Catherine Wines, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Good evening! 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  thanking  everyone  at  Financial  Sector  Deepening  Uganda 
for  the  work  they  have  done  to  organise  this  event  and  also  to  commend  our 
keynote speaker, Catherine Wines, for the very insightful speech that we have just 
heard.    
 In recent years, financial inclusion has become a very prominent component of the 
overall  agenda  for  financial  sector  development,  and  it  is  worth  taking  a  few 
moments to consider why this is the case. I believe that there are two main reasons 
for  the  priority  now  accorded  to  financial  inclusion  in  the  financial  development 
agenda.  
 The  first  pertains  to  the  need  to  make  economic  growth  more  inclusive;  i.e.  to 
ensure  that  growth  does  not  disproportionately  benefit  the  richest  sections  of 
society.  Traditionally,  the  customer  base  of  formal  financial  institutions,  such  as 
commercial banks and stock exchanges, has mainly consisted of larger companies 
and the better off sections of the population, which curtails the direct contribution 
of  financial  sector  development  to  inclusive  economic  growth.  A  more  inclusive 
financial  sector,  with  a  much  broader  customer  base,  might  be  better  placed  to 
contribute to inclusive economic growth.  
 1 
 The  second  reason  arises  from  the  structure  of  many  low  income  economies, 
including  that  of  Uganda.  Production  and  employment  in  these  economies  is 
dominated  by  informal  micro  and  household  enterprises.  These  types  of 
commercial enterprises have usually found it very difficult to access the financial 
services that they need from the formal financial system. For example, many micro 
and  household  enterprises  lack  the  collateral  which  is  demanded  by  commercial 
banks  to  secure  access  to  credit.  In  such  circumstances,  it  is  difficult  to  envisage 
how  inclusive  economic  growth  can  be  achieved  if  the  micro  and  household 
enterprise  sector,  in  which  at  least  three  quarters  of  the  labour  force  in  Uganda 
earns its living, is excluded from access to financial services.  
 The  major  constraint  to  financial  inclusion  is  the  difficulties  which  financial 
institutions face in delivering financial services to micro enterprises and other low 
income  customers  in  a  financially  viable  manner,  especially  in  the  rural  areas. 
However,  innovations  in  technology  and  the  business  models  of  financial 
institutions are reducing transactions costs and thus enabling financial institutions 
to serve a broader section of the population on a more financially sustainable basis. 
Two of these innovations are of particular importance for Uganda. 
 The  first  is  the use of  mobile phone  technology  to  deliver  financial services. The 
2018  Finscope  Uganda  Report  revealed  that  57  percent  of  adults  in  Uganda  use 
digital payments mechanisms such as mobile money and that 23 percent of adults 
in Uganda hold savings on their mobile phones. 
  2 
The second, more recent, innovation is the advent of agent banking, made possible 
by the amendments to the Financial Institutions Act in 2016. Commercial banks in 
Uganda  already  have  more  than  4,500  agents  operating  in  almost  6,400  outlets 
around the country. Agent banking is allowing banks to access customers at much 
lower  cost  than  is  the  case  in  the  traditional  banking  model,  as  the  bank  can 
achieve savings on their costs of bank branches and staff.     
 Probably the most difficult challenge pertaining to financial inclusion in Uganda is 
that of widening access to formal sector credit. The 2018 Finscope Uganda Report 
found that only 5 percent of adults access credit from a formal financial institution 
such as a commercial bank, SACCO or microfinance institution. Access to credit is 
a more challenging aspect of financial inclusion because financial institutions incur 
substantial costs related to credit risk, for example the costs of screening potential 
borrowers,  the  costs  of  monitoring  borrowers  and  recovering  loans,  and  where 
loans cannot be recovered, the costs of loan defaults.  
 About two decades ago, following the emergence and growth of the micro-finance 
industry  in  South  Asia,  it  appeared  that  the  micro-finance  business  model,  often 
utilising  group  lending  schemes,  offered  a  way  of  lending  to  small  borrowers 
which minimised default risks and this made this lending commercially viable. But 
that  business  model  has  been  much  less  successful  in  Africa  and  microfinance 
institutions  currently  provide  credit  to  only  about  two  percent  of  the  adult 
population in Uganda. 
  3 
If access to credit from formal financial institutions is to be widened in Uganda, to 
include more than a very small share of the population, these institutions will need 
to develop innovative business models and products which can mitigate the risks of 
loan defaults.  
 Finally,  I  want  to  remind  everyone  that  today  is  World  Savings  Day.  This  is  an 
annual event held around the world for the purpose of encouraging people to save 
and  may  I  add,  to  safely  keep  their  savings  in  formal  supervised  financial 
institutions.  There  is  a  very  clear  symbiosis  between  the  goals  of  financial 
inclusion and the promotion of savings. I hope that our efforts to enhance financial 
inclusion such as financial and entrepreneurial education, will contribute to raising 
the  savings  rate  in  Uganda,  which  in  turn  will  enable  more  resources  to  be 
mobilised for the investment needed for the development of our economy. 
 Thank you for listening.    
  4 
