  EUROMONEY  
GHANA/WEST AFRICAN CONFERENCE 
BUILDING A DIGITAL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL ECOSYSTEM  
  OPENING KEYNOTE ADDRESS BY 
DR. ERNEST ADDISON 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
 KEMPINSKI HOTEL, ACCRA  
SEPTEMBER 25, 2018 
    Your  Excellency,  Vice  President  of  the  Republic  of  Ghana  –  
Alhaji Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, 
Deputy Governors of the Bank of Ghana, 
Honourable Ministers of State and Members of Parliament, 
The Senior External Adviser, Euromoney Conference,   
Representatives of MasterCard Foundation, 
Stakeholders in the Digital Finance Sector, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, all protocols observed. 
 1. Good  morning  and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this 
Euromoney  Ghana/West  Africa  Conference  on  building  a 
digital business  and  financial  ecosystem.  Before  proceeding, 
let me thank Euromoney for choosing Accra as the host city 
for  this  conference  and  also  for  providing  such  a  unique 
platform  for  industry  experts,  regulators,  and  policymakers 
to  deliberate  on  digitization  of  business  and  the  financial 
ecosystem. I believe these deliberations would facilitate and 
enhance the pursuit of financial inclusion by countries across 
the West African sub-region.   
 2. Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  a  decade  ago  the  importance  and 
criticality  of  payment  systems  was  only  heard  and 
understood  exclusively  within  banking  circles.  Payment 
2 
  services  were  entirely  a  space  dominated  by  banks. 
Customers  of  banks  wrote  cheques  that  were  issued  by 
banks  and  deposited  into  accounts  held  by  banks.  Banks 
settled  payments  among  themselves  through  a  clearing 
arrangement.  Overtime 
images  of  cheques 
facilitated 
clearing;  Even  as  electronic  payment  developed,  debit  and 
credit  cards  were  initially  issued  by  banks.  Today,  this  has 
changed  considerably  and  the  payment  systems  space  has 
grown 
to 
include  many  non-bank  actors, 
including 
telecommunication  companies  and 
financial 
technology 
firms. Financial digitization has unleashed a wave of financial 
products  and  services  at  minimum  cost  to  meet  current 
business  demands  for  financial  services.  Digitisation  brings 
many  benefits  and  can  help  scale  up  access  to  financial 
services  through  mobile  phones,  POS  and  access  points 
through an agent network. 
 3. The  consumer-experience  with  financial  services  is  rapidly 
transforming  on  several  fronts.  For  instance,  across  West 
Africa, consumer interfaces are  gradually moving online and 
physical  notes  and  coins  are  being  replaced  by  electronic 
forms of payment.  
  3 
 4. Ladies and gentlemen, this inaugural Euromoney Conference 
is taking place at a time that Ghana is emerging  as a major 
player  in  financial  inclusion  and  digitisation  of  the  banking 
system in West Africa. The World Bank Global Findex report 
released  in  April  2018  revealed  that  the  share  of  adults 
owning  bank  accounts  in  Ghana  increased  to  58  percent  in 
2017  compared  with  the  Sub-Saharan  Africa  average  of  43 
percent,  and  up  from  41  percent  in  2014  driven  mainly  by 
innovations in the digital finance space.  
 5. More  recently,  Ghana’s  payment  system  has  witnessed 
significant  changes  on  account  of  the  growing  role  of 
Financial  Technology  Firms 
(FinTechs)  and  payment 
innovations.  A  recent  survey  conducted  by  the  Bank  shows 
that  there  are  71  FinTechs  providing  both  front-  and  back-
end services to Ghana’s banking sector. These developments 
are broadly in line with the country’s  developmental agenda 
of  formalising  economic  activities  through  digitisation  to 
enhance growth prospects.  
 6. To  further  drive  the  transformation  of  financial  systems, 
partnerships  between  financial  institutions  and  FinTechs 
have  enhanced  the  provision  of  digital  payment  products  in 
 4 
 response  to  consumer  demand.  The  development  can  also 
be attributed to the on-going efforts by the Bank to promote 
digital  payments  as  an  alternative  to  cash  transactions  with 
emphasis on speed, convenience and efficiency. 
 7. Digitisation  affects  the  way  financial  markets  operate. 
Financial  Market  infrastructure  including  securities  and 
settlement  systems, 
trade 
repositories,  card  payment 
networks,  clearing  and  settlement  of  funds  involves  many 
players  such  as  gateways  processors,  payment  aggregators 
and  merchants  that  are  not  subject  to  licensing  by  Central 
Banks.  The  central  Banks  must  have  a  clear  vision  on  the 
framework that will drive the process including the setting up 
of infrastructure that could reach a wider segment including 
the  rural  areas.  The  framework  must  also  be  interoperable 
and  ensure  competition  among  the  operators.  It  must  also 
include  an  appropriate 
financial  consumer  protection 
framework  to  engender  public  confidence.  Regulators  are 
therefore  challenged  to  define  their  role  in  a  constantly 
evolving dynamic environment.  
 8. In  response  to  that,  the  Bank  has  recently  reviewed, 
amended,  and  consolidated  the  existing  payment  systems 
 5 
 regulatory framework. The  new  draft  Payment  Systems  and 
Services Bill 2017, which has been approved by Cabinet and 
being  prepared  for  consideration  by  Parliament  unifies 
previous  laws  and  guidelines  relating  to  payment  services 
and  e-money  operations  and  sets  the  norms  and  standards 
and regularize actors in the payment system space.  
 9. Broadly, the new Bill  is expected to open up Ghana’s digital 
finance space to promote financial inclusion and help reduce 
poverty.  Among  others,  the  new  Bill  seeks  to  promote 
innovation  in  the  design  of  payment  products  and  services, 
provide  guidelines  to  FinTech  operations  and  engender 
competition in the e-money business. The Bill has also been 
expanded to include provisions for cyber security regulations 
and  strict  adherence  to  ICT  standards  and  payment  service 
providers to the Data Protection Act 2012 (Act 843) would be 
required of all market players.  
 10.  Currently  in  Ghana,  the  range  of  payment  service 
providers  has  expanded  to  include  mobile  money  operators 
and  FinTechs.  These  agencies  work  closely  with  the  major 
financial  institutions  to  develop  innovative  and  affordable 
products for unbanked customers. The various products and 
 6 
 services  on  offer 
include  online  payment  platforms, 
Unstructured  Supplementary  Service  Data  (USSD)  services, 
mobile banking services, Quick Response (QR) codes, money 
transfer services, deployment of Point of Sale (POS) devices, 
transfers  of  inward  remittances  into  mobile  wallets  and 
agency banking.  
 11.  An  important  channel  for  delivering  financial  services  to 
the underserved segments of the population at an affordable 
cost is through the agent network which has grown by some 
297  percent  since  2015.  To  further  deepen  activities  of  the 
agent network,  
   The Bank is developing a digital  Agent Registry in 
collaboration  with  the  financial  services  industry  to 
enhance  the  identification  and  oversight  of  these 
agents.  The  new  registry  will  interconnect  with 
Ghana’s  digital  address  system  to  provide  unique 
identification  for  agents  and  facilitate  real-time 
monitoring  and  tracking  of  agents.  Furthermore,  the 
Registry  will 
facilitate  customers’  access 
to  a 
preferred  agent  point  by  mapping  agent  locations 
 7 
   and  also  inform  stakeholders  if  agents  violate 
regulatory and prudential requirements. 
   The  Bank  also  promoted  the  payment  of  interest 
on  e-money  float  balances  held  by  banks  to 
further  scale  up  mobile  money  service  usage  and 
promote financial inclusion.  
  The Bank in collaboration with stakeholders has  also 
prepared  Cyber  Security  Regulations  for  the 
financial sector which will be launched next month to 
address cyber security challenges in a digital financial 
landscape.  
12.  As  part  of  the  Bank’s  policy  to  transform  the  financial 
ecosystem, 
the 
first 
phase 
of  mobile  money 
interoperability  project  was  implemented  in  May  2018. 
Under  the  project,  disparate  mobile  money  platforms  were 
linked  through  the  central  switch  to  facilitate  funds  transfer 
across  mobile  money  networks.  The 
integration  with 
interbank  payment  systems  infrastructure  is  expected  to 
create  an 
integrated  and 
interoperable  digital 
retail 
payments  ecosystem  which  will  facilitate  seamless  funds 
 8 
 transfer  across  payment  systems  to  promote  financial 
inclusion. 
 13.  These  developments  in  the  Ghanaian  payments  system 
landscape  have  not  only  increased  security,  affordability, 
convenience  and  efficiency  in  digital  financial  services,  but 
have  also  worked  to  promote  financial  inclusion  among  the 
country’s financially underserved populations.  
 14.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  building  a  digital  business  and 
financial  ecosystem  requires  a  strong  and  resilient  financial 
sector.  It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Bank  has,  in 
recent times, instituted several policy measures including the 
new  capital  requirement  regime, 
introduction  of  new 
corporate  governance  guidelines, 
fit  and  proper 
test 
directives  as  well  as  transitioning  to  Basel  II  and  III 
regulatory  framework  to  foster  an  enduring  financial  sector 
which supports the country’s economic growth agenda. 
 15.  In  concluding,  let  me  say  that  building  a  digital  business 
and financial ecosystem requires a robust financial sector. To 
keep pace with innovation therefore, the Bank of Ghana will 
continue  to  strengthen  the  oversight  and  regulatory  regime 
 9 
 to  support  developments  in  the  payment  and  settlement 
systems.  This would  ensure  safety,  reliability,  efficiency  and 
confidence  in  digital  financial  transactions  to  support  the 
growth agenda of the government.  
 16.  Thank you. 
 10 
