   
Governor      
Title 
Date 
Event 
Venue 
 
   
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
: Governor SBP’s Address to the Launching Ceremony of AAOIFI Shariah Standards – Urdu Version 
: December 12, 2018 
: Launching Ceremony of AAOIFI Shariah Standards – Urdu Version 
: Marriott Hotel Karachi. 
 -  Shaikh Ebrahim Bin Khalifa Al Khalifa, Chairman, Accounting and Auditing Organization for 
Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI)  
-  Mufti Taqi Usmani, Chairman Shariah Board, AAOIFI 
-  Distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen 
  Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning!  
  I feel honored to be here on this important occasion of  launch of Urdu version of AAOIFI’s 
Shariah  Standards.  We  are  all  aware  that  national  language  is  an  important  ingredient  of 
any culture and most effective mode of communication in a country. With this in perspective, 
translation  of  global  standards  into  our  national  language  is  an  important  milestone,  as  it 
would  remove  language  barriers  to  understand  Shariah  Standards.  I  believe  this  Urdu 
version of the Shariah Standards will be instrumental in improving awareness about Islamic 
finance  especially  amongst  the  Shariah  scholars,  academia  and  practitioners  of  Islamic 
finance.  The  scholars  and  all  other  experts  involved  in  this  project  deserve  great 
appreciation for their commendable role.  
 As  we  are  all  aware,  Islamic  Finance  Industry  is  relatively  new  to  the  Global  Financial 
Landscape.  Events  like  these  are  important  not  only  for  dissemination  and  awareness  but 
also reinforce the emerging significance of fast growing Islamic Finance.  
  Page 1 of 6 
Ladies & Gentlemen! 
 Islamic banking started initially as a niche market for the faith sensitive clientele and 
is  now  increasingly  becoming  an  integral  component  of  global  financial  system. 
Islamic  finance  industry  has  grown  at  a  fast  pace.  The  development  of  Islamic 
banking industry especially beyond Muslim jurisdictions is a recognition of its viability 
as  a  competitive  alternate  to  the  conventional  banking.  According  to  Financial 
Stability  Report  2018  issued  by  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  its  asset 
base has grown by 8.3 percent to surpass US$ 2 trillion mark. With expanding scope 
and size of Islamic finance, and emerging global challenges, it is gaining importance 
from  financial  stability  perspective.  Inherent  strengths  of  being  asset  backed  and 
prohibition  on  speculative  activities  in  Islamic  finance  lead  to  better  resilience  of 
Islamic banking institutions against excessive risks. However, these strengths alone 
may  not  be  sufficient  to  immunize  the  Islamic  finance  from  risks  associated  with 
deficiencies in due diligence, inadequate buffers, lack of transparency and weak risk 
management  practices.  The  well  thought  out  international  standards  issued  by  the 
global  standard  setting  bodies  like  AAOIFI  and  IFSB  facilitate  in  managing  the 
challenges facing the Islamic finance and harmonizing the industry practices. 
   Against  the  backdrop  of  growth  of  Islamic  banking  globally,  our  domestic  industry  is  also 
demonstrating quite impressive headway. The industry has posted a healthy annual growth 
of over 20 percent  during the last five years. The market  share of Islamic banking industry 
stands at 13.6 percent in terms of banking assets and 14.7 percent in total deposits. Islamic 
banking industry has expanded its network to over 2700 branches in 111 districts across the 
country. 
   Given  the  potential  of  Islamic  finance  to  support  broad  based  economic  growth  and  our 
constitutional  obligation  to  make  available  Islamic  financial  services  in  the  country,  Islamic 
banking has remained a priority area for State Bank of Pakistan (SBP).  
  I  feel  pride  in  sharing  that  the  sound  foundations  of  legal  and  regulatory  environment  laid 
down  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  played  a  key  role  in  sustained  high  growth  of 
Islamic banking in the country. Our Shariah compliance environment is considered amongst 
 Page 2 of 6 
the  best  in  the  world.  It  encompasses  a  comprehensive  Shariah  Governance  framework 
consisting of establishment of Shariah Board, Shariah compliance department and Shariah 
internal audit in Islamic banking institutions supported with Shariah external audits and SBP 
regular  inspections.  Let  me  also  apprise  you  that  SBP  regularly  reviews  the  regulatory 
framework to make sure that it is aligned with international standards and best practices and 
at the same time caters to the evolving needs of the industry. 
   State  Bank  of  Pakistan  also  believes  that  growth  and  development  of  other  elements  of 
Islamic  finance  ecosystem  i.e.  capital  markets,  mutual  funds  and  takaful,  is  essential  not 
only  for  Islamic  banking  industry  but  also  for the  overall  growth  and  development  of  the 
country.  In  this  regard,  SBP  regularly  collaborates  with  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan (SECP), the capital market’s regulator, to promote Islamic finance. 
We  appreciate  and  acknowledge  key  steps  taken  by  SECP  in  last  few  years  including 
establishment  of  Islamic  Finance  Department,  introduction  of  all  share  Islamic  Index, 
issuance  of  Takaful  rules  and  Sukuk  guidelines.  We  believe  that  these  measures  shall 
facilitate the diversity and outreach of the Islamic finance. 
 Ladies & Gentlemen! 
  At  this  stage,  let  me  highlight  few  potential  risks  and  challenges  that  Islamic  banking 
industry  need  to  address  for  its  sustainability  and  stability.  Effective  liquidity  management 
has  been  the  key  challenge  of  Islamic  banking  industry.  This  issue  has  gained  more 
prominence  owing  to  factors  like  dearth  of  Shariah  compliant  investment  opportunities, 
limited availability of Shariah compliant money market instruments and absence of Shariah 
compliant  SBP  standing  facility.  In  Pakistan,  sovereign  sukuk  being  issued  since  2008 
provide the key liquidity management avenue to the domestic industry, however, demand for 
such  instruments  far  surpasses  their  supply.  Being  cognizant  of  this  challenge,  SBP,  in 
consultation with industry is working to develop alternate solutions for liquidity management 
for Islamic banking industry. 
   The inherent advantage of Islamic financial industry to fund projects on equity participation 
and  profit  sharing  basis  enables  it  to  cater  to  the  huge,  unmet  demands  of  underserved 
sectors  such  as  agriculture  and  SMEs.  However,  like  conventional  industry,  Islamic  banks 
are  also  not  effectively  serving  these  sectors.  KAP  (Knowledge,  Attitude  and  Practices  of 
 Page 3 of 6 
Islamic  Banking  in  Pakistan)  survey  based  study  of  SBP,  also  indicates  these  areas  as 
potential  growth  avenues  for  Islamic  banking  industry.  SBP  is  persuading  the  industry  to 
capitalize on its innate strengths to cater to the needs of these underserved sectors.  
   Housing  finance  is  another  attractive  avenue  for  Islamic  banks.    Increased  focus  of 
incumbent government on this sector provides Islamic Banks an opportunity to diversify their 
asset  portfolio.  I  am  confident  that  present  conducive  environment  provides  opportunity  to 
Islamic  banking  industry  to  tap  potential  in  low  income  housing  through  Diminishing 
Musharaka  instruments.  This  would  also  pave  the  way  towards  the  ultimate  objective  of 
Islamic finance. i.e. Maqasid-e- Shariah.  
   Another  major  issue  restraining  Islamic  banking  from  realizing  its  true  potential  is  lack  of 
qualified and trained Islamic bankers. To tackle this issue, SBP  is not only offering training 
courses  on  its  own  and  through  its  training  subsidiary-National  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Finance  (NIBAF),  but  is  also  supporting  industry  in  such  initiatives.  We  have  also 
collaborated  and  sponsored  three  Centers  of  Excellence  in  Islamic  Finance  Education 
(CEIFEs)  at  well  renowned  educational  institutions-  IBA  Karachi,  LUMS  Lahore,  and  IM 
Sciences  Peshawar.  These  institutions  are  fully  operational  and  they  are  providing  regular 
supply  of  trained  human  resource  as  well  as  conducting  training  programs  for  enhancing 
capacity of the existing human resource of the industry. 
   Another important challenge for the Islamic finance industry, as identified in the KAP study, 
is  lack  of  awareness  among  masses  on  demand  side.  As  such  a  robust  awareness 
campaign  about  Islamic  banking  is  necessary  for  promoting  Islamic  banking.  SBP  is 
focusing  on  addressing  this  challenge  through  multipronged  strategy;  it  is  conducting 
various mass awareness programs and focused group discussions all over the country and 
supporting  the  industry  and  other related  stakeholders for  such  initiatives.  However,  this  is 
one area in which Islamic banks have also to play a far more proactive role. 
 Ladies & Gentlemen! 
  As I mentioned earlier, standardization in Islamic finance is essential for addressing various 
issues  facing  the  Islamic  finance  in  addition  to  promote  disclosure,  transparency  and 
integration  into  global  financial  system.  I  think  the  rapid  growth  of  Islamic  banking  and 
 Page 4 of 6 
finance  requires  further  strengthening  of  its  financial  infrastructure.  This  will  augment  the 
ongoing efforts to bring the infrastructure of Islamic financial industry up to the international 
standards. The alignment of Islamic finance industry with the global best practices would not 
only  help  supervisors  in  their  tasks  but  will  also  foster  the  integration  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions into the international financial community. 
 I would like to highlight here the commendable role AAOIFI has played in development and 
promotion  of  Shariah,  accounting  and  governance  standards  to  facilitate  the  growth  of 
Islamic  financial  services  industry.  AAOIFI  has  also  been  instrumental  in  enhancing 
awareness  of  Islamic  banking  and  finance  globally  through  knowledge  sharing  and 
organizing capacity building programs, workshops, conferences, and seminars. Considering 
the  constant  changing  dynamics  in  financial  sphere,  AAOIFI  also  reviews  and  updates  its 
standards 
to  keep 
them  relevant.  AAOIFI’s  enhanced  coordination  with  relevant 
stakeholders  and  increased  collaborative  efforts  help  Islamic  financial  services  industry  to 
grow on sound footings.  
  The AAOIFI role in capacity building through offering Shariah based certifications in the area 
of  Auditing,  Accounting  and  advisory  services  is  laudable.  Such  certifications  provide  the 
much needed qualified resources for effective implementation of the Shariah standards. 
  SBP has long standing association with AAOIFI. As a member of the AAOIFI’s Board of 
Trustee, State Bank contributes in the overall oversight and supervision of its operations. 
Our officials participate as both speakers and participants in different knowledge sharing 
and capacity building initiatives. So far SBP has adopted 6 of the AAOIFI’s standards while 
another 8 to 10 standards are in the final stages of implementation. Besides, SBP has 
advised the banks to refer the AAOIFI’s standards for guidance in different areas of Islamic 
finance. 
  Given the commitment and concerted efforts of all stakeholders, I am optimistic that Islamic 
banking and finance is likely to maintain its positive growth trajectory. The growth of Islamic 
finance  on  its  distinct  strengths  would  bring  more  stability  to  the  financial  system,  improve 
equitable  distribution  of  economic  gains,  and  support  overall  economic  development.  I 
believe  events  and  steps  like  these  are  vital  steps  towards  achieving  this  goal;  hence,  we 
should  not  stop  here  and  but  continue  to  work  towards  establishing  an  ethical  financial 
system.  
  Page 5 of 6 
  At the end, I would like to reiterate that State Bank of Pakistan will continue to extend its full 
cooperation  and  play  due  role for  achieving  our shared  vision  of  a  vibrant  and  sustainable 
Islamic banking sector in Pakistan. 
   Thank you! 
   Page 6 of 6 
