  14.12.2018 
 Economic policy: the challenge of future crises 
Speech by the Governor of the Banco de España at the Barcelona Círculo de 
Economía to mark ten years since the Lehman Brothers collapse 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
    I wish to start by thanking the Barcelona Círculo de Economía for their kind invitation to be 
here with you today, to close this cycle of lectures organised to mark the tenth anniversary 
of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. The economic and financial crisis was attributable to a 
broad and complex range of factors, but there is no doubt that this event remains engraved 
on  the  collective  memory  as  a  moment  of  particular  significance,  marking  in  a  way  the 
symbolic start of the crisis. 
The past decade has provided us with numerous lessons for the future, in particular in the 
area of economic policy management. Today, in order to identify outstanding tasks, I am 
going to devote my speech to a review of the changes that have occurred during these 
years, both at international and national level, which determine our ability to prevent the 
emergence of new crises or to mitigate their effects should they materialise. 
I  shall  start  with  the  reforms  at  international  level,  in  particular  in  the  global  financial 
architecture, and the risks arising from protectionism, the intensification of which may have 
significant  negative  effects  on  world growth  in  the  medium  term.  I  will  then  address  the 
changes in euro governance, before moving on to discuss the role played in recent years 
by monetary policy. Finally, I will focus on the case of Spain, to briefly review the events of 
the last few years and then outline the main challenges facing the public finances, supply-
side policies and the banking industry.  
Progress  on  institutional  design  and  supra-national  economic  policies  and  their 
challenges  
Reform of the international financial system 
At international level, the global financial crisis highlighted the need for far-reaching reform 
of the regulatory and supervisory frameworks. The efforts made in recent years in this area 
have  given  economic  policymakers  updated  instruments  and  new  tools  with  which  to 
address future risks relating to the financial system, its stability and its relationship with the 
economy as a whole. Thus, right from the early stages of the crisis, the G20 set in motion a 
series  of 
including  microprudential  and 
macroprudential banking regulation, international accounting standards and the regulation 
and  monitoring  of  non-banking  sectors,  among  other  measures.  We  are  currently  in  the 
phase of assessing the suitability of all these new instruments, some of which are still to be 
tested in crisis situations. 
reforms  covering  a  number  of  areas, 
In the microprudential domain, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision undertook a 
far-reaching review of the regulatory framework, which would become known as “Basel III”, 
with the aim of increasing the resilience of the banking system and reducing the impact of 
financial crises on the economy. Some of the key reforms introduced include an increase in 
the quantity and quality of minimum regulatory capital and the creation of capital buffers. 
New  prudential  requirements  have  also  been  introduced,  such  as  the  limits  on  large 
exposures, a maximum leverage ratio and two liquidity requirements, at the same time as 
the  reform  of  the  frameworks  for  evaluating  market  risk  and  securitisations  has  been 
launched.  
In addition, last December, a second wave of reforms introduced within the framework of 
the Basel Accords was completed. The focus of these measures has been the calculation 
 3/14 
 of risk-weighted assets, i.e. the denominator of the capital ratio, in order to improve the 
comparability of capital ratios across banks and jurisdictions.  
Another lesson of the crisis was that it is necessary to prevent and mitigate the effects of an 
excessive build-up of risk in the financial system as a whole. An exclusively microprudential 
based regulatory framework is clearly not sufficient to achieve this. New instruments were 
considered necessary to help moderate and address cyclical systemic risks (such as, for 
example,  those  associated  with  the  credit  cycle)  and  cross-sectional  systemic  risks  (for 
example, those linked to the risk arising from, among other aspects, the size, complexity 
and density of the interconnections between financial institutions). 
With regard to cyclical systemic risks, a countercyclical capital buffer has been introduced, 
with a view to preventing risks arising from excessive credit growth at the aggregate level. 
As  for  cross-sectional  systemic  risks,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  promoted  a  set  of 
measures to strengthen the capital requirements for systemic banks and to establish stricter 
supervisory requirements and stronger resolution frameworks for them.  
The development of microprudential policy also entailed changes of an institutional nature. 
In Europe, the European Systemic Risk Board was created, with the task of microprudential 
supervision of the financial system of the European Union (EU). However, at the same time 
it was necessary to create a framework for action at national level to enable the different 
sources of systemic risk to be monitored and the adequacy of the new macroprudential 
policy matters and instruments available to be assessed.  
Following this roadmap, the Spanish Government has recently announced its intention to 
create  a  macroprudential  authority  comprising  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  the 
Economy  and  Enterprise,  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  National  Securities  Market 
Commission. This new authority will be responsible for the macroprudential supervision of 
the Spanish financial system, with the aim of contributing to the prevention and mitigation 
of systemic risk.  
The crisis also highlighted certain vulnerabilities in the international accounting standards, 
resulting in the provisions needed to cover risks being recognised late and being inadequate 
in amount. In response, an expected loss accounting model was introduced, which, along 
with  the  reforms  in  the  prudential  area,  helped  improve  recognition  of  credit  risk  and 
increasing the resilience of banks to unexpected deterioration in their credit portfolios. 
However, the reforms were not only intended to bolster resilience and alerts in the face of 
shocks and sources of risk, but also to promote the development of effective resolution 
mechanisms. This sought to address the problem known as “too big to fail”, a problem that 
became obvious during the crisis, when the authorities of various countries were forced to 
use public funds to rescue banks, owing to the serious consequences that their insolvency 
might have had on the rest of the financial system and on the economy as a whole.  
With regard to resolution, a number of principles have been developed in order to guarantee 
the orderly management of banks in severe difficulties. These include the development of a 
bail-in tool to permit an orderly resolution process that minimises the impact on financial 
stability, ensures the continuity of critical bank functions and minimises the need for public 
funds.  
4/14 
  Apart from the reforms I have mentioned, the G20 promoted stricter regulation and closer 
monitoring of the activity of non-bank financial intermediaries. The aim was to improve the 
monitoring  of  developments  in  this  sector,  and  to  assess  which  regulatory  instruments 
should be used, taking into account the risks these intermediaries pose to financial stability. 
These risks may, in certain circumstances, have similar consequences to those traditionally 
assumed banks. 
The  measures  I  have  mentioned  have  generally  led  to  a  healthier,  more  resilient  and 
diversified  financial  system,  without  adverse  effects  on  the  provision  of  credit  to  the 
economy. In particular, since 2011, the large international banks have almost doubled their 
highest quality capital, from $2 trillion to $3.7 trillion in 2017. Moreover, since the start of 
the crisis, they have halved their leverage and improved their liquidity profiles, mainly thanks 
to an increase in high-quality liquid assets. 
Progress has also been made in other areas, such as simplifying and boosting transparency 
in  the  OTC  derivative  markets,  including  through  the  use  of  central  clearinghouses,  and 
measures  have  been  taken  to  reduce  some  of  the  risks  arising  from  non-bank  financial 
intermediation. 
Nonetheless,  we  cannot  ignore  the  persistence  of  certain  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  First, 
although large banks are now less leveraged, overall debt levels remain very high. Global 
public-sector and non-financial private-sector debt has increased by some 40 percentage 
points (pp) since the financial crisis to reach 250% of global gross domestic product (GDP); 
public-sector  debt  has  increased  significantly  in  the  advanced  economies  and  private-
sector debt in the emerging economies, especially in China. 
Second, there has been an increase in the weight of non-bank financing. The weight of other 
financial intermediaries (OFIs)1 in the global financial system has been growing in recent 
years,  and  reached  30%  in  December  2016,  according  to  the  latest  data available.  This 
trend  is  confirmed  by  the  growth  in  non-bank  financial  intermediation,  which  generates 
similar risks to banking; its weight in the global financial industry increased from 11.6% in 
2010 to 13.4% in 2016. These trends may have potentially important implications for the 
functioning and resilience of financial markets, in particular at times of stress.  
Third, a number of challenges remain relating to implementation of some of the approved 
reforms, in particular the latest package of Basel III reforms agreed in December 2017.  
Finally, now is the time to assess whether the approved reforms are effective and to identify 
any unintended consequences. In this respect, the FSB is due to launch an assessment of 
the policies agreed to address the too-big-to-fail problem next year. 
Reviewing globalisation and world trade rules 
                                                                                              
1 The FSB defines OFIs by exclusion. This is not a statistical definition, therefore, since it covers 
various categories of the national financial accounts: all non-bank intermediaries other than the 
central bank, public institutions, insurance entities, pension funds and financial auxiliaries. 
 
 5/14 
 The political and social consequences of the crisis have had an impact on economic policy 
in the area of trade policy, at global level. Trade tensions and the proliferation of protectionist 
measures are one of the worst legacies of the economic policy response of some countries 
in the current post-crisis period. In fact, protectionism is currently a significant risk factor 
for world trade, and given the latest developments, we cannot rule out further escalation of 
such tensions, with severe consequences for global growth.  
There  is  a  broad  consensus  in  the  academic  literature  on  the  economic  costs  of 
protectionism. In the short and medium term, economies subject to protectionist measures 
suffer reductions in exports and investment, with resulting adverse effects on their activity.  
Also,  the  effects  on  economies  that  adopt  protectionist  measures  are  far  from  positive, 
owing to the increase in the price of their imports, which, in turn, leads to an increase in 
production costs for their businesses and lower purchasing power for households, which 
leads to adverse effects on private consumption and investment. In addition, the uncertainty 
associated  with  trade  tensions  and  the  possible  tightening  of  financial  conditions  may 
discourage  investment  further  and  worsen  the  negative  impact  on  activity  and  potential 
growth. 
The estimates of the main international organisations in relation to the recent trade tensions 
between the United States and China suggest that the measures currently in force will have 
a relatively moderate impact (less than 0.5 pp of GDP in China and the United States, with 
an even smaller effect on global GDP). However, the application of tariffs and additional 
non-tariff measures, such as those announced by these two major powers, along with the 
foreseeable deterioration in confidence and in the financial markets to which this scenario 
could give rise, would involve much higher costs. According to the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), it could, over three years, subtract nearly one percentage point from world GDP, 
with a more pronounced impact on China (-1.5 pp) and on the United States (-1 pp) than on 
other areas, such as the euro area, where the losses would be somewhat less than 0.5 pp. 
Another particularly relevant case at the present juncture is Brexit, which may have very 
significant effects on the UK and EU economies. Depending on the future framework for 
relations between the EU and the United Kingdom, and whether or not the departure from 
the EU takes place in an orderly manner, the latest estimates, published by the Bank of 
England just a few days ago, range from long-term GDP losses for the United Kingdom of 
around  2%  of  GDP  in  the  case  of  an  orderly  exit  and  favourable  future  agreement,  to 
declines  of  around  10%  of  GDP  if  there  is  no  agreement  and  the  exit  is  disruptive  and 
disorderly. The costs for the EU would be lower, although in the event of a hard Brexit the 
impact could be significant for those countries with closer trade and financial ties with the 
United Kingdom, such as Ireland, Belgium and the Netherlands.  
At the same time, the evidence suggests that greater protectionism raises the vulnerability 
of  economies  to  domestic  adverse  shocks.  This  is  because  international  trade  allows 
producers  to  diversify  their  business  and  cope  with  cyclical  fluctuations  in  domestic 
demand. This diversification mechanism is even more important in crisis periods, as seen in 
Spain, where businesses facing severe contractions in domestic demand during the most 
recessionary  phases of  the  last  crisis  found  an  escape  valve  in  the form of  exports  that 
enabled them to maintain their activity and limit job losses.  
6/14 
  It should also be noted that the negative effects of protectionism tend to grow stronger over 
the long term, owing to the damaging impact of trade barriers on competition, productivity, 
technological innovation and potential growth.  
In the present context, characterised by the risk of heightened trade tensions, the review of 
the world trade negotiation rules and reform of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the 
legal  basis  for  the  main  trade  exchanges  in  recent  decades,  are  of  even  greater 
consequence. In fact, from a broader perspective, the latest political reactions against free 
trade  come  on  top  of  a  deeper,  pre-existing  crisis  in  the  multilateral  trade  system.  The 
security provided by trade rules enabled average tariffs between the United States, Europe 
and  Japan  to  be  cut  from  22%  in  1948  to  3%  in  2000.  However,  in  the  latest  round  of 
negotiations between the WTO member countries, which took place in Doha in 2001, very 
little progress was made and structural problems currently affecting this system became 
apparent. These include, notably, the requirement for unanimity among the 164 members 
of the organisation for the approval of new provisions and the existence of a body of rules 
that has proved to be inadequate to manage the variety of challenges raised by China’s 
joining the WTO in 2001.  
A possible way out of the current crisis in the system of rules for world trade and the WTO 
that has been recently discussed would involve moving from a multilateral system based on 
unanimity  to  a  more  flexible  approach.  This  would  allow  resolutions  to  be  adopted  in 
particular areas by a limited number of countries, with the possibility of other economies 
joining them at a later stage. 
This multilateral approach could also be used to approve reforms to adapt the WTO rules 
to the recent changes in the world economy and thus restore global confidence in a system 
of  trade  based  on  respect  for  clear  well-defined  rules,  curbing  the  proliferation  of 
protectionist measures and boosting global growth in the long term.  
The need to promote the opening up of trade in services, where the potential gains are still 
substantial, should also be mentioned. Lastly, in the domestic policy realm, the authorities 
need to adopt a number of policies (boosting labour market flexibility, solid social security 
networks and education and training opportunities) to satisfactorily address the distribution 
of the potential benefits of trade among different population groups.  
The new institutional architecture for the euro  
One of the structural elements that has changed most as a result of the combined financial-
sovereign crisis in Europe is the institutional architecture of the euro area. The financial crisis 
revealed a number of shortcomings and deficiencies in various aspects of the design of the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  such  as  the  absence  of  fiscal  stabilisation 
mechanisms for the area as a whole, the lack of crisis management instruments and the 
incoherence of the supervisory arrangements and of national bank resolution, while there 
was  a  manifest  need  for  progress  towards  genuine  financial  integration  as  a  logical 
consequence of the monetary union. We should recall here the weakness of the euro area’s 
cross-country risk-sharing mechanisms based on the capital markets and banking system, 
especially  in  comparison with  other  currency  areas  of  a  similar  size,  such as  the  United 
States. 
 7/14 
 Especially since the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis, in the first part of the current 
decade, these shortcomings have prompted significant progress in reform of the European 
institutional architecture, including the strengthening of the mechanisms for surveillance of 
the  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism, the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism.  
Despite these reforms, significant limitations persist that require further EMU deepening. 
First, the second pillar of the banking union needs to be completed by means of the creation 
of a common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund to guarantee its financial sufficiency. 
Moreover, it is essential to launch a European deposit insurance scheme to ensure the same 
level of protection for all depositors throughout the euro area, reducing the risk of bank runs 
in situations of financial stress and to weaken the “doom loop” between sovereign risk and 
bank risk.  
In relation to resolution, in line with international initiatives, the European resolution directive 
stipulates  a  minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  in  the  event  of 
resolution. The application of this directive poses a number of challenges, in particular in 
terms of the transition towards compliance with these new requirements by banks, which I 
shall refer to later when discussing Spanish banks. Also, as the IMF has recently indicated, 
it would be desirable to assess the suitability of bail-in strategies in the event of systemic 
crises, given their potentially adverse effects on the financial system as a whole, which may 
ultimately raise social losses and the cost to the taxpayer. 
In order to make further progress in reducing the risk of financial fragmentation within the 
euro area, it is necessary to boost private-sector risk-sharing channels, such as the credit 
and  capital  market  channels,  so  that  they  work  alongside  the  public-sector  risk-sharing 
mechanisms. This requires, first, removing obstacles to the creation in the medium term of 
genuine pan-European retail banks. In particular, a single deposit insurance fund needs to 
be created, the euro area needs to be treated as a single jurisdiction for regulatory purposes 
and, above all, market pressure needs to reach broad segments of the European banking 
system, such as public-sector banks, cooperative banks and savings banks.  
Second, progress needs to be made on the various Capital Markets Union initiatives. The 
implementation of this project should lead to more efficient and integrated capital markets, 
enabling  European  businesses  to  diversify  and  broaden  their  sources  of  funding  and  to 
reduce their excessive dependence on bank finance. However, this is a complex objective 
that requires action on various fronts, including the development of market infrastructures, 
the  review  and  harmonisation  of  market  regulation  and  supervision  and  of  insolvency 
procedures, and the elimination of the bias in favour of debt financing in some countries’ 
tax systems.  
It  is  also  necessary  to  move  towards  a  fiscal  governance  framework  that  allows  the 
stabilising capacity of fiscal policy in the euro area in times of crisis to be increased. For this 
purpose,  countries  should  take  advantage  of  the  current  upswing  to  generate  scope  for 
stabilisation in future crises, since national fiscal policy will continue to be the first line of 
defence. 
8/14 
  In fact, a fiscal union, with shared responsibility for macro-financial risks that are already 
subject to common supervision, besides improving incentives would be conducive to the 
sustainability of public finances and macroeconomic stability in the area. 
However, clear, strict fiscal rules are also necessary for the Member States. Simplification 
of the complex web of rules and procedures that currently make up the Stability and Growth 
Pact, more automatic rules and stronger independent fiscal institutions, as well as a stronger 
European Fiscal Board, could also help achieve this objective. Also, the development of a 
common fiscal capacity that enables an aggregate fiscal stance to be defined and applied 
in the area would supplement the scope for national fiscal action and, as I have already 
mentioned, the stabilising efforts of monetary policy. 
Completion of the current design of EMU and providing it with solid governance are priorities 
that will, however, require broad consensus and political will. 
Monetary policy  
I would now like to discuss the role monetary policy has played in these years and that 
which it could play in the response to future crises.  
When the last crisis broke out, central banks slashed interest rates, which rapidly reached 
near-zero levels In some cases, such as that of the European Central Bank (ECB), rates even 
turned  negative.  In  this  context,  central  banks  had  to  implement  a  series  of  novel,  or 
“unconventional”,  measures.  These  measures  included  asset  purchase  programmes, 
medium- and long-term lending to the banking industry under advantageous conditions, 
and  announcements  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy,  known  as  forward 
guidance. 
The empirical evidence shows all these measures to have been effective at cushioning the 
impacts of the economic crisis and supporting the subsequent recovery, and they now form 
part of central banks’ toolkit for the future. Against this background, what scope is there for 
monetary policy action in the event of a future crisis? 
As  the  inflation  outlook  improves  in  the  future,  interest  rates  may  be  expected  to  rise 
gradually towards their long-term equilibrium rate. The distance between this level and the 
effective lower bound on interest rates – i.e. the level below which further rate cuts would 
be counter-productive as a means of stimulating the economy – will determine the future 
scope for conventional monetary policy. We now know that the lower bound on interest 
rates in the euro area is not zero, as was traditionally believed, but a negative number which, 
although difficult to quantify, is probably not far below the current deposit facility rate of -
0.40%.  
Economic theory and the empirical evidence suggests that demography is one of the factors 
underlying the long-term interest  rate.  Specifically,  demographic  developments in  recent 
decades  in  comparable  countries,  characterised  by  declining  birth  rates,  increasing  life 
expectancy, and a rising ratio of pensioners to workers, seems to have lowered the long-
term equilibrium or “natural” interest rate and is likely to continue to do so in the future. 
Demographic patterns seem therefore to be contributing to a progressive narrowing of the 
 9/14 
 scope for central banks to lower their interest rates in the event of deflationary shocks like 
those suffered during much of the recent crisis.  
One tool which can mitigate this foreseeable loss of scope for interest rate policy forward 
guidance.  In  recent  years,  once  short-term  rates  reached  their  lower  limit,  central  bank 
announcements  undertaking  to  keep interest  rates  at  low  levels  for  long  periods  proved 
effective  at  flattening  the  yield  curve  and  reducing  the  uncertainty  over  possible  future 
interest rate developments, thus improving financial conditions for the real economy.  
Other tools that also provide stimulus when interest rates are no longer able to do so include 
the monetary authority’s balance-sheet expansion measures. In recent years, the world’s 
main central banks, including the ECB, have resorted to them with remarkable intensity. In 
particular, in the Eurosystem the expansion of the balance sheet has mainly been driven by 
longer-term refinancing operations and the asset purchase programme. These measures 
have  been  effective  at  easing  financial  conditions  in  the  euro  area  and,  ultimately,  at 
adjusting  inflation  towards  its  target.  The  ECB’s  asset  reinvestment  policy,  the  guiding 
principles  of  which  were  readjusted  yesterday,  aims  to  preserve  the  monetary  stimulus 
provided by the asset purchase programme through full reinvestment of the assets on the 
programme’s portfolio as they mature.  
In short, monetary policy will continue to have tools with which to tackle future economic 
and financial crises, although these tools naturally have their limitations. Therefore, as the 
Governing Council of the ECB has been saying in recent years, rather than overemphasising 
the role of these tools, they need to be complemented by the implementation of structural 
reforms and fiscal policies to foster growth. 
Spanish economic policy: progress made and challenges 
The Spanish economy has been on a growth path since late 2013 and GDP overtook its 
pre-crisis  levels  in  mid-2017.  A  number  of  structural  reforms  implemented  during  the 
recession contributed to this dynamism. On the domestic front, these include labour market 
reform, the balance-sheet clean-up and restructuring of credit institutions, pension reform 
and fiscal consolidation. 
These reforms have undoubtedly helped largely correct some of the Spanish economy’s 
main imbalances in the pre-crisis period: in particular, high levels of private sector debt, low 
competitiveness, the excessive current account imbalance and the excessive weight of the 
real-estate sector. Similarly, economic policy measures have enabled progress to be made 
on correcting the problems faced by the financial sector during the worst of the recent crisis.  
Nevertheless,  the  recovery  has  also  benefited  from  a  series  of  factors  exogenous  to 
domestic economic policy with varying degrees of persistence. These factors include the 
role played by ECB monetary policy and the significant drop in the oil price between mid-
2014 and early 2016, and, until the end of last year, the improvement in external markets, in 
a context of a global economic recovery. 
However, the effect of these factors can be expected to taper in the future. The foreseeable 
loss of momentum by the expansionary effects of demand-side policies is also relevant. In 
10/14 
 this context, it is particularly desirable for prominence to be given to a renewed reform drive, 
geared towards correcting the Spanish economy's persisting vulnerabilities. 
 Fiscal policy 
I will first mention the fiscal policy situation. Over the past decade the Spanish authorities 
have had to make the fiscal adjustment needed to guarantee the sustainability of the public 
finances. This process has brought the budget-deficit-to-GDP ratio down from a maximum 
of 11% in 2009 to 3.1% last year. 
Despite this deficit cut, Spain’s public accounts continue to show significant weaknesses. 
First, the European Commission estimates the (cyclically adjusted) structural budget deficit 
to  still  be  around  3%  of  GDP  in  2018,  the  highest  in  the  euro  area.  Second,  although 
government debt is on a slightly downward path from its historical peak of 100.4% of GDP 
in 2014, at around 98%, it is still very high. 
The  empirical  evidence  reveals  that  maintaining  a  very  high  level  of  public  debt  for  a 
prolonged period tends to hamper economic growth as it becomes a source of vulnerability 
and reduces the scope for the public budget to act as a stabiliser in the event of a recession. 
The simulations made in a number of papers published by the Banco de España show that, 
on  realistic  assumptions,  the  process  of  reducing  Spain’s  government  debt  will  be  very 
gradual. It may even take several decades to reach a debt-to-GDP ratio of 60%, which is 
the reference value in Europe’s current fiscal rules. 
In  the  light  of  these  considerations,  priority  should  be  given  to  taking  advantage  of  the 
current favourable economic context to reduce the vulnerabilities deriving from the public 
finances and create budgetary room for manoeuvre with which to address future crises. 
These  efforts  should  be  given  the  form  of  a  medium-term  programme  spelling  out  the 
measures enabling the budgetary objectives to be met, and a prudent macroeconomic and 
public revenue projections.  
This  process  of  reducing  the  fiscal  imbalances  also  needs  to  be  compatible  with  an 
improvement in the quality of the public finances. In this connection, the composition of the 
programme’s revenue and expense adjustment is very relevant to achieving its objectives 
without  hindering  economic  growth.  Combining  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  with  other 
structural reforms should also help in this respect.  
Reducing  the  vulnerability  of  Spain’s  public  finances  is  even  more  important  when  we 
consider  the  medium  and  long-term  challenge  posed  by  population  ageing.  The  latest 
estimates predict a significant increase in public expenditure on pensions, health-care and 
long-term care stemming from the substantial rise in the dependency ratio. Even on the 
most optimistic demographic projections, this ratio is set to rise from 25% today to 50% by 
mid-century.  
In  the  case  of  the  pension  system,  the  2011  and  2013  reforms  included  a  number  of 
adjustments that made it possible to significantly counteract the effect of the expected long-
term increase in the dependency ratio.  Nevertheless, the latest legislative developments 
have eased the implementation of these mechanisms with the postponement in application 
 11/14 
 of the sustainability factor until 2023 and, above all, the return to a system of annual pension 
increases  in  line  with  the  consumer  price  index.  According  to  the  Banco  de  España's 
calculations,  reintroducing  this  indexing  system  on  a  permanent  basis  would  lead  to  an 
additional  spending  increment  of  more  than  3 pp  of  GDP  in  2050.    Consequently, 
guaranteeing the financial sustainability of the public pension system will require additional 
measures on the revenue or expenditure sides of the system to offset this additional burden. 
Pending structural reforms  
In the context just described, characterised by the need to pass the baton to demand-side 
policies to underpin the current expansionary phase and boost growth potential, it would 
be  particularly  desirable  to  give  more  prominence  to  measures  to  correct  the  Spanish 
economy’s structural vulnerabilities and strengthen its capacity to adapt to future shocks. 
The structural reforms undertaken in Spain over the course of recent years  have helped 
make the economy more robust and adaptable to adverse situations. This is particularly 
desirable in an increasingly changeable and uncertain global environment. One of the key 
elements providing greater resilience and flexibility is the labour-market reform, which gave 
businesses more internal flexibility. This flexibility provides additional tools with which to 
adjust labour costs in the event of a short downturn instead of the traditional mechanism 
whereby workers – mainly those on temporary contracts – are laid off. 
Other reforms have also encouraged better allocation of funds by the financial system to 
new,  higher  potential,  investment  projects.  These  include  financial  system  reform  and 
insolvency law reform, in particular.  
Despite these changes, the Spanish economy still faces major structural challenges that 
limit  its  potential  growth.  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  of  these  challenges:  population 
ageing, the high unemployment rate, and low productivity growth.  
Population ageing has consequences for the effectiveness of traditional macroeconomic 
policies, the sustainability of the public finances, and productivity growth. Addressing this 
challenge  requires  a  multidisciplinary  policy  that  creates  incentives  for  older  workers  to 
remain in the labour force, revises migration policy to try to adapt it to the needs of the 
labour market, and boosts the birth rate to bring it closer to rates in other European countries 
by improving the work-life balance and enhancing job stability in the childbearing years. 
Meanwhile,  the  high  unemployment  rate  remains  a  serious  drag  on  growth  and  welfare. 
Specifically, it is particularly worrying that almost half of the unemployed have been in this 
situation  for  over  a  year  and  that  the  unemployment  rate  among  low-skilled  population 
groups stands at over 25%. The serious mismatch between the skills of employees and the 
unemployed  that  tends  to  arise  in  such  cases  suggests  there  is  a  need  for  active 
employment policies to foster the employability of all socio-demographic groups using the 
tools  that  have  proven  to  be  effective  for  each  of  them.  A  rigorous  evaluation  of  all  the 
existing programmes is therefore necessary.  
In addition to considerations of economic efficiency, as highlighted by a recent analysis by 
the Banco de España, a lower unemployment rate is directly reflected in an improvement in 
levels  of  inequality.  This  positive  effect  of  employment  on  income  inequality  would  be 
12/14 
  strengthened  by  reducing  the  high  level  of  temporary  employment  in  the  labour  market, 
provided this decrease did not come at the price of reducing the incentives for permanent 
hiring.  
As  regards productivity, Spain’s levels  are  low  by  international standards.  Improving the 
dynamics  of  this  variable  requires  measures  in  various  areas.  In  particular,  it  calls  for 
improvements in human and technological capital. In this regard, it is necessary to bolster 
the  legal  framework  for  education  to  raise  quality  and  address  the  challenges  posed  by 
globalisation,  technological  progress  and  automation.  This  reform  also  needs  to  foster 
innovation in universities and channel it toward the productive system. 
Additionally, despite the fact that the more productive companies have gained weight in 
their respective sectors over the past decade, there are still certain obstacles limiting the 
efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Specifically,  there  is  a  need  to  analyse  the  level  of 
competition in sectors with persistently high profit margins. It would also be desirable to 
reduce the impact of factors preventing the most productive companies from growing. In 
this regard, the regulatory thresholds contingent on company size in the legislation need 
revising.  
Making  decisive  progress  on  this  structural  reform  agenda  is  crucial  to  increasing  the 
economy's long-term growth and laying the foundations for a society that offers its citizens 
more opportunities. Many of the policies I referred to earlier foster reductions both in the 
economy’s structural imbalances and in inequality, such that it should be possible to build 
a broad-based consensus for their approval, despite the obvious difficulties caused by the 
current political fragmentation.  
The challenges for the financial sector 
In the wake of the last crisis, Spanish banks carried out a thorough process of balance-
sheet clean-up, recapitalisation and restructuring which, over the last four and a half years, 
has markedly improved the industry’s position on basic parameters, such as asset quality 
or levels of profitability and solvency.  
Starting  with  asset  quality,  between  December  2013  and  June  2018  there  was  a  very 
significant reduction in non-performing loans and foreclosed real-estate assets. Similarly, 
return  on  equity  returned  to  positive  terrain  with  rates  above  the  euro  area  average, 
recovering from its slump to -25% in 2012. For its part, the total capital ratio has increased 
by  1.7 pp  over  the  past  four  years,  and  the  leverage  and  liquidity  ratios  are  above  the 
European averages. Indeed, recent stress tests by the European Banking Authority and the 
Banco  de  España  show  Spanish  banks’  solvency  position  gives  them  considerable 
resilience against adverse scenarios. 
Nevertheless, even recognising the significant progress made in recent years, the Spanish 
banking sector continues to face important challenges, which it largely shares with other 
euro area banking systems. The most significant of these challenges are: i) speeding up the 
sale  of  unproductive  assets;  ii)  strengthening  capital  and  liabilities  subject  to  bail-in;  iii) 
improving the industry's reputation by avoiding the risk of misconduct; iv) confronting the 
challenge of profitability without undue easing of lending standards; and v) making progress 
in the use of new technologies, which, although they represent a major challenge for the 
 13/14 
 sector, at the same time they present an opportunity for those entities able to use them to 
their  advantage.  In  short,  the  supervisory  community  and  financial  institutions  share  the 
future challenge of ensuring a more stable financial system that offers better services to 
society. 
Concluding remarks 
In this talk I have reviewed economic policy’s existing room for manoeuvre and instruments 
with which to address future crises.  
I  started  by  discussing  those  elements  (such  as  reform  to  the  euro’s  institutional 
architecture, international financial system reform and developments in world-trade rules, 
which will increasingly shape national economic policy).  
I  then  turned  to  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  which  are  the  main  tools  for  managing  the 
economic  cycle,  arguing  that,  at  present,  and  for  different  reasons,  they  both  have  less 
freedom of action than in the recent past.  
Therefore,  in  my  opinion,  the  fundamental  conclusion  is  that  it  is  necessary  to  take 
advantage of the current cyclical position in Spain, while conditions remain favourable, to 
build up budgetary leeway for future recessions and to introduce structural reforms to take 
over from recent years’ expansionary demand-side policies in order to prolong the current 
economic growth phase and boost the economy’s growth potential.  
In short, economic policy provides us with a national, European and global toolkit that, if we 
wish to avoid repeating the errors of the past, we should use properly to prepare ourselves 
for  the  next  economic  crisis,  which  will  surely  arrive.  The  anniversary  of  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers ten years ago, and the economic and financial crisis we have suffered, 
particularly  in  Spain,  should  spur  us  to  press  ahead  with  the  reform  drive  so  that, 
paraphrasing  the  recent  winner  of  the  King  Juan  Carlos  Prize  in  Economics,  Carmen 
Reinhart, next time is different.  
 14/14 
 