Encik  Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  The  ASEAN  insurance
industry - current state
Keynote address by Mr Encik Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central
Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  21st ASEAN  Insurance  Regulators’  Meeting,
44th ASEAN Insurance Council and 3rd ASEAN Insurance Summit, Kuala Lumpur, 28 November
2018.
 Bank Negara Malaysia is honoured to host the 21st ASEAN Insurance Regulators’ Meeting and
the 44th ASEAN Insurance Council Meeting again after eleven years. It is also our privilege to be
part  of  the  3rd ASEAN  Insurance  Summit.  I  trust  that  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  knowledge
during these events will further strengthen the long tradition of close cooperation among ASEAN
insurance  regulators  and  industry  players,  interventions,  and  initiatives  to  build  resiliency  and
liquidity for our market.
Introduction
Since  its  formation  in  1967,  ASEAN  has  achieved  significant  strides  in  advancing  regional
economic  and  financial  cooperation  and  integration.  This  has  contributed  to  sustained  social
development  and  stability  that  we  see  in  the  region  over  the  last  five  decades.  Economic
improvement has seen member states grow at an average rate of over 5.3% and expanded over
100-fold, supported by significant intra-regional trade. In 2017, the ten-member states recorded a
combined  gross  domestic  product  of  close  to  USD3  trillion.  Together,  the  regional  bloc  is
currently the sixth-largest economy in the world and by 2020 is forecasted to become the fifth-
largest economy after the United States of America, China, Japan and Germany.
With a population of just under 650 million, ASEAN is characterised by its rising and expanding
middle class. This segment will represent two-thirds of its overall population by 2030. Increasing
urbanisation,  rising  consumption  levels  and  a  young  workforce  are  expected  to  drive  future
growth.  This 
investment.
Consequently,  this  will  further  propel  the  region’s  journey  to  become  a  highly  integrated  and
cohesive economy as envisaged in the ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint.
Current state of the ASEAN insurance industry
that  will  boost 
the  backdrop 
intra-ASEAN 
trade  and 
forms 
Now,  how  has  the ASEAN  insurance  industry  fared  during  this  period  and  how  will  it  perform
going forward and how do we want it to perform? Ten years ago, the ASEAN insurance sector
recorded a total premium income of USD41 billion, with total assets of USD185 billion. In 2017,
the  region  recorded  a  total  premium  income  of  USD103  billion,  with  total  assets  of  USD480
billion.
Nevertheless,  the  ASEAN  insurance  industry  remains  small.  According  to  Swiss  Re,  the
combined  premium  volume  of  the ASEAN  insurance  market  accounted  for  only  2.1%  of  the
world’s market share in 2017. In comparison, the insurance industries in China and Japan each
accounted for 11.1% and 8.6% of the world’s market share, respectively. Insurance penetration
in the ASEAN region remains low, averaging 3.6% in 2017. This is considerably well below the
global average of 6.1% and the greater Asian region’s average of 5.6%. While this represents a
large  gap  in  insurance  protection  in  the  region,  this  also  points  to  significant  opportunities  for
rapid growth and developments in the near future.
The  ASEAN  insurance  market  hosts  a  diverse  group  of  foreign  players.  Many  have  strong
presence in the region and even pioneered the development of the insurance market in some
member  states.  Similar  to  most  ASEAN  countries,  Malaysia  welcomes  their  participation.  In
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2017,  foreign  players  represent  almost  half  of  the  ASEAN  insurance  market  participants,
including via participation in domestic companies. These players have brought in sound business
models.  Their  strengths  and  expertise  have  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  regional
insurance industry. They have been given greater market access through liberalisation measures
undertaken by ASEAN countries over the years, such as that in the marine, aviation and transit
insurance segment.
Nevertheless, comparing against the speed of expansion of foreign insurers in the region, one
can  argue  that  the  pace  at  which  the  full  translation  of  the  corresponding  benefits  to  the
development  of  the  local  insurance  markets  remains  uneven.  I  would  like  to  share  three
observations of their presence that could be relevant:
First, we can acknowledge that foreign insurers have contributed positively and extensively
towards  the  more  pragmatic  and  contemporary  regulatory  enhancements.  However,  this
also means that regulatory design is heavily influenced by them. In other words, there could
be risks of regulatory capture where policies and decisions could favour the foreign players
at the expense of the local industry and public. As regulators, we have to be cognisant of
these risks. It remains an ongoing challenge to balance policy trade-offs and to preserve the
best interest of the general public at large.
Second, foreign insurers also tend to mainly target the more profitable market segments.
Using  their  international  brand  recognition,  they  are  able  to  capture  these  markets  easily.
Such  segments  include  the  higher  net  worth  individuals,  and  large  and  multinational
corporates.  The  insurance  needs  of  the  lower  income  segment  and  small  and  medium
enterprises are then left underserved.
Third, many of the global players operating in ASEAN today continues to operate as foreign
players and act as conduits to their head offices. Invested capital could be hedged back to
their  home  countries.  Annual  profits  and  fees  received  are  repatriated.  This  in  turn  has
resulted in, among others, persistent outflow of funds to the home countries. This practice
has continued to put pressure on the host country’s balance of payments. Foreign players
should do more to invest in the host country and truly make the host country their home
country  as  well.  On  another  front,  efforts  should  concurrently  be  directed  towards
strengthening  the  underwriting  and  retention  capacity  of  the  regional  insurance  and
reinsurance markets.
What  about  the  domestic  players?  Having  benefitted  from  the  partnership  with  their  foreign
counterparts, domestic and home-grown insurers in ASEAN also need to do more to serve the
protection and financial needs in their countries and the region. Having domestic players as part
of the insurance landscape is a goal that is shared by most countries, if not preferred by all. The
progressive approach towards integrating the regional insurance market already recognises the
unique circumstances and different stages of development in each ASEAN member state. This
is intended to provide lead time to domestic players to prepare themselves for regional insurance
integration.
Unfortunately,  many  of  the  domestic  players  have  yet  to  develop  their  own  competitive
advantage. They have yet to reach a sizeable scale of operations in order to compete effectively
against  their  foreign  counterparts.  As  the  region  moves  into  the  next  phase  of  growth  and
progresses  towards  becoming  a  more  integrated  market,  domestic  players  will  need  to
strengthen their capacity and capability, or risk being driven out of the market.
Reshaping the landscape of the ASEAN insurance industry
ASEAN’s  economic  and  financial  sector  growth  will  see  the  insurance  industry  grow
correspondingly. Given the potential, it could grow faster but it will require the insurance industry
players to step up and seize the opportunities. Amid the advent of Industry 4.0 and digitalisation,
much needs to be done to transform into the players for this new phase. Besides technology,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
this is also a phase where consumer interests and protecting the well-being of the underserved
have become more important goals for societies. The industry needs to take notice that with the
democratisation  of  information  and  knowledge  through  technology,  the  balance  has  shifted  to
favour the consumers and public at large.
This implies that consumer-centric propositions have become increasingly important to meet the
needs  and  circumstances  of ASEAN  consumers.  Studies  show  that ASEAN  is  currently  the
world’s fastest growing population of Internet users, with more than 125,000 new users coming
online every year.                                                                         
Another survey conducted in 2017 revealed that the majority of the middle-class consumers in
five ASEAN countries  are not only willing to pay extra for better quality products, they are also
willing to try and frequently search for new products across various media channels. This affirms
the growing power of the consumer. It also means that digitalising insurance solutions can drive
greater demand for insurance services via improved consumer experience.
Here in Malaysia, these trends have resulted in among others, a number of key policy changes
and interventions that are intended to better protect the consumers of insurance. This includes
the implementation of the Balanced Scorecard framework for agents, which aims to increase the
level of professionalism of intermediaries. In addition, the upcoming introduction of the Minimum
Allocation Rate for investment-linked insurance and takaful products is aimed at safeguarding the
account value of consumers.
Another shift is in the growing demands by society to look into the needs of the underserved. As it
is,  these  needs  remains  vast  across  many  of  our  countries.  Working  towards  promoting
equitable  and  inclusive  growth  is  necessary  for  the  long-term  sustainability  of  ASEAN.  The
industry should explore these less penetrated markets through new strategies and strengthened
capabilities.  Nonetheless,  expecting  markets  to  effectively  provide  for  the  needs  of  the
underserved may be challenging.
Markets, driven by financial motives have a tendency to end up instead widening the disparities in
income, equality and socio-economic protection. Intervention or even redistribution becomes a
necessary tool to correct this, rebalance societal fortunes to enable the economically worst off to
benefit  and  be  co-opted  back  into  the  mainstream,  as  part  of  an  overall  social  agenda  that
promotes inclusion and cohesiveness. This goal, of inclusion and cohesiveness, may well be a
prerequisite to truly maximising society’s economic potential.
Consistent with this is another key initiative in Malaysia that targets the underserved. This is the
new insurance scheme for the Bottom 40% households. Supported by pioneering contributions
from foreign insurers, a fund will be set up to provide insurance cover for those eligible. They will
receive income support if they are diagnosed with critical illnesses or hospitalised. This policy
intervention attempts to resolve the market’s inability to provide such protection. Perception out
there  has  been  that  this  segment  of  the  population  is  uninsurable,  or  from  the  perspective  of
insurers, too risky and likely unprofitable. We are taking a view that this is misplaced, and it will
take proof to change this. Currently, we are still finalising the details and targeting the scheme to
be fully operational in early 2019.
As insurance regulators, these emerging trends place new demands on our skill sets, expertise
and competencies. We have seen the need to become more agile, pragmatic and experimental.
We  also  need  to  be  more  open  to  new  ways  of  formulating  developmental  policies  and
regulation. In this respect, we can learn from each other the evolving practices, environment and
developments that we face in our respective markets.
As  a  group,  I  believe  ASEAN  regulators  will  continue  to  work  closely  towards  achieving  a
consistent  approach  in  driving  the  development  of  a  holistic  insurance  ecosystem  and
infrastructure in the region. Regular dialogues and exchange of information among and between
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulators  and  the  industry  will  continue  with  new  areas  for  collaboration,  particularly  in  the
management of risks and developments brought about by innovation. These include consumer
data  protection  issues,  rise  of  cybercrime,  potential  job  loss  or  disruption,  and  rapid  and
unexpected climate change and natural disasters. 
Closing
This  week’s  ASEAN  events  continues  our  commitment 
towards  promoting  continued
development in the insurance sector. The challenge herein lies with ensuring that the ASEAN
insurance market has the capacity to reinforce the economic growth momentum and stand well-
prepared against the evolving trends and risks. In doing so, we should never forget to uphold the
highest standards of integrity, professionalism and ethics.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
