Luis  de  Guindos:  Euro  area  and  Spain  -  current  status  and
challenges ahead
Remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 1st Edition
of the Prize José Echegaray of elEconomista, Madrid, 15 October 2018.
 Despite  the  recent  slow-down,  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  remains  solid  and
broad-based,  as  confirmed  by  the  latest  data.  Real  GDP  has  expanded  for  21  consecutive
quarters, growing 0.4% quarter-on-quarter during the second quarter of 2018.
1
In the first half of 2018, growth weakened from the very high rates of last year, reflecting lower
exports. In the coming period, however, we expect the economy to continue to grow at a pace
above  its  potential.  In  fact,  the  duration  and  amplitude  of  the  current  expansion  is  still  below
historical averages, having lasted no more than five years and with real GDP now 10% above the
trough in the first quarter of 2013.  By comparison, on average, growth phases in the past lasted
seven and a half years from trough to peak, with GDP increasing by 21% over the same period.
While risks to growth have remained broadly balanced, those related to global factors,
including  the  threat  of  increased  global  protectionism,  rising  oil  prices  and  emerging  market
vulnerabilities, have become more prominent. Volatility in sovereign debt markets and the rise
in populism add to overall uncertainty.
The ongoing expansion has led to strong employment gains.  Since  the  beginning  of  the
recovery, the number of people employed in the euro area has risen by 9.2 million. Euro area
unemployment declined to 8.1% in August, its lowest level in almost ten years.
Consumer  spending  is  being  driven  by  steady  growth  in  households’  real  disposable
income.  Strong  labour  markets  –  with  increasing  job  creation  and  rising  wages  –  boost
household income and, in turn, consumer spending.
The  investment  outlook  remains  solid  on  the  back  of  robust  demand,  improving
profitability and favourable financing conditions. Since the end of 2014, bank lending rates in
the  euro  area  have  declined  significantly,  by  around  130  basis  points  for  non-financial
corporations and by around 110 basis points for households. Lending rates on very small loans,
which can be used as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), have
fallen by more than 210 basis points. This is encouraging, as SMEs provide two-thirds of total
private sector employment in the euro area.
Overall,  the  underlying  strength  of  domestic  activity  in  the  euro  area  continues  to
support a sustained adjustment in inflation. According to the flash estimates, HICP inflation
increased  to  2.1%  in  September,  from  2.0%  in August.  On  the  basis  of  the  latest  oil  futures
prices, headline inflation is expected to hover around the current level for the rest of the year. Our
most recent projections foresee annual headline inflation at 1.7% in 2018 and in each of the two
subsequent years. The stable path of inflation conceals a decline in the contribution of the energy
component,  as  the  impact  of  the  past  oil  price  hike  fades,  offset  by  a  gradual  increase  in
underlying inflation.
Although  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted,  they  have  been
increasing from earlier lows. Tighter labour markets and the emergence of wage pressures
are expected to continue to bolster underlying inflation.
Given  the  underlying  strength  of  the  economy,  we  are  confident  that  the  sustained
convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed even after a gradual winding-down of our
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
net asset purchases. At the same time, an ample degree of monetary accommodation will still
be necessary to ensure a durable convergence of inflation over the medium term.
Against  this  background,  we  have  reduced  our  net  asset  purchases  to  €15  billion  as  of  this
month, and we continue to anticipate that net purchases will terminate by the end of the year. But
in order to ensure that sufficient monetary policy stimulus continues to support the further build-
up of headline inflation that we see in our projections, the Governing Council decided:
to  enhance  our  forward  guidance  on  the  likely  future  path  of  our  policy  interest  rates,
expressing our expectation that they will remain at their present levels at least through the
summer  of  2019,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued
convergence of inflation towards our aim;
and to re-assert our intention to continue to re-invest the principal payments from maturing
securities  in  our  portfolio  for  an  extended  period  of  time  after  the  end  of  our  net  asset
purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
These  measures  will  continue 
accommodation to bring inflation back towards a level that is below, but close to, 2%.
the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  policy
to  provide 
Let me now turn to the Spanish economy.
Following the severe recession in 2008-09 and 2012-13, Spain’s economic recovery has
been strong, with five years of growth since 2013. During this time, the economy has expanded
by an estimated 14% and the level of GDP is now above its pre-crisis peak.
This  strong  recovery  reflects  substantial  policy  efforts  at  both  national  and  European  level,
particularly the reforms initiated at the height of the sovereign debt crisis.
Under the EU financial assistance programme, numerous measures and reforms were
undertaken  to  strengthen  the  banking  system.  These  included  the  stress  testing  and
recapitalisation  of  troubled  banks;  the  identification  of  troubled  real  estate  assets  and  their
transfer to SAREB (Spain’s “bad bank”); and the reform of the savings banks. At the same time,
actions  and  reforms  at  European  level,  including  monetary  policy  (longer-term  refinancing
operations,  LTROs,  asset  purchase  programme, APP)  and  the  move  towards  banking  union,
have ensured liquidity and strengthened confidence in Europe’s monetary and financial system.
Financial  reforms  were  accompanied  by  a  series  of  reforms  to  labour  and  product
markets and to the public sector. The 2012 labour market reform gave priority to collective
bargaining agreements at firm level over those at sectoral or regional level. Reforms to product
markets, including the law on market unity, have sought to reduce regulatory obstacles to firms’
growth, although implementation has been challenging.
The Spanish economy has rebalanced as far as “flow” variables are concerned, while “stock”
imbalances are gradually correcting.
Banks’  asset  quality  and  solvency  has  substantially  improved,  as  reflected  in  higher
capital ratios and a steadily declining ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs). The NPL ratio
of Spanish banks has more than halved from 13.6% in 2013 to 6.4% now and continues to fall
steadily.  The  banking  sector  has  been  able  to  finance  growth  with  new  loans  while  steadily
deleveraging as legacy loans mature.
Private sector debt has fallen considerably. Deleveraging  of  firms  and  households  is  well
under  way,  with  debt  having  declined  by  almost  one-third  since  2012. At  the  same  time,  the
public debt-to-GDP ratio, while remaining very high at almost 100%, has stabilised. The public
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
deficit ratio came down from double-digit levels at the peak of the crisis to 3.1% in 2017.
More  than  two  million  jobs  have  been  created  since  the  end  of  2013  and  the
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  from  a  peak  of  more  than  26%  to  15%.  Throughout  the
recovery, the pace of employment growth has broadly matched that of GDP growth, generating
around  half  a  million  jobs  each  year.  In  a  context  of  subdued  wage  growth  and  low  inflation,
employment growth has supported disposable income and a recovery in consumer spending,
which is now close to its pre-crisis level.
Export  performance  has  substantially  improved,  helping  to  reduce  external  debt.  The
current account deficit of almost 10% of GDP before the financial crisis turned into a surplus in
2012  and  has  remained  positive  throughout  the  recovery.  The  number  of  exporting  firms  has
grown and exports now go to more destinations than in pre-crisis times.
Finally, wage moderation and low inflation are supporting competitiveness.  In  fact,  the
Spanish economy recovered the competitiveness lost in the decade prior to the financial crisis.
However, the recovery of the Spanish economy may have passed its cyclical peak and
downside risks have emerged. While still growing at a reasonable pace, the rate of economic
expansion has slowed gradually in recent quarters. Real GDP growth has decelerated in 2018
compared with the growth we have seen since the second half of 2014. This slowdown mainly
reflects weakness in net trade. Looking forward, global protectionism and weakening conditions
in  emerging  markets  represent  further  downside  risks  to  growth.  Internally,  the  present  low
savings rate of Spanish households and the need to restore savings in the near term, points to
moderation in consumption going forward.
Let me point to the three main challenges that the Spanish economy is facing at present,
in my view. The first relates to the process of fiscal consolidation. While well advanced,
it is still incomplete. The government deficit ratio is still the highest in the EU and it needs to be
further  reduced  to  bring  the  government  debt  ratio  on  to  a  downward  path.  In  fact,  adequate
buffers need to be rebuilt now, in times of solid growth and favourable financing conditions. This
would enable fiscal policy to support the economy in the event of any future shock.
Secondly, unemployment remains very high, as does the share of temporary employment.
Spain’s unemployment rate remains well above pre-crisis levels and is roughly the double of the
euro area rate. This situation calls for further reforms to address the duality of the labour market
and more effective active labour market policies to re-integrate young people and the long-term
unemployed.
Finally, productivity remains low and needs to be raised to maintain economic growth
and enable sustainable wage growth. Productivity gaps between regions and between large
and small firms point to regulatory fragmentation which still needs to be addressed. To enhance
productivity, measures to increase the scale of small firms in the SME sector, which tend to be
smaller than in peer countries, need to be pursued. More attention needs to be placed on the
education  system  and  professional  training  to  enhance  human  capital  and  reduce  skills
mismatches. Finally, greater investment in R&D and innovation by Spanish firms would enhance
their competitiveness and contribute to generate more growth through higher value added.
Only by raising productivity and correcting macroeconomic imbalances can the long-term growth
potential of the Spanish economy rise. This is a condition to place Spain on a solid growth path,
increase employment and raise wages to finally leave behind the financial crisis that erupted ten
years ago.
Let me conclude. The importance of increasing long-term growth potential is true for
Spain as it is for the whole euro area.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, I cannot emphasise enough that a robust euro area economy has to rely on
sound economic governance. Solidifying the institutional architecture of EMU is essential at this
juncture in order to foster cohesive economic performance without fragmentation or excessive
imbalances.
Reforms  at  the  national  and  EU  level  are  needed  to  uphold  a  stable  financial  system  and  a
resilient monetary union. A common stabilisation function, which − in the spirit of a true counter-
cyclical fiscal policy instrument – would maintain convergence in the event of large shocks, is an
overriding priority. Completing the banking union with the establishment of a European Deposit
Insurance  Scheme,  its  third  pillar,  and  firm  moves  towards  capital  markets  union,  promoting
deep  and  liquid  bond  and  equity  markets  in  Europe,  are  necessary  reforms  of  the  financial
sector. Attaining these goals is essential to safeguard financial stability, foster further integration
and support economic growth and well-being of European citizens.
Thank you for your attention.
1
See also Camba-Mendez, G. and Forsells, M., “The recent slowdown in euro area output growth reflects both
cyclical and temporary factors”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
