Luis  de  Guindos:  Investment,  technological  transformation  and
skills
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the joint EIB-
ECB  conference  on  investment,  technological  transformation  and  skills,  Luxembourg,  28
November 2018.
Introduction
 It  is  an  honour  to  open  this  joint  conference  on  “Investment,  technological  transformation  and
skills” together with EIB President Werner Hoyer.
The euro area economy is continuing to grow. We have now seen almost six consecutive years
of  expansion,  with  growth  that  is  broad-based  across  countries  and  sectors.  During  this
recovery,  the  countries  that  were  most  affected  by  the  crisis  have  regained  competitiveness
thanks to a combination of accommodative monetary policy, fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms.
But  challenges  remain  in  the  form  of  low  trend  growth  compared  with  other  advanced
economies,  and  persistently  high  public  and  private  debt  levels  in  a  number  of  euro  area
countries.  Further  efforts  are  therefore  needed  to  strengthen  productivity  growth  and  boost
productive  investments  to  lift  long-term  potential  growth.  In  turn,  this  higher  growth  will  help
reduce  debt  burdens,  create  fiscal  space  and  raise  long-term  equilibrium  interest  rates,
bolstering monetary policy’s ability to support macroeconomic stabilisation.
In that context, the discussions taking place at this conference are both timely and relevant for
policymakers.  In  the  rest  of  my  opening  remarks,  I  want  to  highlight  the  potential  productivity
benefits – and also the challenges – arising from digitalisation. I will also briefly comment on a
few areas where policy changes are needed to promote the greater diffusion of technology.
Digitalisation and its implications for productivity
The  global  economy  is  transforming  fast,  with  an  ever-increasing  share  of  technological  and
digital content. The proportion of total investment accounted for by intangible assets, reported as
intellectual  property  products  in  the  national  accounts,  has  almost  doubled  over  the  last  two
decades. And  not  all  intangible  assets  are  fully  captured  in  national  accounts  and  corporate
balance sheets under current reporting standards.  Other measures, such as connectivity and
2
digital public services, also show a steady rise.
1
A recent ECB survey of large companies  finds that digitalisation is viewed as something that
increases  productivity,  thanks  to  knowledge-sharing  and  more  efficient  production  processes.
But  the  impact  of  digitalisation  extends  beyond  productivity;  it  also  affects  potential  output,
4
competition, employment and economic welfare.
3
Let  me  give  some  examples.  Automation  and  the  increasing  use  of  robots  and  artificial
intelligence are changing the relative prices of labour and capital, and the allocation of resources
between them. The internet, social media, cloud computing and big data analysis are affecting
competition by altering relative prices and market shares between, for example, small and large
firms.
But the overall impact of digitalisation on productivity and potential growth does not depend solely
on  innovation  and  the  creation  of  new  technology.  For  new  technology  to  truly  achieve  its  full
effect, it has to spread from its creator to other businesses in the economy.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yet at present, firm-level productivity appears to be becoming more dispersed, as firms rich in
intangible assets are scaling up investment much more than firms that are lagging behind. This
divergence seems to be related to inefficiencies in the reallocation of resources from the least to
the most productive firms within each sector, rather than inefficient allocation between sectors.
Factors that drive such capital misallocation  appear to be partly related to market rigidities, poor
policy reactions and banks’ reluctance to address their non-performing loans.
5
There are three main avenues for policymakers to harness the benefits of technological progress
and drive an improvement in living standards. The first is to encourage education policies that
mitigate  the  impact  of  technology  on  some  workers.  The  second  is  to  bolster  competition  to
provide businesses with incentives to invest in technology. And the third is to ensure we have a
financial sector that is capable of supporting innovation and growth.
Digitalisation and demand for skills
6
Introducing  new  technologies  appears  to  reduce  the  demand  for  low  and  medium-skilled
workers.  At the same time, it creates new jobs which require highly skilled workers and provides
opportunities for further.  These changes already appear to be having repercussions for wage
distribution and working conditions.
7
These  challenges  come  at  a  time  when  labour’s  relative  contribution  to  potential  growth  is
diminishing  in  the  context  of  an  ageing  population.  All  else  being  equal,  unfavourable
demographics  increase  the  relative  importance  of  capital  deepening  for  underpinning  potential
8
growth.
Education and infrastructure policies promoting entrepreneurship could smooth the transition and
mitigate  adverse  effects  on  low-skilled  workers.  These  include  retraining  and  lifelong  learning
opportunities.  We  have  witnessed  a  sharp  increase  in  the  participation  rate  of  older  workers
during  the  past  decade.  Continuing  this  trend  by  providing  opportunities  for  this  part  of  the
population to reskill and remain connected to the labour market would help mitigate the impact of
ageing on growth.
Policies to support competitiveness
Policies  to  boost  competitiveness  and  attract  investment  in  Europe  are  an  important  step  in
promoting the diffusion of technology, and are rightly a recurrent theme of this conference.
Research  has  revealed  a  number  of  factors  that  can  inhibit  competitiveness  and  impede
investment decisions.  Beyond cyclical and financial factors, such as weak demand, uncertainty
and excessive corporate debt levels,
 structural factors, such as weak economic institutions
and rigid product and labour markets, can also play a negative role.
10
9
To encourage the effective diffusion of technology, structural and macro conditions favouring the
market entry and expansion of productive firms, as well as the exit of persistently unproductive
firms, need to be in place. To ensure a level playing field for firms in the area of new technology,
policies are also needed to settle issues of ownership, tax treatment, property rights, competition
and product regulation associated with intellectual assets. Reforming insolvency regimes would
break  the  vicious  circle  of  weak  banks  and  zombie  firms  having  an  adverse  impact  on
productivity.
Investment finance
11
That brings me to my last point. The widespread diffusion of technology requires financing that is
conducive to innovation and growth. Monetary policy has played a key role since the financial
crisis  by  helping  to  lower  financing  costs  and  increase  access  to  finance.  It  will  continue  to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
But what matters most in the long term is deep and integrated financial markets. Equity funding,
in particular, is becoming increasingly important, as confirmed by the positive impact of deeper
stock  markets  on  growth  in  high-tech  and  patent-intensive  industries.
  Investment  in  new
technology  and  intangible  assets  seems  to  be  more  reliant  on  firms’  internal  funding.
  This
appears to be related to the characteristics of intangible investment,
 such as the low market
value and the sunk cost nature of production, making it harder to use as collateral for external
funding. So completing the capital markets union is of paramount importance.
12
13
14
We  also  need  more  ambitious  policies  aimed  at  increasing  the  supply  of  private  equity,  and
especially  of  early-stage  venture  capital.
  The  development  of  fintech  has  the  potential  to
expand access to credit and other financial services, in particular for small businesses.
15
16
More broadly, to ensure an attractive investment environment in the euro area we should seek to
complete  the  banking  union,  ensure  adherence  to  fiscal  rules  and  fully  implement  structural
reforms.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Boosting productivity growth and ensuring the wide diffusion of technology is crucial to achieving
a long-term increase in living standards in Europe. There are many facets to this challenge, as
the broad and ambitious agenda for this conference shows. I look forward to the discussions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Human capital, knowledge in databases, organisational capital and brands are examples of assets not covered
in the national accounts. See also European Central Bank (2018), “Investment in intangible assets in the euro
area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7, November; and European Commission (2017), “Unlocking investment in
intangible assets in Europe”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 16, No 1, pp. 23–35. However, in Ahmad,
N., Ribarsky, J. and Reinsdorf, M. (2017), “Can potential mismeasurement of the digital economy explain the
post-crisis slowdown in GDP and productivity growth?”, Statistics Working Papers, OECD, the authors conclude
that, while mismeasurement may occur, its magnitude cannot alone explain the slowdown in measured GDP
growth or multi-factor productivity growth after the crisis.
See the box entitled “The role of digitalisation in shaping developments in potential output and the output gap in
the euro area”, in European Central Bank (2018), “Potential output in the post-crisis period”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 7, November.
See European Central Bank (2018), “Digitalisation and its impact on the economy: insights from a survey of
large companies”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7, November.
See the box entitled “The role of digitalisation in shaping developments in potential output and the output gap in
the euro area”, in European Central Bank (2018), “Potential output in the post-crisis period”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 7, November.
See Gamberoni, E., Giordano, C. and Lopez-Garcia, P. (2016), “Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro-
area: some stylized facts and possible determinants”, Working Paper Series, No 1981, ECB, November.
See International Monetary Fund (2018), “Capitalizing on Knowledge-Based Capital”, Euro Area Policies – Staff
Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation with Member Countries, June, p. 18.
There is substantial uncertainty surrounding estimates of the net impact of new technologies on employment.
For instance, the World Economic Forum article on “Understanding the impact of digitalization on society” states
that “current estimates of global job losses due to digitalization range from 2 million to 2 billion by 2030”. At the
same time, it also states that “digitalisation could create up to 6 million jobs worldwide between 2016 and 2025
in the logistics and electricity industries”.
Meanwhile, presumably higher depreciation rates – related to the rising share of intangible assets – require
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
higher rates of investment to maintain the capital stock.
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
See, for instance, Consolo, A., Langiulli, M. and Sondermann, D. (2018), “Business investment in euro area
countries: the role of institutions and debt overhang”, Applied Economics Letters, July.
See Barbiero, F., Popov, A. and Wolski, M. (2018), “Debt overhang and investment efficiency”,  Working Paper
Series, ECB, forthcoming; Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Laeven, L. and Moreno, D. N. (2018), “Debt Overhang, Rollover
Risk, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from the European Crisis”, NBER Working Paper 24555; Gebauer,
Setzer, Westphal (2018), Journal of International Money and Finance.
See Storz, M., Koetter, M., Setzer, R. and Westphal, A. (2017), “ Do we want these two to tango? On zombie firms
and stressed banks in Europe”, Working Paper Series, No 2104, ECB EWP; IWH Discussion Papers 13/2017
and  Andrews  and  Petroulakis  (2017),  “Breaking  the  shackles:  zombie  firms,  weak  banks,  insolvency
frameworks and implications for productivity”, OECD Working Papers, No 1433, OECD, November.
See Kremer, M. and Popov, A. (2018), “Financial development, financial structure, and growth: evidence from
Europe” in ECB, Financial Integration in Europe, May, pp. 65–97.
See Falato, A., Kadyrzhanova, D. and Sim, J.W. (2013), “Rising Intangible Capital, Shrinking Debt Capacity, and
the  US  Corporate  Savings  Glut”,  FEDS  Working  Paper  Series,  No  2013–67,  Federal  Reserve  System,
September.
For  more  details,  see  Haskel,  J.  and  Westlake,  S.  (2017),  Capitalism  without  Capital  –  The  Rise  of  the
Intangible Economy, Princeton University Press. See also the appendix entitled “Characteristics of intangibles
per asset type” in European Commission (2017), “Investment in the EU Member States: An Analysis of Drivers
and Barriers”, European Economy Institutional Papers, No 062, October, p. 80.
See Popov, A. and Roosenboom, P. (2012), “Venture capital and patented innovation: evidence from Europe,”
Economic Policy, Vol. 27(71), July, pp. 447–482.
See “The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech”, speech by Governor Lael Brainard, Federal Reserve Board
of Governors, at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Washington, D.C., 2 December 2016; and “The Promise of FinTech – Something New Under the Sun?”,
speech by Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Deutsche Bundesbank G20 conference on
Digitising finance, financial inclusion and financial literacy, Wiesbaden, 25 January 2017
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
