Yves Mersch: The future started yesterday
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  Bank  of  Latvia  conference  “Payments  in  the  22nd  century:  future  starts  today?”,
Riga, 3 October 2018.
 Predicting what payments will look like in the 22nd century is perhaps better left to science fiction
writers than to central bankers. Still, at least one thing I can be sure of is that payments will be
instant or cash-like.
And we don’t need to wait for the 22nd century to see this happen. Non-cash instant payments
are a reality today in several places around the world. This includes Europe: last year already
saw  the  launch  of  the  SEPA  Instant  Credit  Transfer  (SCT  Inst)  scheme,  developed  by  the
European Payments Council at the request of the Euro Retail Payments Board. Banks from the
Baltic  countries  were  among  the  first  to  embrace  instant  payments,  with  a  number  of  them
joining the scheme from day one.
However,  we  are  now  at  a  critical  stage  for  implementing  instant  payments.  The  number  of
banks offering instant payment services to their clients is steadily increasing, as is the use of
such services by European people and businesses. In November we will launch TARGET instant
payment  settlement  (TIPS):  the  Eurosystem  service  for  instant  payment  settlement  across
Europe  in  central  bank  money.  With  this  service,  the  Eurosystem  is  addressing  the  evolving
needs  of  market  participants  and  supporting  market  integration  by  facilitating  pan-European
reach  at  a  time  when  the  issuance  of  its  new  series  of  safe  and  widely-trusted  banknotes  is
nearing completion.
An opportunity for the European payments industry
The move towards instant payments is not just good news for end users; it is also good news for
the European payments industry. Cards are now the most popular and fastest-growing non-cash
payment instrument in Europe, and many of the most prominent innovations in payments are
card-based. Think of contactless payments and mobile wallets, as well as many online payment
solutions.
This  area  is  dominated  by  non-European  players,  with  international  card  schemes  taking  the
lead. European players are lagging behind, not least because of the lack of a pan-European card
scheme or even interoperable card networks. In this context, we should strive for a truly pan-
European instant solution rather than repeat past shortcomings.
Thanks to instant payments, European market players can now become leaders in innovation,
based  on  European  standards.  The  SCT  Inst  scheme  and  the  infrastructures  developed  to
process instant payments form the ideal basis for innovative payment solutions that meet the
needs of today’s and tomorrow’s end users.
Let’s be clear: this is more than just a need for speed. European people and businesses are
looking for payment solutions that fit seamlessly into their daily lives and business processes,
from person-to-person payments to online marketplaces, and from micropayments to industry
4.0.
Each of these payment solutions could be enhanced by an instant payment feature, but they also
require  additional  services  to  create  a  smooth  and  secure  payment  experience.  Payment
solutions can be integrated into or linked to mobile apps for ordering goods and services, thereby
providing vendors with real-time confirmation of incoming payments. And instant payments can
be integrated into business software and will undoubtedly pave the way for many other additional
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
services.  This  is  where  market  players  can  provide  added  value  and  create  new  business
opportunities.
Time to take action
Market  players  need  to  take  action.  Payment  service  providers  around  Europe  need  to  start
offering their customers instant payment services. And they need to do so quickly.
Experience  from  other  markets,  from  photography  to  music  to  bookshops,  shows  that  when
disruption hits, established players can quickly lose their seemingly comfortable position and find
themselves struggling to remain relevant.
Thanks  to  instant  payments,  the  European  payments  industry  can  create  a  pan-European
platform  for  innovation.  But  only  if  everyone  in  Europe  can  pay  each  other  instantly  and  the
service is not restricted to the customers of certain banks or residents of particular countries.
Moreover,  payment  service  providers  should  not  erect  any  barriers  to  the  uptake  of  instant
payments, for example by only offering them through a limited number of channels or by charging
prohibitively high fees. Such strategies will only drive end users to other players. No one owns
the customer. Web and technology giants are already knocking at the door, eager to leverage
their existing user base to quickly gain market share in payment services.
To  achieve  economies  of  scale  and  benefit  from  the  integrated  European  payments  market,
providers  of  instant  payment  services  should  also  ensure  that  their  services  are  truly  pan-
European. Their customers should be able to send and receive payments across Europe, in line
with the principles of the Single Euro Payments Area.
Ensuring this reachability is the responsibility of each individual payment service provider, but the
Eurosystem is also doing its part to facilitate pan-European reach. Our new TIPS service is in an
optimal position to do so: it has been designed as an extension of TARGET2 with its extensive
network of over 1,700 participants and more than 51,000 addressable Bank Identifier Codes. Its
pricing policy also helps it to achieve a broad reach. There will be no charge for opening and
maintaining  an  account  or  for  receiving  payments  and  reporting.  For  the  first  two  years  of
operation,  the  price  per  initiated  transaction  is  set  at  €0.002,  with  no  charges  for  the  first  ten
million payments settled on each TIPS account by the end of 2019. In addition, TIPS will offer a
flexible  participation  structure,  allowing  market  participants  to  participate  in  TIPS  directly,  to
connect as a reachable party or to use an instructing party to send instructions on their behalf.
With this flexible structure, we are not only providing a new standalone infrastructure but also
allowing the market to leverage existing clearing arrangements – subject to market participants’
choices  –  in  order  to  maximise  the  integration  benefits  of  the  new  service.  This  approach  is
consistent with that of the existing Eurosystem TARGET services as well as our new initiatives.
To promote euro area-wide, smooth and efficient payment systems in line with our mandate, we
might  even  have  to  reflect  on  whether  broader  access  to  central  bank  accounts  for  retail
purposes may be needed.
A clear parallel can be drawn with our aim to foster a true domestic capital market in the euro
area via the European Distribution of Debt Instruments (EDDI) initiative. The issuance, trading,
clearing  and  settlement  of  a  security  in  the  EU  should  not  be  affected  by  the  location  of  the
issuers, investors or intermediaries. The idea of EDDI is to facilitate a centralised issuance and
distribution  service  for  European  debt  securities,  exploring  synergies  with  the  other  TARGET
services and the Eurosystem collateral management system. The Governing Council recently
agreed  to  investigate  the  next  steps  for  the  EDDI  service  based  on  the  guiding  principles  of
efficiency, safety, harmonisation and neutrality.
Avoid creating new fragmentation
This  instant  payments  network  should  then  be  used  as  a  basis  for  pan-European  end-user
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
solutions.  There  are  almost  limitless  opportunities  to  design  innovative  services  on  top  of  the
basic SCT Inst scheme. In fact, we can already see several initiatives flourishing around Europe:
mobile payment solutions for person-to-person and point-of-sale payments, to name just one.
Unfortunately, many of these are limited to one country, or even just a few banks within a single
country. Unless this changes, users of these services will not be able to benefit from the pan-
European nature of SCT Inst. They will have to look for alternatives when they travel, order goods
and services from other countries or do business across Europe, and they will not care whether
these alternatives are based on European schemes or not.
It would be a great pity if fragmentation were to be re-introduced at the end-user level. Suppliers
should  strive  for  pan-European  designs,  using  common  standards  and  working  together  with
stakeholders.
Take point-of-sale payments, which make up the largest segment of the retail payments market
in terms of transaction volumes. Vendors of all types and sizes could benefit from increased cost
efficiency and improved cash management if they could accept instant payments at the point-of-
sale. Point-of-sale solutions for instant payments could also allow businesses that do not accept
cards for cost or practical reasons to offer their customers the choice to pay electronically. Such
solutions should not replicate the situation that exists for cards, with non-interoperable national
solutions. They should be based on common standards so that consumers can make instant
payments at points-of-sale anywhere in Europe.
Conclusions
The SCT Inst scheme and the new instant payments infrastructures have laid the foundation for
a future-proof European payments landscape.
Now it is up to the market to build on that that foundation. This means offering instant payment
services that meet clients’ needs, at attractive prices. Charging prohibitive fees will not support
the take-up of instant payments. On the contrary, it would only drive customers towards other
players.  Rather  than  being  driven  by  the  services  offered  by  other  players,  why  not  drive
developments yourselves and reap the respective benefits? Those market participants that take
this opportunity to offer innovative payment services to their customers at pan-European level will
be  ready  for  the  payments  landscape  of  tomorrow  and  beyond;  perhaps  even  into  the  22nd
century.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
