Ravi Menon: Singapore FinTech - innovation, inclusion, inspiration
Presentation  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at
Singapore FinTech Festival 2018, Singapore, 12 November 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
What a man and what a story.
 Saqib’s story shows how technology can help find innovative solutions to real problems.
It shows how innovation guided by empathy can help create a more inclusive society.
And of course it is a story that is inspiration to all of us – to do better, to be better, to help
others.
That is why we asked Saqib to kick off the third edition of the Singapore FinTech Festival this
morning.
Because  Saqib’s  story  exemplifies  what  Singapore’s  own  FinTech  journey  is  all  about  –
innovation, inclusion, inspiration.
Innovation – because we want to find better ways of doing things.
Inclusion – because we want to benefit as many people as possible.
Inspiration – because amidst all challenges around us, there is hope in a better world.
Please join me once again in thanking Saqib for being here with us today.
Financial Services Built Around Us
Welcome to the third edition of the Singapore FinTech Festival (SFF).
This year, we have close to 40,000 participants from more than 100 countries.
SFF has become the biggest annual gathering of the global FinTech community. You guys
made it happen. Thank you all for your overwhelming and unstinting support.
When we began our FinTech journey in 2015, we imagined a Smart  Financial  Centre where
innovation and technology are pervasive.
We said we want to increase efficiency, manage risks better, create new opportunities, and
improve people’s lives.
We didn’t know – we still don’t know – how the future will look like…
… but we imagined what we want it to look like, and set about trying to create it.
Imagine a world where financial services are built around us – around our life and our needs.
Imagine a world where identity is human.
Imagine a world with no identity cards, no passwords, no mothers’ maiden name. 
We are who we are, not just what we have or what we remember.
This is how we have always identified one another throughout history – by recognition, more
human, more natural.
But  when  we  have  large  numbers  of  people  and  we  don’t  know  one  another,  we  had  to
resort to artificial means.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
But advances in biometrics are now making identity human again.
Many banks are already letting us use our face as our new banking password.
Here in Singapore, OCBC Bank is already doing this.
Next, imagine a world where payments are invisible.
Our shopping experience will be transformed.  
Cameras and sensors identify us and the items that we place in and out of our shopping
bag.
And when we are done, we just walk out of the store!
No more checkouts, no more lines, no more fussing with cash and credit cards.
Fantasy? Just visit Amazon Go – it is already happening.
Imagine a world where insurance is intuitive.
How many of us truly understand our insurance policies … or are fully confident they will pay
out when we need them?
Imagine a world where the payout is automatically triggered by events and is instantaneous.
No more lengthy claims forms, no more waiting time, no more opaque processes.
Science fiction?  Not quite.
MetLife’s Lumenlab here in Singapore is already making this a reality for gestational diabetes
insurance. They are testing this out in MAS’ regulatory sandbox.
Imagine a world where financial advice is integrated.
Imagine our own personal financial dashboard on our mobile devices.
giving us a complete view of our finances - pulling in data from banks we have deposits
with,  insurance  companies  we  have  policies  with,  and  broker-dealers  we  have
investments with ….
…. not to mention, our pension or social security funds, tax liabilities, and mortgages
 … all in one place: a personal balance sheet – in real-time!
And where financial advice is customised for us, based on an integrated view of our unique
situations, at important milestones in our life ….
…  buying  our  first  home,  planning  our  children’s  education,  looking  for  investment
opportunity to grow our retirement nest.
Many FinTech firms are already developing apps and solutions to do this.
This is the financial sector we want to create …
customised for our needs, invisible to our eyes, and an absolute delight.
And I’m very happy that Singapore’s three local banks understand this.
That’s why UOB Bank says it is Right By You!
OCBC Bank says Simply Spot On!
DBS Bank says Live More, Bank Less!
Innovation and technology are key to realising this future.  But they are not enough.  We need a
FinTech ecosystem to make this happen.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
We need common standards, open architecture, and inter-operable infrastructure.
We need collaboration across government, financial industry, research institutions, and the
FinTech community at large.
We need a free flow of ideas, knowledge, investment, people.
And  growing  this  ecosystem  is  what  we  have  been  hard  at  work  for  the  last  3-4  years  in
Singapore with private and public sector coming together in collaboration.
Let me touch on six components of this FinTech ecosystem we are working on.
First, people.
Without people – their skills, their energy, and their enterprise - there is no FinTech.
Second, identity.  
Establishing who we are dealing with and authenticating information about that person is
the first step in any digital transaction.
Third, payments.
Swift, secure, and seamless payments are fundamental to a digital economy.
Fourth, data governance. 
We must ensure the responsible use of data and seamless and secure flow of data. 
Fifth, applied research.
We need to build strong capabilities in FinTech-related research directed at solving real-
world problems.
Sixth, platforms for innovation. 
We need mechanisms to foster collaboration and co-creation ...
… to translate ideas into products; bridge problems with solutions.
People
Let me start with the most critical part of ecosystem - people.
The shortage of tech skills and talent is a global phenomenon. 
For a small city-state like Singapore, it is almost existential …. and that is why it is our top
priority.
Singapore is taking a multi-pronged approach: 
our institutes of higher learning are adapting their curriculum with industry input to develop
students who are able to work with emerging technologies;
our FIs are putting in place programmes to help re-skill mid-career professionals to take on
the jobs of the future; and
we will continue to welcome and embrace top talents from across the world to augment our
own talent pool and raise the game here.
Minister for Education, Ong Ye Kung, will speak more about skills and talent this Wednesday.
Identity
Let me then move on to the pain of verifying identity – the KYC problem. 
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  personal  KYC,  the  Singapore  government  has  taken  the  first  step  with National  Digital
Identity (NDI) …
…  which  every  resident  of  Singapore  can  use  to  establish  his  legal  identity  in  a  secure
manner - with two-factor authentication and a public-private key pair - when making online
transactions.
A powerful component of NDI is MyInfo.
This is a digital service that enables citizens to authorise third-parties to access their
personal data sitting across many different government agencies.
With consent, third parties can use MyInfo APIs to access data that is government-verified to
authenticate their customers and make business decisions relating to that customer.
Last year, MAS and the Government Technology Agency of Singapore (GovTech) started a
pilot with four banks to enable individuals to open a bank account online using MyInfo.
Today, we can open a bank account or apply for a credit card - online and instantly –
when we give consent to the bank to access our data through MyInfo.
More  than  20  FIs  are  now  using  MyInfo  to  provide  more  than  110  digital  financial
services.
We  have  substantially  solved  the  personal  KYC  problem.    But  corporate  KYC  is  far  more
complex. 
Last year, I shared with you that MAS is working with local and foreign banks to explore a shared
services utility for doing corporate KYC.
This is potentially a transformative project.
And we made good progress in harmonising various banks’ KYC systems and integrating
the proposed KYC utility with the banks’ infrastructure.
This  is  no  mean  feat  given  the  diversity  of  banks’  KYC  processes  and  internal  IT
systems
But the economics did not work out: our proposed solution was going to cost more than the
savings that banks will get out of it.
So we have decided to take a pause on the project.
The  banks  participating  in  the  KYC  project  will  publish  a  report  this  week  on  their  learning
experience.
I hope this report will inspire new ideas to help solve corporate KYC problems in the most
cost-efficient way because this is a problem that needs to be solved.
We tried, we failed, we will learn, and we will do better next time.
Innovation is about experimenting and learning from setbacks.
Just as we showcase our successes, let us also be open about our setbacks.
This is the spirit of enterprise we need in the financial sector and in Singapore.
And we will continue to explore other ways to alleviate KYC pain for FIs and their customers.
MAS and the GovTech are now working with the industry to facilitate FIs’ credit assessment of
SMEs using trusted government data.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, young SMEs that wish to obtain bank financing may face difficulties due to the lack of
credit history.
We will help pool trusted data from government sources on the business and key individuals
associated with the SMEs to facilitate a more informed credit assessment.
We will run a pilot with three banks in the first half of next year.
Payments
Next, payments.
We have substantially completed Singapore’s national e-payment infrastructure.
There is FAST, a 24x7 real-time funds transfer infrastructure.
There is PayNow, which rides on FAST to enable instant money transfer to an individual or
business, using their personal ID number, mobile phone number, or unique entity number.
There  is  UPOS,  or  unified  point-of-sale  terminal,  that  can  accept  all  major  credit  card
brands, whether using a smart chip, NFC, or QR code.
And  now  we  have  SGQR,  a  single,  standardised  QR  code  that  can  represent  multiple
payment schemes; this is the first of its kind in the world.
The  pain  point  that  remains  –  for  banks,  businesses,  and  individuals  –  is  the  cross-border
payments and settlement of assets. 
Cross-border  payments  involve  multiple  currencies  and  cross-border  settlements  involve
multiple assets, and there is no single trusted central party to do this.
This is why we think distributed ledger technology holds promise in this area.
Many of you are familiar with Project Ubin.
It involves MAS and the financial industry here working closely.
It  aims  to  make  cross-border  payments  and  settlements  cheaper  and  faster  at  no
compromise in security or privacy, using blockchain technology.
In 2016, Project Ubin demonstrated that banks could pay one another without going through
MAS, using a blockchain based digital representation of the Singapore Dollar.
Last  year,  Project  Ubin  successfully  achieved  decentralised  netting  of  payments  while
preserving transactional privacy.
This year, we have made two more advances.
First,  Project  Ubin  team  has successfully  harnessed  blockchain  technology  for  the 
settlement of tokenised assets.
In the analogue world, payment and exchange of goods are done at the same time.
In financial terms, we call this “delivery-vs-payment” or DvP.
It eliminates settlement risk, i.e. sellers cannot abscond with money without delivering
the goods.
But how do we achieve DvP and eliminate settlement risk in the digital world?
MAS,  Singapore  Exchange,  and  various  industry  partners  worked  together  to  tokenise  digital
currencies and securities assets so that they can be simultaneously exchanged thus achieving
final settlement and DvP.
This has potentially powerful implications for not just the financial sector but also the broad
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
spectrum of economy.
We have published a report from the experiment.
Please take a look, consider the findings, and work with us to advance this cause of
real-time settlement. It is still a holy grail in the world of finance that we must collectively
solve.
Second, MAS is working with like-minded central banks to explore faster, cheaper, and more
efficient cross-border payments.
MAS,  together  with  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  Bank  of  England  and  various  commercial
banks, did an in-depth study of the inefficiencies of today’s international payment systems.
MAS  and  Bank  of  Canada  have  begun  work  on linking  our  respective  blockchain
platforms  to  explore  the  possibility  of  instant,  24/7  settlement  of  cross-border
payments transactions.
We are very much looking forward to reporting our progress on this at next year’s SFF.
Data Governance
The fourth element of FinTech ecosystem is data governance. 
The ability to aggregate, store, process, and transmit data – especially across borders – is
critical to the digital age.
Yet, we all have deep-seated concerns about the privacy, confidentiality, security and ethical
use of data.
If we don’t address these concerns, we will not have the consensus that is necessary to
achieve the many benefits of technology.
What do we need to get right in data governance?
Data must be protected – we must safeguard privacy, confidentiality, and security.
Data must be used in a responsible, transparent, and ethical manner.
We must be able to explain the results of data driven algorithms. We cannot hide behind
the black box.
Humans, not machines, are accountable for decisions driven by AI or data analytics.
We must ensure that outcomes of data or AI driven processes are ethical, free of bias,
and socially acceptable.
Only then, can we create an ecosystem where data flows seamlessly in a trusted manner.
MAS  has  been  actively  working  with  the  industry  to  develop principles  to  guide  the
responsible use of data in financial services. 
We  are  pleased  to  release  today  a  set  of  principles  to  promote Fairness,  Ethics,
Accountability & Transparency, or FEAT, in the use of AI and data analytics.
I’m told this is the first of its kind in the world – where the regulator and industry have come
together to set guidance on the responsible use of AI and data analytics. And I am sure this
is a living document that will be continually updated as we learn more.
Next, on the international front: we need more data connectivity, and less data localisation.
This is a serious risk.
Data localisation measures are on the rise around the world.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  data  cannot  cross  borders,  the  digital  economy  cannot  cross  borders  and  we  will  be
poorer for it.
Not  all  data  localisation  is  bad:  there  may  be  some  legitimate  concerns  about  national
security.
But a good part of data localisation that is happening in the world today is due to misguided
notions of cyber security or data privacy or, worse still, old-fashioned protectionism.
This is a key challenge for the technolgy community to solve together with policy makers – how
to enhance data connectivity while taking into account the issues of data sovereignty.
Many of the technologies do exist today: end-to-end encryption, anonymisation.
Some experiments are already underway.
For  example,  here  in  Singapore,  UOB  Bank  is  collaborating  with  Intel  to  test  out  an
interesting solution.
It will allow the bank’s staff in Singapore to run a federated analysis of data residing in
other  countries  and  obtain  an  integrated  output  of  that  analysis,  without  seeing  any
actual data.
MAS  and  Bank  of  Thailand  are  very  keen  on  this  project  and  are  participating  as
observers of the project.
We need common data standards across countries so that data can flow freely in environment
of trust and security.
In  the  digital  economy  of  future, data  connectivity  agreements  among  countries  will
become as important as today’s free trade agreements.
Applied Research
Another important element of FinTech ecosystem is applied research.
Last  year,  MAS  launched  the S$27  million  grant  scheme  to  support  R&D  in AI  and  data
analytics for the financial sector.
We have received more than 30 applications from financial and research institutions.
We have now put out five calls for applied research proposals:
in econometrics and data science,
back-testing methodologies,
quantum computing for the financial sector, and
explainable AI.
Last year, MAS and the industry also began collaborating with MIT Media Lab to do serious
FinTech R&D.
MAS, industry professionals, and MIT researchers have come together towards developing
prototypes  that  look  into applications  of AI  and  distributed  ledger  technology  in  the
financial sector.
They  include  use  cases  in  smart  contracts,  trade  finance,  and  central  bank  digital
currencies.
And earlier this year, the Intellectual Property Office of Singapore established a FinTech Fast
Track initiative for patents.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Under  the  Fast  Track, FinTech patents can be granted in as quickly as six months,
compared to the industry convention which can be up to two years.
Once  patented  in  Singapore,  applicants  can  leverage  on  our  global  patent  highways  to
expedite the registration of their patents in more than 30 overseas markets.
Platforms for Innovation
The final piece in FinTech ecosystem - platforms for innovation. 
Innovation does not occur in isolation. 
We  need  platforms  to  connect  people  and  ideas;  problems  and  solutions;  and  foster
collaboration.
One such platform we are excited about is AFIN – the ASEAN Financial Innovation Network.
Let’s begin with the problem statement.
There are about 1.7 billion adults globally who are unbanked.
One  out  of  three  of  the  unbanked  come  from  just  four  countries  in Asia  –  China,  India,
Pakistan, Indonesia.
It  is  a  shame  that  in  this  day  and  age,  so  many  do  not  have  access  to  a  bank  account,
secure and efficient means of payment, or insurance protection.
The root of this problem is two-fold.
Banks face high costs in reaching out to customers in remote villages.
And frankly, many of their mainstream financial services may not be suited to the needs
of these customers.
FinTech firms, on other hand, are able to create agile and mobile digital solutions to access
and serve these underserved segments.
But they lack the resources to scale and penetrate new markets.
This is where AFIN comes in, to bring banks and FinTech firms together to develop solutions to
penetrate these hard-to-reach markets.
AFIN  is  spearheaded  by  MAS,  the  ASEAN  Bankers  Association,  and  the  World  Bank’s
International Finance Corporation.
This Wednesday, AFIN will launch API Exchange, or APIX.
It  is  the world’s first cross-border, open architecture platform to enhance financial
inclusion.
APIX is both an online FinTech Marketplace and FinTech Sandbox.
As a marketplace, it will enable FIs to discover and connect with FinTech firms through
APIs on a globally curated platform.
As  a  sandbox,  it  provides  a  platform  for  FIs  and  FinTech  firms  to  collaborate  and
experiment on solutions in a contained environment.
Please step forward to participate in this exciting enterprise to deepen financial inclusion
in ASEAN and the Asia-Pacific region.
Next,  MAS  and  the  InfoComm  Media  Development  Authority  (IMDA)  are  working  together  to
create a cross-border innovation platform for SMEs called Business sans Borders.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Business sans Borders will do two things:
It  will  enable  SMEs  to  connect  in  a  global  services  marketplace,  where  they  can  explore
synergies in digitalising their business processes and mutualise costs.
It will allow solution providers to more effectively reach out to SMEs who tend to be highly
dispersed and are sometimes hard to reach.
Business sans Borders will begin with a proof-of-concept next year, with three features:
first, a sandbox where start-ups and established players come together to experiment and
build relevant solutions;
second, an “app store” where SMEs can access a wide range of services, from finance and
logistics to human resources; and
third, an AI engine to match SME suppliers with buyers for products and services, across
ASEAN and beyond. 
Conclusion
Let me end where I began.
FinTech is not just about technology – though technology is very important in all that we do and
will help to solve many real problems.
FinTech is not just about finance – though we want to create a world where financial services are
built  around  us,  and  we  want  empower  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  to  participate  in  the
modern economy.
FinTech is about what Saqid Shaikh reminded us of earlier today – a spirit of enterprise that is
infused with empathy and lifts us to be better people.
It is about innovation, inclusion, and inspiration.
Everything  we  do  in  FinTech  must  always  have  a  larger  purpose  –  to  improve  the  lives  of
individuals, to build a more dynamic economy, to promote a more inclusive society.
This is the FinTech spirit.  And over the next five days of this Festival, may you find that spirit and
may you be inspired to break new ground, and seek a better, newer world.
Thank you all for your support. Have a great FinTech Festival!
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
