Christopher Kent: Securitisation and the housing market
Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, to the Australian Securitisation Forum Conference, Sydney, 26 November 2018.
 I thank Emma Doherty, Kate Fernandes and Eden Hatzvi for invaluable assistance in preparing
these remarks.
Introduction
Good afternoon, and thank you to the Australian Securitisation Forum for their invitation. It’s a
pleasure to be here.
Today  I’ll  provide  an  update  on  developments  in  the  markets  for  housing  and  housing  credit.
These markets are closely related and both are of considerable interest to those that issue and
those that invest in Australian residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS).
Along the way, I’ll make use of data on residential mortgages from RMBS that are eligible for
repurchase  operations  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  Among  other  things,  these  data  are  a  useful
source of timely information on interest rates actually paid, loan by loan. As I’ll demonstrate, this
allows us to infer something about shifts in the supply of, and demand for, housing credit, thereby
shedding some light on the different forces driving these markets.
1
With this background in mind, I’ll also review some recent developments in the RMBS market.
And I’ll finish by taking the opportunity to emphasise that RMBS issuers and investors should be
prepared for any future changes in the use and availability of benchmark interest rates.
Interactions between the housing market and the market for housing credit
As highlighted recently in a speech by the Deputy Governor, the markets for housing and housing
credit are going through a period of significant adjustment.  After years of strong growth, housing
prices have been declining nationally, driven by falls in Melbourne and Sydney over the past year.
Also,  there  has  been  a  noticeable  decline  in  investor  credit  growth  and  an  easing  in  owner-
occupier  credit  growth.  The  cycles  in  the  growth  of  overall  housing  prices  and  investor  credit
have moved together quite closely over the past few years (Graph 1).
2
 1 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Underpinning these changes, there have been shifts in the demand for, and supply of housing, as
well as in the demand for, and supply of, housing credit.
Credit supply affecting housing demand
The links between these two markets run in both directions, from housing credit to the housing
market, and from the housing market to housing credit. Of late, the story more commonly told,
though, is that a tightening in the supply of credit over recent years has impinged on the demand
for housing.
This story is certainly the more apparent one in terms of its causes and effects. In particular, the
measures  implemented  by  regulators  over  recent  years  to  address  the  risks  associated  with
some forms of housing lending have worked to mitigate those risks and they have also led to a
noticeable slowing of investor credit. This, in turn, has contributed to a decline in the demand for
housing.
 2 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
Again, these links have been discussed by Guy Debelle and are well-documented in the Bank’s
latest Financial  Stability  Review  (FSR).   In  late  2014,  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation
Authority  (APRA)  set  a  benchmark  for  investor  lending  growth  at  each  bank  of  no  more  than
10  per  cent  per  annum  (Graph  2).   Then  in  March  2017, APRA  announced  it  would  require
interest-only loans – which are disproportionately used by investors – to be less than 30 per cent
of each bank’s new lending. Over the same period, several other measures were implemented,
including to tighten up the ways in which banks assessed the ability of borrowers to service their
loans, and to limit the share of loans that constituted a large portion of the value of the property
being purchased.
4
Banks responded to these requirements in two key ways. First, for some years now they have
been  tightening  lending  standards,  thereby  reducing  the  availability  of  credit  to  higher-risk
borrowers. Second, banks raised interest rates for new and existing borrowers, first on investor
loans from 2015, and then on interest-only loans in 2017 (Graph 3). In other words, the banks
tightened the supply of credit, most notably for investors.
 3 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The FSR presents estimates of the effect of APRA’s first round of regulatory changes from late
2014.  The  key  conclusions  of  that  analysis  are  that,  with  the  introduction  of  the  10  per  cent
investor credit growth benchmark:
the composition of new lending shifted away from investors and towards owner-occupiers,
with little change in overall housing loan growth;
and housing prices have grown more slowly in regions with higher shares of investor-owned
properties.
So, that’s the story that emphasises the effect of prudential measures on the supply of credit.
And, in turn, the effect of tighter credit supply on the demand for housing.
Housing market developments affecting investor demand
I now want to draw your attention to the story less often told about the important causal link going
in the other direction. In particular, the correction in the housing market over the past year or so
appears to have been impinging on the demand for credit.
There are a number of reasons for the ongoing adjustment in housing prices:
the aforementioned reduction in the supply of credit;
the large increase in the supply of new housing associated with the high levels of housing
 4 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
construction in Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney;
weaker demand from foreign buyers due to stricter enforcement of Chinese capital controls
and various policy measures in Australia (many of which were implemented by various state
governments)  that  have  made  it  more  costly  for  foreign  residents  to  purchase  and  hold
housing;
and last, but by no means least, the very substantial growth in housing prices over a long
period, which had pushed housing prices to record levels as a share of household incomes
and raised the prospects for a correction.
In  support  of  this  last  point,  I  note  that  housing  prices  in  Melbourne  and  Sydney  (which  had
increased  by  55  and  75  per  cent  respectively  since  2012)  are  currently  experiencing  larger
declines than in Brisbane (where housing prices had risen 20 per cent from 2012 to the recent
peak; Graph 4).  It is also worth noting that housing prices are currently rising in Adelaide and
Hobart.  In  addition,  in  Melbourne  and  Sydney house  prices  had  run  up  further  than apartment
6
prices, and it is now house prices that have declined the most.
5
While there may have been numerous causal factors, after a period of slowing housing price
growth, more recently it is clear that housing prices are in decline in a number of major markets.
 5 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
This dynamic would have weighed heavily on the minds of buyers; particularly investors whose
only motivation for buying is the return on the asset. An expectation of even a modest capital loss
provides a strong incentive for them to delay buying a property, particularly in an environment of
relatively low rental yields.
But how can we assess the role of factors affecting credit supply versus those affecting credit
demand? Changes in the price of credit – that is, interest rates – can help. Other things equal, a
fall  in  the  supply  of  credit  relative  to  demand  can  be  expected  to  be  associated  with  higher
interest rates on housing loans. In contrast, a fall in the demand for credit (relative to supply)
should be associated with a decline in interest rates. Just to be clear, I’m talking about the credit
supply and demand curves shifting inwards. The former, by itself, reduces quantities while prices
rise as the equilibrium shifts up along the demand curve. The latter, by itself, reduces quantities
but decreases prices as the equilibrium shifts down along the supply curve.
So  what’s  happened  to  the  interest  rates  borrowers  are  actually  paying?  The  Securitisation
Dataset provides estimates for both owner-occupiers and investors.
There  has  been  a  modest  broad-based  decline  in  outstanding  mortgage  rates  in  the
Securitisation  Dataset  over  the  year  to  August  (Graph  5).  This  suggests  that  banks  were
responding to weakness in credit demand by competing more vigorously to provide loans to high-
quality borrowers. Indeed, looking just at new loans there is some evidence that average variable
interest rates declined by more for investors than owner-occupiers, which is consistent with a
noticeable decline in the demand for investor credit.
 6 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, compositional changes might also explain why there was a slight decline in interest
rates over this period. In particular, the tightening in lending standards has helped to shift the
profile of loans away from higher-risk borrowers. This shift would have contributed to the decline
in  average  interest  rates  paid  as  better  quality  borrowers  tend  to  get  loans  at  lower  rates.
However,  it  turns  out  that  rates  have  declined  over  this  period  even  within  the  set  of  low-risk
borrowers – for example, those with low loan-to-valuation ratios (LVRs) (Graph 6). So the decline
in average rates paid has been driven by factors other than just compositional changes.7
 7 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
While banks began the process of tightening lending standards from around 2015, over the past
year or so they have extended these efforts by applying greater rigour to their assessments of
the ability of prospective borrowers to service loans. For example, banks have been assessing
borrowers’ expenditures more thoroughly, which is likely to have contributed to reductions in the
maximum loan sizes offered to borrowers.  Notwithstanding these changes, there are two other
pieces  of  evidence  that  suggest  that  factors  other  than  just  a  tightening  in  constraints  on  the
supply-side have been affecting housing credit and housing market developments over the past
year or so:
8
First, the majority of borrowers had earlier chosen to borrow much less than the maximum
amounts offered by lenders. Hence, reductions in the sizes of maximum loans on offer over
9
the past year does not imply one-for-one reduction in credit actually extended.
Second, given that owner-occupiers have lower incomes on average than investors, they
are  likely  to  have  faced  noticeable  reductions  in  maximum  loan  sizes  as  a  result  of  the
recent  tightening  in  serviceability  practices.  However,  owner-occupier  credit  growth  has
remained notably higher than investor credit growth.
 8 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
In summary, weakness in credit demand – stemming from the dynamics in the housing market –
has  been  a  significant  development  over  the  past  year  or  so.  This  is  not  to  say  that  ongoing
weakness of credit supply has not also been at work since then, but that credit supply is not the
only part of the story.
Broader developments in the securitisation market
So far I have focused on the prudentially regulated banks. While the non-banks still only account
for a modest share of outstanding mortgages, the sector has experienced very strong growth
over recent years and is an important source of competition for the banks.
The  RMBS  market  is  a  major  source  of  funding  for  the  non-bank  providers  of  residential
mortgages, and so RMBS issuance provides an indication of the recent growth in this sector.
Last year, RMBS issuance was at its highest level since the global financial crisis. Non-banks’
issuance was in line with the high levels issued by this sector in the mid-2000s (Graph 7). In
2018, RMBS issuance in aggregate has been lower, but this has been largely been driven by
decreased issuance by banks. Non-banks, by contrast, are continuing to issue close to $4 billion
of RMBS per quarter.
This high volume of RMBS issuance by non-banks is consistent with a sizeable increase in their
mortgage lending. This is an unsurprising consequence of the tighter supervision and regulation
of mortgage lending by banks. This is not to say that non-banks are unregulated. They operate
 9 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
under a licensing regime managed by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
And,  as  my  colleague  Michele  Bullock  mentioned  recently,  the  members  of  the  Council  of
Financial  Regulators  (which  includes  the  Reserve  Bank, APRA  and ASIC)  are  monitoring  the
growth of the non-bank lenders for possible emerging financial stability risks.
10
The Reserve Bank’s liaison indicates that non-banks have been lending to some borrowers who
may  otherwise  have  obtained  credit  from  banks  in  the  absence  of  the  regulatory  measures.
Consistent with this, the Securitisation Dataset shows that a rising share of non-bank lending
has been to investors. Indeed, there has been at least a five-percentage-point increase in the
share of investor loans across all outstanding non-bank deals in the Securitisation Dataset over
the past two-and-a-half years (Graph 8).
 This is in contrast to the share of total bank loans to
investors, which has been declining over that period.
11
Similarly, the share of non-bank loans that are on an interest-only basis has been stable over the
past  couple  of  years,  whereas  the  share  of  bank  loans  that  are  interest-only  has  declined
significantly over the same period.
 10 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The increase in the share of investor housing in deals issued by non-banks is one of the few
noticeable changes in the composition of the collateral underpinning RMBS in the past couple of
years. Indeed, for deals by non-banks the share of loans with riskier characteristics such as high
LVRs or self-employed borrowers has been little changed.
One of the other changes to loan pools in new deals is a fall in seasoning (i.e. the age of loans
when  the  deal  is  launched).  This  has  been  most  pronounced  for  non-banks  (Graph  9).  It  is
consistent  with  non-banks  writing  a  lot  more  loans.  Hence,  warehouses  of  their  loans  are
reaching desired issuance sizes more quickly.
Despite the pull-back in RMBS issuance by the major banks over recent years, the broader stock
of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  on  issue  increased  by  around  $20  billion  over  the  past  18
months, after remaining broadly stable for the previous 5 years (Graph 10; in addition to RMBS,
ABS  cover  other  assets  such  as  car  loans  and  credit  card  receivables).  Demand  for  these
additional asset-backed securities has been driven by non-residents.
 11 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
As well as a shift in the composition of investors in ABS, we have observed some changes in
deal structures over recent years. Of particular note, the average number of tranches per deal
has increased from around four to eight (Graph 11). The increase has been broad-based across
different types of issuers. This general trend covers deals with a greater number of tranches with
differing levels of subordination, as well as deals where the top tranche is split into a number of
individual tranches with different characteristics but equal subordination.
 12 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  have  also  seen  what  might  be  termed  greater  ‘specialisation’  of  individual  tranches.  For
instance, in recent years the use of one or more tranches with less common features – such as
foreign currency, short term or green features – has increased.
 This increased specialisation
is consistent with issuers addressing the needs of different types of investors.
12
All of these developments point to the evolution of the Australian securitisation market over the
past few years, with non-bank issuers playing an increasingly important role and non-resident
investors taking an increasing share of issuance.
Benchmark interest rates, RMBS pricing and funding costs
The  increase  in  bank  bill  swap  (BBSW)  rates  in  early  2018  has  led  to  a  modest  rise  in  the
funding costs of both banks and non-banks.
 However, the increase in overall funding costs has
been a bit greater for non-bank issuers than for banks. This is because banks have a sizeable
proportion  of  their  liabilities  –  such  as  retail  deposits  –  that  do  not  reprice  in  line  with  BBSW
rates.  Also,  the  bulk  of  non-banks’  loans  are  funded  via  RMBS  issuance,  and  the  cost  of
issuance has risen by a bit more than BBSW rates (Graph 12). The premium over the BBSW
benchmark rate has risen to the level of two years ago. At the margin, these changes mean that
13
 13 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
non-bank issuers are not able to compete as aggressively on price for new borrowers as banks
than was the case a year ago.
Most lenders have passed through modest increases in their funding costs to borrowers over the
past  few  months.  Despite  these  increases,  competition  for  new  loans  remains  strong,  and
interest rates for new loans are still well below outstanding rates. So credit supply is available to
good quality borrowers on good terms and there is a strong financial incentive to shop around.
Interest Rate Benchmarks for the Securitisation Market
One  final  point  I’d  like  to  make  on  pricing,  is  that  RMBS  issuers  and  investors  should  be
considering the implications of developments in interest rate benchmarks. In light of the issues
around  benchmarks  such  as  LIBOR  (the  London  Inter-Bank  Offered  Rate),  substantial  efforts
have been made to reform these benchmarks to support the smooth functioning of the financial
system.
BBSW rates are important Australian dollar interest rate benchmarks, and the 1-month BBSW
 14 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
rate is frequently used in the securitisation market. We have worked closely with the ASX and
market  participants  to  ensure  that  BBSW  rates  are  anchored  as  much  as  possible  to
transactions in the underlying bank bill market. However, the most robust tenors are 6-month and
3-month  BBSW,  which  are  the  points  at  which  banks  frequently  issue  bills  to  investors.  In
contrast, the liquidity of the 1-month BBSW market is lower than it once was. This is mainly due
to the introduction of liquidity standards that reduced the incentive for banks to issue very short-
term paper.
Given this, RMBS issuers should consider using alternative benchmarks.
 One option would be
to reference 3- or 6-month BBSW rates for new RMBS issues. Another option is the cash rate,
which is the (near) risk-free benchmark published by the Reserve Bank.
 Given the underlying
exposure in RMBS is to mortgages rather than banks, it could make more sense to price these
securities at a spread to the cash rate rather than to BBSW rates, which incorporate bank credit
risk.
15
14
Issuers  and  investors  globally,  including  in Australia,  should  also  be  prepared  for  a  scenario
where a benchmark they are using ceases to be published. In such an event, users would have
to  rely  on  the  fall-back  provisions  in  their  contracts.  However,  for  many  products  –  including
RMBS  –  the  existing  fall-back  provisions  would  be  cumbersome  to  apply  and  could  generate
significant market disruption. This is most urgent for market participants using LIBOR, since the
regulators  are  only  supporting  LIBOR  until  the  end  of  2021.  While  we  expect  that  BBSW  will
remain a robust benchmark, it is prudent for users of BBSW to also have robust fall-backs in
place.  The  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA)  recently  conducted  a
consultation  on  how  to  make  contracts  more  robust.  We  would  expect  Australian  market
participants to adopt more robust fall-backs in their contracts following this process.
Conclusion
As the housing market undergoes a period of adjustment, it is useful to have an understanding of
some of the drivers at play. Much attention has been given to the effect of prudential measures in
dampening the supply of credit and how this has affected the housing market. However, it is also
important  to  acknowledge  causation  going  in  the  other  direction,  whereby  the  softer  housing
market has led to weakness in credit demand. My assessment is that the slowing in housing
credit  growth  over  the  past  year  or  so  is  due  to  both  a  tightening  in  the  supply  of  credit  and
weaker demand for credit. Within that environment, lenders are competing vigorously for high-
quality borrowers.
Developments  in  the  RMBS  market  are  consistent  with  non-bank  lenders  providing  an  extra
source  of  supply.  While  non-banks  remain  small  as  a  share  of  total  housing  lending,
developments over the past couple of years show that the sector continues to evolve. The recent
increase  in  issuance  spreads  may  provide  some  slight  headwinds  for  the  sector;  however,
spreads remain below their levels in early 2016.
Finally,  I  would  urge  both  issuers  and  investors  to  be  responsive  to  the  forces  affecting
benchmarks  used  to  price  RBMS  and  to  focus  on  preparing  for  the  use  of  alternative
benchmarks.
1
2
Since mid 2015, the Reserve Bank has required that detailed information about asset-backed securities and
their underlying assets be reported to the Bank in order for these securities to be eligible as collateral for
transactions with the Bank. The collection of these data allows the Bank to manage its actual and contingent
exposure to these securities. The Bank also requires some data to be made available to permitted data users
with the aim of enhancing market transparency. The database contains information on approximately 1.6 million
housing loans, or roughly one-quarter of those outstanding. Across many, although not all, dimensions the
database is reasonably representative of the broader mortgage market; see the forthcoming RBA Bulletin article
by Fernandes and Jones.
 15 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Debelle G (2018), ‘Assessing the Effects of Housing Lending Policy Measures’, Speech at FINSIA Signature
Event: The Regulators, Melbourne, 15 November.
See RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2018), Financial Stability Review, October.
I use the term ‘banks’ loosely to include all authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs). For details on the
investor  lending  growth  benchmark  see  APRA  (Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority)  (2014),  ‘APRA
Outlines Further Steps to Reinforce Sound Residential Mortgage Lending Practices’, Media Release No 14.30,
9 December.
Note that housing prices in Melbourne and Sydney remain 50 and 60 per cent higher than in 2012, respectively.
The data in Graph 4 only partially capture off-the-plan sales of apartments. Nonetheless, to the extent that such
apartments are relatively close substitutes for existing apartments, the prices for apartments shown should be
broadly representative of all apartments.
The shift from interest-only payments to principal-and-interest payments is another compositional change that
may have contributed to a reduction in the average interest rates paid over this period. However, interest rates
also  declined  within  the  set  of  interest-only  and  principal-and-interest  loans,  for  both  owner-occupiers  and
investors.
See RBA (2018), Household and Business Finances, Financial Stability Review, October.
See RBA (2018), ‘Box B: The Impact of Lending Standards on Loan Sizes’, Financial Stability Review, October.
Bullock  M  (2018),  “Building  Financial  Sector  Resilience:  A  Decade  Long  Transition”,  10th  Annual
Commonwealth Bank Global Markets Conference, Sydney, 30 October 2018.
While, as I note below, the average seasoning of loans in non-banks’ new RMBS deals has fallen in recent
years, the data on non-banks’ securitised loans remain a less reliable indicator of recent lending activity.
A typical RMBS tranche (or note) will pay a floating interest rate with principal returned on a ‘pass-through’ basis
as payments are received (subject to the payment profile specified in the RMBS deal documentation). A short-
term tranche is one that is structured to receive sufficient principal payments such that its weighted average life
is less than or equal to one year. A ‘green’ tranche indicates that a sufficient share of mortgages in the pool
involves housing that meets certain energy efficiency or low carbon criteria for residential buildings.
See RBA (2018), Domestic Financial Conditions, Statement on Monetary Policy, August for more detail on the
effect of higher BBSW rates on banks’ funding costs.
This point was raised in a speech by Guy Debelle several years ago: Debelle G (2015), ‘Benchmarks’, Speech
at the Bloomberg Summit, Sydney, 18 November.
For further details, see Debelle G (2018), ‘Interest Rate Benchmark Reform’, Keynote at ISDA Forum, Sydney, 15
May, and Alim S and E Connolly (2018), ‘ Interest Rate Benchmarks for the Australian Dollar’,  RBA  Bulletin,
September.
 16 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
