    
 
Why the buy-side should buy into the FX Global Code  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks given by 
Andrew Hauser, Executive Director, Markets 
 
At London FX Hive Live 
6 December 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am very grateful to Frederick Ladbury, Ed Kent, David Edmunds, Grigoria Christodoulou, Rohan Churm, 
 
David Clark and David Puth for their help with, or input to, these remarks. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
1 
   Introduction 
 
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak with you today.  Much of your agenda is rightly focused on 
the future:  on how to exploit new technology; how to trade with new platforms and market participants; and 
how to meet ever more demanding customer needs.  That relentless push to innovate is one of the great 
strengths of the global FX markets, and it is a privilege to be part of that conversation. 
 
Against that backdrop, my own remarks – on getting the buy-side signed up to the FX Global Code – might 
seem a little backward looking.  I hope to convince you otherwise.  At a time when FX markets are evolving 
rapidly, there has never been a more important time for investors active in those markets – all of you – to be 
shaping, and adopting, the norms, conventions and standards embodied in the Code.  You are a vital part of 
the market, and play a crucial role in maintaining market discipline.  Leaving the maintenance of standards to 
others – to the sell-side, to public authorities and regulators, or (worst of all) to no-one, as happened a 
decade ago – cannot serve either your interests, or those of your investors. 
 
In my remaining remarks, I want first to review the strong progress that has already been made on 
developing and embedding the Code, including in some buy-side firms.  I will then turn to review four specific 
concerns sometimes heard from buy-side colleagues still unsure about signing up, and set out what I hope 
will be persuasive responses.  Strengthening buy-side adoption is one of the Global FX Committee’s top 
priorities for the coming year – and we have asked senior figures from both sides of the market to lead that 
work, working either as individual liaison representatives, or as members of a new buy-side outreach working 
group.  I am pleased to see several of them here today – including David Clark, Robbie Boukhoufane and 
Richard Purssell – and I know they would be happy to answer any questions you may have, either now or 
later. 
 
Take up of the Global Code:  progress so far 
 
Before turning to review progress, I must first confess more than a little self interest in this subject.  In my 
current role, as Executive Director for Markets at the Bank of England, Chair of the London Foreign 
Exchange Joint Standing Committee, and a member of the Global FX Committee, I have a responsibility to 
foster strong, efficient and fair foreign exchange markets in sterling and other currency pairs.  But I was also 
in at the birth of the Code itself, because in 2014-15 I led the team that produced the Fair and Effective 
Markets Review, which recommended amongst other things that the ‘Global Preamble’ produced by national 
FX committees in March 2015 should be expanded into a full-blown Global Code, sweeping away the various 
national texts that preceded it, and setting a new standard for trading practices and behaviours in a market 
that urgently needed reform. 
 
Two years later, in May 2017, the Global Code was launched, setting out a common set of guidelines for 
good practice in the FX market.  The Code contains 55 principles covering ethics, governance, execution 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
2 
 2
     and transparency, information sharing, risk management, confirmation and settlement; and it tackles aspects 
of current and future market development, including electronic trading, algorithmic trading and prime 
brokerage.  The drafting process was a truly global effort, taking two years and involving central banks and 
market participants, including buy-side, sell-side and end-users, from 16 jurisdictions around the world.  
Many of you, or your institutions, played a vital role in that process. 
 
Takeup of the Code, which is voluntary, has grown rapidly.  The number of ‘Statements of Commitment’ 
(SoCs) – which record organisations’ recognition of, and commitment to adopt, the Code – has risen sixfold, 
from 100 in April 2018 to 605 in November, as recorded on the GFXC’s global index.  That index, available 
on the GFXC website,1 allows market participants to see who signed up, and when.  It includes statements 
from banks, asset managers, corporate treasurers, infrastructures, non-bank liquidity providers – and 41 
central banks, including the Bank of England, who have committed to following the principles in the Code in 
their official operations and investment activities, except where doing so would inhibit the discharge of their 
legal duties or policy functions. 
 
Adoption of the Code is now widespread amongst banks and other sell-side firms.  Table 1 shows that all of 
the largest 30 firms by asset size have signed up to the Code.  Progress on the buy-side has been slower, 
though still quite encouraging:  11 of the largest 30 asset managers, accounting for over $17 trillion of assets 
under management, have so far committed to the Code (Table 2).  That number will rise over time, as firms 
currently working towards adoption reach the end of their internal processes. 
 
Nonetheless, it is clear that more remains to be done to secure the same degree of signup to the Code as 
there has been on the sell-side.  What are the remaining obstacles, and how can we address them? 
 
 
 
                                                       
1 https://www.globalfxc.org/global_index.htm 
 
 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
3 
 3
  Table 1:  Statements of Commitment to the FX Global Code by the 30 largest sell-side institutions  
 Firm 
Assets 
($billions)
SoC on public register, or 
have otherwise informed 
the Bank of England
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Limited
China Construction Bank Corporation
Agricultural Bank of China
Bank of China
MUFG Bank 
HSBC
JP Morgan Chase 
BNP Paribas
Bank of America NA
Citigroup
Wells Fargo
Crédit Agricole
Mizuho Bank
Sumitomo Mitsui
Deutsche Bank
Santander S.A
Barclays
Societe Generale
Bank of Communications
Postal Savings Bank Of China
Lloyds Bank
RBC Capital Markets
Royal Bank of Scotland
TD Securities
Industrial Bank
ING Bank
UniCredit
China Merchants Bank
Shanghai Pudong Development Bank
Goldman Sachs
4,211
3,632
3,439
3,204
2,774
2,652
2,610
2,354
2,329
1,922
1,915
1,862
1,850
1,848
1,817
1,769
1,533
1,531
1,473
1,467
1,099
1,040
1,036
1,028
1,023
1,016
1,005
994
975
974
   
Source:  Firm asset rankings from ‘Forbes Global 2000’ list for 2018, https://www.forbes.com/global2000/list/.  GFXC signup data from 
the GFXC global index of public registers, https://www.globalfxc.org/global_index.htm. 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
4 
 4
     Table 2:  Statements of Commitment to the FX Global Code by the 30 largest asset managers  
 
Assets Under 
Management 
($billions)
SoC on public register, or 
have otherwise informed 
the Bank of England
Firm 
Blackrock
Vanguard Asset Management
State Street Global Advisors
Fidelity Investments
BNY Mellon Investment Management
Capital Group
J.P. Morgan Asset Management
PIMCO
Amundi
Prudential Financial
Legal & General Investment Management
Goldman Sachs Asset Management
Wellington Management International
Natixis Investment Managers
T. Rowe Price
Nuveen
Nothern Trust Asset Management
Invesco
AXA Investment Managers
DWS (Deutsche Asset Management)
Affiliated Managers Group
UBS Asset Management
Insight Investment
Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Bank
Aberdeen Standard Investments
Legg Mason
Franklin Templeton Investments
BNP Paribas Asset Management France
Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and Banking
Allianz Global Investors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
6,060
4,663
2,641
2,284
1,808
1,715
1,677
1,667
1,626
1,323
1,263
1,224
1,026
947
941
923
913
890
850
800
794
756
751
748
739
733
716
649
611
568
          
Source:  Firm AUM rankings from IPE’s ‘Top 400 Asset Managers 2018’, https://www.ipe.com/Uploads/k/x/x/Top-400-Ranking.pdf.  
GFXC signup data from the GFXC global index of public registers, https://www.globalfxc.org/global_index.htm. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
   5 
 5
  Why not sign up to the Global Code?  Four explanations and responses 
 
In this section, I want to respond to four stylised explanations sometimes heard from buy-side firms still 
uncertain about signing up to the Code. 
 
Explanation (1):  Lack of awareness – “What is the Global Code?  I’ve never heard of it, and don’t 
know what signing up involves.” 
 
Given the breadth of engagement during the drafting of the Code, and the raft of publicity since its launch, it 
is hard to believe that asset managers of the size listed in Table 2 are unaware of its existence.  A wealth of 
materials on the Code is available on the GFXC2 and national FX Committee3 websites.  The UK’s 
Investment Association has produced a public summary of the Code4 and a guide to signing up,5 explaining 
the process of making a public commitment for buy-side firms.  Similar material is available from the 
Association of Corporate Treasurers6.  And a raft of conferences and training courses have covered the main 
themes of the Code.  Nevertheless, the global buy-side is a diverse community, so a key priority for the 
GFXC outreach work is to consider what more can be done to ‘push’ targeted material to a wider range of 
firms, using the contacts of national FX committees and trade associations to help organise a dedicated 
event in the New Year. 
 
Explanation (2):  Lack of relevance – “I’ve read the Code but most of it seems to be for the sell-side:  
parts of it aren’t relevant to my business, others are disproportionate.  In areas of sell-side behaviour 
I do care about – like last look and disclosures – the original Code didn’t go far enough” 
 
It would be quite wrong to think that the Code is irrelevant to buy-side firms.  The principles on Ethics, 
Governance, Information Sharing, and many parts of those on Risk Management and Compliance and 
Confirmation and Settlement apply directly.  Examples of principles of particular relevance include: 
 
  Principle 8 (‘market participants should be clear about the capacities in which they act’, including to 
their own clients); 
 
  Principle 9 (‘market participants should handle orders fairly and with transparency in line with the 
capabilities in which they act’ – which assigns specific duties to clients, including being aware of  
 
                                                      
2 https://www.globalfxc.org/ 
3 eg https://www.newyorkfed.org/fxc/index.html, https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/london‐foreign‐exchange‐joint‐standing‐committee 
or http://www.sfemc.org/ 
4 https://www.theinvestmentassociation.org/assets/files/press/2018/FX%20Global%20Code_summary.pdf 
5 https://www.theinvestmentassociation.org/assets/files/consultations/2018/20181105‐guidetosigninguptothefxgobalcode.pdf 
6 https://www.treasurers.org/technical/codes 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
6 
 6
    responsibilities they should expect of others, being aware of risks associated with the transactions 
they request and undertake, and regularly evaluating the execution they receive); 
 
  Principle 12 (‘market participants should not request transactions… with the intent of disrupting 
market functioning or hindering the price discovery process’); and 
 
  Principle 31 (‘market participants should have independent processes in place to mark-to-market 
trading positions to measure the size of their profit and loss and the market risk arising from trading 
positions’) 
 
Throughout the whole Code, however, there is no suggestion of a ‘one size fits all’ approach:  for buy-side 
firms, as for all organisations covered by the Code, proportionality is a key principle.  Part II of the Foreword 
explicitly recognises that ‘the steps that different Market Participants take to align their activities with the 
principles of the Global Code will necessarily reflect the size and complexity of the Market Participant’s FX 
Market activities, and the nature of the Market Participant’s engagement in the FX Market.’ 
 
The Code is also a living document, which allows it to be strengthened or clarified where necessary, 
including in areas of particular interest to the buy-side, such as last look and disclosures.  In December 2017, 
Principle 17 of the Code was updated to make it clear that market participants should not undertake trading 
activity that utilises information from a client's trade request during the last look window.  Though I know this 
remains a topic that can arouse real passions in a room full of asset managers, it does show the commitment 
of the Global FX Committee to ensure that the Code responds to buy-side concerns.  And it’s working:  a 
recent report from Nex suggested that hold times and reject rates have fallen materially since the change.7  
Similarly, on sell-side disclosures regarding service levels and protections – another contentious and uneven 
area of the market in the past – the Global FX Committee is preparing to publish new guidance aimed at 
improving transparency.8  I hope this will have a similarly positive effect on market norms, and the Global FX 
Committee will be critically monitoring its impact in due course. 
 
Explanation (3):  Uncertain business case – “The Code is a useful guide to market conventions, but 
that doesn’t mean we need to sign up.  The Code is really about the sell-side putting its house in 
order – the buy-side has nothing to apologise for.  At best, the Code just reiterates what we already 
do; at worst, it’s more regulation in disguise.”  
 
This is for me the most important observation to address, and vital for securing the buy-in of CEOs and 
Boards.  In putting together that case, I think there are five points worth stressing: 
 
                                                      
7 https://www.nex.com/insights/20180904-fx-code-changing-behaviour. 
8 https://www.globalfxc.org/press/p181129a.htm 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
7 
 7
       First, the Code provides a simple and powerful ‘off the shelf’ way to educate and promulgate 
globally-recognised best practice amongst your FX trading and operations staff internally, 
complementing other tools and regulations; 
 
  Second, it sends a clear signal to your sell-side counterparties of the standards you expect them to 
uphold in their dealings with you, and your intention to hold them to account for those standards – 
strengthening market discipline and sending a clear collective message that the buy-side expects the 
highest standards of service for their customers; 
 
  Third, in demonstrating a commitment to best practice both by your own traders and from those you 
trade with externally, it gives your firm a competitive advantage in the market for investors and other 
customers.  That is all the more important as the boundaries between ‘buy-side’ and ‘sell-side’ 
activities become increasingly blurred. 
 
  Fourth, from the end of 2019, when the Senior Managers Regime comes into force in the UK for 
FCA-regulated asset managers, behaving in accordance with a recognised market Code will help 
Senior Managers demonstrate they are observing ‘proper standards of market conduct’ – a key 
requirement of the regime9.  That is a significant positive benefit to signing up to the Code – and to 
ensure firms are able to take full advantage of that, the Global Code has been submitted to the FCA 
for formal recognition; and 
  Fifth, signing up to the Code gives buy-side firms a stronger voice in the ongoing development of the 
Code and the FX market as a whole:  a vital part of ensuring the Code is fit for purpose,  
future-proofed, and reflective of the needs of the whole market.  
 
Explanation (4):  Concern about the cost of signing up and implementing the Code – “this is just one 
of many things we are being asked to comply with.  We act for 1000s of different investors, with 
multiple expectations and mandates.  Our regulatory team is overwhelmed.” 
 
We understand that buy-side firms face many competing challenges, and have taken steps to help with 
implementation.  I have already mentioned the proportionality principle that lies at the heart of the Code, and 
the steps that the new GFXC buy-side groups will be taking to help improve understanding and promulgate 
best practice for implementation.  In the UK, the Investment Association is also finalising with its members a 
guide intended to assist firms navigate their own assessment of the Code’s requirements against existing 
requirements, for public release in early 2019.  All of these should help firms looking for assistance in signing 
up.   
 
                                                      
9 https://www.fca.org.uk/about/recognised‐industry‐codes 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
8 
 8
    But it is worth remembering too the cost of not supporting the Code:  the heightened risk of returning to the 
doubt, uncertainty and collapse in trust in the operation of the FX and other core wholesale markets that we 
saw a decade ago, and the more restrictive regulation that would inevitably follow.   The Code offers the 
opportunity for the market collectively to recognise its responsibilities in a fair, balanced and cost effective 
way in the interests of the users of the capital markets:  your customers. 
 
Conclusions  
 
If there was one lesson of the Financial Crisis ten years ago, it was the importance of the market taking 
collective responsibility for raising and maintaining standards in financial markets, of which foreign exchange 
forms a vital part.  Buy-side firms, as huge and growing players in those markets, have a vital role to play in 
that.  By signing up to the Global Code, you signal a commitment not just to uphold those standards 
yourselves, but also to hold others to them – and in so doing help ensure the markets remain deep, liquid, 
safe and fair to everyone.  Over the coming year, the Global FX Committee and the broader international 
community will be working towards bringing the level of signup to the Code on the buy-side up towards that 
seen on the sell-side.  Please join us in that campaign. 
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
9 
 9
   