  29.11.18 
 Opening remarks 
2nd Annual Meeting CEBRA International Finance and Macroeconomic 
Program 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to the second annual meeting of the CEBRA 
(Central Bank Research Association) International Finance and Macroeconomics Program, 
hosted by the Banco de España. 
Let  me  first  thank  our  colleagues  from  CEBRA  for  their  efforts  in  co-organising  this 
conference.  CEBRA  is  an  association  that  seeks  to  encourage  applied  and  theoretical 
research  on  relevant  topics  for  central  banks,  among  other  institutions.  Its  research 
programmes foster interaction among researchers at central banks and in academia. In this 
vein,  the  International  Finance  and  Macroeconomics  Program  (IFM)  led  by  Galina  Hale 
provides  an  excellent  forum  to  discuss  key  policy  questions  that  are  also  relevant  to 
academia. 
The  title of  this  conference  is:  “Risk,  volatility and  central bank policies”.  Allow  me  to 
briefly share with you –from a central banker’s perspective– some of our current concerns 
in relation to the three items highlighted in this title.  
Starting with risks, in recent months some institutions – including  the Banco de España 
through its Financial Stability  Report – have stressed that, although the financial stability 
environment remains favourable, global near-term risks have increased or have begun to 
materialise.  
In recent years the global economy has experienced a period of sustained and across-the-
board  growth,  supported  by  unprecedented  expansionary  and  unconventional  monetary 
policies around the world. But this context has also been conducive to the accumulation of 
certain financial vulnerabilities. In particular, it has led to a “search for yield” by investors 
who have been seeking more profitable and riskier investments. This is evidenced at least 
by  three  facts:  increasing  leverage,  the  high  share  of  debt  at  risk  and  the  relatively  high 
valuations of certain assets.  
Now the current phase of ultra-loose monetary policy is coming to an end. In the US, after 
seven  years  of  interest  rates  around  the  zero  lower  bound,  monetary  policy  is  being 
normalised. Other advanced economies, such as the UK or Canada, have also started to 
raise interest rates. Regarding the euro area, the ECB Governing Council anticipates that, 
subject to incoming data confirming the medium-term inflation outlook, net asset purchases 
will come to an end in December 2018. 
In this context, two main developments in international financial markets warrant attention 
as, in my view, they might currently pose key threats to financial stability and global growth. 
First, the economic and financial situation of some emerging markets is under pressure as 
a  result,  among  other  factors,  of  the  combination  of  monetary  policy  normalisation  and 
strong  fiscal  stimulus  in  the  United  States.  Last  summer  financial  conditions  in  most 
emerging market economies were tightened, giving rise to considerable outflows and steep 
exchange  rate  depreciations,  particularly  in  Argentina  and  Turkey.  This  sharp  market 
reaction should be a reminder of the risks that the normalisation of monetary policy at the 
global  level  could  entail,  in  particular  for  those  countries  that  have  accumulated 
macroeconomic imbalances.  
 3/5 
 Second,  a  potential  increase  in  economic  and  geopolitical  uncertainty  stemming  from 
escalating trade tensions could adversely impact global growth. In this regard, the latest 
forecasts  by  international  organisations  already  reflect  some  impact  and,  indeed,  global 
growth and global trade has already begun to lose momentum. In addition to protectionist 
escalation,  sources  of  geopolitical  risk  have  also  grown  in  Europe  as  a  result  of  Brexit 
negotiations and the fiscal situation in Italy. 
But how have financial conditions actually evolved in this new scenario? Until very recently, 
financial conditions in advanced economies remained loose, while conditions in emerging 
markets  had  tightened.  Interestingly,  US  interest  rates  have  increased  at  the  longer 
maturities, but still modestly. Nevertheless, a materialisation of current risks might lead to a 
“snap-back” scenario of sharply rising long-run yields, driven by a sudden decompression 
of term premia, that might amplify market stress and harm the economy. 
In this context of growing near-term risks, a better understanding of volatility, the second 
topic of the conference, is also crucial for central banks, given the implications for monetary 
policies  and  financial  stability.  The  period  of  ultra-loose  monetary  policy  has  driven  a 
prolonged period of low volatilities. Nevertheless, global markets could be entering a new 
phase of higher volatility or more frequent short-lived bouts of instability as interest rates 
increase.  Moreover,  volatility  markets  –  in  particular,  volatility-linked  derivatives  –  have 
become  more  popular  in  this  low-uncertainty  environment.  Negative  surprises  in  these 
markets might amplify shocks and impair the functioning of key markets, potentially even 
affecting the financing of the real economy. The surge in volatility witnessed last February 
illustrates this point. 
 
Central  bank  policies  are  affected  by  this  scenario  in  at  least  two  dimensions.  First,  it 
makes more challenging the definition of an adequate monetary policy normalisation path. 
A too-rapid adjustment of monetary policy could trigger the materialisation of some of the 
risks mentioned. A too-gradual adjustment may ultimately force policy to be tightened more 
rapidly to contain overheating, thus giving rise to the “snap-back” scenario. By the same 
token, the persistence of very easy financial conditions and very low volatility extends the 
“search for yield” behaviour of investors and the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial 
system. In this regard, effective communication by central banks throughout the monetary 
normalisation process will be key to helping anchor financial conditions, despite the threat 
of heightened volatility.  
Second,  in  this  complex  environment,  it  is  particularly  important  to  emphasise  the  role 
played by one of the major policy innovations generated during the financial crisis, namely 
the development of macroprudential policy frameworks. 
The proper and timely use of the new macroprudential tools, together with the regulatory 
and supervisory overhaul of the global banking system undertaken in recent years, should 
help to contain the build-up of financial imbalances. However, given its novelty it’s difficult 
to know ex-ante how effective these new macroprudential tools will be. 
In addition, multiple new challenges remain and need to be dealt with. Let me mention a few 
of them: (i) the reinforcement of policy measures to address bank-like risks stemming from 
the  activities  of  non-banks,  which  have  significantly  increased  in  recent  years;  (ii)  the 
emergence of new risks, such as those derived from financial technology or cybersecurity; 
4/5 
  (iii)  the  strengthening  of  sustainable  finance  to  address  environmental  risk,  and  (iv)  the 
creation or expansion of global and regional backstops. 
I am certain that our speakers in this conference will address these and other interesting 
matters. Indeed we will have the opportunity to explore this subject in depth through nine 
selected articles by prominent researchers. Actually, we are most privileged to have with us 
two distinguished keynote speakers, Ricardo Reis and Torben Andersen, who will no doubt 
illuminate us on these important matters.  
This two-day conference is organised in four sessions: the first will address certain money 
and market-related aspects. During the second session we will try to shed some light on 
the propagation of shocks when considering higher-order statistical moments of economic 
and financial variables. The third session will deal with two issues related to risk which are 
important  for  central  banks,  namely  the  credit  risk  associated  with  monetary  policy 
operations  and  the  evaluation  of  systemic  risk  measures.  Finally,  the  fourth  session  on 
uncertainty will deal with the spillovers from the uncertainty on certain financial markets to 
the macroeconomy or to other markets. 
And now, allow me to introduce you to our first speaker, Ricardo Reis. We are particularly 
honoured  to  have  him  here  today.  It  is  most  appropriate  he  should  be  our  first  Keynote 
Speaker given his profound knowledge on the topics to be addressed in this conference. 
Among his recent honours, I would recall that last year he received the 2016 Bernácer prize 
at the Banco de España as the best European economist under the age of 40 working in 
macroeconomics and finance. His keynote speech today will focus on “Central bank swap 
lines”. Ricardo, we are very grateful to have the opportunity to exchange views with you 
again in our institution. 
The floor is yours.  
  5/5 
