Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 7 March 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  have  conducted  a  thorough
assessment  of  the  economic  and  inflation  outlook,  also  taking  into  account  the  latest  staff
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area.  As  a  result,  the  Governing  Council  took  the
following decisions in the pursuit of its price stability objective.
First,  we  decided  to  keep  the key ECB interest rates  unchanged.  We  now  expect  them  to
remain at their present levels at least through the end of 2019, and in any case for as long as
necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Second, we intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past the date
when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Third, we decided to launch a new series of quarterly targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO-III), starting in September 2019 and ending in March 2021, each with a maturity of two
years. These new operations will help to preserve favourable bank lending conditions and the
smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Under  TLTRO-III,  counterparties  will  be  entitled  to
borrow up to 30% of the stock of eligible loans as at 28 February 2019 at a rate indexed to the
interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  over  the  life  of  each  operation.  Like  the
outstanding TLTRO programme, TLTRO III will feature built-in incentives for credit conditions to
remain favourable. Further details on the precise terms of TLTRO-III will be communicated in due
course.
Fourth, we will continue conducting our lending operations as fixed rate tender procedures with
full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until the end of the reserve maintenance
period starting in March 2021.
Today’s monetary policy decisions were taken to ensure that inflation remains on a sustained
path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. While there are signs
that  some  of  the  idiosyncratic  domestic  factors  dampening  growth  are  starting  to  fade,  the
weakening  in  economic  data  points  to  a  sizeable  moderation  in  the  pace  of  the  economic
expansion  that  will  extend  into  the  current  year.  The  persistence  of  uncertainties  related  to
geopolitical factors, the threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets appears
to  be  leaving  marks  on  economic  sentiment.  Moreover,  underlying  inflation  continues  to  be
muted. The weaker economic momentum is slowing the adjustment of inflation towards our aim.
At the same time, supportive financing conditions, favourable labour market dynamics and rising
wage  growth  continue  to  underpin  the  euro  area  expansion  and  gradually  rising  inflation
pressures. Today’s decisions will support the further build-up of domestic price pressures and
headline inflation developments over the medium term. Significant monetary policy stimulus will
continue to be provided by our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates, reinforced by the
reinvestments of the sizeable stock of acquired assets and the new series of TLTROs. In any
event,  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its  instruments,  as  appropriate,  to
ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim  in  a
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
sustained manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.2%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2018,  following
growth of 0.1% in the third quarter. Incoming data have continued to be weak, in particular in the
manufacturing sector, reflecting the slowdown in external demand compounded by some country
and sector-specific factors. The impact of these factors is turning out to be somewhat longer-
lasting,  which  suggests  that  the  near-term  growth  outlook  will  be  weaker  than  previously
anticipated. Looking ahead, the effect of these adverse factors is expected to unwind. The euro
area  expansion  will  continue  to  be  supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  further
employment gains and rising wages, and the ongoing – albeit somewhat slower – expansion in
global activity.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the March 2019 ECB staff macroeconomic projections
for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.1% in 2019, 1.6%
in  2020  and  1.5% 
the  December  2018  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  has  been  revised  down
substantially in 2019 and slightly in 2020.
in  2021.  Compared  with 
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are still tilted to the downside, on account of
the  persistence  of  uncertainties  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  the  threat  of  protectionism  and
vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.5% in February
2019, after 1.4% in January, reflecting somewhat higher energy and food price inflation. On the
basis of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to remain at around current levels
before  declining  towards  the  end  of  year.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally
muted, but labour cost pressures have strengthened and broadened amid high levels of capacity
utilisation  and  tightening  labour  markets.  Looking  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to
increase  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing
economic expansion and rising wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2019  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.2% in 2019, 1.5% in 2020
and  1.6%  in  2021.  Compared  with  the  December  2018  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down across the projection horizon,
reflecting in particular the more subdued near-term growth outlook.
Turning  to  the monetary  analysis,  broad  money  (M3)  growth  decreased  to  3.8%  in  January
2019, from 4.1% in December 2018. M3 growth continues to be backed by bank credit creation,
notwithstanding  a  recent  moderation  in  credit  dynamics.  The  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1
remained the main contributor to broad money growth.
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations declined to 3.3% in January 2019,
from 3.9% in December 2018, reflecting a base effect but also, in some countries, the typical
lagged reaction to the slowdown in economic activity, while the annual growth rate of loans to
households  remained  at  3.2%.  Borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households  are  still
favourable, as the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continue to support
access to financing, in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises. The policy measures
decided today, and in particular the new series of TLTROs, will help to ensure that bank lending
conditions remain favourable going forward.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity  and  growth  potential.  This  is  particularly  important  in  view  of  the  overall  limited
implementation  of  the  2018  country-specific  recommendations,  as  recently  communicated  by
the European Commission. Regarding fiscal policies, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal
stance and the operation of automatic stabilisers are providing support to economic activity. At
the  same  time,  countries  where  government  debt  is  high  need  to  continue  rebuilding  fiscal
buffers.  All  countries  should  continue  to  increase  efforts  to  achieve  a  more  growth-friendly
composition of public finances. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of the
European Union’s fiscal and economic governance framework over time and across countries
remains essential to bolster the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of
Economic and Monetary Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing
work and urges further specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital
markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
