Marzunisham Omar: Comprehensive approaches to monetary and
financial policy making in ASEAN-5 countries
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Marzunisham  Omar,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the third BNM-IMF Seminar, Kuala Lumpur, 17 July 2019.
 In his remarks at this seminar last year, Odd Per quoted the book Enchanted; “First time is luck,
second time is a coincidence and third time is a tradition.” Here we are gathered today for the
third BNM-IMF Seminar to celebrate this “tradition”, a tradition I hope will continue for many years
as we can all agree that candid and open dialogue between the IMF and ASEAN-5 central banks
is mutually beneficial.
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  IMF  and  the  team  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  for
organising this Seminar and to my colleagues from the region for being highly supportive of this
effort.
The  topic  today  –  “Comprehensive  Approaches  to  Monetary  and  Financial  Policy  Making  in
ASEAN-5  Countries”  –  is  indeed  timely  given  the  ongoing  work  at  the  IMF  on  the  “Integrated
Policy Framework”. I hope today’s Seminar will help shed greater insights on how central banks
in ASEAN economies, which are small, open economies, navigate through increasingly complex,
interrelated issues in our pursuit of preserving monetary and financial stability. I have no doubt
that we in ASEAN will also find today’s Seminar useful in understanding the IMF’s latest thinking
on these issues.
There are two parts to my brief remarks today. First, I will touch on the increasingly complex
policy  making  environment  given  the  openness  of  our  economies.  Second,  I  will  posit  three
issues  that  we  need  to  grapple  with  in  considering  the  optimal  policy  mix  towards  achieving
monetary and financial stability.      
Our mandates are to preserve monetary and financial stability, which are critical conditions for
sustainable growth. In the pursuit of these mandates, a key consideration is the openness of our
economies.  While  the  integration  of  our  economies  with  the  global  economy  and  international
financial  markets  has  yielded  substantial  benefits,  it  has  also  made  our  economies  more
susceptible to external shocks and spillover effects from global developments.
Let me briefly touch on some of these external factors:
First,  global  growth  momentum  is  slowing. A  key  issue  is  how  deep  and  prolonged  the
slowdown  will  be. A  key  risk  is  the  ongoing  trade  tension  and  its  impact  on  global  trade,
investment and sentiments. For many of our countries that depend heavily on international
trade, the impact is already being felt in the slowdown of our exports and growth.
Second, major central banks have indicated intentions, or a few have taken steps, to relax
their  monetary  policy  to  support  growth  in  an  environment  of  low  inflation.  While  this  has
helped to loosen the global financial conditions, the question is should emerging economies
be prepared for another round of surge in capital inflows?
This brings me to my third point. For emerging economies, capital flow volatility is a fact of
life and something that policy makers have to deal with; and we have to acknowledge that
the size and volatility of capital flows will only intensify.
While  the  transmission  of  global  shocks  to  the  domestic  economy  through  the  real  economy
channel – that is through trade and investment – is something that we have been dealing with for
decades,  policy  makers  today  are  confronted  with  the  increasingly  dominant  channel  of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
transmission of shocks through the financial markets, at least in the immediate term. All of us
have  experienced  how  spillovers  from  external  developments  that  were  manifested  through
capital flow volatility have adversely affected domestic financial markets, asset prices, liquidity
conditions and importantly, exchange rates.
All these challenges make for a complicated policy environment for ASEAN central banks. Gone
are the days when keeping our own house in order is enough. Sure, good fundamentals matter
as they have no substitute. They are, however, no longer sufficient. As Keynes rightly pointed out
a long time ago, “the market can stay irrational longer than you can remain solvent.” Often, we
have seen how external developments that are beyond our control, such as the unprecedented
quantitative easing by the advanced economies and the subsequent Taper Tantrum, triggered
periods  of  large  inflows  followed  by  sharp  reversals  in  emerging  economies  with  severe
consequences.  For  small  open  economies,  these  flows  can  easily  overwhelm  the  domestic
financial markets and lead to build-up of vulnerabilities in the economy.
Facing this new reality, the policy reaction function of central banks from the emerging market
economies could, to quote BIS General Manager Carstens, be described as a multi-instrument
reaction function responding to multiple-indicator variables, including the exchange rate.
Given these increasingly complex and interconnected challenges and the risks of policy trade-
offs, what should guide policymakers going forward? Allow me to pose three questions on this.
Question 1: The assignment problem
First, the assignment problem – how do we assign policy tools to policy targets appropriately?
The Tinbergen principle suggests that policymakers trying to achieve multiple economic targets
need to have at least one policy tool for each policy target. Robert Mundell went one step further
and suggested that each policy instrument should be assigned to the policy target on which it
has the greatest relative effect. This may sound good in theory, but we know it is much more
complex in reality given the multifaceted and often interconnected risks confronting us.
For  ASEAN  policymakers,  how  can  we  assign  the  tools  available  to  us  to  our  expanding
objectives/mandates in the most optimal way? How do we avoid overburdening any single policy
tool? If multiple tools are needed, how do we sequence them? Is there a case to be made for an
optimal order of policy based on prioritising of objectives? Or is a pre-agreed sequenced policy
order too restrictive?
Question 2: Rules versus discretion
Second, is the old question of rules versus discretion. While rules-based frameworks are easier
to enforce and do not require recurring justification of explicit decisions once in place, a purely
rule-based  framework  can  be  too  constraining  and  rigid.  The  inherent  rigidity  reduces  policy
space for policymakers to maneuver in times of stress. On the other hand, while a discretionary,
principle-based  framework  accords  policymakers  the  necessary  flexibility  and  space  to
maneuver, there is a risk that policymakers may overstretch this flexibility. Perversely, there is
also the risk of inaction by policymakers.
I have always viewed policy making as akin to designing an earthquake-proof building, whereby
the stability of the building (the economy, in our context) is not achieved by increasing rigidity, but
by  allowing  flexibility.  This  pertinent  question  of  rules  versus  discretion  is  one  that  we  should
continue to ask ourselves. 
Question 3: Dealing with large capital flows: proactive or reactive?
Third,  in  dealing  with  risks  emanating  from  large  capital  flows,  is  it  better  to  be  proactive  or
reactive?  Should  policymakers  pre-emptively  lean  against  the  wind  to  tackle  capital  inflows
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
before it manifests in the build-up of domestic imbalances, or should we take a more reactive
stance by tackling domestic vulnerabilities and manage the fall-out from capital inflows? Being
reactive may be too late, but pre-emptive measures may be viewed negatively.
I recognise that I have raised more questions than answers in my remarks this morning. I do not
have the answers for all of them but I believe these questions are important and relevant for us to
address today and in days ahead.
What I can tell you definitively is that the work on the integrated policy framework (IPF) is highly
important  as  the  environment  that  ASEAN  policymakers  are  navigating  through  becomes
increasingly challenging. On this note, I look forward to an engaging and fruitful discussion today.
To my ASEAN colleagues, let us use this opportunity to share our views and experiences with
the IMF. To our IMF colleagues, it is my hope that you will consider these views and continue to
engage with regional policymakers as you work towards finalising the work on the IPF.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
