   SPEECH DELIVERED 
AT 
  GRAPHIC BUSINESS/STANBIC BREAKFAST MEETING  
BY 
                                      DR ERNEST ADDISON  
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
AT 
AT LABADI BEACH HOTEL 
ON 
TUESDAY, APRIL 23, 2019 
 1 
 Introduction 
 1.  Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin by thanking Graphic Business and Stanbic Bank 
for  the  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  topic:  "Achieving  Sustainable  Exchange 
Rate:  Our  Options”  This  topic  is  timely—coming  at  a  time  that  we  have 
successfully emerged out of a sudden bout of volatility in the exchange rate, which 
generated a lot of debate domestically and also externally. It is my expectation that 
my brief remarks and subsequently discussions will shape the narrative on currency 
and  exchange  rate  management  in  the  context  of  a  small  open  commodity 
dependent  economy  that  has  adopted  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  to  underpin 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
 2.  The  recent  sharp  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Cedi  generated 
considerable  debate  on  the  options  that  we  have  as  a  country  to  deal  with  the 
seasonal  bouts  of  depreciation  in  a  more  sustainable  way.  Before  I  jump  into 
discussing  the  underlying  causes  of  these  sudden  episodes  of  sharp  currency 
depreciation, allow me to first put the key issues into context. 
 3.  First and Foremost,  I  think  what we  need to understand is that  the exchange  rate 
reflects  a  price.  And,  as  is  the  case  with  all  prices  for  goods  and  services  in  the 
economy,  the  exchange  rate  will  change  and  respond  to  the  dynamics  of  the 
economy  and  will  always  be  subject  to  the  dynamics  of  demand  and  supply.  As  a 
 2 
country, we have adopted a flexible exchange rate regime, which has served us well 
in  the  past  and  continues  to  do  so  under  the  Bank’s  inflation  targeting  monetary 
policy framework.  
 4.  Looking  at  the  history,  the  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  has  served  Ghana  well, 
given  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  Ghanaian  economy.  I  am  sure  there  are 
some schools of thought that harbour the idea of Ghana pegging the Cedi to one of 
the  major  trading  currencies  to  achieve  some  stability.  Whilst  this  might  sound 
appealing,  empirical  evidence,  including  analytical  work  by  the  IMF  shows  that 
growth has been more robust in countries with flexible exchange rate regime than in 
countries with fixed exchange rate regimes.   
 5.  As  we  all  know,  Ghana’s  economy  is  import  dependent,  hence  the  existence  of 
persistent  foreign  exchange  demand  pressures  by  importers.  In  addition  to  these 
huge demand pressures, the seasonal repatriation of profits and dividends foreign-
owned companies reflects in significant outflow of resources out of the services and 
income accounts, exerting additional pressures on the local currency. As a matter of 
fact, these developments explain why the two consecutive years of trade surpluses 
have not fully translated into current account surpluses. 
 6.  The  strong  policy  reforms  introduced  in  the  last  24  months—fiscal  consolidation, 
complementing  monetary  policy  stance,  and  financial  sector  reforms  are  yielding 
 3 
results.  Growth  has  rebound  from  a  low  of  [3.6  percent]  in  2016;  inflation  has 
dropped sharply from 15.6 percent in 2016 to single digits; fiscal deficit more than 
halved; and supported by a very strong external payments position—trade surpluses 
for  the  first  time  in  decades.  All  these  together  meant  that  we  were  able  to  build 
reserves to the tune of US$7.6 billion (in 2017) representing 4.4 months of import 
cover.  The  level  of  reserves  moved  to  US$9.9  billion  (5.1  months  of  import  cover) 
following the recent sovereign bond issuance. All these reflect the attraction of the 
positive  turnaround  in  the  Ghanaian  economy  to  foreign  investors,  who  have  been 
contributing to finance the deficits.    
 7.  The  growing  exposure  to  foreign  investors  also  means  that  the  country  becomes 
susceptible to movements in global sentiments. 
  Recent Trends in Exchange Rates  
8.  The remarkable turnaround in the performance of the cedi continued in the first few 
months  of  2018  supported  by  improving  macro  fundamentals,  strong  external 
payments position alongside significant build up in international reserves. However, 
from the week beginning May 21, 2018 a combination of external factors such as US 
monetary  policy  normalization,  sharp  oil  prices  hikes,  and  a  stronger  US  dollar 
impacted  adversely  on  emerging  market  and  frontier  market  economies,  including 
 4 
Ghana.  This  resulted  in  some  portfolio  reversals  from  emerging  markets  to  take 
advantage  of  higher  yields  in  the  US.  In  Ghana,  we  saw  increased  coupon 
repatriation,  exerting  additional  pressures  on  the  local  currency.  At  end  October 
2018, the cedi had cumulatively depreciated by 7.8%. 
 9.  The  start  of  2019  has  been  characterized  by  intense  cedi  volatility  reflecting  the 
following: 
   First, as has always been the case, was the seasonal foreign exchange demand 
pressures fuelled mainly by importers and corporates; 
   Second, investor sentiments weakened on concerns about the economic outlook 
as  Ghana  was  on  the  verge  of  exiting  from  the  IMF  program.  This  triggered 
some  outflows,  putting  pressure  on  the  cedi.  We  also  witnessed  significant 
repatriation of coupons by non-resident investors, which contrasted past trends 
of re-investment of coupon proceeds; 
   Third, as part of the objective to build up lost reserves in 2018, the BoG, decided 
to  improve  Net  International  Reserve  levels  to  what  pertained  at  the  end  of 
December  2018.  This  required  that  the  BoG  limit  its  presence  in  the  market. 
Consequently,  the  efforts  to  build  up  reserves  in  a  period  of  strong  foreign 
exchange demand, exerted additional pressures on the local currency. 
 5 
 10. The interplay of these factors resulted in a year-to-date depreciation of the Cedi by 
8.0 percent (as at March 19, 2019) compared with 0.02 percent depreciation in the 
same period of last year.  
 What then explains the recent turnaround in the FX market? 
11. Since the last week of March 2019, the Cedi has recovered remarkably against the 
US  dollar,  appreciating  from  GH¢5.9/US$  at  the  peak  of  the  episodic  jump  to  the 
current levels of GH¢5.1/US$ and reflecting:  
  Reversal of sentiments on the economic outlook; 
   The  successful  completion  of  the  IMF-ECF  programme  has  served  to  provide  an 
endorsement of macroeconomic policy management and the subsequent release 
of the last tranche of FX resources associated with the completion; and the  
   Positive news  effect associated with  the $3.0 billion Eurobond inflows which  has 
improved the country’s reserve buffers.  
 12. In  addition,  S&P  Global  Ratings  affirmed  its  ‘B/B’  long  and  short-term  foreign  and 
local sovereign credit ratings on Ghana with a stable outlook. The affirmation of the 
rations was attributed to Ghana’s relatively strong growth prospects driven in large 
part  by  increased  oil  production  which  is  expected  to  support  sound  fiscal  policy 
 6 
management  and  help  deliver  a  favourable  macroeconomic  outlook.  On  these 
positive  accounts,  the  broad  expectation  is  for  a  further  rally  in  the  value  of  the 
currency. 
 Conclusion 
13. In conclusion, let me emphasize the key point that ensuring stability in the value of 
the currency in a sustainable manner must be underpinned by a variety of factors. 
These should include the following:  
  Continued  strengthening  and  maintenance  of  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment;  
  Improving  debt  management  strategies  and  engineering  policies  to  shift 
financing of the budget away from non-residents and towards more of domestic 
financing.  Successful  implementation  of  this  strategy  will  help  moderate  the 
country’s  external  vulnerabilities  arising  from  shifts  in  investor  sentiments. 
Currently our bond market is significantly exposed with non-resident holdings of 
domestic bonds above 25 percent in the domestic debt market; 
   Addressing Ghana’s import dependence through the pursuit of structural reforms 
geared towards promoting local production; 
  7 
  Continued  improvement  in  the  business  environment,  especially  in  the  area  of 
ease  in  doing  business,  to  attract  investments  into  the  country;  These  should 
include  re-examining  laws  that  serve  to  improve  the  business  environment, 
pursuing business-friendly regulations, making it easy to move goods across the 
country, and pursuing policies to facilitate trade among others; 
   Taking  a  re-look  at  Ghana’s  retention  agreements  and  promoting  local  content, 
especially in the downstream oil sector, and finally; 
   Promoting non-traditional exports, including areas such as Tourism. 
 I  believe  that  these  pointers  will  help  shape  the  follow-up  discussions  on 
achieving exchange rate stability in a sustainable manner.  
 Thank you.  
         8 
Figure 1: Year -to-Date Depreciation (2000-2018) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Year-to-date Depreciation in the first quarter (2011-2019) 
 
 9 
 Figure 3: Recent Trends in Macroeconomic Fundamentals 
Source: Bank of Ghana 
 
Figure 4: Recent Trends in Macroeconomic Fundamentals 
 
   10 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Daily cedi/Dollar Exchange Rate 
   11 
