I am honored to be with you today, to inaugurate the opening of the new 
Raiffeisen  Bank  head  office.  Your  investment  in  this  facility  is  a  clear 
indicator  of  your  commitment  to  continue  operating  successfully  in 
Kosovo's banking and non-banking systems, in the future as well.   
Raiffeisen Bank has played a very important role in creating a safe and 
sound financial system that has contributed to Kosovo's economic growth. 
We are very honored with your presence and the success you have shown 
so far and we hope you will continue with this success in the future. 
Raiffeisen  Bank  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  development  of  fair 
competition,  continuous  improvement  of  products  and  development  of 
new  products,  by  increasing  access  to  finance,  contributing  to  the 
development  of  trade  relations  with  other  countries,  helping  to  attract 
more  foreign  investors  and,  as  well,  in  improving  the  reputation  of 
Kosovo in general. We are thankful for this. 
Raiffeisen Bank has also helped in the development of human capital, and 
continues  to  use  the  potential  of  our  youth.  Among  other  things, 
Raiffeisen Bank remains an example of a good employer, for which, we 
are all proud of.  
The  CBK  as  a  financial  system  supervisor  will  continue  to  work  on 
maintaining  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  and  will  continuously 
improve  the  economic  environment,  in  which  the  financial  industry 
operates.   
The financial sector is a sector with great dynamic development and rapid 
changes  in  the  economic  environment  that  surrounds  it.  The  financial 
systems of different countries are constantly integrating and this requires 
increased  cooperation  between  these  countries.  The  CBK  remains 
committed to cooperating, with the aim of overcoming challenges in the 
future  and  integrating  Kosovo's  financial  system  into  the  systems  of 
developed economies.    
Banks  in  Kosovo,  as  in  all  other  countries,  have  a  special  status  in  the 
economy. This status is associated with different regulatory requirements 
and greater requirements for social responsibility, and I am pleased to say 
that banks in Kosovo successfully meet these requirements. 
Today in Kosovo our savings are  safe and advancements in technology 
allow us to access them faster. 
 Banks are an example of success in Kosovo, so I urge them to promote 
their  success  even  further,  in  order  to  attract  and  increase  foreign 
investments  in  other  sectors  as  well.  This  would  affect  the  economic 
development  that  is  most  needed  for  financial  stability,  as  well  as  the 
further advancement of the banking sector in which Raiffeisen Bank plays 
a very important role. 
At  the  end,  I    would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  contribution  to  the 
economic development of Kosovo and wish you success in the future. 
 