REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, AT THE SESSION “THE TASK FOR EMERGING MARKETS”. 
REINVENTING BRETTON WOODS COMMITTEE–UBS INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL 
MACRO  SEMINAR  “MANAGING  THE  SOFT  LANDING  OF  THE  GLOBAL 
ECONOMY”. Washington, DC, April 12, 2019.1 
I thank the organizers for the kind invitation to participate in this panel. 
The deceleration of world economic activity that we have seen during the last 
years  has  encompassed  both  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies. 
However, when we look at projections by the main international institutions 
both for the short and the long terms, hopes for a recovery from the current 
weakness  fall  disproportionately  on  the  shoulders  of  the  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs). For instance, according to the most recent projections by 
the  IMF,  the  upturn  of  global  growth  in  2020  depends  entirely  on  higher 
growth rates in these countries, and projections for the long term do not show 
a much different picture. In fact, according to the Fund, emerging markets and 
developing economies’ share in global growth will increase from around 76 
percent this year to 85 percent in 2024.2 
With  this  as  a  background,  it  is  obviously  important  to  identify  possible 
roadblocks  ahead,  not  only  for  the  benefit  of  EMEs  themselves,  but  in  the 
interest of world economic activity. In general, the external environment faced 
by EMEs at present is quite challenging, and the situation is unlikely to change 
much in coming years. However, I would like to focus on two issues which, in 
my  view,  are  of  special  importance  at  this  stage.  The  first  is  related  to  the 
                                                           
1 The  views and opinions  expressed in this document  are the sole responsibility of the  author  and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
2 International Monetary Fund (2019): “World Economic Outlook”, April. 
1 
 implications, from a medium- to long-term perspective, of the potential for a 
more  gradual  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies 
(AEs).  The  second  focuses  on  the  consequences  of  the  recent  protectionist 
trends for global value chains, and the resulting repercussions on EMEs. 
Following  a  period  of  turbulence  and  volatility  in  late  2018,  international 
financial markets have displayed a more orderly behavior since the turn of this 
year.  This  has  been  particularly  beneficial  for  EMEs.  Per  some  estimates, 
portfolio  capital  flows  to  these  countries  increased  more  than  three-fold 
between the last quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019, a development 
that has been accompanied by an appreciation of these countries’ currencies, 
declines in domestic interest rates and, in general, easier financial conditions. 
To a significant extent, shifting market expectations regarding the future path 
for monetary policy in the main AEs, particularly in the United States, explains 
this result. Following recent communications signaling patience in determining 
potential  adjustments  to  its  monetary  policy  stance  while  maintaining  the 
target range for the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve has, in its latest 
monetary policy meeting, substantially revised downwards its projections for 
this variable over this and the next couple of years. In addition, the pace of 
reduction of its balance sheet will be slower starting next month, a process 
that is intended to conclude in September this year. 
The expected slower pace of normalization of monetary policy in AEs seems to 
be  well  justified  in  view  of  the  evolution  of  the  main  macroeconomic 
aggregates in these countries. However, is the associated improvement in the 
financial environment facing EMEs giving us reasons to celebrate? I believe this 
 2 
is far from clear. In fact, this pause in the monetary policy tightening cycle in 
AEs may result in a more complex and uncertain external setting for EMEs. It 
is true that the risk of an additional tightening of financial conditions in these 
economies in the near future appears to have receded. Nonetheless, it should 
be  noted  that  the  sense  of  relief  perceived  at  present  may  well  be  just 
temporary, and even perilous: 
  The  flip  side  of  more  monetary  gradualism  in  AEs  is  a  downgraded 
perspective for economic activity in these countries and, consequently, 
at the global level. As already pointed out, the prospect of lower interest 
rates abroad should help alleviate some short-term pressures on EMEs, 
especially in the monetary and financial fronts. However, the fact that 
this new, more subdued outlook for rates derives from a less favorable 
real sector evolution in AEs suggests that, from a medium-to-long term 
perspective, the net effect on EMEs is likely to be detrimental.3   
  The possibility that risks for financial stability continue to build up in a 
context  of  persistently  low  interest  rates  and  existing  vulnerabilities, 
both in AEs and EMEs, is particularly concerning. The progress achieved 
in  alleviating  some  of  these  risks  during  the  years  after  the  Global 
Financial  Crisis  is  remarkable.  However,  the  task  in  this  respect  is  far 
from complete, and ongoing global shifts at the current juncture clearly 
accentuate the challenges. Among these, it is worth to highlight the still-
high debt levels, both public and private, in a number of economies, a 
situation  that  is  aggravated  by  potential  mismatches  between  assets 
                                                           
3  International  Monetary  Fund  (2014):  “Underlying  Drivers  of  U.S.  Yields  Matter  for  Spillovers”,  Spillover 
Feature in Chapter 2 of World Economic Outlook, October. 
3 
 and liabilities in terms of currencies, liquidity and maturities. In addition, 
an  environment  of  low  interest  rates  for  longer  may  affect  the 
profitability  and  risk-taking  decisions  of  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, while the valuations of some assets (especially on the risky 
side of the spectrum) may continue to stretch further.4  
  The  potential  of  a  more  pronounced  global  economic  downturn  and, 
paradoxically, of a  disorderly tightening of global financial conditions, 
persists.  Even  though  the  global  economy  and  financial  system  have 
shown relative resilience to adverse shocks in recent times, scenarios of 
this type can still be triggered by developments in a number of fronts. 
These include, beyond the materialization of the above-noted financial 
stability  risks,  events  that  have  been  in  the  limelight  for  some  time 
already,  such  as  the  tensions  between  the  US  and  trade  partners, 
notably  China;  the  Brexit  process;  weaknesses  in  the  euro  area; 
idiosyncratic challenges in a number of EMEs and, in general, a sharper 
than expected deceleration of world economic activity as a result of a 
combination of factors.  
  An additional concern relates to the lack of space that monetary policy 
in the US and other AEs may have to counter an economic downturn. In 
contrast  to  the  situation  of  a  decade  ago  (i.e.  at  the  outbreak  of  the 
GFC),  those  economies’  central  banks  at  present  run  the  risk  of  “not 
having the ammunition” required to face a mild deceleration, let alone 
a major economic or financial shock. This, as a result of a normalization 
that  has  proceeded  more  slowly  than  originally  thought,  and  which 
                                                           
4 International Monetary Fund (2019): “Global Financial Stability Report”, April. 
 4 
appears to have come to a halt in part due to neutral interest rates that 
are estimated at levels substantially lower than in the past.  
  While concern is  reasonably concentrated now on the possibility of a 
significant weakening of global economic activity, we must not lose sight 
of the other side of the coin, i.e. the potential for a surprise that forces 
the resumption of monetary policy normalization at a faster pace than 
currently anticipated. In particular, while a lot of attention is paid to the 
increased probability of a recession in the United States, the baseline 
scenario for growth above potential this year and not far from this level 
for  2020  is  usually  not  attached  the  same  importance.  Clearly,  the 
disruptive  impact  of  a  surprise  along  these  lines  could  be  far  greater 
under current expectations.  
A  second  aspect  of  today’s  global  economic  landscape  that  is  worth 
highlighting  relates  to  the  turn  towards  protectionism  of  recent.  The  costs, 
both in the short and the long terms, impinged on the world economy from 
increased tariffs and other barriers to trade have been extensively discussed, 
and  the  impact  is  already  evident  in  international  trade  figures.  In  fact,  the 
WTO  recently  reduced  projections  for  global  trade  growth  for  2019  to  the 
lowest  level  in  three  years,  to  a  significant  extent  as  a  result  of  rising 
commercial  tensions  and  tariffs.5  The  implications  for  trade  in  intermediate 
goods  within  the  framework  of  global  value  chains  (GVCs)  is  particularly 
worrisome for a number of reasons:  
                                                           
5 World Trade Organization (2019): “Global Trade Growth Loses Momentum as Trade Tensions Persist”, Trade 
Statistics and Outlook, Press Release No. 837, 2 April. 
5 
   The proliferation of GVCs lost momentum since 2011, and this trend has 
probably  been  accentuated  by  the  aforementioned  protectionist 
actions.  However,  their  importance  at  present  remains  significant: 
around 70 percent of international trade is for production under these 
arrangements,  a  figure  that  can  be  roughly  translated  as  trade  in 
intermediate  goods  and  services  being  about  twice  as  large  as  that 
serving final demand.6 
  Notwithstanding their prominence, GVCs are particularly at risk due to 
ongoing trade conflicts. This is mainly due to the cumulative effect that 
tariff increases have on the total production cost of final goods, given 
their multiple border crossings within these frameworks, a principle that 
applies to other trade barriers as well.7 Additionally, a deeper sense of 
caution may hinder  further country integration (both at the intensive 
and  extensive  margins)  into  GVCs,  in  view  of  the  magnification  of 
spillovers from bilateral tariff increases that they bring about.8 Thus, it 
would  be  reasonable  to  expect  a  further,  albeit  probably  protracted, 
retrenchment in GVCs as regional and global production arrangements 
adjust to environments characterized by higher barriers to international 
trade. 
  GVCs  are  an  important  driver  of  productivity  gains  in  the  partaking 
economies through a number of channels. In addition to the innovation, 
                                                           
6 Carstens, A. (2018): “Global Market Structures and the High Price of Protectionism”, remarks at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 42nd Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 25 August.  
7 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2018): “Trade Policy Implications of Global Value 
Chains”, Trade Policy Brief, December. 
8 International Monetary Fund (2019): “The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs”, Chapter 
4 of World Economic Outlook, April. 
6 
 technology  adoption  and  knowledge  spillovers  arising  from  the  close 
interaction  between  firms  in  less  developed  economies  and  foreign 
counterparts  that  may  be  at,  or  close  to,  the  technological  frontier, 
productivity  is  enhanced  internally  by  the  specialization,  external 
competition and the increased access to higher-quality and more cost-
effective  inputs  inherent  to  GVCs,  while  the  scope  to  leverage  scale 
economies may as well play an important role.9  
  Closely related to the above, GVCs are to a significant extent responsible 
for some beneficial macroeconomic outcomes of recent times, including 
subdued price pressures resulting from lessened bargaining power in a 
number of industries and input markets.  
  Uncertainty related to trade frictions and the ensuing decline of cross-
border flows of goods and services, is most probably behind the recent 
moderation of industrial activity, particularly in sectors that are heavily 
reliant on GVCs, such as manufacturing.10 The downshift that has been 
observed  in  global  industrial  production  since  last  year  is  partly  the 
result  of  transitory  shocks  such  as  the  ones  experienced  by  the 
European  auto  industry  a  few  months  back.  However,  manufacturing 
and  other  industrial  activities  are  clearly  facing  significant  headwinds 
from  protectionism  and  dislocations  to  GVCs,  that  may  intensify  in 
coming years should risks to international trade continue to materialize. 
                                                           
9  Criscuolo,  C.  and  J.  Timmis  (2017):  “The  Relationship  Between  Global  Value  Chains  and  Productivity”, 
International  Productivity  Monitor,  No.  32:61-83,  Spring;  and  International  Monetary  Fund  (2018):  “Is 
Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?”, Chapter 4 of World Economic Outlook, April. 
10 The annual growth rates of industrial production, as well as the level of manufacturing PMIs, have dropped 
to readings not seen since 2016. 
7 
 I would like to conclude by noting that although, as I said at the beginning, 
expectations of an improvement in the world economic situation in the short 
and long terms depend crucially on the performance of EMEs, their realization 
is far from assured. Potential growth in these countries has fallen during the 
last  decade  and  the  possibility  of  further  declines  down  the  road  is  high.11 
While part of the explanation lies in the evolution of demographic dynamics, 
low investment rates and dismal productivity growth are at the heart of these 
trends.  In  view  of  the  complex  nature  of  the  factors  behind  long-term 
developments  such  as  these,  major  efforts  must  be  made  to  sustainably 
enhance these economies’ productive capacity. Domestic policy efforts have a 
central  role  in  facing  these  challenges.  However,  it  is  unclear  whether 
achieving this objective will be feasible in an external environment that, partly 
as  a  result  of  the  factors  explained  above,  is  creating  an  atmosphere  of 
uncertainty  and  adversely  affecting  productivity,  thus  pushing  just  in  the 
opposite direction.   
                                                           
11 World Bank (2019): “Global Economic Prospects”, January. 
 8 
