Kevin  Stiroh:  Thoughts  on  cybersecurity  from  a  supervisory
perspective
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  SIPA’s  Cyber  Risk  to  Financial  Stability:
State-of-the-Field Conference 2019, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 12 April
2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Good morning and welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  We are very happy to be
hosting  this  conference  on  “Cyber  Risk  to  Financial  Stability”  for  the  Columbia  School  of
1
International and Public Affairs (SIPA).
One of the advantages of a talk on cybersecurity is that there is not a motivation problem—you
don’t  need  to  convince  anyone  that  this  is  a  fundamental  risk  for  financial  firms,  the  financial
system, and the broader economy.  There is strong consensus on that point.  As a result, we
can  use  our  time  more  productively  to  talk  about  the  substantive  issues  around  things  like
identification, protection, detection, response, and recovery, the implications for financial stability,
and the important work that needs to be done.
The focus of today’s conference is on the link between cyber threats and financial stability.  This
is clearly an important topic and there is a growing field of research that explores issues around
transmission channels, amplifiers, and behavioral dynamics.  As a few specific examples, recent
papers  map  out  the  link  from  cyber  risk  to  financial  stability  through  a  range  of  transmission
channels  such  as  interconnectedness,  confidence,  and  data  integrity,  and  a  related  paper
focuses  on  the  potential  dynamics  of  a  cyber-triggered  run.     I  think  these  frameworks  and
perspectives offer a very useful point of departure for macroprudential policy discussions.  For
today, however, I’m going to shift from a macroprudential view to a microprudential one and offer
some  thoughts  on  cyber  risks  from  a  supervisor’s  perspective.    These  are  not  independent
views, so I hope my perspective adds to the broader discussion today.
2
Before proceeding, I’d like to emphasize that these are my views and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
As you may know, the supervisory program for the largest banks that was implemented after the
financial crisis looks at both individual firm safety and soundness and the potential impact that
distress  at  a  large  bank  can  have  on  broader  financial  markets  or  the  economy.     More
specifically,  this  framework  expresses  two  complementary  goals  for  the  supervision  of
systemically important firms: (1) Enhanced resiliency of the firm to lower the probability of failure
or  inability  to  serve  as  an  intermediary  and  (2)  Reduced  impact  on  the  financial  system  or
economy in the event failure or material weakness does in fact occur.  This is one way to link
microprudential issues to the macroprudential concerns.
3
From  a  supervisory  perspective,  cyber  risk  can  be  viewed  through  the  lens  of  operational
resiliency where a cyber attack threatens the ability of a firm to provide critical financial services. 
An effective risk management framework with appropriate governance and controls is one way to
mitigate those risks.  Just as capital and liquidity promote financial resilience, strong governance
and controls support operational resilience.  The governance and controls portion of the large
bank assessment framework includes an evaluation of risk management capabilities including
4
independent risk management and controls and planning for the ongoing resiliency of a firm.
As  I  indicated  earlier,  cyber  risks  are  well-known  and  firms  are  expending  considerable
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
resources and management bandwidth to address them in terms of technology, process and
personnel.  U.S. banks and other financial firms are projecting higher spending on cybersecurity
each year as they face bigger threats and more attacks.   Cumulatively, we have seen estimates
6
as high as $1 trillion for global spend on cybersecurity through 2021.
5
One  area  of  supervisory  focus  is  on  maintaining  resilience  of  core  business  services.    For
cybersecurity,  this  includes  continued  progress  on  preventive  and  detective  efforts.    It  also
includes things like a comprehensive process to assess cyber-related capabilities; identification
of gaps in business resilience requirements such as recovery time objectives; risk monitoring
and  testing  programs;  and  management  reporting  to  facilitate  appropriate  prioritization. 
Moreover, bank resiliency increasingly depends on the resiliency of third-party service providers.
In this sense, our approach to cybersecurity is embedded in the broader supervisory and risk
management  frameworks.    As  such,  we  see  notable  similarities  to  other  shocks  that  could
impact a firm’s operational resiliency, safety and soundness, and ability to continue to provide
financial services in a sustainable way.  From a process perspective, for example we expect
firms  to  leverage  traditional  approaches  to  risk  identification,  measurement,  mitigation,
monitoring and reporting.  In terms of governance, we expect effective oversight from Boards of
Directors.  There are also similarities to risk management of information technology with a focus
on things like change management and information security controls, asset management, and
the software development lifecycle. 
There  are,  however,  important  differentiators  that  distinguish  cyber  risk  from  other  operational
shocks such as those related to natural events or human error.  These differentiators provide a
useful map for risk managers and supervisors who must adapt to these evolving risks.
One obvious differentiator of cybersecurity risk is around motivation.  While there are exceptions,
we  don’t  usually  think  of  a  credit  or  market  risk  event  or  a  natural  disaster  happening  with
intentionality  by  a  determined  adversary.    Asset  quality  or  market  prices  may  change
unexpectedly and weather events may prove disruptive, but they lack intent to harm.  By contrast,
cyber events, by definition, involve an intention to steal, disrupt, or destroy.  According to one
recent  survey,  the  biggest  drivers  of  cyber  attacks  were  access  to  information  followed  by
financial profit.   Cybercriminals are increasingly motivated by data theft, rather than solely direct
monetary theft.  In addition, the adversary is likely to evolve and may even actively respond during
an attack making it necessary to have a dynamic response to this more complex threat.
7
Motivation also impacts the varied nature of the threat landscape.  Cyber events are driven by
nation states, organized crime, and political activists.  As result, the threat landscape changes
not  only  with  opportunity,  data  and  technology,  but  also  in  response  to  global  and  domestic
politics.  One study highlights that cyber incidents from nation states are on the rise.   These
types of cyber attacks have no physical boundaries as a malicious actor can successfully launch
an attack on an institution located in another part of the world.  All of these factors impact how an
institution will choose to prepare and respond.
8
A  second  critical  differentiator  is  the  nature  of  disruption  including  potential  impacts  on  data
confidentiality, integrity, and availability.  Cyber attacks that involved data corruption or destructive
malware are unique to a cyber threat and can have an immediate and devastating impact.  The
question  of  data  integrity  has  emerged  as  a  critical  factor  in  a  cyber  attack  and  introduces
additional risk management challenges.  For example, the ability to respond and recover may be
disrupted  if  there  is  data  destruction  or  corruption  in  a  scenario  that  is  also  likely  to  include
considerable uncertainty.  Even if a firm can recover from a data corruption cyber-attack, when
would  customers  and  clients  trust  them  as  a  counterparty?    Issues  around  confidence  and
interconnectedness are ways that a cyber event can have broader macroprudential implications.
A third differentiator relates to the skill and human capital needed to build the most successful
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
defenses.    Cyber  security  requires  a  different  set  of  skills  and  abilities  including  systems
development and acquisition lifecycles; general enterprise architecture and IT governance; and IT
service  management  sub-disciplines  such  as  asset  management,  and  configuration
management.    Even  within  the  technology  fields,  cybersecurity  efforts  involve  specialized
disciplines that are not usually addressed by general IT specialists related to perimeter defense,
endpoint security, and authentication.  Acquiring and retaining the critical talent for these activities
is a growing challenge.
All of these issues present unique challenges from a risk management perspective.  Moreover,
the fragmented regulatory landscape for cyber risk and lack of mature metrics and measurement
tools add difficulty.  This is true both for the firm’s second and third lines of defense and Boards
of Directors’ oversight, as well as for supervisors approaching this from an external perspective.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this talk, these issues are well-known and both the private
sector and the public sector are actively working toward solutions to these difficult problems.  I
expect we’ll see continued evolution of the risk management framework as the broader fintech
ecosystem develops and cyber defenses co-evolve with new threats.   Challenging and complex
issues  include  the  most  effective  strategies  around  prevention,  detection  and  response;
communication protocols internally, and with clients, vendors, and the official sector; business
continuity plans and contingency exercises; and the role of Boards of Directors.  Supervisors can
contribute  to  this  debate  by  continuing  to  emphasize  the  critical  importance  of  a  strong  risk
culture with the appropriate governance and controls framework.
To  conclude,  I  believe  that  resiliency  to  a  cyber  event  is  an  area  where  the  incentives  of  the
private and public sector are closely aligned.  Microprudential and macroprudential objectives are
reinforcing.  As a result, there is an imperative to collaborate, share information, and learn from
one another about threats, responses, and best-practice approaches.  Conferences like this one
that bring together the private sector, the public sector and academics are a critical component
to that necessary dialogue.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
I thank Danny Brando, Bill Brodows, Dianne Dobbeck, Jackie McCormack and Danielle Vacarr for help preparing
these remarks.
Jason Healy, Patricia Mosser, Katheryn Rosen and Alexander Wortman,  The Ties that Bind: A Framework to
Assess the Linkage Between Cyber Risks and Financial Stability, Columbia SIPA, December 2018 and The
Future  of  Financial  Stability  and  Cyber  Risks,  The  Brookings  Institution,  October  2018.      Darrell  Duffie  and
Joshua Younger, “Cyber Runs,” February 13, 2019.  See also Office of Financial Research, Cybersecurity and
Financial Stability: Risks and Resilience, 17–01, February 5, 2017 and Financial Stability Oversight Council,
2018 Annual Report, 2018.
Federal  Reserve  Board,  SR  19–3, Consolidated  Supervision  Framework  for  Large  Financial  Institutions,
December 2012.
Federal Reserve Board, SR 19–3, Large Financial Institution Rating System, February 2019.
Thales, Thales Data Threat Report 2018 – Financial Services Edition, December 2018.
Cybersecurity Ventures, 2018 Cybersecurity Market Report, May 2017.
Positive Technologies, Cybersecurity Threatscape 2018: Tends and Forecasts, March 2019.
Crowdstrike, 2019 Global Threat Report: Adversary Tradecraft and The Importance of Speed, February 2019.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
