   20.05.2019 
The Need for Deepening Euro Area Integration 
City Week 2019: The International Financial Services Forum 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me start by thanking Maurice Button and the Board of Patrons of City Week 2019 for 
their invitation to participate in City Week 2019. It is a pleasure to be here together with 
leading participants from the financial sector.  
2019 marks the year in which we are celebrating the 20th anniversary of the launch of the 
euro.  However,  this  celebration  is  taking  place  at  quite  a  challenging  point  in  time.  The 
legacies of the crisis in terms of unemployment and debt, the rise of populism, the threat 
posed  by  protectionism  and  uncertainties  stemming  from  Brexit  all  make  for  a  complex 
situation.  
But to the surprise of many, this background has not reduced European citizens’ support 
for the European integration process. Quite the opposite I would say. Euro area citizens 
have  declared  the  highest  level  of  support  for  the  euro  ever  recorded.  The  latest 
Eurobarometer survey shows that 74% of citizens across the euro area countries favour the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  with  a  single  currency,  the  euro.  The  survey  also 
reveals  strong  support  for  more  coordination  and  economic  reforms  to  improve  the 
performance of national economies.  
These  figures  provide  solid  grounds  for  European  governments  and  institutions  to 
combine efforts aimed at making the euro area architecture more robust and resilient 
to shocks, and at increasing its ability to respond when shocks occur.   
Admittedly, Europe has already taken bold steps to increase its capacity to detect and 
handle crises. During the crisis years, two new intergovernmental treaties were introduced, 
paving the way for strengthening economic and fiscal stability by creating the European 
Stability  Mechanism.  This  key  instrument  provides  financial  assistance  to  countries  in 
difficulties and, as recently agreed, may also act as a fiscal backstop in banking resolution 
processes.  New  procedures  for  the  surveillance  of  imbalances  (the  Macroeconomic 
Imbalances  Procedure)  and  the  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  also 
agreed. 
In the financial arena, important reforms, such as the creation of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  for  significant  banks,  were 
implemented. On top of this, the impulse of monetary policy, with a substantial broadening 
of the ECB’s monetary policy toolkit, was also a crucial factor that helped cope with the 
Euro crisis and its negative impact on price stability.   
Attempts  to  draw  comparisons  between  the  governance  framework  in  the  United  States 
and the European Union should be mindful that the US currency union has had 150 years 
to evolve, while the European currency union is still rather young. Nonetheless, it is precisely 
with this long-term perspective that we have to judge EMU.   
All in all, while acknowledging the relevance of the various institutional changes made, a 
broad  consensus  points  to  the  fact  that  additional  reforms  are  needed  in  the  EU’s 
architecture, and in particular in the architecture of the European Monetary Union.  
 3/11 
 Against  this  background,  allow  me  to  briefly  sketch  those  reforms  which,  in  my  view, 
deserve more attention in EU policy-makers’ agendas during the next institutional period 
following the European elections.  
First,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  more  progress  to  complete  the  single  market  for 
services. For example, by addressing obstacles in the regulation of professional services 
and other administrative barriers, and by enhancing cross-border cooperation in the energy 
sector. 
Second, there is also a pressing need to strengthen and simplify the fiscal framework. 
The current fiscal rules have proven to be overly complex, hard to enforce, and unable to 
prevent a procyclical fiscal policy. Moreover, steps in this direction might be essential for 
promoting economic stability and a more favorable environment for investments ahead of 
the challenge of digitalisation. 
Third, more efforts need to be made to preserve the multilateral system of trade.  
 Focusing  now  more  on  specific  euro  area  reforms,  I  would  highlight  in  particular  two 
priorities which, in my view, should be at the center of the discussion.   
Firstly, the need to increase financial integration and the development of European capital 
markets by reinforcing the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union initiatives. 
Secondly, progress towards a more comprehensive fiscal stabilisation capacity at the 
Eurozone level. 
The need to increase financial integration 
European citizens and firms still face several barriers to investing across European markets. 
Pensioners and investors in different countries have access to different investment products 
and their rights differ as a result of diverging local insolvency laws.  
The banking sector still remains mainly national, and intertwined with the sovereign 
of its host jurisdiction. For bank depositors and national authorities, the current situation 
is  such  that  the  ultimate  backstop  for  insuring  deposits  in  a  failed  institution  relies 
completely on a national government which has a limited say on the on-going supervision 
and resolution of the failed institution. This is so since decision-making processes on these 
responsibilities are now adopted by the European single mechanisms. 
      4/11 
   Notwithstanding cultural, legal or historical reasons, these inconsistencies and obstacles 
are broad-based, and stem from pure regulatory barriers, a lack of infrastructure or limited 
political resolve. The results are pervasive. Investment portfolios are not well diversified 
and investment opportunities are lost as these may not always be matched with savers’ 
funds. The financial system remains fragile and fragmented because of the doom-loop 
between sovereigns and banks.  
An important consequence of insufficient integration is the limited capacity of risk-sharing 
mechanisms in the Euro Area countries, compared with those of the United States.  
    5/11 
 As  you  know,  risk-sharing  is  the  ability  of  countries  to  diversify  country-specific  shocks 
among other member states through the cross-country savings and capital market channels 
(i.e.  the  private  risk-sharing  mechanisms),  as  well  as  through  fiscal  transfers  (the  public 
sector channel).  
With regard to the private channels, the degree of risk-sharing through capital markets 
is comparatively low in Europe. And although it moved on a rising trend during the pre-
crisis years as a result of the increase in wholesale financial integration, it subsequently fell, 
remaining at levels well below those observed in the United States. Limited development of 
equity markets in Europe, prevailing national investment bias in the Euro area relative to that 
in  the  United  States,  and  a  greater  concentration  of  cross-border  investment  in  a  small 
number of  Member  States  in  Europe  are  some  of the  reasons  explaining  such  divergent 
reactions between these two financial areas.  
The budgetary channel is practically non-existent in the euro area. By contrast, in the 
United States, estimates show that the public channel helps soften between 10% and 20% 
of adverse shocks in a particular State.  
As  a  result,  the  credit  channel  is  ultimately  the  sole  means  for  cushioning  shocks 
across Euro Area countries. However, the credit channel is not enough to compensate for 
the  weakness  of  the other  channels.  This  means  that,  on  average,  between  40%  and 
60%  of  an  adverse  shock  impacting  a  Euro  Area  country  translates  directly  into  a 
decline in that country’s consumption. These figures are double the impact calculated for 
the United States.  
Besides the need to strength risk-sharing mechanisms to address macroeconomic shocks, 
achieving  key  targets  such  as  controlling  the  levels  of  public  debt  and  reducing  the 
sovereign risk nexus (often cited as the most fundamental original flaws of the euro design) 
do  not  only  depend  on  introducing  policies  of  pure  fiscal  discipline.  They  also  require 
soundly functioning and well-integrated financial markets capable of diversifying risks 
across borders and correctly pricing concentration risks.  This is why, in my view, the 
most immediate and significant challenge facing EMU is to reinforce the integration of both 
banking systems and capital markets. 
Reinforcing the Banking Union 
When the euro was launched, there was actually an expectation that many banks would 
become truly European, providing retail services across the whole euro area. The reality is 
quite different.  
     6/11 
   Cross-border consolidation remains very limited and most firms and households in the 
euro  area  remain  largely  dependent  on  their  domestic  banking  systems  to  maintain 
investment and smooth consumption profiles.   
Although  no  formal  barriers  to  foreign  banks  exist,  relevant  distortions  arise  from  still-
significant specificities in banking regulations across countries. Some of the existing 
savings  banks,  government-owned  banks  or  regional  banks  in  the  EU  are  protected  by 
national  legislations  hampering  incentives  to  compete  or  effectively  sheltering  them 
from competition. Moreover, regulation fails to fully acknowledge the benefits generally 
arising from geographical diversification in a single market.  
We also need to address the current deadlock on the third pillar of the Banking Union, 
the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS).  Some  experts  argue  that  this  third 
element may not be essential once we have in place a stringent resolution framework with 
homogeneous bail-in requirements; but in my view, it remains crucial to make EDIS a reality. 
Such  a  scheme  would  have  a  strong  impact  on  trust  and  contribute  to  increased  risk-
sharing, insofar as it is designed as a fully fledged mutualised EDIS. Contributions to EDIS 
taking  into  account  bank-specific  risks  could  limit  the  risk  of  permanent  cross-
subsidisation  and  would  also  help  deal  with  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  This  would 
contribute to reducing the link between national governments and banks and preventing 
destabilising cross-border flights to safety in the event of difficulties. 
Moving towards a Capital Markets Union 
The  other  key  initiative  to  increase  the  integration  of  Europe’s  financial  markets  and  to 
facilitate risk-sharing capacity in EMU is the Capital Markets Union project. The project 
aims at providing firms with the same funding opportunities, and households with the same 
saving opportunities, irrespective of the member state in which they are located.  
  7/11 
   However, inconsistent regulations, as well as varying market practices and industry 
standards  across  EU  countries,  prove  to  be  key  impediments  in  developing  a  truly 
pan-European capital market.  
As a result, country savings and investments are still highly correlated, a fact known as 
the  Feldstein-Horioka  puzzle.  This  correlation  has  subsided  over  time  in  the  case  of  the 
European Union but is still sizable, which is more bewildering in the case of the currency 
union. A departure from perfect capital mobility has important economic implications, as it 
might be leading to lower aggregate investment, a higher home bias in investment decisions 
and a lack of portfolio diversification.  
The  Capital  Markets  Union  project  has  received  a  stronger  push  over  the  last  few 
months. Most of the work in terms of harmonising investment products across the EU has 
already been agreed. Progress on savings products has also been achieved. In particular, 
the  development  of  the  market  for  the  Pan-European  Pension  Product  is  particularly 
relevant  considering  the  situation  of  public  finances  in  many  EU  countries  and  the 
challenges  posed  by  population  ageing.  But,  looking  ahead,  greater  headway  is  needed 
over the coming years. In particular, allow me to highlight three dimensions.  
First, the legal framework: Insolvency regimes vary widely across jurisdictions for financial 
and non-financial corporations, as a result of cultural traditions and legal frameworks. This 
is  a  major  obstacle  for  cross-country  investments  and,  I  would  add,  a  very  difficult  one 
indeed to overcome. 
Second, the strengthening of European regulators. As European markets become more 
integrated  and  technologically  complex,  this  is  becoming  a  more  essential  element  that 
policy-makers need to address. It will be even more important since, depending on the final 
outcome  of  negotiations,  Brexit  might  increase  the  risk  of  fragmentation,  as  some 
companies  and  transactions  may  be  reallocated  to  various  possible  destinations,  while 
others may remain in the UK.  
8/11 
   Third, more needs to be done in terms of making capital taxation more consistent. The 
debate has stalled in this regard. For example, the various regimes for withholding taxes, 
with more than 90 types of forms in different languages, are often cited as a huge obstacle 
for  investment  by  market  participants.  Moreover,  the  favorable  tax  treatment  of  debt 
compared to that of equity has significant economic implications. 
A  well-functioning  Capital  Markets  Union  will  have  major  ramifications  as  it  will  attract 
institutional  investors,  improving  the  allocation  of  resources  and  strengthening  the 
international role of the euro. Crucially, it will help reshape capital markets in Europe after 
Brexit. I believe that this project is essential for the Single Market, for the Economic and 
Monetary Union and a resilient euro, and, ultimately, for the EU’s global competitiveness. I 
am certain that these and other matters will be raised and discussed during the following 
panel of this conference. 
The case for a fiscal stabilisation capacity 
But, even if developments in European financial markets were complete, private risk-
sharing  would  still  be  inefficiently  low.  This  is  because  private  investors  do  not  yet 
internalise the positive macroeconomic stabilisation externalities of their portfolio choices. 
In  this  context,  the  other  area  that  urgently  needs  addressing  is  enhancing  the 
stabilisation capacity of the euro area through fiscal instruments.  
Moreover, the efficiency case for fiscal risk-sharing ultimately hinges on the relevance 
of idiosyncratic shocks and the capacity of national fiscal policy to face these shocks. 
The  efficiency  argument meets  the  responsibility  argument  in  the  case  of  fiscal liabilities 
stemming from inadequate Euro-wide policies, as is now the case of financial supervision 
and resolution. 
True,  some  evidence  suggests  that  national  business  cycles  have  now  become  more 
synchronised.  But  it  is  clear  from  economic  developments over  the  last  decade  that  the 
mere  sum  of  national  fiscal  buffers  may  not  be  enough  to  accommodate  severe 
common shocks. 
In addition, although in normal circumstances monetary policy should be able to deal with 
aggregate shocks, it may not be the case in situations in which monetary policy is already 
operating at the effective lower bound.   
As the comparative analysis reveals, all other mature currency unions have centralized fiscal 
tools allowing governments to take actions when difficulties arise in a particular state or in 
situations of an aggregate recession. Despite several measures taken in response to the 
crisis, the EU still lacks fiscal tools to cushion against asymmetric or large systemic 
shocks that may arise in the Euro area. 
At  the latest European  Summits,  a  consensus  seems  to  be  emerging  for  a small  budget 
within  the  EU’s  regular  budget,  earmarked  for  specific  support  for  member  states  in  the 
form of loans seeking to promote competitiveness and convergence, in particular in 
the  areas  of  innovation  and  human  capital.  While  such  a  budget  may  be  a  first  step 
towards more ambitious instruments, we should realise that its limited size would not make 
 9/11 
 it a suitable tool for smoothing the adjustment costs for countries experiencing a severe 
shock. And nor would it contribute to improving the design of fiscal policy at the euro area 
level in the event of a widespread recession.  
By  contrast,  a  centralised  fiscal  capacity  could  contribute  to  both  aims  through 
temporary fiscal transfers for countries experiencing a particularly adverse shock. Several 
proposals have been discussed. They include the need to designate a Euro area finance 
minister  with  her  own  budget  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  a  rainy-day  fund  with  or 
without the possibility of issuing debt, a European unemployment (re-)insurance scheme, 
and  so  on.  Views  on  these  proposals,  however,  differ  in  terms  of  size,  allocation  of 
competences, political feasibility and in many other respects. 
  According to Banco de España simulations, the effective design of any of the proposals 
needs to be sizable enough to provide stabilizstion for an economy facing a recession, 
even a large economy facing a deep recession. The trigger mechanism must be clear and 
smooth to ensure a timely response. But it should also address legitimate concerns over 
moral hazard and permanent transfers. The phasing-out should ensure that fiscal transfers 
will not be permanent so as to avoid undue redistribution across member states. 
To preserve sound incentives, in my view, countries with access to this instrument must 
comply with fiscal rules and with the rules of the Macroeconomic imbalances procedure. 
Even countries with a good fiscal record can fail to deal with sizable shocks, but ex ante 
compliance  with  fiscal  rules  –and  a  transparent  process-  is  necessary  to  dispel  doubts 
about the behaviour of the country under stress, while also providing flexibility for national 
fiscal buffers.  
The Banco de España simulations show that, with an annual contribution of 0.35% of GDP 
per country, it is possible to design a fiscal capacity with a risk-sharing capacity similar to 
that of the existing instruments in the US. If such an instrument had been in place since 
10/11 
  the inception of the Euro, most countries (and not only the usual suspects) would have 
benefited  from  the  scheme  at  one  point,  without  permanent  redistribution  across 
countries.  
Finally, the creation of a common safe asset for the euro area should be explored further. 
The normal operations of markets and financial intermediaries require a broad spectrum of 
assets with sufficient liquidity and minimum counterparty risk. This situation is amplified in 
turbulent times, as investors react to increases in uncertainty by accumulating assets with 
a low level of perceived risk. Within the EMU, the volume of such assets is insufficient, as 
only the debt of a small group of countries is perceived as riskless, thereby giving rise to 
scarcity and financial fragmentation. An improvement in the fiscal position of countries might 
help  expand  the  number  of  available  safe  assets.  But  a  common  safe  asset  will  have 
additional benefits, by contributing to reducing the link between national governments and 
banks;  preventing destabilising cross-border flights to safety in the event of difficulties; and, 
more generally, promoting a more stable and equitable provision of safe assets for the EMU 
as a whole. 
In sum, there is a pressing need to improve the functioning of the EMU before the next crisis 
hits.  Increasing  financial  integration  and  introducing  fiscal  instruments  to  improve 
macroeconomic stabilisation are of the utmost importance in achieving this goal. 
Thank you for your attention.  
  11/11 
