Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Opening  address  -  8th  Conference  of  the
Central Balance-Sheet Database
Opening  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  8th
Conference  of  the  Central  Balance-Sheet  Database  "The  buoyancy  of  the  corporate  sector",
Lisbon, 4 February 2019.
As prepared for delivery.
 Good afternoon. Welcome to another conference of Banco de Portugal’s Central Balance-Sheet
Database.
It is always with great pleasure that I associate myself with this event, hosted by the Statistics
Department of Banco de Portugal, and which is in its eighth edition. 
The  information  produced  and  made  available  by  the  Central  Balance-Sheet  Database  is  a
valuable asset, which we are proud to preserve and improve. Not only is it a valuable asset for
Banco de Portugal, as producer of studies on the Portuguese economic reality, but also, and
above  all,  a  valuable  asset  for  firms,  economic  decision-makers,  academia  and  society  in
general. 
The  Central  Balance-Sheet  Database  is,  as  you  know,  fed  by  so-called  IES  –  Simplified
Corporate  Information.  The  IES,  created  a  dozen  years  ago  within  the  scope  of  the  Simplex
programme,  is  an  internationally  admired  success  case  and  a  notable  example  of  inter-
institutional  cooperation  and  articulation,  involving  Banco  de  Portugal,  the  Ministries  of  Justice
and Finance, and Statistics Portugal.  
As  a  result  of  this  joint  effort,  the  Central  Balance-Sheet  Database  produces  and  releases
information that is rich, wide-ranging and conducive to a timely and thorough knowledge of firms’
financial and economic situations, which is almost unrivalled at international level. 
The potential of this wealth is enormous as it:  
Allows business owners and managers to frame their enterprise in the sector and size class
to  which  it  belongs,  to  make  international  comparisons  and  to  assess  business  and
investment opportunities;
Provides policy-makers with knowledge of the microeconomic reality that is fundamental to
successfully design the institutional and regulatory framework;
And allows analysts and researchers to improve understanding of the corporate reality and
thereby the performance of the Portuguese economy.
The study on the buoyancy of the corporate sector in Portugal, which will be presented today and
will serve as the basis for the subsequent discussion, is a perfect illustration of this.
The results of this study provide very relevant clues to understanding the reaction of economic
agents  to  the  crisis  we  went  through  recently,  and  also  to  acknowledging  the  challenges  we
face. 
In  this  study,  we  can  find  signs  of  the  emergence,  as  a  result  of  the  recent  crisis,  of
entrepreneurship focused on business opportunities in which the scale, organisation and capital
requirements  were  not  key  determinants  to  success.  This  appears  to  have  been  –  alongside
outward  migration  –  the  response  of  economic  agents  to  the  job  destruction  caused  by  the
crisis. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is positive news as it shows that the economy was able to react.
However,  although  it  is  true  that  this  type  of  entrepreneurship  makes  economic  adjustment
easier, it is important to recognise that it is not enough to lead the Portuguese economy to a
higher growth path. For this we need two additional types of entrepreneurship:
Entrepreneurship focused on technological business opportunities;
And  entrepreneurship  that  promotes  the  restructuring  and  growth  of  existing  small  and
medium-sized enterprises.
Public policies have a relevant role to play in the promotion of these types of entrepreneurship,
from  the  adoption  of  a  legal  and  institutional  framework  conducive  to  an  attractive  business
environment – that is, a business environment that enables a more efficient and flexible allocation
of  available  resources  and  promotes  a  reduction  in  the  levels  of  uncertainty  that  economic
agents operate in. 
The  attractiveness  of  the  business  environment  depends  on  countless  factors,  from  the
operation of the labour market to the operation of the capital market, to corporate insolvency and 
recovery mechanisms, to name but a few.
Notwithstanding, no matter how relevant the business environment may be, the way the manager
combines that environment, the organisation and the firm’s strategy is actually equally critical to
economic growth. For this to result in production that is desired and valued by the market, we
always need a management model that is effective and professional. 
In an economy like that of Portugal, in which family-run firms form a large proportion of small and
medium-sized  enterprises  as  a  whole,  the  reconciliation  between  family  ownership  and
management professionalisation is a critical element in the evolution of the corporate sector and
the Portuguese economy. The separation of ownership and management is a decisive factor for
management  professionalisation.  Such  separation  allows  a  fair  balance  to  be  found  and
safeguarded  between  the  continuity  of  the  entrepreneurial  factor  that  was  present  during  the
development of a given firm, the legitimate interests of the different stakeholders of that firm, and
the defence of an ambition to grow in scale and/or value chain migration. 
That  is,  only  through  the  professionalisation  of  management,  combined  with  the  continued
commitment  of  the  entrepreneurial  elements  present,  can  there  be  an  affirmation  of  more
effective management models and the sustainability and growth of business.  
Public  policy  can  encourage  management  professionalisation  in  family-run  firms  in  different
ways,  amongst  which  I  would  highlight  the  development  and  provision  of  the  “family  holding”
concept,  as  the  legal  expression  of  a  centralised  management  model  of  the  holdings  of
members of a single family. Always taking on an optional and supplementary nature, this legal
concept would be especially effective if provided with a simple statutory and tax regime that was
stable and easily accessible.
In order to understand the dynamics of the corporate sector fully and promote it with maximum
effectiveness,  aggregated  information  will  never  be  enough.  It  is  indispensable  to  know  the
microeconomic and sociocultural mechanisms that, on the ground, determine economic agents’
decisions  and  how  they  interact  with  the  environment  and  public  policies.  Only  then  will  it  be
possible to understand, for example,
The reasons for death rates among firms in their third and fourth years of life;
The positive and negative impact of the business environment on a firm,
Or the management model a certain entrepreneur chooses for their business.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is where the Central Balance-Sheet Database reveals its worth, not only for the answers it
provides,  but  also  for  the  questions  it  enables.  Based  on  information  like  that  which  will  be
presented today, it should certainly be possible to find socioeconomic and multidisciplinary lines
of  research  for  fieldwork,  leading  to  the  micro-  and  macroeconomic  data  that  we  see  in  our
tables and charts.
Let me therefore finish by inviting you to get to know the information that Banco de Portugal is
providing today, and searching it for answers and the questions that will lead us to an ever-more
dynamic corporate sector.
Thank you very much. Keep up the good work.  
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
