  The third anniversary of the establishment of the Kosovo Credit Guarantee Fund  
Honourable, 
Mr Rinor Gjonbalaj, Chairman of the Board of Directors at the KCGF 
Mr Christian Heldt, German Ambassador to the Republic of Kosovo,  
Mr Bedri Hamza, Minister of Finance,  
Mrs Lisa Magno, USAID Kosovo Mission Director,   
Mr Riccardo Serri, Head of the EU Office,  
Mr Alessandro Tappi, Chief Investment Officer at EIF, 
I am honoured to celebrate today with you the third anniversary of the establishment of the Kosovo Credit 
Guarantee Fund. It has been a privilege for the Central Bank to contribute, within its legal mandate, to the 
process  of  the  Fund  establishment,  in  particular  in  the  area  of  proper  legal  framework.  This  fund  has 
achieved  tremendous  success  during  these  past  three  years,  assisting  the  economic  development  and 
creation of new jobs in Kosovo. Within such a short time, the Fund has managed to guarantee more than 
2,560 loans amounting to EUR 100 million, with a guaranteed amount totalling to EUR 47.5 million.  
Studies  to  date  show  that,  among  others,  access  to  finance  is  one  of  the  obstacles  to  private  sector 
development. Challenges faced by small and medium-sized enterprises for access to finance in one hand, 
and challenges faced by financial institutions during risk assessment of the financing of these enterprises 
on  the  other  hand,  are  already  known.  So,  by  providing  credit  guarantees,  the  Fund  has  assisted  in 
overcoming  these  challenges  by  facilitating  access  to  finance  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises. 
Therefore, financial institutions have channelled their liquidity into the type and value of proper funding 
for the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises.  
This  additional  funding  mechanism  has  helped  them  to  develop,  create  new  jobs,  and  export,  thus 
positioning Kosovo at a competitive level in the regional and European markets.  
An  essential  prerequisite  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  Fund  is  the  interaction  with  a  stable  and 
efficient  banking  system.  The  continuous  growth  of  competition  in  the  banking  system  and  the 
advancement of this sector have led to a decline in cost in bank financing conditions, and improvement 
thereof. The average effective interest rate on loans in March 2019 was 6.7%. This level of interest rates 
has now approximated the cost of bank financing in Kosovo to other countries in the region. Also, lending 
of the banking sector has increased significantly, raising its lending rate to ever EUR 2.8 billion, with an 
annual growth rate of 11.4% in March 2019.  
Considering the high level of banking sector stability, the continuous growth of the position of liquidity 
and  capitalism,  considerably  above  the  level  required  by  the  Central  Bank,  the  Fund's  introduction  and 
active  participation  in  this  sector  have  strongly  influenced  the  continuation  of  significant  increase  and 
improvement of the aforementioned lending standards. 
The satisfactory stability of the banking sector is also reflected by the good quality of the loan portfolio. 
The low level of non-performing loans marked a further decline to 2.6% in March 2019. This represents 
the lowest level so far, and continues to list Kosovo as the country with the lowest rate of non-performing 
loans in the region. 
 Despite  the  hitherto  success,  the  Fund  will  face  challenges  in  achieving  future  objectives.  The  good 
quality  of  loans  guaranteed  by  the  Fund,  adequate  operating  tariff,  effective  risk  management 
mechanisms,  operational  independence,  and  financial  stability  are  essential  for  the  functioning  and 
development of the Fund. These can be achieved by proper corporate governance which is integrated into 
the institutional framework of the Fund. The Board of Directors and Management shall ensure that such a 
framework  is  prudent  and  operates  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  best  internationally  accepted 
standards.  
It is very important for the Fund to increase its activity since the fund's guarantee potential is much higher 
than what it is currently being utilized. The agreement between the European Investment Fund (COSME 
Programme) and the Fund enables the reguaranteeing of the portfolio up to EUR 45 million for a two-year 
period to a credible institution such as the European Investment Fund which will have a positive impact 
on  increasing  access  to  financing  for  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  These  benefits  would 
enable the Fund to reduce the fee for loans re-guaranteed by the COSME Programme.  
The CBK will continue to ensure the financial stability it currently enjoys. The role of banks in particular, 
and of other financial institutions in general, is very important and there is still room for this role to be 
further  advanced  in  order  to  increase  its  impact  on  the  development  of  Kosovo's  economy  and  further 
development of the banking system itself.  
Above  all,  it  is  a  collective  obligation  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  a  financially  stable  Kosovo 
Credit Guarantee Fund so that it serves to the development of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  with  praises  on  the  excellent  work  done  so  far  in  the 
functioning of the Fund, and looking forward to  maximum inter-institutional engagement  for advancing 
this Fund so that it further increases financial intermediation in Kosovo. 
    