Ravi Menon: The global economy in 2019
Fireside  chat  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of
Singapore, at Citibank's 16th Asia Pacific Investors Conference, Singapore, 27 February 2019.
 Question: How vulnerable is the global economy to a synchronised slowdown from both
US and China? How does the rest of Asia, including Singapore, weather and navigate
this environment? What type of policies must countries pursue to build resilience? 
Global growth is on a gentle slide down, but is not heading for a hard landing.
We have had two years of robust growth, in many parts of the world above trend.
It is to be expected that global growth will moderate this year towards a more sustainable
rate, and this moderation has already started.
We  expect  global  GDP  to  grow  by  3.5%  this  year,  only  slightly  slower  than  the  3.7%
1
estimated for 2018, and higher than the average of 3.4% in the three years to 2016.
The US economy remains in good shape.
2
The US is projected to grow by 2.4%  in 2019, still above potential.
The effects of the fiscal stimulus are not expected to fade until later this year.
Employment growth remains healthy, and this will sustain household spending.
Private investment is a question mark: the recent increase in political and policy uncertainty
is  a  dampener,  but  ongoing  deregulation  will  support  increased  capital  outlays  in  some
sectors.
China’s economy is moderating but is likely to stabilise at a more sustainable pace.
China is facing three economic headwinds:
the lagged effects of the drive to deleverage the economy;
the maturing of the global manufacturing cycle; and
the effects of the US trade tariffs – both the direct impact on production and the indirect
effect on consumer and investor sentiment.
But accommodative macroeconomic policies will help to avoid a sharp growth deceleration.
Monetary policy has been loosened and we are already witnessing signs of a revival in
credit creation.
Fiscal policy is also providing support, boosted by infrastructure spending.
China’s  economy  is  expected  to  grow  by  6.2%  in  2019,  down  from  6.6%  last  year.  The
growth moderation is not trivial but nor is it alarming.
What is worrying about 2019 is not headline growth rates. 
What is worrying is that downside risks have increased and policy buffers are limited in
the advanced economies.
First, downside risks.  Global economic policy uncertainty is probably at its highest since
3
the Asian financial crisis 20 years ago.   
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Trade tensions are an obvious source of uncertainty.
Trade negotiations between the US and China have yet to produce an agreement.
Recent  signals  are  encouraging  but  the  risk  remains  of  a  breakdown  in  talks  and  a
further escalation of tariffs. 
This could in turn have knock-on effects on supply chains across Asia.
And trade risks are not limited to US-China. 
US tariffs on automobile imports from the EU remains a distinct possibility.  Automobiles
are a significant chunk of global trade and supply chains.
Europe is another source of potential risk.
The key risk event is Brexit.  There are few indications that an agreement between the
UK and the EU can be reached before the 29 Mar separation deadline.
Italy also bears watching.  The economy is in recession.  This is happening against the
backdrop  of  continued  high  government  debt  and  a  banking  system  that  has  still  not
healed from the last crisis.
Second, limited policy buffers.  Growth is moderating in the advanced economies with
little policy space for stimulation.
In Europe, the growth cycle is turning down while interest rates are still negative.  The need
for consolidation in public finances means limited scope for fiscal expansion.
The US has more monetary policy buffer, but not much more.  The fiscal bullet has already
been fired.
If the baseline growth forecasts that I mentioned earlier pan out, the limited policy buffers are
less relevant.  But if there is a sharper slowdown, there are few safety nets.
What does all this mean for Asia?  Growth in Emerging Asia is expected to remain stable.
On the downside, exports have moderated in line with the maturing of the global economic
and IT cycles.
On the positive side, domestic demand remains resilient, labour markets are buoyant, and
the decline in oil prices should give a boost to economic activity.
Financial  conditions  have  loosened  this  year,  as  capital  inflows  resumed  after  significant
outflows in 2018.
Apart from the fallout from the trade conflict between the US and China, the key risk in
Emerging Asia is leverage.
Leverage ratios have risen sharply in a number of countries in Asia – corporate leverage in
some countries, household leverage in others.
Excessive leverage can be a source of financial instability, particularly if global growth were
to slow down significantly or interest rates to rise sharply.
Policymakers have to strike a balance to ensure that measures to support growth do not add
to financial excesses in the economy.
But Asia has strong buffers and is today more resilient to external shocks, compared to
10 or 20 years ago.
Most countries in Emerging Asia:
are running current account surpluses;
have healthy FX reserves relative to imports and short-term external debts;
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
have more flexible exchange rates; and
strengthened macroprudential policy frameworks to cope with volatile capital flows.
As with the global economy, the Singapore economy is also moderating towards a more
sustainable pace.
The economy did well last year, growing by 3.2%.
This  year,  external  demand  will  be  softer,  reflecting  slower  global  GDP  growth  and  the
maturing of the global tech cycle. 
Manufacturing and trade-related sectors will feel most of the external drag.
Financial services is likely to continue to outpace the overall economy on the back of
ongoing digital transformation. But growth will be slower than last year, reflecting weaker
credit demand, especially from the region.
The official forecast is for GDP growth to be in the 1.5-3.5% range this year.
Growth is likely to come in close to the mid-point of that range, maybe a touch lower.  
This is not a bad outcome.  It will bring the level of GDP closer to its potential.  There is no
need to stimulate the economy.
If there is a sharper slowdown, Singapore’s healthy macroeconomic position gives it the
resilience to absorb the shock.  It also has the policy space to respond to mitigate the
impact.
Question:  Can  ASEAN  be  a  net  beneficiary  of  the  US-China  trade  tensions  through
production  diversion/substitution  effects,  or  is  the  income  effect  too  large  versus
substitution effects?
The short answer is that it is too early to tell if ASEAN will be a net beneficiary of US-
China trade tensions.  The immediate impact is clearly negative: there are no winners.
There are two ways through which ASEAN countries could benefit from the US-China
trade tensions: trade diversion in the short term and supply chain reconfiguration in the
medium term.
Trade diversion happens when the US and China import more from ASEAN and cut back on
imports from each other as a result of the tariffs.
Supply  chain  configuration  happens  when  production  networks  shift  away  from  China  to
ASEAN countries.
There appears to be some trade diversion to countries in Asia as a result of the US-
China tariffs but this is not large and may not be sustained.
Korea and Taiwan seem to have benefitted as alternative suppliers of the intermediate and
capital goods targeted by the US tariffs.
Malaysia,  Philippines,  and  Vietnam,  also  seem  to  have  benefitted  from  trade  diversion  as
shown by their relatively strong export growth to the US in tariff-hit products.
But already these effects seem to be tapering off.
As  for  supply  chain  reconfiguration,  one  hears  anecdotal  stories  of  such  shifts  but
nothing has been picked up in the data.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
A recent survey by AmCham China and AmCham Shanghai reported that almost one-fifth of
the  companies  that  responded  had  relocated  or  were  considering  to  move  China-based
manufacturing facilities to Southeast Asia.
It remains to be seen whether these plans are followed through.  Few countries can match
the scale that China provides.
And so far, there has been no decisive pick-up in FDI flows into the ASEAN countries.
This is not surprising.  Shifting production facilities is costly and will not be undertaken lightly
in response to short-term factors.  It also takes time to shift these facilities.
Most  businesses  are  likely  to  take  a  wait-and-see  attitude  given  that  the  US-China  trade
negotiations are ongoing.
If the negotiations break down and the tariffs turn out to be permanent, the impetus for
firms to relocate their production bases to countries outside China would be stronger.
In such a scenario, the US tariffs will expedite a process that has already begun as a result
of rising labour costs in China vis-à-vis other regional economies.
Some  ASEAN  countries may stand  to  gain  as  manufacturers  seek  alternative  cheaper
locations outside of China, and circumvent the tariffs at the same time.
Which countries gain from this depends on who has comparative advantage in producing
the affected goods and who can provide a favourable investment climate.
But the immediate impact is clear: ASEAN countries will be negatively impacted by the
US-China trade conflict. 
The heightened uncertainty over trade is already beginning to erode business sentiment and
dampen investment across the region.
And to the extent that growth in China slows down as a result of the tariffs, it is likely to have
a larger negative “income” effect on ASEAN than any positive substitution effect from trade
diversion or supply chain reconfiguration.
China is the largest, if not one of the largest, trading partner to every country in ASEAN.  A
slowdown in China will have a significant impact on growth in ASEAN.
In short, tariffs are a net negative to a region that has depended on open and free trade
for its prosperity.
 
Question: Expectations about global central bank policies have been shifted towards a
more dovish bias, notably Fed statements last month, and in the region, Reserve Bank of
Australia shifting from a tightening to a neutral bias and Reserve Bank of India’s surprise
rate cut. Given the uncertainties over global growth and benign inflation trends, do you
see more central banks in the region following suit, including Singapore?
Central banks’ recent actions and pronouncements have been consistent with the state
of their economies.
Economic  growth  has  peaked  and  is  moderating.    Inflation  has  edged  up  but  remains
benign.  At the same time, downside risks to growth have increased.
There is room to take a pause and watch how the data pans out.
In  short,  central  banks  ranging  from  the  US  Fed  to  the  ECB  to  the  Bank  of  England  are
exercising more patience and flexibility.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Fed’s decision to adopt a “wait-and-see approach regarding future policy changes”
is of course the most significant expression of this new mood. 
It has helped to allay investor anxiety over the future pace of rate hikes and its impact on
growth in both the US and global economies.
It  has  also  resulted  in  a  significant  easing  of  financial  conditions  globally,  and  helped  lift
sentiments in the near term.
The impact on the real economy—in particular, investment—is expected to be modest.
Ultra-easy  monetary  policy  in  the  past  decade  has  had  limited  effect  on  capital
spending,  which  continues  to  be  driven  by  real  factors  such  as  policy  certainty,
demographics, and productivity growth.
I believe the Fed remains alert to risks on both sides: a sharper than expected slowdown in
growth as well as an unexpected pick-up in inflation.
And that it will be prepared to move in either direction.
The easing of global financial conditions arising from the Fed’s pause will provide Asia
with some relief and policy space.
Heightened volatility in capital flows and exchanges rates last year had led to a tightening of
financial conditions across Asia.
The pressures on the current account and exchange rates have receded following prompt
measures  by Asian  countries  to  hike  interest  rates  and  moderate  import-intensive  fiscal
spending.  
Now, the pause in US monetary policy tightening has eased global financial conditions and
given Asian central banks more room to calibrate monetary policy to domestic inflation and
growth considerations.
Still, central banks have to assess the balance of risks carefully.  A premature loosening
of monetary policy could risk undoing recent gains in restoring currency stability.
As for Singapore, monetary policy remains unchanged; the current settings for the trade-
weighted exchange rate remain appropriate.  What we will do in Apr is another matter,
depending on the growth and inflation outlook then.
As I said earlier, we expect GDP growth this year to come in close to the mid-point of the
official forecast range of 1.5-3.5% per cent.
This moderation in growth from last year will bring the economy closer to its potential
path.
Inflation continues to behave according to our expectations. MAS Core Inflation came in at
1.7% y-o-y last month.
This is within MAS’ forecast range of 1.5 to 2.5 per cent for the full year, which was
announced in the October 2018 Monetary Policy Statement.
The impact of the recently announced Budget does not change the outlook for growth or
for inflation.
Although the government expects to run a deficit in this Budget, the fiscal impulse – which
measures the impact of actual spending that flows through the economy in a given year –
will be neutral in FY2019.
The  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  are  expected  to  have  a  muted  effect  on  core
inflation this year and the next.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Question: The outlook for the Fed’s balance sheets has changed. Where do you see
financial  vulnerabilities  brewing  in  the  world,  as  we  advance  towards  quantitative
tightening?
There are two things worth keeping in mind with respect to the Fed’s balance sheet run-
off.
First, the Fed has moved away from its previous guidance that the run-off will be on
“autopilot.”
The Fed has signalled that the balance sheet run-off will end sooner than earlier anticipated.
It has also said it is prepared to alter the size and composition of its balance sheet if future
economic conditions warrant such a move.
This  suggests  that  the  withdrawal  of  central  bank  liquidity  could  be  less  than  earlier
envisaged.
Second, the Fed has not changed its policy of running down its balance sheet at a rate of
up to US$50 billion a month.
This means that the path for liquidity conditions remains on a tightening trajectory and long-
term interest rates could back up higher.
The notes of caution that central banks, regulators, and analysts have been sounding about
the need for entities to manage down their leverage remain valid.
I  believe  systemic  financial  risk  is  contained  –  in  the  US  as  well  as  major  financial
markets. 
Leverage in the financial industry has come down significantly compared to before the global
financial crisis.
Capital and liquidity buffers in key financial institutions are stronger, thanks to the post-crisis
regulatory reforms.
But pockets of financial vulnerability exist in many parts of world. 
They bear close watching as liquidity conditions gradually tighten.
The root cause of these vulnerabilities is leverage. 
The world as a whole is more indebted today than it was prior to the global financial crisis.
In the US, non-financial corporate debt has risen sharply, spurred by years of very low
interest rates.
The underwriting of some of this debt has been quite weak.
f  the  business  environment  turns  for  the  worse  and  cash  flows  dry  up,  corporate  debt
defaults could snowball.
This is not likely to be a systemic problem, but it could create disruptions.
Leverage  ratios  have  also  risen  sharply  in  several  Asian  economies  –  corporate
leverage in some, household leverage in others.
Corporate earnings have not gone up in tandem with the rise in leverage, signalling weaker
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
repayment ability under interest rate stress.
Households, which have taken on more leverage on the back of low interest rates, might be
more vulnerable to shocks in housing prices. 
If economic growth were to slow down significantly or interest rates rise sharply, these high
levels  of  leverage  could  set  off  financial  stresses  –  again,  not  of  a  systemic  nature  but
troublesome nonetheless.
1
2
3
IMF World Economic Outlook, January 2019.
This represents an average of forecasts by the Fed (2.3%), IMF (2.5%) and Consensus Economics (2.5%).
The Global Economic Policy Uncertainty (GEPU) index rose from 124.2 at the start of 2018 to a record 311.8 in
December, before easing slightly to 271.3 in January 2019.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
