Norman T L Chan: Hong Kong as a risk management hub
Welcoming remarks and keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong
Kong  Monetary Authority,  at  the  Treasury  Markets  Summit  2019,  Hong  Kong,  16  September
2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  About 15 years ago, a senior banker suggested to me that, in order to further promote Hong
Kong’s position as an international financial centre (IFC), we should turn Hong Kong into a
“risk management hub” in Asia. However, he did not elaborate further at the time on exactly
what he meant and how this could be achieved. To be honest, it was not clear to me then
what this risk management hub idea was all about.
2.  Now looking back, I realise that, even without us consciously pursuing the idea as a policy
objective, Hong Kong has already made major accomplishment as the “risk management
hub” in Asia. Let me explain.
Prerequisites for a Risk Management Hub
3.  Clearly an important pre-condition for a risk management hub is to have money or capital
flowing  through  Hong  Kong.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  genuine  financial
flows from those that are not.  Many of you may recall that, in the 1990s and prior to the
Asian Financial Crisis, many Japanese (regional) banks used Hong Kong to conduct the so-
called euro yen businesses, through which the banks would book in Hong Kong their yen
loans  to  borrowers  in  Japan,  presumably  to  benefit  from  more  favorable  tax  treatment. 
While this kind of booking businesses may inflate the size of Hong Kong’s banking system in
terms of total assets, it does not, as we have learnt from the experience of the euro yen
booking in the 1990s, bring about much real benefits to Hong Kong in terms of job creation
or  enhancement  of  the  credit  underwriting  skills  of  the  bank  practitioners.    The  lending
institutions did not perform any meaningful risk management functions in booking these euro
yen  businesses.    As  we  all  know,  the  euro  yen  business  in  Hong  Kong,  driven  by  tax
reasons, faded away right after the Asian Financial Crisis.
4.  That is why the HKMA has made it clear in the past 10 years that we do not welcome banks
moving “pure” booking business to Hong Kong. Our position is that, in booking any loans or
other  assets  in  Hong  Kong,  the  banks  must  demonstrate  that  they  have  the  necessary
capability  and  control  process  to  prudently  manage  the  risks  of  these  assets,  both  at
origination and on an ongoing basis.  Then there is still the basic question: how do we attract
financial flows to Hong Kong instead of to other financial centres?  There is a bit of chicken
and egg problem here.  Unless restrained by capital controls, money is highly agile and risk
sensitive and will migrate to centres that offer the greatest efficiency and safety.  In other
words,  money  tends  to  move  through  centres  that  provide  a  high  standard  of  risk
management.  By handling more financial flows, a centre will be able to further improve and
innovate on its risk management capability.  The process is interactive and there would be a
clustering effect once a centre has established the leading position in risk management and
client servicing.
5.  Here  I  should  mention  several  important  developments  in  the  last  decade  that  are  highly
relevant and instrumental to Hong Kong’s rise to become the risk management hub in Asia.
Internationalisation of Renminbi (RMB)
6.  From  2009  onwards,  Hong  Kong  has  rapidly  developed  into  the  biggest  offshore  hub  for
RMB businesses in the world. Hong Kong is the source of around 50% of the global offshore
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
RMB liquidity.  On average, Hong Kong’s RMB Real Time Gross Settlement system clears
and  settles  over  RMB1  trillion  a  day.    Moreover,  over  70%  of  the  global  RMB  SWIFT
settlement goes through Hong Kong.  All these figures suggest that Hong Kong is already
the largest centre for RMB loans, Dim Sum bond issuance and RMB-related products and
financial derivatives.  The availability of a wide range of banking products, investment and
hedging instruments in Hong Kong has made us the undoubted leader in risk management
in the offshore RMB market.
Stock Connect
7.  The launch of the Hong Kong-Shanghai Stock Connect in 2014, followed by the Hong Kong-
Shenzhen Stock Connect in 2016, has opened up the most important part of the Mainland
capital market to the world’s investors through Hong Kong. The northbound Stock Connect
has presented a huge opportunity for Hong Kong to develop risk management capability for
understanding of the risks and the pricing of such risks for offshore investors interested in
the A share markets.  Apart from helping to channel foreign investments into the Mainland
market,  the  Stock  Connect  has  also  contributed  to  the  inclusion  of  bigger  weights  of A
shares in the global stock market indices such as the MSCI.
Asian Equity Derivatives Hub
8.  Another recent trend that is relevant is that several international financial firms have decided
or are planning to relocate their Asian equities derivatives booking hubs from Europe to Asia.
This is very logical as the underlying securities and clients are based in Asia.  The HKMA
welcomes these moves and stands ready to facilitate such moves, on the condition that the
booking  business  must  be  accompanied  by  the  necessary  risk  management  functions. 
Again, this will enhance Hong Kong’s position as the risk management hub for Asian equities
and derivatives, particularly Mainland related stocks.
Bond Connect
9.  By the same token, the launch of the northbound Bond Connect in 2017 has opened another
window of opportunity for Hong Kong to enhance its risk management functions for offshore
investors wishing to invest in the Mainland bond market. It is still early days yet, but I am
confident that Bond Connect offers attraction to those investors who prefer using a nominee
holding  structure  through  the  Central  Moneymarkets  Unit  of  the  HKMA.    Other  value-add
services for these bond investors would likely be launched in the months ahead.
Mainland-Related Lending
10.  The bread and butter of banks are of course their lending businesses. There is no point in
collecting  deposits  from  customers  if  the  bank  cannot  find  useful  and  hopefully  profitable
outlet  for  these  funds.    With  the  rapid  development  of  the  Mainland  economy  and  the
deepening  of  the  Reform  and  Opening  Programme,  Hong  Kong  has  become  the  most
important financial intermediation hub for investments into and out of Mainland.  The HKMA
has been collecting statistics under the category of “Mainland-related lending” by banks in
Hong Kong.  This category includes lending to Hong Kong and foreign corporates investing
in the Mainland and to Mainland corporates, mostly large state–owned enterprises.  As Hong
Kong  is  becoming  an  important  source  of  funds  for  foreign  direct  investments  into  the
Mainland and overseas direct investments from the Mainland to overseas markets, the size
of Mainland-related lending has grown from a very small amount in 2009 to HK$4.6 trillion
now, which accounts for around 45% of the total bank loans in Hong Kong.  This is a very
significant component of our banking system and is of critical importance to the profitability
as  well  as  soundness  of  our  banks.    So  clearly  it  is  crucial  that,  in  growing  this  lending
business, banks must maintain a high standard of risk management in underwriting these
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
loans.    The  credit  risk  capability,  both  at  the  point  of  origination  in  terms  of  know-your-
customer (KYC) and customer due diligence and for ongoing monitoring, must be enhanced
to cater for the rapid growth of this new line of business.  Naturally the HKMA has accorded
high priority in our ongoing supervision of banks to ensure that the underwriting standards
are  upheld  all  the  time.    I  am  pleased  to  report  that  the  non-performing  loan  (NPL)  ratio,
which  is  a  key  indicator  to  assess  the  credit  quality  of  the  Mainland-related  lending,  has
remained at a healthy level of around 0.7%, which is just slightly above the overall NPL ratio
of 0.56% for all bank loans.
Wealth Management 
11.  Given the rapid growth and accumulation of wealth in Hong Kong and the Mainland, there is
a strong demand for wealth management services. The asset-under-management of private
banking in Hong Kong now amounts to roughly US$1 trillion.  Again, risk management is the
key  to  the  sustainable  development  of  the  private  banking  industry.    There  are  two  key
aspects of risk management in the private wealth business.  First, the banks must conduct
proper  KYC  processes,  especially  on  the  source  of  funds  and  ongoing  monitoring  of
suspicious  fund  flows  for  anti-money  laundering  /  counter-terrorist  financing  purposes. 
Second, the private banks must understand the risk appetite/tolerance level of their clients
on the one hand and conduct proper product due diligence before marketing them to clients. 
If  Hong  Kong  wishes  to  remain  the  preferred  centre  for  private  wealth  management,  we
must  strive  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the  need  to  accord  appropriate  investor
protection and allow the banks to provide user-friendly and efficient services to clients.  To
succeed in this endeavour, the regulators must work in close collaboration with the industry
to  continue  adapting  the  rules  and  practices  to  cater  for  the  evolving  demands  of  the
customers and the rapidly changing financial markets.  There is no magic quick fix available,
and I hope that the stakeholders would agree to adopt a truly risk-based approach.  What it
means  is  that  the  regulators  should  articulate  the  risks  or  problems  that  they  seek  to
address while the industry should consider how proper risk management could be achieved
without  over-interpreting  the  regulations  or  imposing  rigid  processes  that  drive  away
customers. 
Soft Power
12.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  any  premier  IFC  must  possess  superior  soft  power  if  it  wishes  to
sustain  such  position.  Soft  power  is  the  sum  of  a  wide  range  of  tangible  market
infrastructure  and  intangible  strengths.    While  there  must  be  a  robust  but  market-friendly
regulatory regime, we need to have a high degree of professionalism amongst the industry
practitioners.    Fully  cognizant  of  this  principle,  the  HKMA  has  in  the  last  decade  or  so
launched  many  soft  power  enhancement  schemes  for  the  banking  industry.    One  of  the
enhancement initiatives was the setup of the Treasury Markets Association (TMA) in 2005
through  the  merger  of  the  Treasury  Markets  Forum  and  ACI-The  Financial  Markets
Association  of  Hong  Kong.    I  floated  this  idea  in  2004  and  received  full  support  from  the
industry  practitioners.    The  TMA  was  set  up  with  the  clear  mission  to  enhance  the
professionalism of industry practitioners and the competitiveness of the treasury markets in
Hong Kong.  In addition to offering high-quality training programmes, the TMA has recently
joined the Global Foreign Exchange Committee as Hong Kong’s representative and played
an active role in developing the FX Global Code on good practices in the FX market.
13.  In pursuing soft power enhancement, the HKMA has worked closely with the TMA and also
the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Bankers  in  launching  modules  of  the  Enhanced  Competence
Framework  (ECF).  We  will  launch  another  two  more  ECF  modules  on  operational  risk
management  and  compliance  shortly.    You  are  of  course  aware  of  the  launch  of  the
Academy of Finance by the HKMA in June this year.  The Academy has two core missions:
financial  leadership  development  and  monetary  and  financial  research,  including  applied
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
research.  The Academy is a new venture and we will work closely with all the stakeholders,
including the TMA, to upgrade the soft power of Hong Kong as the premier financial centre in
Asia. 
14.  Ladies and gentlemen, international competition between financial centres is very fierce and
will likely to be even more so going forward. Business can and will flow quickly away from
Hong  Kong  if  we  somehow  fail  to  upgrade  the  standards  of  our  financial  services.    In
conclusion,  let  me  say  that  to  become  “an  international  risk  management  hub”  is
synonymous to becoming “an international financial centre”.  No IFC can exist or compete if
it  is  not  also  a  risk  management  hub  in  delivering  the  various  forms  of  financial
intermediation,  including  the  money,  banking,  capital,  asset  management  and  insurance
markets.    I  don’t  really  think  there  is  such  creature  as  a  “pure”  risk  management  hub  as
opposed to an IFC.  In other words, it is hard to contemplate how a place can turn into a risk
management hub if money and capital do not flow through it. 
15.  Finally, let me share with you a couple of takeaways on what I have said today on how Hong
Kong can enhance its competitive position and leadership in risk management:
        (a)
    (b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Financial institutions must not put their own interests above those of their clients. The
professionalism and integrity of the financial institutions and the practitioners are crucial
in  earning  the  confidence  and  trust  of  their  customers.  Without  such  trust,  the
prospects of Hong Kong as an IFC are doomed.
Financial firms should avoid getting carried away in boom times. Motivated by big and
growing profits and bonuses, many financial firms are minded to undertake very rapid
expansion without building the necessary risk management capability. Excessive risk
taking or overly aggressive expansion usually lead to rather unhappy endings, as the
financial history is littered with so many such failure cases.
As for the regulators, they should stay true to the risk-based approach with the right
sense  of  proportionality  and  should  adopt  an  open  mind  on  how  the  risk  can  be
addressed.  The  regulators  should  stand  ready  to  discuss  with  the  industry  to  see  if
there can be alternative ways of dealing with the risks identified. The industry is always
closer  to  the  markets  and  the  clients  they  serve  and  should  therefore  have  a  better
sense  of  how  to  get  things  done  in  a  way  that  would  cause  less  disruption  or
inconvenience.
The regulators must not fall into the trap of complacency, and should constantly stay on
alert  and  maintain  a  sense  of  unease  even  in  good  or  peaceful  times.  Banking  and
financial crises can never be avoided all together, but we can at least build sufficient
buffers to lower their chance of occurrence or when they happen, the damage can be
reduced or contained.
The industry should stand ready to challenge the regulators if the severity of the risk is
overstated or there are better alternatives than what has been put on the table. On the
other  hand,  the  industry  must  avoid  over-interpreting  or  gold  plating  the  regulators’
requirements in such a way that is safe from the compliance point of view but would
create  bad  customer  experience  without  enhancing  the  underlying  risk  management
outcomes.
16.  All  in  all,  the  financial  industry  should  seek  to  collaborate  with  the  regulators,  more  as
partners than as adversaries, in developing risk management framework and practices that
are most suited for Hong Kong’s circumstances and needs.  There is no one-size-fits-all
solution for risk management and Hong Kong must find its own path to success by learning
from the best practices elsewhere and by striving to upgrade on a continuous basis.  Finally,
may  I  wish  all  of  you  a  fruitful  and  productive  time  in  today’s  Treasury  Markets  Summit! 
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
