Philip R Lane: The Brexit discontinuity
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  2019  European
Financial Forum, Dublin, 13 February 2019.
Introduction
 I am pleased to address the 2019 edition of the European Financial Forum. Currently, both policy
officials  and  private-sector  participants  in  the  global  financial  system  are  confronted  with  a
combination of cyclical and structural concerns. At the cyclical level, the recent revision in global
growth projections and the downside shift in the risk distribution require a careful assessment of
the  likely  duration  of  adverse  shocks  and  the  potential  offsetting  impact  of  some  mitigating
stabilising  factors:  this  exercise  will  be  aided  by  the  arrival  of  the  incoming  hard  data  on
macroeconomic outcomes in the first months of 2019.
At  the  structural  level,  longer-term  prospects  depend  on  the  traditional  determinants  of  global
productivity  (such  as  investment  and  innovation  rates),  the  steady-state  cross-country
distribution of national income levels relative to the frontier and demographic trends. In addition,
climate change (together with the international policy response) will exert an increasing influence
1
on the path for global output.
However,  both  short-term  and  long-term  prospects  are  currently  also  subject  to  an  unusually
high  level  of  uncertainty  about  the  paradigms  governing  policymaking. At  the  global  level,  the
primary  focus  is  on  the  future  of  the  multilateral  policy  framework  underpinning  international
trade. Within Europe, Brexit constitutes another paradigmatic shift: the departure of the United
Kingdom  from  the  European  Union  represents  a  disruptive  event  across  many  dimensions,
including the operation of the single market. A full analysis of such paradigmatic events requires
a multi-field integrated approach that draws upon history, political science, international relations
as  well  as  economics  and  finance.  I  will  not  attempt  such  a  comprehensive  approach  in  this
speech: rather, I will focus on some of the implications of Brexit for the Irish economy and the
Irish financial system.
The Central Bank of Ireland has been focused on Brexit risks since the announcement of the
2016 UK referendum. Our work has focused on ensuring that: (i) the risks to the Irish economy
and  consumers  are  understood;  (ii)  regulated  firms  prepare  appropriately  for  all  scenarios,  in
order to protect consumers; (iii) where necessary, the required policy and legal adjustments are
prepared  to  counteract  the  cliff-edge  risks  of  a  hard  Brexit  to  the  delivery  of  vital  financial
services; and (iv) we perform our gatekeeper role in a robust and efficient manner for new firms
seeking authorisation or existing firms revising business plans.
We  have  taken  a  transparent  approach  to  this  work:  we  publish  the  work  of  our  Brexit  Task
Force, release answers to frequently asked questions, hold stakeholder roundtables, and have
published a series of analytical reports and speeches. This research and analysis both informs
our own work and seeks to assist other policy makers and stakeholders.
In  what  follows,  I  will  first  discuss  the  domestic  macroeconomic  implications  of  Brexit  before
turning to its impact on the financial system.
Brexit and the Irish Economy
The Irish economy expanded at a strong pace in 2018, supported by the strength of activity on
the  domestic  side  of  the  economy  and  a  still-favourable  international  environment.  Looking
ahead, the Central Bank’s latest central projection is that the outlook for the economy remains
broadly positive, even if some moderation in growth is in prospect. This moderation partly reflects
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  limits  imposed  by  domestic  capacity  constraints  due  to  the  tightening  of  conditions  in  the
labour market and current bottlenecks in the housing market. It also is the domestic counterpart
to  the  pullback  in  the  international  economic  environment,  even  if  this  is  partly  offset  by  the
expansion in domestic government spending.
We have also explored the scenario of a sudden and disorderly Brexit, using a range of modelling
approaches. In view of the deep adaptation of the Irish economy to a EU28 single market that has
included Britain, a sudden, no-deal scenario would have immediate disruptive effects that would
permeate almost all areas of economic activity. The agri-food sector would be disproportionately
affected, with a corresponding outsized impact on rural regions, especially near the Border.
Our  modelling  work  suggest  that  a  disorderly  Brexit  could  reduce  the  growth  rate  of  the  Irish
economy by up to four percentage points in the first year. In addition to the direct disruption to
international trading arrangements, adverse developments in the UK economy have a general
spillover  impact  in  Ireland,  via  export  demand,  the  value  of  Irish-owned  operations  in  the  UK,
asset  prices  and  confidence  effects.  Moreover,  a  significant  further  depreciation  of  Sterling
against the euro would adversely affect those firms dependent on the UK market, even if there
are  some  offsetting  positive  effects  for  domestic  firms  through  the  favourable  impact  on  the
terms of trade.
Given the current favourable forecasts for the economy as a result of domestic demand and the
strong non-UK multinational sector, our assessment is that there would still be some positive
growth in output this year and next even under a no-deal scenario, but materially lower than in the
central forecast. A further mitigating factor is that the state of the public finances will permit the
running of a counter-cyclical fiscal deficit through the operation of the automatic stabilisers on tax
revenues and transfer payments.
Brexit and the Financial System
The scale and complexity of the Irish financial system is increasing as a result of Brexit. Well
over  one  hundred  firms  have  applied  for  new  authorisations  or  permission  to  expand  their
existing businesses. While some of these applications relate to firms that now plan to serve Irish
customers  directly  rather  than  through  a  UK  entity,  most  of  the  volume  is  driven  by  export-
orientated international firms that will serve EU27 customers from an Irish base.
Our gatekeeping role is critically important in maintaining the integrity of the EU27 single market
in financial services market and protecting consumers, whether resident in Ireland or elsewhere
in the EU27. It is imperative that any new firm authorised here meets the high standards that are
expected of any entity authorised in the EU. Equally, we have engaged closely within the Single
Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  to  ensure  that  similar
regulatory and supervisory approaches are adopted across the EU27.
More generally, within the framework laid out in legislation, the post-Brexit EU will have to develop
and  implement  a  revised  supervisory  approach  that  recognises  the  shift  in  the  geography  of
cross-border  trade  in  financial  services  within  the  EU27,  with  less  reliance  on  the  UK  as  a
bilateral trading partner and more reliance on newly-formed and expanded connections across
EU27  member  countries.  In  addition,  in  meeting  their  individual  mandates,  EU  and  non-EU
regulators will have to work together in the supervision of large financial groups, in view of the
ongoing intra-firm sharing of technology and services platforms and inter-linked balance sheets
between EU entities and non-EU entities (including UK entities).
A strategic priority for the Central Bank of Ireland is to increase further our engagement in the
relevant EU and international fora in order to contribute our own expertise in shaping this new
agenda.  This  is  a  continuation  of  the  substantial  effort  we  have  made  since  the  international
financial crisis in actively contributing to the shaping of international regulatory and supervisory
standards.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the basis of the work that we and others have undertaken, I am satisfied that the immediate
cliff-edge risks of a hard Brexit have been largely addressed. In addition to the preparations by
individual firms, this has included the temporary permission by the European authorities for the
UK central securities depository (CSD) to continue to serve Irish securities during the transition
to an alternative EU27 CSD arrangement.
There are some remaining risks of consumer detriment. The Irish and UK financial systems are
closely  connected,  with  UK  firms  and  firms  from  Gibraltar  providing  financial  services  to  Irish
consumers, including insurance and payment services. We have worked with the European and
UK  authorities  to  ensure  that  those  firms  providing  services  to  Irish  consumers  are  able  to
continue to do so in the event of a hard Brexit. The vast majority of UK-based firms have taken
appropriate action, but not all have to date. In this context, I am pleased that the Central Bank of
Ireland has worked with the Department of Finance to support the drafting of legislation to create
a temporary run-off regime that will protect insurance customers in event of a no-deal Brexit.
In terms of financial stability risks, our assessment is that the improvements in the resilience of
the financial system over the last decade provide a vitally-important buffer. Taken together, the
more balanced macroeconomic profile, the restructuring of the Irish banking system, the much-
higher  capital  and  liquidity  ratios,  the  decline  in  the  non-performing  loan  ratio  and  the  more
intrusive supervisory regime mean that the capacity to absorb negative shocks is much greater
than in the past.
Conclusions
While there remains much uncertainty about the final nature of Brexit, the Central Bank of Ireland
(and,  more  generally,  the  international  central  banking  and  regulatory  community)  has  been
active since the calling of the referendum in preparing for the full range of Brexit scenarios. Our
near-term focus is in ensuring that our contingency planning covers the unfolding situation, while
continuing to work with those firms that have not yet finalised their Brexit plans. Regardless of the
precise outcome, the intrinsic discontinuity represented by any form of Brexit means that it is
certain  the  2020  edition  of  the  European  Financial  Forum  will  be  discussing  a  fundamentally-
different European financial system compared to the system that has been in place for the last
several decades.
1
See for example Lane, Philip R., (2019), Climate Change and the Irish Financial System, Economic Letter, Vol.
2019, No.1, Central Bank of Ireland
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
