Ignazio  Visco:  Challenges  for  the  financial  sector  in  adapting  to
cyber threats
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  G7  Conference  on
"Cybersecurity: coordinating efforts to protect the financial sector in the global economy", Bank of
France, Paris, 10 May 2019.
 Today we are discussing how cyber risk is evolving in the financial sector, and what we should
do  about  it.  To  set  a  course  of  action  for  the  future,  I  believe  we  should  go  back  to  one
fundamental  question:  why  did  financial  authorities  get  involved  in  cyber  defence  in  the  first
place?
Our overarching goal has always been to preserve a high degree of trust in the financial system.
This is by no means limited to cybersecurity – it is our raison d’être. That is why we regulate
financial  risk-taking  and  why  we  do  not  grant  disreputable  players  any  licence  to  banking
activities.  That  is  also  the  reason  why  we  make  sure  that  vital  systems  such  as  payment
infrastructures are not taken down by hackers.
When it comes to financial risk-taking, we all acknowledge that markets fail to deliver socially
optimal results on their own, hence regulation and supervision are needed. The same argument
applies to cyberspace. Financial firms have their own reasons to protect themselves. They do
not want to lose their credibility and their customers because of a cyberattack. But this is not
enough. Cyber vulnerabilities have extensive negative externalities – individual entities such as
financial institutions do not have the incentives nor the means to internalise them all. Authorities
need to rectify this.
The nature of cyberspace is such that externalities are not contained within national borders, or
within  any  single  sector.  One  important  source  of  cyber  risk  for  supervised  entities  is  their
increasing reliance on third-party suppliers who fall outside the jurisdiction of financial authorities.
In the past, attackers have leveraged vulnerabilities in the IT systems of third parties to strike
financial institutions. In the G7 Fundamental Elements For Third Party Cyber Risk Management
in the Financial Sector published last year, we introduced tenets on the appropriate management
of  third-party  risk.  We  must  now  accelerate  work  on  implementation.  When  it  comes  to  third
parties who operate in regulated sectors, such as energy and telecoms, the different authorities
must step up their coordination and cooperation efforts.
There are two dimensions to cooperation.
First, within each country there needs to be a cohesive national system of cyber defence that
allows  different  authorities  to  work  together  effectively.  In  this  context,  governments  have  a
natural role as coordinators.
Attacks are getting more sophisticated. Some involve resourceful actors, such as nation-states
and terrorist organisations. The financial sector remains a prime target, and we cannot effectively
mitigate  the  risk  by  simply  mandating  supervised  entities  to  follow  good  practices.  Complex
attacks can be deployed via obscure tools. Even large financial institutions with excellent (and
expensive) defence systems can be lost in the face of cutting-edge threats; they can, of course,
work  out  some  of  the  technical  details,  but  they  might  miss  some  of  the  broader,  systemic
elements,  simply  because  they  ignore  relevant  information:  precedents  that  affected  other
sectors; attacker tactics; and effective defences adopted elsewhere. This kind of information is
generally available only to intelligence agencies and the military. Cross-sector, nationwide as well
as international cooperation is therefore essential.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
There needs to be a mechanism within each country that allows appropriate public bodies to
coordinate and jointly support, each within its own mandate, the victims of a cyber campaign. In
the European Union, the Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive takes this course.
Second, cooperation must extend beyond borders given the nature of many of the attacks and
the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  system.  This  will  always  be  a  challenge  because
disclosing  vulnerabilities  to  entities  from  another  jurisdiction  might  endanger  national  security.
Nonetheless,  we  need  to  find  feasible  solutions  to  this  problem,  since  this  kind  of infosharing
might prove crucial in order to respond to some attacks.
The  G7,  as  a  group  of  like-minded  countries,  remains  the  most  favourable  context  for
international cooperation – the many achievements of the G7 Cyber Expert Group (CEG) provide
a  good  example  of  what  can  be  done.  The  CEG  was  established  in  2015  under  the  German
presidency,  and  it  went  on  to  deliver  results  during  the  presidencies  of  four  other  countries  –
Japan, Italy, Canada, and now France. We need to persevere on this route.
One area that is ripe for more cooperation is the establishment of common security standards
for hardware and software, which also covers the growing market for financial technology apps.
In the European Union, we have a tradition of very strict safety, physical health and environmental
protection standards. We require a Conformité Européenne certification – the CE mark that you
see  on  labels  –  for  any  product  in  certain  commodity  sectors  that  enters  our  markets.
Certification mechanisms are not exclusive to the EU – think of the FDA approval process for
pharmaceuticals in the US.
In  the  EU,  a  new  regulation  (currently  under  approval)  will  introduce  a  mechanism  of
cybersecurity certification for many products, too. This is an important step, but it would be more
effective if G7 countries could converge at least on a subset of requirements. If a service is not
safe  according  to  our  own  laws,  it  should  not  be  on  the  market  –  and  there  should  be  a
reasonable degree of convergence between laws in like-minded jurisdictions.
I would like to conclude by posing two questions.
First, I would be very interested to hear from my co-panelists as to what their perspective is on
the state of cooperation between authorities and the private sector, especially when it comes to
vital infrastructure like clearing and settlement systems. Are regulators in this room happy with
what we have achieved so far? What do private institutions think should be improved and how?
Second, are we leveraging technology strongly  enough?  Artificial  intelligence (AI) is emerging
as a pervasive game changer in our economies. It introduces new possibilities in all sectors, and
cybersecurity is no exception. AI facilitates the detection and the exploitation of vulnerabilities –
attackers know this, so they are starting to deploy machine learning to analyse and penetrate
target systems. Cybersecurity companies use the same AI analytic tools, with the goal of fixing
the weak spots. By the same token, authorities could employ AI, let us say, to ascertain whether
supervised entities are meeting mandated security standards on a continuous basis.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
