 M a r c h   1 5 ,   2 0 1 9 
Bank  of 
Japan 
Toward Inclusive and Sustainable Development 
Remarks at the B20 Tokyo Summit hosted by 
Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to have the opportunity to give a speech at the B20 Tokyo Summit 
today. This year, with Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Aso, I co-chair the G20 
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meetings. We are discussing a wide range of 
issues at the G20, including those related to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).1 To 
tackle global challenges such as the SDGs, it is essential for the private and public sectors to 
cooperate with each other. Therefore, I find it very meaningful for business leaders from the 
G20  member  countries  to  meet  together  and  have  discussions,  in  parallel  with  the  G20 
processes. 
 This year the B20, under the theme of "Realizing Society 5.0 for SDGs," has been discussing 
innovations in various areas, changes in the business environment, and how to tackle global 
challenges.  Society  5.0  has  been  proposed  by  the  Japanese  government.  It  is  defined  as  a 
human-centered  society  that  balances economic  advancement  with  the  resolution  of  social 
problems by a system that highly integrates cyberspace and physical space.2 In such a society, 
the current problems in various areas will be expected to be resolved by cooperation between 
the private and public sectors through new technologies and innovations. 
 Today, I will first talk about some recent developments toward achieving the SDGs, and then 
discuss how innovation could be used to pursue inclusive growth under which "no one is left 
behind," mainly focusing on the financial aspects. 
 I. Recent Trends toward Sustainable Development 
Since the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century, global economic productivity has been 
boosted and people's living standards have been drastically enhanced. This rapid economic 
growth  was  supported  by  advancements  in  industrial  technologies  such  as  the  internal 
combustion  engine,  and  by  the  realization  of  a  large-scale  industrial  society  incorporating 
                                                        
1 The SDGs are global development goals set by the United Nations in 2015. They are made up of 17 
goals and 169 targets to be achieved by 2030. The SDGs succeeded the "Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs)," established following the adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration in 
2000. 
2 For details on "Society 5.0 for SDGs," see the website of Cabinet Office, Government of Japan. 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/society5_0/index.html 
 1 
new technologies. It is also true, however, that economic development has had some negative 
impact globally. Even during the Industrial Revolution, people were troubled by pollution in 
industrial  areas  and  by  poor  living  conditions  in  rapidly  expanding  urban  areas.  These 
problems became widespread as industrialization advanced globally. As a result, the modern 
society,  which  has  developed  dynamically  based  on  economic  principles  such  as  profit 
motivation  and  price  mechanisms,  is  now  confronted  with  a  situation  of  "external 
diseconomies," a kind of market failure, in economics terminology. It is not easy to resolve 
this situation. For instance, in the case of climate change due to global warming, an increase 
in the consumption of fossil fuels in one country now affects other countries, and indeed the 
entire  globe,  thereby  causing  "spatial  external  diseconomies."  Moreover,  today's  massive 
consumption  of  fossil  fuels  may  negatively  affect  future  generations,  thereby  causing 
"intertemporal external diseconomies."  
 One solution to external diseconomies may be direct government regulation. However, this 
might not necessarily be effective enough as all kinds of problems have become increasingly 
complicated and globalized. In recent years, many positive developments have been made by 
private companies, public organizations, and international organizations toward solving such 
problems.  
 First,  mechanisms  have  been  used  more  widely  to  encourage  economic  agents  to  act  in 
accordance with the goals of sustainable development. In regard to environmental issues, for 
instance, carbon tax and renewable energy subsidies give incentives for private agents to save 
energy  and  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  Some  countries  and  companies  have  started 
emissions  trading  through  market  mechanisms  based  on  allocated  amounts  of  permits  to 
discharge greenhouse gases, thereby internalizing the social costs of external diseconomies. 
Moreover,  many  private  companies  have  made  public  commitments  to  address  climate 
change as part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR), and their stakeholders, including 
shareholders,  are  keenly  interested  in  such  commitments.  If  this  trend  becomes  more 
common,  sustainable  development  could  be  realized  by  not  only  relying  on  compulsory 
measures such as direct control of emissions but also using those mechanisms I mentioned. 
  2 
Second, recent technological innovations have potential to address problems in a way that 
could  not  have  been  considered  before.  Regarding  energy  and  the  environment,  industrial 
products that reduce energy consumption have been developed for a long time, especially in 
the  wake  of  the  oil  shock  in  the  1970s  and  since  concerns  over  pollution  became  more 
widespread. Moreover, dramatic recent developments in digital technologies such as artificial 
intelligence (AI) and the internet of things (IoT) now allow for the detailed management of 
energy demand, forecasts of local climate, etc., and are thereby contributing to  the further 
enhancement  of  energy  efficiency.  As  for  emissions  trading  mentioned  earlier,  distributed 
ledger  technology  has  started  being  used  to  reduce  trading  costs  and  expand  markets.  In 
Society  5.0,  we  are  expected  to  tackle  global  challenges  and  realize  a  sustainable  society 
using these new technologies. 
 II. Inclusive Growth and Technological Innovations -- from a Financial Perspective 
Needless  to  say,  technological  innovations  have  also  brought  significant  changes  to  the 
financial  sector,  which  is  closely  related  to  central  banks.  These  changes  are  important  in 
achieving  inclusive  growth,  one  of  the  key  objectives  of  SDGs.  The  concept  of  inclusive 
growth  is  that  the  dividends  of  economic  growth  should  be  distributed  fairly  across  all 
members  of  society,  leaving  no  one  behind. While  the  global  economy  has  grown  rapidly 
since the Industrial Revolution, there have been many people who have not been able to enjoy 
the benefits of growth. Some people have had access to opportunities such as employment, 
education, and new technologies in various areas, while others have not. Eliminating such 
disparities has also become an important global concern. 
 In the context of the financial sector, many countries have recognized financial inclusion as 
an important policy agenda, the idea that no one should be left behind in having access to and 
getting  benefits  from  formal  financial  services.  What  is  remarkable  here  is  that  the  latest 
advancements in technologies in the financial sector, so-called FinTech, can help to promote 
financial inclusion.3 The diffusion of mobile payments in emerging and developing countries 
                                                        
3 For details about the wide-ranging impact of FinTech on the financial economy and the engagement 
of central banks, see the following report.  
Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement System Report Annex, FinTech Special Edition, September 
2018.  
 3 
is  perhaps  a  typical  example  of  the  contribution  of  FinTech  to  financial  inclusion.  New 
financial services such as cashless payment using smartphones sometimes spread rapidly in 
regions  without 
the  necessary  social  infrastructure  of  bank  branches  and  wired 
communication. This is a phenomenon, known as "leapfrogging,"  in which people who do 
not have access to conventional financial services can obtain immediate access to convenient 
services through new technologies. 
 For  instance,  in  China,  payment  and  settlement  services  using  smartphones  offered  by 
e-commerce and social network services (SNS) companies have spread rapidly since around 
2013. In major cities, the cashless society has progressed to such an extent that people can 
quite  easily  lead  their  daily  lives  without  cash.  Online  loan  services  based  on  credit  risk 
analysis using AI and big data have also been rapidly deployed so that individuals and small 
and medium-sized enterprises can access them easily. In Africa, where the holding of bank 
accounts and access to financial services is limited due to underdeveloped banking industries, 
financial services such as cash withdrawal and short-term loans using mobile devices have 
become increasingly accessible. Other examples include mobile payment spreading in small 
island  developing  states  where  the  development  of  financial  infrastructure  had  been 
constrained.  Also,  in  big  cities  in  Southeast  Asia  with  heavy  traffic  congestion,  mobile 
payment has developed from ride-hailing services. In this way, FinTech has been applied in 
accordance with each country's or region's situations. 
 FinTech  can  therefore  contribute  not  only  to  economic  growth  through  enhancing 
convenience and financial intermediation, but also to the resolution of social problems such 
as financial inclusion. 
 At the same time, there are some notes of caution in regard to the rapid diffusion of FinTech. 
First, it is necessary to ensure the security of transactions, including cyber security and the 
protection  of  personal  information.  The  risks  of  abuse  of  these  technologies  for  money 
laundering and terrorist financing must also be addressed. Moreover, securing the stability of 
the financial system is important. In particular, the diffusion of FinTech that expands access 
 4 
to credit in countries with weak financial supervision may increase financial stability risks, 
even though it contributes to financial inclusion.4 
 III. Role of the Public Sector 
As I have explained, technological advancements can play a significant role in tackling global 
challenges such as environmental protection and financial inclusion. What role, then, can the 
public  sector  play  in  addressing  these  challenges  while  taking  advantage  of  new 
technologies? I would like to point out three important roles of the public sector, based on the 
issues I have raised so far and recent discussions in the G20.  
 First, it is important to support people who cannot fully or readily enjoy the benefits of new 
technologies.  Recently,  concerns  have  been  expressed  that  AI  and  robots  may  take  over 
certain  occupations.  As  discussed  at  the  G20  under  Argentina's  presidency  last  year,  one 
important role of the public sector is to provide a safety net and opportunities for education 
and training to those who would be negatively affected by new technologies.5 We should also 
pay attention to the possibility that people who are less familiar with digital technologies may 
be left behind. While FinTech can significantly expand access to financial services, people in 
certain conditions or circumstances may suffer disadvantages from new technologies such as 
automated credit examination, for instance. In this regard, we have raised the issue of aging 
and financial inclusion at the G20 under Japan's presidency this year. We will discuss whether 
the development and diffusion of digital technologies  might impede the access to financial 
services by the elderly, and how to provide convenient and accessible financial services for 
all. 
 Second,  we  need  to  secure  economic,  financial,  and  social  stability.  If  unemployment 
increases  and  investment  declines  due  to  an  economic  recession  or  financial  instability,  it 
would become harder to address a variety of economic and social issues by introducing new 
                                                        
4 Sahay,  R.,  M.  Čihák, P.  N'Diaye, A.  Barajas,  S.  Mitra, A.  Kyobe, Y. N.  Mooi,  and  S.  R. Yousefi 
"Financial Inclusion: Can It Meet Multiple Macroeconomic Goals?" IMF Staff Discussion Note 15/17, 
International Monetary Fund, 2015.  
5 For a report to the G20 on "the future of work," see  
http://www.oecd.org/g20/g20_menu_of_policy_options_for_the_future_of_work_fwg-executive_su
mmary.pdf  
 5 
technologies.  If  the  abuse  of  new  technologies  leads  to  social  disruption  and  widespread 
suspicion of technology, the deployment of new technologies would become more difficult. 
Regarding technological innovations in the financial sector, the G20 has especially focused 
on  crypto-assets  and  their  underlying  technology,  and  has  discussed  how  to  contain  the 
various types of risks while harnessing their potential benefits. 
 Third, international cooperation is important. As various issues have become globalized, it is 
essential  for  financial  authorities  to  cooperate  across  regions.  For  instance,  regarding 
environmental  issues,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  comprising  central  banks  and 
financial  authorities  from  many  countries,  established  an  industry-led  task  force  on 
disclosures  of  companies'  climate-related  financial risks  and  strategies.  The  task  force  has 
made  recommendations  for  consistent  company  disclosures.6 The  G20  has  also  introduced 
various multinational initiatives related to environmental issues, including the promotion of 
infrastructure investment highlighting environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors. 
 Concluding Remarks 
Today I have talked about how new technologies can contribute to tackling global challenges 
such as environmental protection and financial inclusion, and what role the public sector can 
play. As stressed by Schumpeter about 100 years ago, innovation is driven by entrepreneurs. 
However,  the  public  sector  can  play  an  important  role  as  well  in  tackling  modern  global 
challenges related to the SDGs. The Bank of Japan would like to contribute through taking 
initiatives  toward  the  healthy  development  of  FinTech,  supporting  financial  institutions 
which  contribute  to  regional  vitalization,  promoting  financial  literacy,  as  well  as  securing 
economic, price, and financial stability. 
 I would like to conclude my remarks here, with the hope that today's discussion at the B20 
will stimulate further cooperation between the private and public sectors toward achieving 
the SDGs. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
                                                        
6 For details, see the reports posted on the task force's website. For example, "Recommendations of the 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures," June 2017. https://www.fsb-tcfd.org  
 6 
