Guo Shuqing: Rejuvenation of China is unstoppable
Speech  by  Mr  Guo  Shuqing,  Party  Secretary  and  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People's  Bank  of
China, at the Tsinghua PBCSF Global Finance Forum, Beijing, 25 May 2019.
Distinguished guests, professors, students and friends,
Good morning!
 It gives me great pleasure to attend the Tsinghua PBCSF Global Finance Forum. Taking this
opportunity,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  observations  on  some  economic  and  financial
issues of common interest. I would also welcome your questions and comments later on.
I. The escalation of trade friction by the United States does not help solve any problem.
On May 10th, the US government announced the increase of tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese
exports. It then further declared to impose ban on Huawei and other Chinese companies, and
also decided to launch anti-subsidy investigation on the renminbi exchange rate. Such actions
did not surprise the Chinese government, companies and people, as we have believed that a
trade  war  does  not  help  solve  any  problem,  but  could  only  do  harm  to  the  others  while  not
benefiting the inflictor, resulted in collateral damage to the whole.
From the perspective of China, though in theory the US could raise the tariffs on Chinese exports
to the maximum, the impacts on China’s economy would be very limited. Firstly, the vast majority
of China’s exports to the US are suitable for domestic sale. Now China is right in the process of
consumption upgrade, which means a rapidly expanding domestic market could absorb a large
amount  of  the  products  intended  for  export,  without  exerting  a  “crowding  out”  effect  on  the
existing consumer goods. Secondly, the export market has been further diversified. With great
progress made in the Belt and Road Initiative, Chinese products are also welcome in overseas
markets  other  than  the  US.  Thirdly,  despite  the  tariff  increase,  a  substantial  amount  of  the
Chinese products are still expected to export to the US, as on the one hand, there is currently no
better substitute for these products, and on the other, the US importers are more than willing to
share the increased cost given the ample profits of the import business. Fourthly, China is now
upgrading its industrial structure, which requires the transfer of certain production activities to
overseas,  and  thus  facilitating  high-quality  growth  in  China.  Fifthly,  financial  market  in  China
withstood the over-impacts caused by the trade tension last year. Hence, it has become more
resilient to stand up to any further shocks.
From the perspective of the US, it would expose to the corresponding backlash of tariff increase
to  almost  the  same  extent.  For  example,  the  US  exports  to  China  will  contract,  which  would
undermine the interests of many US companies and lead to notable income decline of some US
high-tech firms. A large number of the US companies that have been long accustomed to relying
on the processing, assembly, transportation and distribution of the Chinese exports for creating
value added will be severely impacted, with some even face the danger of going bust.  The US
consumers would also pay higher costs, with the low- and middle-income people, farmers and
blue-collar workers in particular, suffering more welfare losses in real terms. Besides, the US
has huge assets and liabilities overseas, and relies on the Wall-street dominated international
financial  system  more  than  any  other  country.  A  trade  war  will  undoubtedly  lead  to  market
fluctuations and ultimately a lackluster international financial market.
From the logic perspective, the US tariff increase aims to reduce trade deficit with China. But
with China’s retaliatory measures, the forthright outcome of tariff increase could be quite murky
and even counter-productive in the end with other factors considered. Firstly, to put China’s high-
tech firms on its sanction list, to which the US government explicitly forbids the sale of products
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
and technologies by its companies, is an action of directly increasing the trade deficit by the US
itself.  Secondly,  the  launch  of  a  the  trade  war  has  sent  waves  to  the  international  financial
market, leading to a rapid depreciation of the renmibi, which again aroused the US government
concern of compromising the effect of tariff increase. Thirdly, a substantial tariff increase would
inflate commodity prices, denting the advantage of a low inflationary environment enjoyed by the
US economy. Fourthly, the gap left by curbing Chinese imports would be filled by exports from
other economies, resulting in unchanged total US trade deficit.
From the perspective of history, the trade frictions between the US and other rising economies
have been lasting for over 40 years, such as first with Germany, then Japan, and later the four
Asian Dragons. In 2000, China overtook Japan as the country recorded the biggest trade surplus
with the US. Now, countries such as India, Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh and
some  Latin  American  countries  are  developing  with  strong  momentum,  which  are  jointly
promoting  the  change  of  international  pattern  of  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Hence,  China’s
exports to the US may decrease gradually, but the overall pattern of US trade deficit will be hard
to change.
II. The United States has benefited substantially from its trade deficit with China.
If we only look at statistics, it seems that the US has been on the losing side given its large value
and  percentage of trade deficit with China. But with more granular analysis, it is not difficult to
see that the US has actually got huge benefits from trade with China in many aspects. To use a
metaphor here, the US gained benefits from bilateral economic and trade exchange with China
are just like peeling several layers of skins off the same bull.
First，the US importers and multinationals have grabbed the lion share of the added value of the
trade balance. Nearly 60 percent of the US-China trade deficit in goods was attributed to foreign-
invested companies in China, most of which are US-owned companies. Thus, sales of these
products ultimately contributed to the revenue and profits of the US companies. 61 percent of the
trade imbalance between China and the US comes from processing trade, and China gets very
little in the actual value distribution. Besides, one-third of the growth in US companies’ overseas
sales was contributed by the Chinese market.
Second, the US consumers have enjoyed huge “consumer surplus” through trade with China.
According to statistics, about one-fourth of retail goods in the US market were imported from
China. For example, 26 percent of the products sold by Wal-Mart came directly from China. The
steady flow of China’s inexpensive and quality products into the US has helped lower the cost of
living for the US households and improved welfare.
Third, it is China that supported the prices of US exports of products and services. For example,
if without China’s large purchase of commodities such as grain and energy, as well as civilian
aircrafts and chips, their prices would by no means be at today’s level. Besides, according to US
statistics, it has a surplus of more than $40 billion in trade services with China every year.
Fourth, the US has experienced the miracle of “high consumption and low inflation” since the
1990s. Even during the ten years of quantitative easing, there was no distinct inflation in the US.
One of the significant reasons is that China, with its population larger than that of Europe, the US
and  Japan  combined,  and  in  the  matured  stage  of  industrialization,  has  unprecedentedly
increased the global supply of consumer goods.
Fifth,  the  US  has  gained  from  a  huge  volume  of  cheap  capital  repatriation.  The  capital
accumulated by China through its trade surplus underpins US consumption and investment in
the form of China investing in the US dollar-denominated assets such as the US Treasury bonds.
By the end of last year, China held a total of $7.3 trillion worth of international financial assets,
more than half of which were denominated in US dollar. With continued inflow of the Chinese
capital,  the  funding  cost  of  the  US  market  has  remained  extremely  low,  creating  extremely
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
favorable conditions for US economic recovery and prosperity.
Sixth,  the  US  has  long  occupied  China’s  huge  savings  resources.  The  Chinese  people  are
hardworking  and  frugal.  Even  when  their  monthly  salary  was  around  a  dozen  or  dozens  of
dollars, they tried to put aside some money for savings. Hence, China’s domestic savings rate
and household savings rate have always been at a relatively high level. While on the contrary, the
US  has  had  a  relatively  large  investment-to-savings  gap.  By  that  token,  the  US  huge  current
account deficit with China means a US occupation of China’s net savings of the same scale.
Since the capital repatriated from China into the US mainly takes the form of securities and other
assets  investment,  coupled  with  a  high  share  of  direct  financing  in  the  US  financial  system,
deposit  creation  in  the  US  has  remained  low.  Over  the  past  several  decades,  broad  money
supply and cash in the US have both been growing slowly, in sharp contrast to the phenomenon
of the 1970s and 1980s, sufficing to explain a new secret of the US, that is, it has even saved lots
of money from printing and issuing the dollar notes. In that sense, the famous Triffin dilemma in
the international economics study has found an effective solution.
III. The alleged “China’s theft of US technology” is the logic of power politics.
Forty years ago, China started to introduce foreign investors, who were allowed to set up three
different  kinds  of  foreign-invested  enterprises  (i.e.  Sino-foreign  joint  ventures,  Sino-foreign
cooperative  enterprises  and  wholly  foreign-owned  enterprises),  and  have  since  gained  huge
profits in China. Now the market sales of foreign investors in China have amounted to trillions of
dollars  and  with  profits  reaching  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars. All  these  were  based  on  the
principle  of  reciprocal  cooperation  with  mutual  benefits,  without  any  one  of  the  investment
contracts forced to be signed by the Chinese government. Strict observance of the contract has
always been advocated by Europe and the United States, and is gradually appreciated by the
Chinese enterprises and residents. But now all of a sudden, the US alleged that Chinese laws
and  economic  practices  impose  “forced  technology  transfer”,  “forced  IPR  transfer”  and  even
used the word “theft”. That was not only a challenge to the basic facts, but also a humiliation to
the Chinese people.
It  is  a  common  practice  for  any  rising  economy  to  learn  the  knowledge  and  experiences  of
developed  countries.  That  is  why  there  emerged  the  so-called  “catching  up  and  imitation”
concept in development economics. Over more than ten centuries in history, China’s science
and technology was second to none in the world. Our intangible assets have made exceptional
contributions to the development of human civilization. The well-known “Four Great Inventions” of
Ancient China have contributed to the emergence of capitalism in Europe. Without gunpowder,
compass, and the printing technology, there would be no modern industrial economy. Great men
in history such as Francis Bacon and Karl Marx have all spoke highly of that. That being said, it
seems in retrospect that our ancestors have their own regrets. Though they have invented so
many things, they only failed to invent “IPR”.
Looking  back  into  history,  it  should  be  noted  that  imitation  and  even  plagiarism  of  technology
among  countries  were  very  common  during  the  industrial  age  of  Europe  and  the  US.  Some
companies  even  tried  to  acquire  advanced  technology  through  dishonest  and  unprincipled
means.  This  is  a  specific  historical  time  phase  which  can  not  be  bypassed.  The  developed
countries have all gone through the process of standardizing intellectual property protection. But
it  is  by  building  upon  the  work  of  their  predecessors  that  each  of  the  country  achieved  new
breakthroughs in and made new contributions to technological advancement. Thus, we believe
that no country, including the US, can realize modernization by theft. But rather, modernization
can only be achieved through hard work and strenuous efforts of their own peoples.
It was originated from the western countries to trade technology for market or to trade market for
technology.  Based  on  the  principle  of  fairness,  technology  trading  is  a  fundamental  market
economy  activity  commonly  accepted.  Over  the  past  years,  developed  countries,  including
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
European  countries  and  the  US,  have  always  claimed  to  voluntarily  transfer  knowledge  and
technology on the principle of free and fair trade, so as to help the third world countries get rid of
poverty and backwardness and realize economic independence. If such goal can be achieved, it
will undoubtedly be conducive to the development of the world economy. But now it seems that
US does not have the willingness to fulfill its commitments.
By technology transfer, developed countries have been continuously gaining substantial returns.
Through such means as patents grant and franchising, developed countries have made huge
profits with their technologies applied in the developing economies. Some of the profits were in
turn  re-invested  for  research  and  development  (R&D),  forming  a  “perfect  cycle”  for  the
technological advancement of the developed countries. Besides, many of the technologies were
tested through application in the developing countries. With contributions from project managers
in those countries to further improve the technologies, the overall technological capacity of the
developed countries was further promoted.
It is totally groundless for the US to make the accusations against China by citing intellectual
property protection as a cover while aiming in essence for trade protectionism. In contemporary
world,  China  is  already  a  firm  defender  and  active  builder  of  international  intellectual  property
rules.  The  Director  General  of  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization  (WIPO),  Francis
Gurry, said in an interview with China Intellectual Property News in 2019 on the sidelines of the
high-level Forum on China IP Protection that “China is now a world leading player in intellectual
property  creation  and  protection”.  Only  a  few  years  ago  the  US  government,  agencies,  and
politicians openly acknowledged China’s progress in intellectual property protection. Are these all
changed overnight?
The history has proven, and will continue to prove that, sanction and blockade will not stop a
country’s  technological  and  economic  development,  but  on  the  contrary  will  make  it  further
determined to continue its own research and push forward its technological development. During
the  1950s  and  the  1960s,  despite  the  blockade  and  embargo  imposed  on  us,  China  still
developed  the  atomic  and  hydrogen  bombs,  missiles  and  man-made  satellites  under  poor,
backward  and  tough  situations,  gradually  making  itself  one  of  the  leading  science  and
technological powers in the world.
IV. China will further deepen the reform of renminbi exchange rate regime.
China’s CPC Central Committee and the State Council have decided to deepen the reform on
renminbi exchange rate formation mechanism, increase the flexibility of renminbi exchange rate
and keep it largely stable at a reasonable and equilibrium level. Over recent years, the renminbi
exchange rate against a basket of currencies has kept stable in a global context. The Chinese
government has made great efforts to maintain a balance between the flexibility and stability of
renminbi exchange rate, which was widely recognized by the international community.
Since the early 1990s, the US has constantly threatened China with the allegation of “exchange
rate manipulation”. By definition of the US Treasury Department, three quantitative criteria need
to  be  fulfilled  concurrently  to  become  a  currency  manipulator,  including:  1)  an  annual  trade
surplus of over $20 billion with the US, 2) a current account surplus accounting for 3 percent of
GDP, and 3) the value of foreign exchange purchased for exchange rate interference purpose
exceeding 2 percent of GDP. In 2018, China’s current account surplus was only 0.37 percent of
its GDP, and there was no large amount of foreign exchange purchase, neither did China gain
competitive advantage of trade through currency depreciation. So the US government can hardly
label China a currency manipulator.
Over  the  past  decade,  all  dramatic  renminbi  depreciations  were  triggered  by  external  factors.
The  most  recent  one  in  May  this  year,  when  offshore  Chinese  yuan  dropped  over  3  percent
against the dollar, was totally caused by the escalated trade friction by the US government. Over
the years, developed countries had always called for greater flexibility of renminbi exchange rate.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, once the renminbi exchange rate formation mechanism became more market-oriented
and more elastic, some countries soon adopt an attitude of “Lord Ye’s Love of Dragons”, the
actual  fear  behind  professed  love,  with  unfounded  suspicion  and  accusation  towards  China,
which is absolutely ridiculous.
As  is  well-known,  despite  the  recent  FX  market  fluctuations,  so  far  there  is  no  panic  among
Chinese firms and residents. More and more people have realized that it is not realistic to make
money  from  currency  speculations.  Nor  is  it  safe  to  transfer  financial  assets  overseas.  In
sophisticated markets, nearly no companies or individuals live on investment returns of foreign
currency speculation. Even the so-called Mrs Watanabe in Japan actually turned out to be an
overstated investment story.
It is normal to have temporary fluctuations on renminbi exchange rate. But for the long run, given
China’s economic fundamentals, continued renminbi depreciation is unlikely. With huge market
size and growth potential, China remains to be the biggest engine for global economic growth. As
the  quality  of  China’s  economic  development  improves,  the  renminbi  exchange  rate  will  keep
approaching the purchasing power parity (PPP), and the speculators who tried to short sell the
Chinese currency will inevitably suffer huge losses. 
V. China does not practice the so-called state capitalism.
In  recent  years,  there  have  been  views  in  the  world  that  the  rapid  development  of  China’s
economy is the result of the practice of “state capitalism”, which explains why Chinese products
are extremely competitive in the international market. That is a groundless reasoning.
In fact, China’s economic structure has become increasingly diversified, with the market share of
state-owned enterprises continuing to decline. Factoring in public services by the government,
China’s state-owned economy now accounts for less than 40 percent of GDP. Many of the state-
owned  enterprises  have  got  listed  in  China  and  abroad,  thus  having  become  companies  with
mixed ownership in nature. Enterprises 100 percent state-owned are now very limited. For large
state-owned enterprises, a number of their subsidiaries’ ultimate control have been transferred to
private companies. Even among the central government-owned enterprises, they compete with
each other. More than 20 years ago during the reform of the military industrial enterprises, each
sector was divided into two or more companies.
At present, private and foreign capital can enter into almost all industries and sectors, only with
few facing legal or policy restrictions. Be it rail transportation, equipment manufacturing, or raw
energy materials, enterprises with different kinds of ownership structure are found in all these
sectors. China adopts the principle of neutral competition, emphasizing that all market players
are treated equally. We encourage them to both compete and cooperate, and to complement
each other for a win-win relationship. China’s industrial and credit policies are of a guiding nature.
When implementing those policies, the principles of the market and law must be observed. Such
policies are no differences from the US National Export Initiatives and the European Industrial
Renaissance. Internationally, there are always people complaining that the Chinese government
provides huge subsidies for all products. In fact, this kind of criticism is logically difficult to stand.
If all enterprises are to be subsidized, resources must be equally taken from all of them.
The financial industry has also cultivated a diversified structure. China has state-owned financial
institutions, as well as foreign-owned ones. Listed institutions and rural credit cooperatives even
have natural person shareholders. There are more than 3,000 private-controlled institutions out of
4,588  banking  institutions  in  China,  and  most  of  the  170  Chinese  insurance  companies  are
private-controlled. Most of the securities companies and fund companies are private-owned as
well.  Even  for  the  top  five  commercial  banks,  foreign  ownership  accounted  for  as  high  as  25
percent a decade ago, while at that time it was very difficult for them to even apply for a branch in
the  US.  Currently,  the  big  banks’  ownership  shares  from  private  sector,  domestic  or  foreign,
account for an average of 30 percent, with some even exceeding 40 percent. It shall also be
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
pointed  out  that  although  the  KPIs  of  the  top  five  banks  are  improving,  their  market  share
continue to decline, now only 37 percent. So in terms of market concentration, China is notably
lower than some major economies, like the US and the European countries.
Another  typical  example  is  China’s  Fintech,  which  takes  the  lead  in  the  world.  The  most
important  underlying  reason  is  that  the  government  adopted  a  prudent  yet  inclusive  attitude
towards private internet companies, thus creating a fair competition environment. Large state-
owned banks adopted the attitude of both competition and cooperation from the very beginning
toward Fintech companies. For example, more than a decade ago, Ali-pay was born and swiftly
grew through cooperation with the large and medium-sized banks, including China Construction
Bank. Now, all Fintech companies have established strategic cooperative partnerships with the
large and medium-sized banks. Other banks themselves have also made great efforts to develop
Fintech  business.  They  carried  out  all-round  cooperation  with  IT  companies  in  fund  raising,
account  opening,  payment  and  settlement,  inclusive  finance  etc.  They  draw  on  each  other’s
strengths  to  make  up  for  each  other’s  shortcomings,  and  have  achieved  remarkable  results.
Thus,  it  demonstrates  that  even  in  such  most  significant  and  essential  field,  the  Chinese
government didn’t simply exercise state monopoly.
VI. The goal to improve corporate governance structure will remain unchanged.
In recent years, some foreign institutions and organizations have been skeptical about China’s
corporate governance, especially about the CPC’s role in it. Private enterprises in China have
always been operating independently and effectively based on their Articles of Association and
governance structures. They are independent entities operating in the market and abide by the
rules of the market. The CPC has not interfered in their operation.
In the state-owned enterprises, the leadership of the CPC has always played a central role. It is
the  most  distinctive  feature  of  the  Chinese  corporate  governance  model  to  integrate  the
leadership of the CPC. President Xi Jinping has stressed that it is a major political principle to
adhere  to  the  CPC’s  leadership  in  state-owned  enterprises,  which  must  be  implemented
consistently;  and  that  the  reform  of  state-owned  enterprises  should  follow  the  direction  of
establishing  a  modern  enterprise  system,  which  must  also  be  implemented  consistently.  To
further deepen the reform of state-owned enterprises, corporate governance must be improved
while the role of the CPC must also be fully recognized, so that the two can integrate with and
better promote each other.
From  the  perspective  of  global  theoretical  research  and  empirical  studies,  there  is  neither  a
unified model of corporate governance nor an “optimal model” that can be blindly copied. The
fundamental corporate governance principles and framework of Chinese enterprises are in line
with the international prevailing standards. At the G20 Hangzhou Summit held in China in 2016,
we  have  made  clear  in  the  communiqué  to  support  the  principles  of  corporate  governance
advocated by the G20 and the OECD. Under such a general principle and framework, it complies
with the international common practices to make some adjustments and refinements in practice
to reflect each country’s specific conditions.
Establishing  a  modern  enterprise  system  and  upholding  the  CPC’s  leadership  are  fully
compatible  with  each  other.  First,  of  in  terms  of  establishing  a    mechanism  where  effective
checks and balances are in place, the general meeting of shareholders, the board of directors,
the senior management and the board of supervisors are encouraged to assume their respective
responsibilities  and  roles  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The  CPC  Committee  mainly  takes  the
responsibility to lead the direction, to manage the overall situation and to ensure implementation.
It plays a key role to ensure that the company abide by the law and policy, cultivate a healthy
corporate culture and fulfill social responsibilities. Business strategies and decision-making are
up  to  the  board  of  directors.  Second,  in  the  protection  of  stakeholders,  good  corporate
governance  means  taking  full  account  of  the  legitimate  rights  and  interests  of  shareholders,
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
employees, customers, communities, creditors, as well as that of the upstream and downstream
companies of the supply chain. CPC has always adhered to the fundamental principle of serving
the people. It has both rich experiences in mass work and the capacity to organize and motivate,
which  can  better  protect  the  legitimate  rights  and  interests  of  all  parties.  Third,  the  CPC
organizations adopt collective leadership, and the members of the CPC Committee, the board of
directors,  and  the  board  of  supervisors  can  also  be  cross-appointed,  which  can  better  solve
problems  like  internal  controls,  large  shareholder  manipulation,  inadequate  performance  of
directors, and the non-independence of independent directors, and so on.
Past  practices  have  proved  that  cultivating  a  corporate  governance  model  with  the  Chinese
characteristics is absolutely feasible. For example, the core leading roles of the CPC Committee
have been fully brought into play in the five large banks, i.e. ICBC, ABC, BOC, CCB and BOCM.
These  banks  have  made  historic  breakthroughs  in  corporate  governance  and  business
performance  after  a  series  of  major  initiatives  such  as  reform  of  ownership  structure,
introduction  of  strategic  investors,  and  getting  listed  domestically  or  overseas.  Some  of  the
banks had won international awards on corporate governance more than a decade ago. These
banks have also been highly internationalized with a global network of shareholders and outlets.
Some  key  business  indicators  of  these  banks  have  reached  the  international  advanced  level,
including  productivity,  return  on  capital,  cost-to-income  ratio,  capital  adequacy  ratio  and
provisioning  coverage  ratio,  to  name  just  a  few.  It  also  shows  that  while  learning  from  the
international experiences, China is capable of proactively exploring good corporate governance
models with the Chinese characteristics.
VII. China will unswervingly keep opening up the financial sector.
The opening-up of the financial sector is the trend of the times, and it will neither stop nor go
backward. In 2013, China overtook the US to become the world’s largest trading nation. In 2018,
the imports and exports of China accounted for 10.8 percent and 12.8 percent of the world’s total
respectively. China has been regarded as the largest trading partner by over half of the world
countries. Compared with the production and exchange of commodity goods, the opening-up of
China’s service industry has been relatively lagging behind. The financial sector is a vital part of
the service industry and needs to further open up to better serve the real economy and people’s
lives.
In  2018,  15  pieces  of  opening-up  measures  in  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors  were
announced.  In  May  this  year,  12  new  opening-up  measures  were  further  unveiled.  All  these
measures are being implemented step by step on schedule. Going forward, there still remains
ample  room  for  further  opening-up,  since  currently  foreign  capital  only  takes  up  2  percent  of
China’s A-share  market  capitalization  and  2.9  percent  of  China’s  bond  market,  while  foreign-
funded banks account for 1.6 percent of the total commercial banking assets, and foreign-funded
insurance  companies  account  for  5.8  percent  of  the  total  insurance  assets  in  China.  Foreign
institutions with good market reputation, sound credit record, and expertise in risk management,
credit rating, wealth management, factoring, consumer finance, pension, health insurance and
other  business  areas  are  particularly  welcome  to  do  business  in  China.  With  participation  of
those institutions, financial market entities can be further enriched, financial product innovation
further promoted and the financial market vitality further unleashed.
In the process of further opening up, the complexity and contagion of financial risks will no doubt
further increase. For a large developing country like China, it is crucial to mitigate and control
financial  risks,  in  particular,  large-scale  inflows  and  outflows  of  cross-border  capital  and  the
speculation of “hot money". Efforts must also be taken to resolutely prevent excessive bubbles in
the property market and financial assets. 
VIII. China should also have its own house cleaned first.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The fate of the Chinese nation should be held firmly in the hands of itself, as no external forces
can  alter  the  direction  of  its  development.  At  present,  the  whole  country  is  advancing  the
transition from high-speed growth to high-quality development in accordance with the strategy
made  by  the  19th  CPC  National  Congress.  China’s  stable  development  depends  on  whether
some  internal  challenges  can  be  well  addressed,  especially  those  prominent  ones  such  as
ageing population, environmental pollution, income disparity, imbalanced regional development,
weakness in innovation capacity, and etc.
In  China,  people  aged  sixty  and  above  account  for  approximately  18  percent  of  the  total
population and are expected to reach over 300 million by 2025, making China a typical ageing
society  then.  The  accelerated  ageing  pace  will  bring  profound  impacts  to  all  aspects  of  the
economy and society. There will be less participants in the labor force with lower savings rate,
which is detrimental to long-term economic development. In addition, China’s elderly care, health
care and social security systems will also face critical challenges.
Meanwhile,  environmental  pollution  remains  a  serious  problem  in  China.  Every  year,  the
economic losses caused by environmental pollution and ecological damage could be as high as
hundreds of billions of yuan. The CPC Central Committee led by President Xi Jinping attaches
great  importance  to  ecological  preservation.  As  underscored  by  President  Xi  Jinping,  “clean
waters and green mountains are invaluable assets”. Despite the high cost of pollution control,
firm actions must be taken to combine economic, legal and administrative measures to address
this issue so as to protect the interests of the Chinese people.
Income disparity is another prominent issue. Since the reform and opening-up, income gap in
China has widened across industries, sectors, classes and communities. Among that, income
gap  caused  by  certain  unfair  competition  was  particularly  acute.  Though  the  imputed  rent  of
owner-occupied property in China is significantly underestimated and the calculation methods of
household income needs to be further optimized, China’s Gini coefficient remains at a high level,
which deserves high attention. Currently, China is facing the critical task of winning the battle
against  poverty.  Even  when  the  phased-in  objective  is  achieved,  poverty  alleviation  will  still
remain a long-term social undertaking.
Regional gap is also distinct. Marked imbalance in economic development exists between the
eastern and western regions as well as between the southern and northern regions. Some old
industrial areas and resource-dependent cities in particular are faced with the huge pressure of
unsustainable  development.  A  more  severe  problem  is  the  net  population  decline  in  some
regions. If this problem is not handled well, it will adversely affect industrial transformation, even
posing threat to the sustained national economic development.
In  addition,  insufficient  innovation  restricts  economic  development  to  a  large  extent.  In  recent
years,  despite  the  attention,  efforts  and  investment  made  in  the  development  of  science,
technology  and  education,  the  outcomes  are  not  quite  satisfactory.  There  remain  institutional
barriers  in  such  fields  as  science,  technology  and  education.  For  example,  the  evaluation
mechanism of scientific and technological outcome, together with corresponding governmental
resource  allocation  mechanism,  should  be  further  improved.  Economic  transformation  toward
high quality growth has been restricted by bottlenecks in the transformation and application of
technological achievements as well as by key impediment to grasping core technologies. 
The  above-mentioned  issues  need  to  be  addressed  with  comprehensive  deepened  reform,
multiple-pronged measures, integrated approaches and on-going efforts. The financial industry
can make great contributions in that process, which I believe, is also the direction and objective
of the financial supply-side structural reform. We are convinced that under the strong leadership
of CPC Central Committee with President Xi Jinping as its core, the Chinese people will achieve
the two centenary goals with great success!
Last but not least, I wish the Forum a great success.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you!
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
