Luis  de  Guindos:  Deepening  EMU  and  the  implications  for  the
international role of the euro
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the occasion of
the joint conference of the European Commission and the European Central Bank on European
financial integration and stability, Brussels, 16 May 2019.
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  speaking  today  at  the  joint  European  Commission  and  ECB
conference on financial integration in Europe.
The  choice  of  the  international  role  of  the  euro  as  the  guiding  theme  represents  a  change  in
focus in the discussions on Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) reforms, from a post-crisis
response to a broader agenda.
At the same time, Europe is facing new challenges, not least a return to fragmentation at the
global  level  and  the  United  Kingdom’s  departure  from  the  EU,  amid  heightened  political
uncertainty.
In this context, I would like to give an overview of where we are in terms of European financial
integration and draw lessons for the concrete policy actions that would promote integration.
Where do we stand on financial integration in Europe?
At the ECB, we analyse two dimensions of financial integration: price convergence across the
1
euro area and quantity-based integration via cross-border activities.
The great financial crisis caused fragmentation along both of these dimensions. Since then, we
have made great progress thanks to measures to reform EMU and the announcement of our
Outright Monetary Transactions. These actions, together with a wide range of policy measures
taken in the years that followed, put us back on the path towards greater integration.
However, this process has stalled somewhat in the last two years.
On  the  capital  markets  side,  most  of  the  recent  positive  developments  in  terms  of  financial
integration  have  been  driven  by  an  overall  reduction  in  price  dispersion,  rather  than  an
improvement in holdings of non-domestic assets, or cross-border holdings.
Going beyond the aggregate figures, however, we see that the investment fund sector makes a
positive  contribution  to  integration  by  allowing  investors  to  spread  and  diversify  their  asset
holdings across countries. In 2017, investment funds held roughly 78% of all their holdings in
bonds issued outside their own domicile.  This is important because more cross-border holdings
are  needed  to  support  consumption  smoothing  in  the  face  of  shocks  and  to  enhance  cross-
border risk-sharing.
2
In banking markets the picture is also mixed. In general, we have seen a reduction in the cross-
country  dispersion  of  banks’  funding  costs  and  lending  rates,  pointing  to  some  price-based
integration.
In  terms  of  quantity,  however,  integration  is  still  fairly  low  as  cross-border  interbank  lending
remains stagnant and cross-border retail lending continues to be very limited.
More cross-border lending would be welcome as it could better insulate the domestic banking
sectors from regional shocks, thus helping to sustain consumption or investment levels in the
face of adverse shocks.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
These findings have implications for the EU’s policy agenda.
First, cross-border financial integration still falls short of the potential for cross-border
private risk-sharing we would like to see in the euro area. While the United States is an
ambitious benchmark in this respect, it is interesting to note that 40% of shocks to GDP growth
can be mitigated through diversification via capital markets in the United States. This compares
3
with only 20% of shocks to GDP growth that can be smoothed in the euro area.
The capital markets union (CMU) agenda therefore needs to be pursued with renewed vigour to
foster a deeper integration and development of markets.
Second, the banking union is still not a reality even though two of its three pillars have
been put in place. Euro area-based banks have substantially reduced their cross-border claims
4
since the crisis, and about 60% of banks’ total exposures are to their home countries.
This is worrying at a time when the political momentum behind completing the banking union is
fading. Importantly, this may lead banks to refocus their activities on their domestic markets as
they anticipate that the banking union will remain incomplete, resulting in further fragmentation.
Renewed risks of fragmentation increase the need for European integration
Pursuing reforms through European projects is even more important in view of a possible return
to fragmentation at different levels.
At the global level, a lack of commitment to fully implement internationally agreed standards may
hinder  international  activity.  Europe  should  be  taking  a  leading  role  here  and  promoting  an
integrated and level playing field within its own borders and beyond by implementing the agreed
reforms and maintaining a high-quality regulatory framework. This will provide confidence in the
health and resilience of our markets and buttress Europe’s credibility as a rule-maker.
From a global perspective, European capital markets are currently too small and too fragmented.
The CMU agenda should therefore be geared towards creating the ecosystem needed to develop
more  vibrant  European  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  that  are  able  to  compete
internationally. This means both promoting policies that help markets to increase their size and
scope, and doing away with the barriers to the cross-border functioning of markets implied by
differences in national policy concerning insolvency, taxation and other areas. Promoting a single
rulebook  in  a  wide  range  of  areas,  including  consumer  protection,  anti-money  laundering  and
accounting rules, is also key to the success of CMU. Regulatory consistency in a broad sense
and a level playing field, as opposed to leniency, are crucial to render EU markets attractive.
At  the  European  level,  Brexit  is  an  additional  challenge  which  may  lead  to  fragmentation  as
services could be provided in a more decentralised way. At the same time, EU27 capital markets
are  still  subject  to  national  rules  and  supervision,  making  for  a  patchwork  of  regimes  which
prevent the integration of markets and may open the door to regulatory arbitrage. As a response
to Brexit, we need to develop truly European capital markets, and this makes progress on the
CMU front even more urgent.
As the United Kingdom leaves the EU’s regulatory and supervisory framework and develops a
new one of its own, a different relationship between the two jurisdictions will need to be defined. It
will need to balance the benefits of continued integration with the UK financial markets with the
potential  risks  to  financial  stability,  consumer  and  investor  protection,  and  the  integrity  of  the
Single Market. This path will not be easy for either side as the lure of the flexible and light-touch
regulation of the past can be strong, bringing with it the risk of divergence between EU and UK
rules or a potential race to the bottom. And these considerations will also play out as we review
the role of equivalence regimes in EU financial legislation.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
European responses are the way forward
Turning  to  policy  responses,  the  way  forward  is  clear:  we  need  to  move  away  from  national
responses  and  promote  European  ones  within  the  CMU  and  banking  union  agendas.  Let  me
briefly emphasise five priority areas.
First, we need to complete the banking union’s institutional architecture. In particular, we should
ensure that the backstop to the Single Resolution Fund is fully operational, agree on a banking
union solution to liquidity needs in resolution and define a clear path towards a European deposit
insurance  scheme  (EDIS).  A  fully  fledged  EDIS  would  facilitate  cross-border  banking  since
depositor protection would be independent of a bank’s location, and ensure that an increase in
cross-border activity does not reduce the overall resilience of the system. This would provide the
institutional framework for the cross-border risk-sharing that Europe needs.
Second, to facilitate cross-border activity and the emergence of pan-European entities, we need
to put an end to national ring-fencing. Within the banking union, supervisors should be able to
grant  cross-border  waivers  for  capital,  liquidity  and  large  exposures,  provided  that  prudential
safeguards are in place. This would lead to more efficient resource allocation and support the
emergence  of  resilient  cross-border  banks  able  to  provide  credit  across  borders  and  to  offer
investors  access  to  diversified  products.   It  would  also  foster  cross-border  bank  penetration,
which would support the credit channel of private risk-sharing. Within CMU, a more level playing
field would also enhance the capital market channel of risk-sharing.
5
Third,  we  need  to  mobilise  the  large  existing  pool  of  savings  in  Europe  so  it  can  be  put  to
productive  uses.  Today,  households  keep  35%  of  their  financial  wealth  in  cash  and  deposits,
around  a  third  in  insurance  and  pension  funds,  and  the  rest  in  shares,  funds  and  bonds.
Differences in saving behaviours – through banks or through pension funds – suggest that there
is  potential  for  savings  to  be  allocated  more  efficiently  within  the  banking  union  and  for  retail
investors  to  participate  more  actively  in  capital  markets.  Fostering  equity  investment  by
addressing the debt-equity bias and improving financial literacy, for instance, would support the
development  of  an  equity  culture  in  Europe,  which  would,  in  turn,  help  to  finance  innovation,
growth  and risk-sharing , while also increasing the return on savings for households.
6
7
Fourth,  we  need  to  continuously  review  the  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to
ensure that authorities can monitor and address potential financial stability risks. European firms
are relying more heavily on corporate bonds for their financing than they did in the past, and both
households  and  various  financial  intermediaries  are  increasingly  holding  corporate  bonds  via
investment  funds.  This  changing  environment  might  entail  new  sources  of  risk  as  well  as
different transmission channels of financial instability. Robust prudential standards in the non-
bank financial sector therefore need to be upheld, and changes to the financial structure need to
be  reflected  in  the  supervisory  framework  to  avoid  risks  developing  beyond  the  watch  of
supervisors. The macroprudential toolkit will also need to be extended to the non-bank financial
8
sector so that the authorities have the means to address risks at the system level.
Last but not least, we should not shy away from having an open discussion on the need for a
European safe asset. If well designed, such a European asset could become the benchmark for
investors in EU capital markets, reduce the incentives for capital flight on national bonds within
the euro area and contribute to lowering risks on banks’ balance sheets.
Deeper  financial 
international role of the euro
integration  will  strengthen  EMU  and  ultimately  enhance  the
More  developed  and  integrated  banking  and  capital  markets  play  a  complementary  role  in
financing the real economy by providing different sources of financing adapted to various funding
needs and stages of firm development. They also help to match borrowers and investors in an
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
efficient way.
Efficient  capital  and  banking  markets  also  contribute  to  fostering  cross-border  private  risk-
sharing via the credit and capital channels, which reduces the need for public risk-sharing and
enhances the resilience of EMU.
We  therefore  need  to  promote  a  European  approach  to  financial  integration  so  that  we  can
complete both the banking union and the capital markets union. Achieving developed, integrated
EU markets that are open and attractive to international investors would ultimately reinforce the
9
role of the euro on the international stage.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
The ECB regularly releases a set of financial integration indicators and since 2007 has published a report on
“Financial  integration  in  Europe”.  Integration  is  measured  using  both  price  and  quantity-based  composite
indicators.  They  aggregate  market-specific  indicators  related  to  money,  bond,  equity  and  banking  markets,
thereby offering a comprehensive overview of financial integration in the euro area.
ECB (2018), Financial integration in Europe, Special Feature B “Integrating euro area corporate bond markets:
benefits and potential financial stability challenges”.
See ECB (2018), “Risk sharing in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, and Alcidi, C., D’Imperio, P. and
Thirion,  G.  (2017),  “Risk-sharing  and  consumption  smoothing  patterns  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area:  A
comprehensive comparison”, Centre for European Policy Studies Working Document, No 2017/04, May.
ECB (2017), Financial Stability Review, Special Feature B: “Cross-border banking in the euro area since the
crisis: what is driving the great retrenchment?”, November, and EBA transparency exercises and EBA stress test
exercises, 2013–2018.
ECB  (2017), Financial integration in Europe, Special Feature “Cross-border  bank  consolidation  in  the  euro
area”.
See,  for  instance,  ECB  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and  innovation  in  productivity  and  growth  in
Europe”, Occasional  Paper  Series,  No  72,  as  well  as  ECB  (2018), Financial integration in Europe,  Special
Feature A: “Financial development, financial structure and growth: evidence from Europe”.
ECB  (2016), Financial integration in Europe, Special Feature A: “Financial  integration  and  risk  sharing  in  a
monetary union”.
See, for instance, “Redesigning Europe’s financial landscape “, speech by Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of
the ECB, at the 6th Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy, Frankfurt, 14 December 2018.
In the literature it is argued that in modern times the size, depth and variety of domestic capital markets are key
factors in fostering the international role of a currency. See McCauley, R. (2017), “The Euro and the Dollar”,
Essays  in  International  Finance,  No  205,  Princeton  University,  November;  Hartmann,  P.  (1998),  Currency
Competition and Foreign Exchange Markets: The Dollar, the Yen and the Euro, Cambridge University Press;
Portes, R. and Rey, H. (1998), “The emergence of the euro as an international currency”, Economic Policy, Vol.
13(26),  pp.  306–343;  Hartmann,  P.  and  Detken,  C.  (2000),  “The  Euro  and  International  Capital  Markets”,
International Finance, 3(1), pp. 53–94.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
