Norman T L Chan: Remarks at the Hong Kong Academy of Finance
Inauguration Ceremony and fellowship conferment
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority,  at  the  Hong  Kong  Academy  of  Finance  Inauguration  Ceremony  cum  Fellowship
Conferment, Hong Kong, 26 June 2019.
The Honourable Paul Chan, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  A very warm welcome to all of you for joining us today to witness the Inauguration Ceremony
cum Fellowship Conferment of the Hong Kong Academy of Finance (AoF). 
2.  I  strongly  believe  that  the  most  crucial  factor  that  differentiates  an  international  financial
centre (IFC) from the other aspiring financial centres is its superior “soft infrastructure” or
“soft power”.  I am sure you will agree with me that the quality and professionalism of the
people in the financial services industry are the building blocks for the “soft infrastructure”
that determines the competitiveness of an IFC.  The mission of the Academy is to serve as
a  centre  of  excellence  for  developing  financial  leadership  as  well  as  a  repository  of
knowledge in monetary and financial research, including applied research.
3.  The AoF  will  develop  and  run  a  Leadership  Development  Programme  to  nurture  financial
leaders in Hong Kong.  The Academy will invite senior management and promising talents
from financial institutions, regulators, professional firms and academia in the field of finance
to  join  as  Members.    AoF  Members  will  be  invited  to  participate  in  the  Leadership
Development Programme through which they can interact with the Academy’s International
Advisers, Fellows and other top financial leaders through seminars, workshops and small
group discussions.  Although the Academy does not offer technical or professional training,
which is well served by many tertiary institutions and professional bodies such as the Hong
Kong Institute of Bankers, the Hong Kong Securities and Investment Institute, the Treasury
Markets Association,  we  will  collaborate  closely  with  these  institutions  as  our  partners  to
achieve  the  maximum  synergy  in  accomplishing  our  common  goal  of  enhancing  the  soft
power of Hong Kong.
4.  On the research front, the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR), which was
set  up  20  years  ago  to  undertake  monetary  and  economic  research,  has  become  a
subsidiary  of  the AoF  and  will  expand  its  ambit  to  cover Applied  Finance  Research  and
Thought Leadership.  The HKIMR will continue to have its own Board of Directors and, in
addition  to  the  existing  Council  of  Advisers  for  Monetary  Research,  a  new  Council  of
Advisers  for Applied  Research  has  been  set  up  to  oversee  the  applied  research  work  of
AoF. 
5.  The  AoF  is  a  cross-sectoral  collaboration  to  achieve  the  goal  of  enhancing  the
competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial industry.  May I take this opportunity to thank our
fellow regulators for their support in the setting up of the Academy and in providing guidance
on its future work through the Board of Directors, which includes representatives from the
Insurance Authority, the Securities and Futures Commission, the Mandatory Provident Fund
Schemes Authority alongside the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
6.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  today  the  AoF  will  also  confer  Fellowship  upon  10  distinguished
leaders in recognition of their outstanding achievements and contributions to Hong Kong in
the field of finance.  May I take this opportunity to congratulate the Fellows and to express
our  deep  appreciation  of  their  remarkable  achievements  and  contributions  to  Hong  Kong
over the years. 
7.  Before  I  conclude,  let  me  express  our  sincere  gratitude  to  the  members  of  the  Experts
Group,  Preparatory  Committee,  Exchange  Fund  Advisory  Committee  and  the  Financial
Secretary,  who  is  also  the  Honorary  President  of  the  Academy,  for  their  support  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
contributions that have made it possible for us to launch the AoF within a very short period of
time.    Lastly,  the  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  Ms  Christine
Lagarde,  has  asked  me  to  convey  her  apologies  for  not  being  able  to  officiate  at  today’s
ceremony as planned.  Although not being able to join the occasion in person, she will deliver
a video message to us later on.  Once again, I thank all of you for joining this ceremony
today.  Thank you for your kind attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
