Yves Mersch: Tenth anniversary of the euro in Slovakia
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  International  Conference  to  mark  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in
Slovakia, Bratislava, 11 January 2019.
Accompany charts of the speech.
 I am honoured to be in Bratislava today and to speak before such a distinguished audience. This
conference  marks  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  euro  in  Slovakia,  which  in  fact  is  a  double
anniversary as it coincides with twenty years of the euro.
What could be a better anniversary gift, or a clearer symbol of the vitality of our single currency,
than Slovakia’s success since the introduction of the euro on 1 January 2009?
Slovakia  has  achieved  an  impressive  real  convergence  of  living  standards  towards  the  EU
average. The key ingredients of this success have been the country’s willingness to grasp the
opportunities offered by EU membership and the adoption of the euro.
Indeed, on the economic side fundamental institutional reforms allowed Slovakia to transition to a
vibrant  market  economy  and  adopt  a  highly  successful  export-led  growth  model,  which
underpinned  real  convergence.  Reforms  rather  than  continued  devaluation  or  requests  for
financial assistance is the recipe for success.
Nevertheless, this should be no reason for complacency, as the next stage of convergence is
bound to be harder. Neither EU membership nor the single currency offer an “autopilot” for strong
economic growth.
I  will  therefore  argue  that  relentless  efforts  in  the  pursuit  of  institutional  quality  and  good
governance are essential in order to raise the country’s long-term growth capacity.
The drivers of Slovakia’s success
Within just three decades, Slovakia has made a remarkable economic transition from a centrally
planned  economy  to  a  market  economy  that  is  closely  integrated  into  the  Single  Market.  The
significant efforts made during the transition have clearly paid off.
Having all but doubled since the early 1990s, Slovakia’s real GDP per capita stands at just over
1
80% of the EU average.
Equally impressive has been the pace of economic convergence, which exceeded expectations
based  on  the  initial  level  of  Slovak  national  income.   Slovakia  has  managed  to  achieve  a  per
capita GDP level above that of most other countries in central and eastern Europe (CEE), and
close to catching up with that of Slovenia and the Czech Republic (Chart 1).
2
Much  of  this  success  is  rooted  in  the  country’s  remarkable  institutional  transformation  in  the
context of joining the EU.
Slovakia’s accession to the EU gave momentum to its convergence efforts and provided it with
an external institutional anchor.
Fundamental reforms such as the establishment of a clearly defined system of property rights,
effective economic law enforcement and institutions to curb fraud and anticompetitive behaviour
were crucial in allowing Slovakia to operate in a market economy and to cope with competition
and market forces.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Access  to  the  Single  Market  and  adoption  of  the acquis  communautaire  have  contributed  to
Slovakia’s success in two ways.
First,  the  removal  of  trade  barriers  and  application  of  European-wide  standards  considerably
reduced  the  cost  of  doing  business  across  borders,  fostering  trade  and  encouraging  the
3
country’s participation in European value chains.
Second,  a  more  stable  and  predictable  legal  and  regulatory  environment  improved  investor
security and contributed to a rapid inflow of foreign investment, providing the economy with the
necessary foreign capital, know-how and technology to increase its competitiveness.
The Slovak economy became deeply integrated into the Single Market, with an export share of
almost 100% of GDP, well above that of other CEE economies (Chart 2), and almost 20% of
4
jobs depending on EU exports to the rest of the world.
The resulting significant economic convergence eventually paved the way for the introduction of
the euro.
Many  saw  the  loss  of  an  independent  monetary  policy  and  the  inability  to  respond  to  external
shocks as the most significant cost of joining the euro area.
However, Slovakia’s high degree of openness had made it difficult for its national central bank to
manage  the  business  cycle  in  the  face  of  volatile  capital  flows.  The  exchange  rate  had  more
5
often become a source of shocks rather than a shock absorber.
So the benefits of adopting the euro were compelling.
One immediate benefit was the stabilisation of Slovakia’s exchange rate with key trading partners
and the elimination of currency conversion costs. Research shows that euro adoption thereby
6
contributed to a 12% increase in Slovakia’s exports to the euro area.
A  further  advantage  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  was  the  strengthening  of  Slovakia’s
macroeconomic institutions. Adopting the euro gave further impetus to institutional convergence
and  allowed  Slovakia  to  anchor  its  macroeconomic  institutions  in  a  stronger  European
framework.
In the run-up to euro adoption, numerous amendments to the Slovak institutional framework were
made  to  ensure  convergence  with  EU  requirements,  which  were  closely  monitored  by  the
7
European institutions as in the ECB Convergence Report.
High  standards  were  required  for  the  independence  of  the  central  bank,  particularly  for  the
personal independence of executive board members.  Safeguarding institutional independence
is  crucial  when  European  monetary  policy  coexists  with  national  financial  and  labour  market
policies and where interests may not always be aligned.
8
The  embedding  of  Slovak  institutions  in  a  stable  European  institutional  framework  therefore
contributed to macroeconomic stability during the crisis and increased investment and trade.
Indeed,  in  comparison  with  the  Czech  Republic,  which  has  very  similar  economic  structures,
Slovakia has experienced faster economic growth since 2009. Although the Czech Republic was
able to pursue an independent monetary policy during the crisis, Slovakia managed to maintain a
0.9  percentage  point  advantage  over  that  country  in  terms  of  average  annual  GDP  growth
9
between 2009 and 2016.
As a result, the gap between Slovak and Czech GDP per capita narrowed from 21% in 2008 to
13.8% in 2017.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The importance of institutional quality for long-term convergence
May Slovakia’s success continue for many years to come. In the long run, though, it cannot be
taken  for  granted  that  Slovakia’s  growth  model  will  continue  to  deliver  strong  growth;
convergence  with  EU  countries  could  slow.  Slovakia  risks  falling  into  the  so-called  middle-
income trap, whereby middle-income economies tend to follow a lower growth trajectory.
Much  of  the  country’s  growth  depends  on  its  ability  to  attract  foreign  investment,  skills  and
technology to raise productivity. However, the country has now started to experience a slowdown
in foreign investment, technology diffusion and labour productivity.
10
For  Slovakia  to  avoid  the  middle-income  trap,  it  could  be  useful  to  develop  new  strategies
focused on domestic innovation. Above all, this would lead to more productive firms, more private
capital and more skilled labour to spur long-term growth.
Such improvements, however, often depend on setting the right institutional conditions. Indeed,
institutional quality has proved to be an important factor in achieving higher incomes in the long
run.
 Factors such as inefficient public administration, weak control of rent seeking, tax evasion
and corruption hamper competition and economic inclusion.
11
Slovakia ranks below the euro area average in some of these areas, as measured by the most
commonly used institutional governance indicators. More importantly, while most other new euro
area countries showed some improvement over the past decade, reform momentum in Slovakia
appears to have slowed after the euro was adopted (Chart 3).
By  improving  in  two  key  areas,  Slovakia  could  help  foster  the  right  domestic  conditions  for
businesses to thrive.
One area is improving the business environment. According to the World Bank’s Doing Business
Indicator,  Slovakia  ranks  below  the  new  euro  area  countries,  in  particular  in  areas  such  as
starting a business, protecting minority investors or dealing with construction permits (Chart 4).
Moreover,  55%  of  entrepreneurs  perceived  corruption  as  a  problem  for  doing  business  in  the
country, according to the Eurobarometer in 2017. 
12
Another area for potential improvement is the judicial system. According to the Organisation for
Economic  Co-Operation  and  Development  (OECD),  the  integrity  of  the  legal  system  and
independence  of  the  judiciary  are  perceived  as  insufficient  (Chart  5).
  Improving  the
independence and transparency of the judicial system could help in the fight against corruption
and increase public confidence in the state.
13
Addressing these issues would also create the conditions for national businesses to fully exploit
the potential of the Single Market and contribute to sound and inclusive growth.
Conclusion
As  we  celebrate  ten  years  of  euro  adoption,  Slovakia  has  become  a  success  story  for  the
convergence  process  in  the  EU.  The  country  can  be  proud  of  having  achieved  impressive
economic and institutional convergence in such a short time.
Slovakia’s  success  shows  that  EU  accession  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  can  create
considerable opportunities – opportunities that can be seized, or wasted. Slovakia is a positive
example  of  a  country  that  has  seized  the  opportunities  of  European  integration  through
fundamental institutional reforms.
Nevertheless,  continued  efforts  in  the  pursuit  of  institutional  quality  and  good  governance  are
needed  in  all  euro  area  countries  in  order  to  reap  lasting  benefits  from  Monetary  Union.  This
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
includes strict compliance with the doctrine of central bank independence.
For  Slovakia,  further  improving  the  business  environment  and  judicial  system  would  help
promote continued economic success over the next ten years.
I’m confident that sound domestic and European institutions will support sustainable growth and
contribute to maintaining confidence in the euro and the European project.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Real GDP per capita in terms of purchasing power parity as a percentage of the EU28 average in 2016.
See Economic Convergence in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, European Commission, 2018.
See Blind, K., Mangelsdorf, A. Niebel, C. and Ramel, F. (2018), “Standards in the global value chains of the
European Single Market”, Review of International Political Economy, Volume 25, Issue 1.
See ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/in-focus/trade-and-jobs/
See Suster, M. (2006), “The effects of euro adoption on the Slovak economy”, BIATEC, Volume XIV, 6/2006.
See www.banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/slidesjaanikamerikull.pdf
ECB Convergence Report, May 2008.
ECB Opinion of 27 October 2009 on Národná banka Slovenska’s independence (CON/2009/85).
See ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/economy-finance/eb034_en.pdf
See Chiacchio, F., Gradeva, K. and Lopez-Garcia. P. (2018), “ The post-crisis TFP growth slowdown in CEE
countries: Exploring the role of Global Value Chains”, Working Papers Series, No 2143, ECB, April.
See Masuch, K., Moshammer, E. and Pierluigie, B. (2016), “Institutions and Growth in Europe” CEPS, April.
Flash Eurobarometer 457, Businesses’ attitudes towards corruption in the EU, October 2017.
OECD, Economic Surveys, Slovak Republic, June 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
