Luljeta  Minxhozi:  The  importance  of  educating  young  people  in
Global Money Week
Address by Ms Luljeta Minxhozi, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, to the opening
ceremony of the Global Money Week in Albania, Tirana, 25 March 2019.
 Dear Deputy Minister of Education, Youth and Sports,
Dear Chairman of the Albanian Association of Banks,
Dear students and teachers,
Dear old and new friends of the Bank of Albania,
On this first day of the Global Money Week, I wish you a warm welcome to the central building of
the Bank of Albania and thank you for participating and engaging in our activities.
This  is  the  12th  year  the  Bank  of Albania  engages,  like  many  other  central  banks  across  the
world, in financial education efforts for the public in general, with a particular focus on the young
generation.  This marks also the sixth year of Bank of Albania’s engagement as the organiser of
the Money Week.
This has become an annual meeting place for all stakeholders having an interest in this beautiful
and  important,  at  the  same  time  complicated  and  challenging  field.  Like  many  other  central
banks, the Bank of Albania has assumed a proactive role in enhancing financial literacy. This
commitment  is  fully  in  line  with  the  spirit  of  transparency  toward  the  public  and  raising  its
awareness on economic and financial issues, which have an impact on the day-to-day living for
each and every one of us.
Over  these  12  years,  with  support  from  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Youth  and  Sports  and  the
Albanian Association of Banks, numerous educational activities and projects have been designed
and implemented. They have been tailored to target different age groups, and consist of a variety
of  activities  such  as  training  for  teachers  and  journalists,  brochures  for  the  general  public,
dedicated  programmes  for  high  schools,  such  as  the  “Personal  Finance  in  Your  Hands”,  the
educational package for the elementary schools and the Albanian Money app.
The Museum of the Bank of Albania reflects perfectly our efforts for enhancing knowledge about
money. The multifunctional Museum provides visitors with a platform that helps them to learn
about  the  monetary  history  in Albania,  as  well  as  the  functions  and  importance  of  the  central
bank, and to become more financially literate.
The Money Week is a global celebration campaign built to inspire children and young people to
learn about money matters, livelihoods and entrepreneurship, hence becoming responsible and
financially capable citizens in the future.
Starting today, the Money Week will be celebrated in 169 countries across the world, until 31
March 2019. This is a Child & Youth Finance International (CYFI) initiative, with the support of the
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD),  and  over  53  thousand
institutions and organisations and over 32 million children and young people participate in this
year’s edition.
The slogan for this year is ‘Learn.Save.Earn.’ Around this slogan, partner institutions organise
awareness-raising and educational activities. As active participants in the Money Week activities,
we have chosen to focus on educating the young people and encouraging them not to use the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
outdated terms “new lek” – “old lek” in our day-to-day financial interactions.
Our slogan for this year is “Too young to speak in old lek”
This is the overarching theme for most of our contest categories. I take this opportunity to thank,
on behalf of the Bank of Albania, all the participants and I exhort them to be an active part in the
efforts for eliminating such outdated terminology.
The Bank of Albania, with long-standing support from the Albanian Association of Banks, and the
precious  support  from  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Sports  and  Youth,  will  organise  a  series  of
awareness-raising  activities  for  children  and  young  people  on  such  topics.  Thus,  during  the
Week, a number of activities will be organised such as lectures, contests, visits to commercial
banks and the Museum of the Bank of Albania, aimed at involving as many students as possible.
In all educational activities of the Bank of Albania, including these contests, we appreciate and
encourage inspiration, originality and proactive thinking.
The submitted projects for all the categories, whose winners are present today, feature all these
elements. I take this opportunity to personally congratulate all of them for their qualitative works
presented during the submission phase. Their work and engagement are a source of constant
inspiration for the Bank of Albania to introduce increasingly ambitious projects.
The projects category targeted sixth graders, the photomontage category targeted ninth graders
and the videos category targeted high-school students. The participation rate was very high, with
around 340 students from 40 schools.  
 I would like to extend my special thanks to the teachers and professors, whose commitment and
passion is a key and necessary element for the realisation of these educational projects.
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  the  insofar  commitment,  and  invite  all  the  participating
institutions  to  continue  the  cooperation  in  the  future,  with  a  view  to  advancing  our  financial
education efforts for the children and young people, contributing, in turn, to the livelihood of the
society in Albania.
Thank You!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
