Mugur  Isărescu:  Opening  speech  -16th  meeting  of  the  Financial
Stability Board Regional Consultative Group for Europe
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 16th
meeting of the Financial Stability Board Regional Consultative Group for Europe, Bucharest, 7
May 2019.
 Distinguished guests,
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning,
I am pleased to welcome you to Romania and to the National Bank of Romania, for the Sixteenth
meeting  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  Regional  Consultative  Group  for  Europe.  We  are
delighted to be able to host such a meeting. Looking over the participants’ list, which is full of
respected  contributors  and  speakers  from  central  banks  and  European  financial  institutions,  I
understood why we are going to debate such diverse, ample and very interesting topics: Artificial
Intelligence,  Machine  Learning  and  Big  Data;  assessment  of  global  and  regional  financial
vulnerabilities; leveraged loans and collateralized loan obligations; indebtedness after the global
financial crisis.
I will not go into detail regarding the topics to be discussed today, which I am sure will create
stimulating debates. I wish you fruitful further discussions.
Let me say a few words about the informal seminar concerning Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning and Big Data, a topic which partially surprised me, as it is not a typical central banking
issue. During my career as a central banker, I have not come across this topic in debates quite
often. However, in recent years, I have seen that there has been an increasing interest in this
matter  and  in  other  issues,  once  considered  exotic  for  central  banking.  Let  me  give  you  two
examples.
First. A  few  years  ago,  at  a  Central  Banks’  Governors’  Club  of  the  Central Asia,  Black  Sea
Region and Balkan countries meeting in Shanghai, there was a presentation about the role the
central banks could play in reducing pollution.
Second. Early this year, in Bruges, within the IMF Dutch-Belgian Constituency, the National Bank
of Belgium gathered central bankers to discuss policy challenges related to doing business in the
digital era.
So, it is not a real wonder that we talk today about Artificial Intelligence here, in Bucharest, at the
National Bank of Romania.
It is good for central banks to review from time to time what they are doing. As Agustin Carstens,
the  head  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  has  recently  said  that  central  banks  are
‘acutely aware of the need to adapt’ their frameworks. That opens the way to new ideas, such as
allowing inflation to temporarily overshoot to compensate for past years of weak price growth.
I will not go into detail regarding inflation and all the variables that allow us to acknowledge and
deal  with  it.  Deputy  governor  Liviu  Voinea  thoroughly  addressed  the  inflation  puzzle  and  the
present whereabouts of Phillips Curve, during dinner last night.
Allow  me  to  return  to  the  first  topic  of  the  day  and  say  a  few  considerations  about Artificial
Intelligence,  Machine  Learning  and  Big  Data.  The  interconnected  use  of  new  technologies  is
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
already  a  common  practice  in  many  operational  fields,  such  as  the  defense  industry,  the
automotive industry or the healthcare sector. It is, therefore, natural that new technologies would
penetrate the financial sector.
Their  applications  are  diversified  in  design  and  scope,  examples  of  which  are:  algorithmic
trading, portfolio optimization, scoring and pricing models.
Moreover, the use of these new technologies receives more and more attention in the financial
and economic areas, as the transition from classical banking sector products and services is
growing exponentially. In this context, the focus moves from the individual to more general issues
and  the  question  arises  about  the  effects  that  the  trinity  described  by  artificial  intelligence,
machine learning and big data analytics, have on the financial system. Implicit answers to this
question are formulated as considerations of financial stability. In other words, the key question is
related to the costs and benefits that the new technologies listed above have on financial stability.
The  answers  to  this  question  are  quite  varied,  given  that  this  issue  has  not  been  thoroughly
investigated  up  to  this  moment.  Among  the  best-known  benefits,  some  of  the  areas  where
progress can be made by using the specified technologies are: regulatory compliance, systemic
risk  monitoring,  fraud  detection  and  supervisory  effectiveness.  In  contrast,  the  associated
disadvantages could be linked to explanatory issues, the need for human resource adaptation,
new  data  related  concerns  (privacy  issues),  or  increased  dependence  on  third  parties.
Nevertheless, as consumers and companies are embracing these new technologies, it is the
policymakers’ role to identify potential risks and vulnerabilities and to formulate adequate policy
responses and tools in order to adequately address them.
Then again, Big Data is not the only example where views have dramatically changed over time –
other relevant cases are the negative interest rates employed by the European Central Bank, an
unthinkable  measure  in  the  pre-crisis  era,  or  the  unconventional  monetary  policy  programs
implemented by central banks worldwide.
A valuable lesson to be learnt here is to always challenge preconceptions and the “status quo” in
an ever-changing financial system.
I will stop here saying that I believe financial stability should always look towards the future. In this
direction,  significant  progress  has  been  made  recently 
the  development  of
Environmental,  Social  and  Governance  –  or  ESG  –  investing.  In  this  new  paradigm,  policy
makers  should  first  and  foremost  learn  to  assess  and  monitor  new  types  of  risks,  such  as
climate change, and evaluate their growing impact on financial sector stability.
through 
In an open letter published three weeks ago on climate-related financial risks from the Governor
of Bank of England Mark Carney, Governor of Banque de France François Villeroy de Galhau and
Chair of the Network for Greening the Financial Services Frank Elderson, the significant effects
of  climate  change  are  highlighted  and  a  call  for  action  from  central  banks  and  supervision  is
issued,  with  specific  recommendations  where  central  banks  are  encouraged  to  integrate
sustainability into their own portfolio management. In closing, the authors recognize that “climate
change is a global problem, which requires global solutions, in which the whole financial sector
has a crucial role to play”.
Today we have unlocked the gates towards exotic, yet newsworthy debates here, in Bucharest.
Therefore, permit me to extend an open invitation to you all for further discussions at the National
Bank  of  Romania  about  the  impact  of  climate  changes  on  economies,  finance  and  central
banking. We will be honored to host such a conference in Bucharest.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
