Jiří Rusnok: The future of monetary policy - what can we see as the
dust has settled?
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jiří  Rusnok,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  High-Level
Economic Conference, Prague, 16 June 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests, I wish you a good morning. It is my pleasure to welcome you
all to this high-level conference on “The Future of Monetary Policy: What Can We See as the
Dust Has Settled?” hosted by the Czech National Bank. This conference is organised as part of
this year’s celebrations of the 100th anniversary of the introduction of our national currency –
named the koruna – in 1919.
Before I give the floor to the distinguished speakers, let me first make a few remarks that will set
the  stage  for  the  upcoming  event.  During  the  past  100  years,  our  currency  and  the  overall
economic  situation  of  our  country  has  enjoyed  times  of  economic  prosperity,  but  also  some
more difficult periods. This alternation between good and bad times applies elsewhere. Before
the outbreak of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in 2008, it seemed that monetary policy had
triumphed. Inflation in advanced countries and elsewhere had decreased to low and stable levels.
The goal of price stability had been achieved. Central banks were using standard tools with well
understood transmission mechanisms. The outbreak of the Great Recession suddenly changed
this  perspective.  The  GFC  brought  significant  economic  slack  and  deflationary  tendencies  to
many  countries.  In  response,  central  banks  started  using  unconventional  tools.  Since  then,
monetary policy has therefore been facing new challenges not only in practice, but also when it
comes  to  the  need  for  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  new  situation  and  transmission
mechanisms.  Therefore,  I  am  glad  that  so  many  distinguished  speakers  have  accepted  our
invitation and have come to Prague. And will share with us their experience and views on the new
challenges for monetary policy.
The conference will feature a policy panel. I am deeply indebted to the high-level representatives
of  other  inflation-targeting  central  banks  whose  currency  is  derived  from  the  name  “crown”
(koruna  in  Czech)  who  have  agreed  to  come  to  Prague  and  join  me  in  the  panel.  I  strongly
believe  that  our  exchange  of  views  on  the  monetary  policy  challenges  that  inflation-targeting
economies have been faced with since the global crisis will be very inspiring.
The  conference  also  includes  four  thematic  sessions.  Each  session  consists  of  two  or  three
papers by distinguished economists along with a presentation by a commentator who puts the
papers into the broader academic or policy context. After the presentations, there will be time for
a general discussion.
We will open the conference with a session on interest rates. Since the global financial crisis, the
level of equilibrium real  interest  rates  has  been  widely  debated.  Knowledge  of  this  equilibrium
level is important for assessing the stance of monetary policy. Some economists argue that the
level  has  dropped  as  a  consequence  of  either  the  GFC  or  other  long-run  trends,  such  as
demographic trends, that are exogenous to monetary policy. If this is the case, the nominal policy
rate will not necessarily return to its pre-crisis levels. There are, however, other economists who
argue that the observed drop in real rates was mainly of a cyclical nature. If this view is correct,
the steps towards neutral monetary policy – steps already undertaken by some central banks in
recent years – may easily continue to the pre-crisis levels. I am therefore glad that we have here
two papers that may shed some more light on this policy important topic.
The  next  session  will  be  devoted  to  the  exchange  rate.  Nobody  doubts  that  exchange  rate
movements are of utmost importance for open economies. The papers in this session analyse
the  monetary  policy  channel  of  the  exchange  rate  and  the  possibilities  of  international  policy
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
coordination. Both are simultaneously fascinating and policy relevant.
Friday, the second day of our conference, will include two sessions. One will be dedicated to
bounded rationality in macroeconomics. The rational expectations revolution that started in the
late 1960s changed modern macroeconomics in a significant way. The rise of new Keynesian
DSGE models some 20 years ago demonstrated that the rational expectations approach can be
fruitfully applied even to large-scale models that are of practical use in policy institutions such as
central  banks  and  international  organisations.  Let  me  remark  that  the  CNB  has  been
successfully using its own DSGE model as its main forecasting and policy analysis tool for more
than  a  decade  now.  On  the  other  hand,  the  experience  with  models  based  fully  on  rational
expectations sometimes shows that certain aspects or policy implications are at odds with what
is considered reasonable. One example is the forward guidance puzzle, i.e. the unrealistically
large responses of inflation, long-term rates and output to the announcement of the future path of
interest rates. Therefore, we as macroeconomists want to reconsider the assumption of super-
rational agents and replace it with something more realistic.
The second session on Friday will be devoted to two papers that may challenge our ideas about
the economy and the way we think in terms of our usual models. It is always extremely useful to
listen to new concepts and visions and to rethink our current approaches. Discussing thought-
provoking and stimulating papers is the only way to avoid rigidity in ideas and opinions. Rigidity
that will – sooner or later – lead to wrong attitudes and decisions.
I believe that good policymaking will always benefit from cutting-edge research. I would therefore
like to thank the participants of the high-level policy panel, the presenters and commentators in
the individual sessions, and all other participants for coming to our event.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  wish  you  all  an  interesting  conference,
fruitful discussions and an enjoyable stay in Prague.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
