Olli Rehn: Bretton Woods @ 75 – What Is New with the International
Monetary System?
Remarks by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Panel Discussion on "Bretton
Woods @ 75 – What Is New with the International Monetary System?" in the context of the IMF
Spring Meetings, Washington DC, 12 April 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 1. As we are celebrating the 75-year anniversary of the Bretton Woods system, let me start by
noting that fostering economic and financial stability has been and will continue to be the key
objective in developing the International Monetary System – as reflected in the establishment of
the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1944,  and,  more  recently,  underlying  the  adoption  of  Europe’s
single currency, euro.
My home country, Finland, is a case in point of a small, open economy in search of a stable
monetary  regime.  Throughout  the  20   century,  Finland  had  just  one  currency,  markka,  but
several changes in its monetary regime – ranging from frequent devaluations to literally cutting
large value banknotes in halves. Eventually, we decided to join the European single currency,
euro, 20 years ago. This has greatly enhanced stability, but also brought challenging adjustment
needs.
th
Learning  by  doing,  in  2016,  after  realising  that  Finland’s  labour  cost  growth  had  significantly
outpaced that of our peers, an agreement was reached with the social partners that helped to
narrow  the  gap  of  price  competitiveness  to  our  main  competitors.  The  Competitiveness  Pact
reduced unit labour costs by 6½ % in the period of 2014-17. Assisted by strong global demand,
the pact was an important factor underlying Finland’s rebound from zero growth to 2-3 % growth
in 2017-18. One might say, it’s small-country open-economy macroeconomics in action!
2. In the international monetary system, the US dollar has been the most important international
currency  since  the  birth  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system.  While  we  have  moved  to  a  more
multipolar currency system, with the euro gaining ground since 2000 in international trade and
currency markets, and the renmimbi making headway as well, the central scenario is still that the
US  dollar  continues  to  play  the  dominant  role,  and  retain  its  exorbitant  privilege  as  the  global
reserve currency. When the financial crisis hit with full force, the dollar swap-lines of the Fed with
e.g.  the  ECB  were  crucial  in  rapidly  restoring  confidence  in  the  money  markets  and  in  the
financial system.
Looking ahead, the outlook for continued growth in emerging Asia in the 21  century will probably
promote  the  role  of  the  renminbi.  On  the  other  hand,  the  still  limited  degree  of  openness  in
China’s financial markets works for now to the opposite direction.
st
The euro’s international role looks set to remain relatively strong. Let me underline that the ECB
does  not  take  a  policy  view  on  the  global  role  of  the  euro,  but  we  see  it  as  a  market-driven
process. The euro’s role will essentially depend on the strength and dynamics of the euro area
economy, as well as on developments in international trade.
As this year, 2019, is the first centennial of his sacking from the post of Austrian finance minister,
it  is  probably  appropriate  to  quote  Joseph  Schumpeter,  one  of  the  greatest  economists  of  all
time, who once wrote: "The condition of the monetary system of a nation is a symptom of all its
1
conditions."
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
What Schumpeter said about a nation, goes today as well for Europe and for our Economic and
Monetary Union. What happens to our money, is a reflection of the state of our union and its
economy.
In line with Schumpeter’s unbeatable logic, such policies that make the euro area more robust
and  its  growth  stronger  will  strengthen  the  euro’s  global  role.  The  most  pressing  institutional
reform  is  the  completion  of  the  Banking  Union  and  creating  a  single  capital  market  for
investment, not least for sustainable finance. This should be supported by economic reforms in
the EU member states. I also think there is a need to strengthen the external representation of
the euro, as evidenced by the developments in the wake of the global financial crisis. These are,
of course, issues to be solved between the European capitals, but there is a sense of urgency to
make progress.
3. When posing the question “What is new in the international monetary system?”, we must dig
deeper.  During  the  past  decade,  the  operating  environment  of  central  banks  has  changed  in
profound ways.
The  key  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  is  how  vital  financial  resilience  is  for  the  real  economy.
Financial  stability,  including  macroprudential  policy,  has  become  the  other  key  pillar  of  central
banking, alongside monetary policy. The main policy implication is to develop financial regulation
consistently at the global level. Given the remarkable progress so far, a comprehensive impact
assessment is appropriate before taking big new steps forward. However, it is imperative that we
safeguard the progress achieved and avoid rollbacks.
4. Equally important, the operating environment of monetary policy proper has been substantially
transformed. In a way, monetary policy has to live in two different timelines. In the immediate and
short-term, it has to deal with the economic slowdown. In the medium-to-long term, it has to deal
with many analytical puzzles to stay effective.
First, the short-term. After two years of robust expansion, global growth is waning. As a result,
(almost)  all  major  central  banks  have  had  to  put  monetary  policy  normalisation  on  hold  and
instead to maintain an accommodative policy stance. This holds true for the ECB as well.
On  Wednesday,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  concluded  that  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation  remains  necessary  to  support  the  economic  expansion.  Significant  monetary
policy stimulus is indeed being provided by our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates,
reinvestments by a sizable stock of acquired assets, and the new series of targeted long-term
refinancing operations.
As President Draghi said, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as
appropriate, so that inflation converges to our aim, which is below but close to 2% in a sustained
manner. It is worth noting that our inflation aim does not imply a ceiling at 2%, since inflation can
deviate from our target in both directions.
5. Second, the long-term. There are major economics-related analytical puzzles in the operating
environment of monetary policy.
It  is  clear  from  the  economics  research  that the natural rate of interest,  or  the  equilibrium
interest rate, has declined to a historically low level. If this turns out to be long-lasting, the room
for  manoeuvre  for  traditional  interest  rate  policies,  especially  in  the  accommodative  direction,
limited.  Equally  problematic, the  interdependence  of  economic  activity  and
remains 
inflationary pressures seems to have weakened, causing a flattening of the Phillips curve and
implying  a  weaker  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  inflation  via  aggregate  demand.  Moreover,
inflation expectations have remained low in recent years, thus deviating from central banks’
definition of price stability.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Because of these developments, it is reasonable to assume that the unconventional monetary
policy instruments will stay permanently in the central banks’ toolbox, at least in reserve.
In my view, a review of monetary policy strategy is a sound way to prepare for these longer-term
challenges. Last November, the Federal Reserve announced it would launch such a review. The
latest  update  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy  took  place  in  2003  –  before  the  global
financial crisis and its ramifications and policy changes. I am glad this option is now discussed
and assume that the ECB will conduct a review at an opportune time, in the relatively near future.
6. On a final note, let me just say one thing. As the international monetary system is built on trust,
current policy uncertainty and the erosion of international cooperation are damaging to everyone.
We need bolder joint efforts to steer the global economy towards a more sustainable future, be it
ecological, economic or social sustainability.
On Europe’s part, I can only say that we keep the flame of global multilateralism alive. I hope
others will stay, or join, on board.
Thank you so much for your attention!
1
“Der Zustand des Geldwesens eines Volkes ist ein Symptom aller seiner Zustände."
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
