  A public lecture by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at 
Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 
6 March 2019 
 Independence and policy flexibility:  
‘Why should central banks be independent?’ 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you for your kind invitation to come and speak at Stellenbosch University today.   
At a time when our country is embarking on a course of political and economic renewal, 
I would like to focus for the time that I am here with you on the public good enshrined 
in  our  Constitution  that  concerns  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  talk 
about why central bank independence matters for that broader public good and how it 
relates to achieving our inflation-targeting objective.  
 The constitutional mandate and independence 
 Our Constitution provides the mandate for the South African Reserve Bank (SARB): 
protect the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable growth. 
The Constitution sets our mandate in this way for a simple reason: it is an expression 
of  a  public  good. When  we  attain  that  public  good,  it  helps  us  to  reach  the  kind  of 
economic  growth  we  want.  It  does  not  mean  that  achieving  our  mandate  alone  will 
 Page 1 of 11 
necessarily  generate  that  outcome.  But  it  is  necessary  for  achieving  it.  Many  other 
policies and behaviours play similar and necessary, but not sufficient, roles.  
 Having  been  given  a  mandate,  the  central  bank  needs  to  achieve  it.  This  requires 
setting out an operationally relevant policy target and ensuring that the institution has 
the  powers  to  achieve  it.  Central  bank  independence  is  really  just  about  giving  the 
SARB the institutional freedom to get on with those two things. But, of course, hitting 
an inflation target is not a simple matter of declaring  a target and then browbeating 
economic actors to set prices and wage demands in line with  this target. For those 
actors, the gains of higher (or lower) inflation exceed the costs they experience, but 
they do not exceed the costs to society as a whole. This is a common political economy 
problem;  it  arises  in  many  areas  of  policy.  And  because  of  it,  nearly  all  countries 
choose  monetary  policy  frameworks  with  clear  and  simple  targets,  and  with  targets 
that  imply  balanced  growth.  I  will  return  a  bit  later  to  the  issue  of  alternative  policy 
frameworks.   
 However, ensuring that independence delivers good, socially optimal outcomes also 
requires  that  it  is  conditioned  by  a  complementary  framework  which  ensures 
transparency and accountability. Paul Tucker, a former Deputy Governor of the Bank 
of England, sets it out in this way in his recent book: central bank delegation should 
have the following principles, namely ‘a clearly articulated regime, simple instruments, 
principles  for  the  exercise  of  discretion,  transparency  that  is  not  deceptive, 
engagement  with  multiple  audiences,  and,  most  crucially,  testimony  to  legislative 
committees’.1 
 In line with those principles, and in order to get to low inflation, central banks need to 
explain to the public what they are doing and how they are doing it. And they also need 
to be held accountable for their efforts. Independence is the flip side of accountability; 
a central bank cannot be easily held to account if private and/or political actors have 
                                                           
1 Tucker, P. 2018. Unelected power. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 
 Page 2 of 11 
the ability to sway its decisions. Nor can a transparent target be easily manipulated to 
show success when there is in fact none.  
 Our mandate is implemented by targeting an inflation rate, which is interpreted not as 
literal price stability (an inflation rate of 0%) but as a low and stable growth rate in the 
price level. Our targeted inflation rate, set in consultation with government, is a range 
of inflation between 3 and 6% on an ongoing annual basis. In other words: we target 
a monthly, year-on-year inflation rate of not lower than 3% and not higher than 6%.   
 In practice,  we  aim for  inflation  to  come  out near the middle  of our  target  range,  at 
around  4.5%.  This  gives  scope for  variation and  shocks  to  hit the economy.  These 
shocks move inflation above and below 4.5% but, by the design of our framework, they 
do not necessarily require policy adjustments. This is the meaning of ‘flexible’ inflation 
targeting, and it allows us considerable leeway in looking  through or past temporary 
shocks to the inflation rate. Since the beginning of the inflation-targeting period, which 
started in 2000, our average annual inflation rate has been 5.5%, a full percentage 
point higher than the midpoint.   
 This points to mixed success in the history of our inflation management. Inflation has 
stayed moderate, well below the high levels of the 1980s and 1990s. But inflation has 
not really been sufficiently low to get our high long-term interest rates lower, and this 
creates an economic cost that weighs more heavily on job creation as time goes on. 
We have indicated that a consistently lower rate in the near term, at the midpoint of 
our target band (4.5%), would lower long-term interest rates and be more supportive 
of balance in the economy.     
 What do we mean by balance? First, let me say what it is not. Balance is not about 
achieving an inflation rate that meets the demands of some groups of people but not 
others. And it is not about reaching an inflation rate that causes economic damage – 
neither too low nor too high.  
  Page 3 of 11 
Rather,  balance  is  about  supporting  competitiveness  and  job  creation  in  the  export 
industries and about reducing the bias to growth in the non-tradeables sectors caused 
by  high  inflation.  As  it  happens  for  most  countries,  emerging  and  advanced,  that 
inflation target is between 2 and 3%.2 Our trading partners and competitors typically 
have  lower  inflation  than  we  do.  It  is  also  about  getting  the  balance  right  between 
saving and investing; inflation should be at or around a rate which maximises both the 
supply of credit and the demand for it.  
 So  why  would  anyone  want  higher  inflation?  Prices  rise  at  different  rates.  Some 
sectors  may  see  stronger  rises  than  others,  giving  them  stronger  revenue  growth 
relative to those not seeing the same price increases. This implies redistribution. For 
example, some businesses like higher inflation because, via currency depreciation, it 
increases the prices of the goods they sell faster than the cost of production. Of course, 
the costs eventually catch up as inflation rises in response to the weaker currency, but 
while these prices are catching up, exporters get a small and temporary gain. In this 
instance,  higher  inflation  redistributes  a  little  from  exporters  in  other  countries  that 
compete with ours. But, more importantly, it  redistributes from domestic consumers 
and  producers  to  those  gaining  from  higher  prices.  Once  costs  rise,  however,  the 
economy is where it started in the first place.  
 Along similar lines, debtors prefer higher inflation because, over time, it reduces the 
real value of their debt. A particular example I like to think about is those who want 
higher  inflation  because  they  like  to  borrow  to  make  their  living  out  of  short-term 
activities, often in the financial markets. Their frequent criticisms are always the same: 
we worry too much about inflation, both now and in the future, and, if we didn’t worry 
so much, we could all enjoy lower short-term interest rates today.   
 The catch here is that when lower short-term rates today push up inflation in the long 
run,  then  borrowing  for  investment  is  skewed  away  from  the  long  term  to  the  short 
                                                           
2 For details, please see ‘Box 4: South African inflation: an international perspective’ in the Monetary 
Policy Review published by the South African Reserve Bank in October 2016, available at 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/7504/MPROctober2016.p
df.  
 Page 4 of 11 
term. We shouldn’t be surprised if this also skews job creation away from the types of 
jobs  that  are  sustained  over  the  long  run.  That  is  not  a  trade-off  that  we  believe  is 
consistent with the public good mandate set out in the Constitution. The real test of 
monetary policy is not the short-term interest rate but what happens to the long-term 
rate. 
 We should by now be able to recognise the problem with allowing inflation to go up in 
ways that benefit some groups: the gain is temporary and costs other groups. To claim 
back  what  they  have  lost,  the  losers  want  compensation,  which  creates  additional 
negative distortions. And, because the advantage is temporary, the beneficiaries want 
policy to give them the gain again and again. Giving in to this desire, trying to conjure 
up  temporary  gains,  lies  behind  many,  if  not  most,  historical  instances  of 
macroeconomic failure.    
 Let me turn now to the losers from high inflation. There are three social groups that 
we should all worry quite a lot about, for both economic and ethical reasons.   
 The first are younger people. Higher inflation and higher interest rates make it more 
expensive  (and  often  impossible)  to  start  borrowing  for  housing,  education  or 
transport, or starting new businesses.   
 The second group are workers. Here it is often argued that more inflation would create 
more jobs for blue-collar workers. This is the old idea of the Phillips curve which has 
proven, except in very particular circumstances, to be wrong. 
 First,  some  basic  facts.  For  South  Africa,  the  economy  grows  more  strongly  when 
inflation  is  low.  If  you  don’t  believe  me,  take  a  look  at  the  historical  data  series 
yourself.3   
                                                           
3 Simple correlations show that, since 1990, growth has always been lower when inflation was higher. 
 Page 5 of 11 
 Second, some empirics. The original Phillips curve idea worked as follows. If there are 
suddenly higher prices, businesses will believe that this is stronger real demand. They 
will respond to this demand by increasing production because they think they will be 
able to sell more and because their return is higher relative to the cost of production. 
But  this  is  not  ‘time-consistent’. When  workers  respond  to  their  real  loss  of  income 
(higher inflation minus last year’s wage level), they ask for higher wages and the cost 
of production rises. Suddenly, the business is not more profitable anymore, cannot sell 
more of its product, and retrenches.   
 In macroeconomic policy, the temporary gain of the Phillips curve is illusory. You end 
up with less employment and higher inflation. Your ‘misery index’ increases – and yes, 
there is such a thing, invented by Arthur Okun, and it measures exactly that. 
 Finally, I would like to note that the third group that gets hurt the most by higher inflation 
includes those that cannot defend themselves from it: the poor. Without the power to 
demand higher compensation for inflation, the poor and those living off fixed nominal 
incomes, pensioners in particular, are most vulnerable. It is for these  people, above 
all others, that low inflation is both morally and economically right. 
 At  the  end  of  the  day,  central  bank  independence  allows  the  SARB  to  hear  what 
different interest groups have to say, but gives it the policy space to make decisions 
about inflation that on balance benefit all. By having an inflation target range, we make 
a commitment to explaining transparently how we have achieved that target.   
 Monetary and fiscal policy coordination 
 Independence  also  matters  for  ensuring  effective  monetary  and  fiscal  policy 
coordination.  
  Page 6 of 11 
Much  monetary  theory  involves  figuring  out  how  to  avoid  high  inflation  and  its 
impoverishing effects. Sometimes high inflation is caused by the excessive ambitions 
of sovereigns to spend fiscal resources on projects that do little to generate long-run 
economic  growth.  Continuous  fiscal  deficits  reflect  those  ambitions,  and  because 
those deficits are financed with debt, they create a tax liability for citizens in the future. 
When  debt  rises  too  rapidly  and  above  certain  levels,  our  borrowing  today  both 
constrains  what  future  generations  of  South  Africans  can  do  (as  they  are  forced  to 
repay  our  debt)  and  undermines  their  own  living  standards  (as  they  pay  the  higher 
taxes). All of this directly generates pressure to allow inflation to rise. We cannot blame 
future generations for this. It is a function of the choices we make now. 
 Some  of  you  may  disagree  with  this  and  argue  that  governments  need  to  address 
social deficits and therefore will always run large deficits. But while I certainly agree 
that those social deficits need to be rectified, it has to be done sustainably and with a 
critical  emphasis  on  spending  public  funds  on  those  things  that  raise  the  potential 
growth rate of the economy. If our spending does not do this, then we will end up not 
being able to spend more in the future. Future generations might simply end up having 
to pay more interest and more tax. 
 Another important argument for ensuring central bank independence is avoiding what 
is  called  ‘fiscal  dominance’,  which  is  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  prevent  the 
sovereign 
from  going  bankrupt  because  of  excessive  spending  on  current 
consumption. 
 Inflation targeting as an expression of the mandate 
 Let me now turn to a discussion of how inflation targeting is a good expression of our 
constitutional mandate to support balanced and sustainable growth.  
 The independence of central banks gives them the opportunity to keep on top of global 
research and use human capital to best understand how to achieve their mandates. 
 Page 7 of 11 
Oftentimes, criticism of their independence is really about not liking the objective set 
out in the Constitution. If the SARB had no independence, then other objectives could 
be imposed on it. But what are those other objectives, and where do they come from? 
Have they been researched and understood properly? Or are they wishful thinking? 
Perhaps  they  do  reflect  good  intentions  and  legitimate  aspirations.  But  the  test  of 
whether they are the right or even useful objectives has to be based on analysis and 
research, comparative assessment, and technical know-how. Inflation targeting has, 
in  recent  times,  become  a  popular  policy  framework  mainly  because  it  has  proven 
successful  in  achieving  good  outcomes  where  other  approaches  have  failed. 
Nonetheless, it is always useful to consider alternatives.   
 Dual-mandate  frameworks  are  one  alternative.  But  even  the  central  banks  with 
multiple mandates tend to act as if they were inflation targeters because low inflation 
helps to keep interest rates low, and the two together help to maximise employment. 
The  mandate  is  achieved  because  the  rate  of  inflation  determines  the  sustainable 
outcome of the other two objectives.  
 For  this  reason,  the  move  to  include  employment  creation  as  a  mandate  alongside 
inflation targeting for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand has proven less eventful than 
its political sponsors had advertised. Why? One reason is that employment levels are 
determined by many different things, so putting a specific target on it for the central 
bank to try and achieve is unrealistic and can result in unintended consequences. Say, 
for  example,  that  inflation  is  rising  and  employment  is  falling  because  of  adverse 
technological change. In this instance, there is little monetary policy can do to increase 
employment levels. But responding by cutting rates, which seems like the right thing 
to do, only increases inflation further and eventually undermines job creation further 
as well. 
 Like other central banks, we already include concern about growth and employment 
in our Taylor rule. And because we apply the framework flexibly, we don’t respond with 
policy  to  every  upward  move  in  inflation. The  difference  between a flexible  inflation 
target and a dual-mandate central bank just isn’t very meaningful. Over time, keeping 
 Page 8 of 11 
inflation expectations low and well-anchored is the clearest and most effective way of 
helping the economy to achieve full employment. 
 Another alternative is to target the exchange rate directly. Keeping it perfectly stable 
would, at least on the surface, suggest a better fit with the letter of the mandate in the 
Constitution. But it is often not well understood just what maintaining a fixed currency 
actually means, or what this requires in terms of policy. In a nutshell, fixing the currency 
requires  fixing  it  against  another  currency  or  a  basket  of  currencies.  Then,  our 
monetary and fiscal policies are required to adjust regularly to keep the rand’s value 
stable  against  those  currencies.  But  those  third  currencies  keep  moving,  and  this 
means  that  we  need  to  move  our  policies  in  line  with  their  moves,  even  when  the 
economic cost may be high. 
 To give you a concrete example of how problematic this can be, let’s consider the case 
of Argentina in the early 1990s. Argentina had pegged its currency to the US dollar. 
But Argentina was not as productive as the United States (US), despite the peg giving 
them a similar inflation rate. Eventually, Argentina could not afford to maintain the peg, 
as the peso’s value was under pressure to fall and the country had no reserves left. 
The  peg  was  dropped  and  the  economy  fell  into  a  deep  recession,  with  very  high 
inflation, massive job losses and a sharp rise in poverty.   
 You may think that Argentina is an extreme case, but it demonstrates how a country’s 
policies can become subordinate to, and ultimately determined by, the actions of other 
countries. Our inflation-targeting framework and floating currency means that we have 
considerable freedom to set our policies in line with the inflation outcome that we want 
to achieve. 
 Some commentators have suggested that this freedom to float the currency means 
that our monetary policy works against export-led growth. Our currency is too strong 
in this view. It is worth reminding ourselves of what the International Growth Panel, led 
by Prof. Ricardo Hausmann, suggested to us back in 2006. They showed us how a 
more  export-led  growth  strategy  needs  to  be  predicated  on  a  more  competitive 
 Page 9 of 11 
exchange rate achieved by running a fiscal surplus to create space for lower interest 
rates, and supplemented by an effective inflation-targeting framework.4   
 In fact, under inflation targeting, excessive exchange rate appreciation has been rare 
and short-lived. These discrete periods occurred when capital flowed in as a result of 
high  commodity  prices,  sustained  public  borrowing,  and  low  yields  in  advanced 
economies  –  not  because  of  inflation  targeting.  All  else  being  equal,  the  inflation-
targeting framework has lowered inflation and rates, reducing the pull on hot money in 
recent times. In fact, a fundamental objective of inflation targeting has always been to 
achieve a more competitive exchange rate, and the best way to achieve this is to get 
inflation to be permanently low. 
 Conclusion 
 The  Constitution  recognises  and  expresses  the  public  good  which  is  price  stability 
because it helps societies to achieve balanced and sustainable economic growth. It is 
necessary but not sufficient. Like the mandate, central bank independence is also not 
a  static,  ivory-tower  concept.  It  is  a  living  and  breathing  idea.  It  is  an  idea  that  is 
practical. It gives life to the mandate set out for the SARB by the Constitution.   
 This independence means that the SARB can make the case for how best to achieve 
that  goal,  in  consultation  with  government and  with full  transparency  to  the  general 
public.  As  an  institution,  we  have  worked  with  government  to  identify  the  inflation-
targeting  framework  as  the  best  way  of  achieving  the  mandate,  for  all  the  reasons 
I have set out today.   
 We believe that the case for the existing framework is very strong. We have achieved 
a historically low rate of inflation and, as a direct consequence of this, historically low 
                                                           
4 For the Panel’s recommendations, please see Ricardo Hausmann’s Final recommendations of the 
International Panel on Growth, available at 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/comm_media/press/2008/Final%20Recommendations%20of%20the%20I
nternational%20Panel.pdf, especially pages 6 and 12-13. 
 Page 10 of 11 
interest rates. Of course we would like to improve on this track record and edge both 
inflation and  interest  rates  lower  on  a  sustainable basis. This  is  the  most  important 
contribution that monetary policy can make to full employment, economic growth and 
the well-being of our society.   
 Thank you. 
  Page 11 of 11 
