Philip R Lane: The academy and the economy
Remarks by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Trinity Business +
Technology Forum 19, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 23 May 2019.
Introduction
 I  am  pleased  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  the  Trinity  Global  Business  +  Technology  Forum  19,
especially on the occasion of the opening of the new Trinity Business School building.
Let  me  start  by  commenting  on  the  important  potential  economic  and  social  contributions  of
business  schools,  before  turning  to  the  more  general  role  of  universities.  First,  high-quality
business education and training at all levels (undergraduate, postgraduate, executive education)
is  a  significant  determinant  of  living  standards  and  economic  performance.  On  this  point,  the
most compelling evidence has been generated by the long-running World Management Survey,
which measures the contribution of management practices to firm performance in a large-scale
cross-country  cross-industry  panel  of  firms  (worldmanagementsurvey.org).  The  many  studies
that  have  exploited  this  dataset  conclusively  show  that  a  major  factor  driving  productivity
differentials across countries and across firms is the quality of management.
Second, business education is especially pivotal in countries that specialise in the provision of
business  services  on  an  international  scale  (see  also  McKinsey  Global  Institute  2019).  This
broadly  describes  the  Irish  economy,  with  the  Irish  affiliates  of  multinational  firms  (plus  the
domestic  ecosystem  of  supporting  professional  services  firms)  typically  providing  a  range  of
business services to the global operations of these companies and many Irish firms exporting
business services to overseas clients.
Third, business education is itself a significant export activity, with Irish business schools and
universities educating many international students, both locally and through a range of external
partnerships.
Fourth, given the importance of the business sector in delivering essential and socially-valuable
goods  and  services,  business  schools  have  a  special  responsibility  to  ensure  that  their
graduates are properly equipped to fulfil their social and ethical responsibilities to wider society.
Fifth, the diversity and dynamism of the business sector constitutes a gold mine for research
across a wide range of disciplines. This is especially true for a business school that is an integral
part  of  a  full-scale  university,  in  view  of  the  high  potential  of  multi-field  approaches  in
understanding  both  the  drivers  of  firm  performance  and  the  economic  and  social  impact  of
business.
This last point is well illustrated by today’s event. A basic function of a university is to explore the
inter-connections across different fields of knowledge: the agenda and list of participants for this
forum  vividly  illustrates  the  wide  range  of  disciplines  that  are  relevant  in  exploring  the  myriad
economic,  business  and  social  implications  of  technological  innovation  and  digitalisation.  This
also  holds  true  for  another  topic  that  was  discussed  in  this  morning’s  programme:  climate
change. Universities have a vital role to play in tackling the implications of climate change, in view
of the all-encompassing nature of challenges posed by global warming.
These topics – the technological revolution and climate change – are also central to the work of
the Central Bank of Ireland.
In relation to the technological revolution, this is relevant for all parts of our mandate. In terms of
macroeconomic  performance,  the  global  technology-producing  sector  is  a  major  driver  of
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
employment,  productivity  and  tax  revenue  in  Ireland,  while  all  sectors  in  the  economy  must
respond to the changes in market structure and consumer preferences induced by technological
change.
Of  course,  the  financial  sector  is  among  the  most  prominent  sectors  affected  by  these
developments.  This  is  natural,  since  information  processing  (in  a  very  general  sense)  is  the
defining characteristic of financial services and digitalisation constitutes a paradigm shift for the
whole  sector.  Incumbent  firms  that  wish  to  survive  and  prosper  must  invest  heavily  in  IT  in
response  to  the  entry  of  new  providers  of  financial  services  (the  fintech  sector)  and  the
expansion into financial services by the major technology firms (the BigTech sector).
In this contest between existing firms and new entrants, the role of regulators is to ensure that all
providers  of  financial  services  meet  regulatory  requirements,  since  households  and  firms  in
choosing  their  providers  should  be  able  to  rely  on  a  common  set  of  expectations  about  the
prudential and conduct standards of all firms. To this end, the Central Bank of Ireland’s Innovation
Hub  provides  a  platform  that  helps  fintech  firms  reconcile  the  deployment  of  new  financial
technologies and compliance with regulatory requirements.
The  digital  transformation  of  financial  services  also  poses  new  supervisory  challenges.  For
instance,  a  high  priority  is  the  monitoring  and  remediation  of  operational  risk,  in  view  of  the
potential damage caused by systems failures in the provision of digital services. In addition, new
methods of delivery (such as robo-advisors in financial planning) must be carefully assessed to
ensure that an appropriate balance is struck between the potential gains and possible new types
of risk.
The shift towards electronic payments and the emergence of many new providers of e-payments
services is enabled by the back-end plumbing provided by the real-time gross settlement (RTGS)
systems maintained by central banks. To this end, central banks are also investing to improve
the speed of these systems. For instance, the European Central Bank recently launched its new
market infrastructure service – TIPS (TARGET Instant Payment Settlement) – to enable payment
service  providers  to  offer  fund  transfers  to  their  customers  in  real  time  on  a  24–7-365  basis.
TIPS is an extension of the TARGET2 RTGS provided by the Eurosystem and is based on the
SEPA Instant Credit Transfer scheme, which is expected to be used by many payment service
providers to offer pan-European instant payments.
The digital revolution also extends to the work of central bankers and financial regulators. For
instance, as with many other disciplines, central banking and financial regulation can benefit from
the  data  analytics  revolution.  Each  day,  we  receive  high  volumes  of  numerical  data  and
documentation from regulated firms and other entities that are required to submit information to
us, together with a tsunami of data on market prices and transactions. New analytical methods
that  can  draw  insights  from  these  data  goldmines  promise  to  improve  the  identification  and
mitigation of risks to the financial system and enhance the efficiency of our policy interventions.
This potential explains why we have been investing in developing our in-house analytics expertise
over recent years.
Given  the  symbiosis  between  our  in-house  work  and  the  data  analytics  community  in  the
university  system,  we  see  the  value  in  fostering  a  broader  range  of  research  in  analytical
subjects. For instance, the Central Bank of Ireland is pleased to participate as an industry partner
in  the  new  Science  Foundation  Ireland  Centre  for  Research  Training  in  Foundations  of  Data
Science.  In  addition,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  we  plan  to  launch  a  new  programme  of
doctoral scholarships in data analytics, which will support students in Irish universities that wish
to explore methods and data relating to the work of the Central Bank of Ireland. 
These initiatives complement our well-established tradition of sponsoring our own staff members
to undertake doctoral degrees: for instance, twenty-four staff have completed doctorates since
2011. In fact, our commitment to the further education of our staff is extremely broad, with staff
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
members taking diplomas and post-graduate degrees across a wide range of disciplines.
In relation to climate change, the Central Bank of Ireland fully recognises that climate change and
the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy  and  society  constitute  major  policy  challenges,  with
profound implications for macroeconomic outcomes and the behaviour of the financial system
(Donnery 2019, Lane 2019a). As a member of the Network for Greening the Financial System
(NGFS), we will be collaborating with central bankers and financial regulators from around the
world in monitoring associated risks and developing suitable policy frameworks.
However, it is clear that an extension of the university sector’s programme of work on climate
change to include academic analyses of its macroeconomic impact and its implications for the
financial system would provide a valuable external and independent expert perspective on these
issues. In particular, given the global efforts in this area, it would be especially valuable to see
academic studies that are customised to the specific challenges facing the Irish economy and
the Irish financial system.
Beyond topics such as digitalisation and climate change, it is important that central banks and
financial regulators also incorporate the latest thinking in academic research. For instance, the
fields of behavioural economics and behavioural finance have become mainstream over the last
decade.  These  fields  study  how  people  actually  make  choices,  taking  insights  from  both
psychology and economics. For instance, the evidence shows that people are sensitive to the
way that information is presented – the so called ‘framing effect’ – and that decisions can reflect
emotions and biases, such as overconfidence or loss aversion.
These fields are beginning to shape financial regulation, since the research shows that people
often make predictable, persistent and costly errors when choosing and using financial products.
The models developed by researchers allow us to understand why these errors arise and what
we can do to ameliorate them. In relation to policy impact, the 2009 Credit Card Accountability
Responsibility  and  Disclosure  (CARD) Act  in  the  United  States  was  informed  by  behavioural
evidence  that  showed  that  consumers  misunderstand  the  true  cost  of  credit.  In  the  United
Kingdom, the Financial Conduct Authority banned the sale of add-on insurance products through
automatic  tick  boxes  on  the  basis  of  behavioural  evidence  that  consumers  cannot  compare
products in this setting (Iscenko et al 2014). Since behavioural economics and finance can help
to create more targeted and effective policy solutions, the Central Bank of Ireland is committed to
using  insights  from  these  disciplines  to  strengthen  consumer  protection  and  promote  healthy
household finances. 
In terms of my wish list for university research, let me highlight several more areas.
First, the demographic transition  will  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  national  and  international
economies, together with an array of associated implications for society, families and individuals.
In terms of the financial system, an ageing population changes saving and investment behaviour,
while also requiring the implementation of a sustainable approach to pensions provision. While
universities  such  as  Trinity  College  Dublin  have  extensive  research  programmes  on  many
dimensions of ageing, the pervasive macro-financial implications of demographic change remain
insufficiently understood.
Second, the financial system in Ireland and at the international level has undergone significant
transformation in the wake of the crisis. One significant trend is the increasing role played by
non-bank  financial  institutions  in  financing  the  economy  and  in  providing  direct  and  indirect
savings  vehicles  for  households:  while  much  has  been  learned  about  the  banking  sector,
relatively  less  is  understood  about  non-bank  financial  intermediation,  especially  under  crisis
scenarios. In connected fashion, the policy framework for preserving financial stability in the non-
bank intermediation sector is relatively less developed. Accordingly, academic researchers have
an important role to fulfil in advancing our understanding of the universe of non-bank financial
intermediation.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, important lessons from the crisis are that limiting credit growth, improving the capacity of
banks to absorb losses and ensuring that banks can be safely restructured or resolved in the
event of failure are important elements in maintaining financial stability. This has resulted in a
significant expansion in the mandates of central banks and financial regulators, with the Central
Bank  of  Ireland  receiving  new  mandates  to  act  as  the  macroprudential  authority  and  the
resolution authority.
A central issue in any macroprudential analysis is the conundrum that policy decisions that limit
credit dynamics and require extra bank capital buffers are intended to build resilience in the event
of a future adverse (cyclical or structural) shock but that support for such pre-emptive policies
can erode during sustained periods of good economic performance in the hope that “this time is
different”  (Reinhart  and  Rogoff  2009).  Given  the  damage  caused  by  the  property  boom-bust
cycle and our unusually high exposure to tail risks such as shifts in global trade and taxation
arrangements,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  strongly  committed  to  being  a  leader  in  the
implementation of a comprehensive macroprudential policy framework (Lane 2019b).
At the same time, both the macroprudential and resolution policy mandates are relatively new
and the accumulated international evidence on their effectiveness is relatively scarce. In addition,
our macroprudential rules that place limits on the size of mortgage loans compared to house
values and income levels are a central element of our macroprudential policy framework: since
these rules touch the lives of so many people, it is vitally important that these rules are robustly
evaluated and assessed.
While  we  conduct  considerable  internal  analysis  and  research  to  formulate  and  evaluate  our
policies, these constitute additional areas in which university researchers can play a vital role as
independent assessors of the quality of our policies.
Such academic work has high societal value, given that a failure to fulfil our macroprudential and
resolution  policy  mandates  would  put  the  country  at  risk  in  the  event  of  a  future  crisis.  Many
lessons  should  be  learned  from  the  severe  crisis  that  Ireland  has  suffered,  including  the
importance  of  fostering  serious  and  substantive  debate  on  macro-financial  stability  across
participants  from  all  sectors,  with  a  special  role  for  academic  voices  in  this  dialogue  (Casey
2018).
Fourth, central banks and financial regulators are increasingly the focus of academic research,
especially  given  the  increased  powers  delegated  to  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  in
recent times. The Central Bank of Ireland has been transformed in the wake of the crisis, both in
terms of its mandate and the size of the organisation. It is vital that the work we do is externally
scrutinised  and  challenged,  given  our  important  mission  of  serving  the  public  interest  by
safeguarding  monetary  and  financial  stability  and  working  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system
operates in the best interest of consumers and the wider economy.
In recognition of the importance of independent analysis on policy topics that relate to the work of
the Central Bank of Ireland, we are committed to increasing our engagement with the academic
research community through a range of initiatives such as visitor and exchange programmes,
facilitating (where possible) access to our datasets and the funding of external research.
In summary, while I may be an exile from my previous career as a university professor, I am
convinced that the academy (both business schools and, more widely, the university sector) has
a pivotal role in determining economic and social outcome through its educational and research
activities. To this end, I wish to convey my best wishes to all the inhabitants (both staff members
and students) of this impressive new building!
References
Casey, Ciaran Michael (2018), Policy Failures and the Irish Economic Crisis, Routledge.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Donnery,  Sharon  (2019),  “Risks  and  Opportunities  from  Climate  Change,”  Speech  at
Sustainable Finance Ireland Conference (May 16 2019).
Iscenko,  Zanna,  Charlotte  Duke,  Steffan  Huke  and  Brian  Wallace  (2014),  “How  Does  Selling
Insurance  as  an Add-On Affect  Consumer  Decisions? A  Practical Application  of  Behavioural
Experiments in Financial Regulation,” FCA Occasional Paper 3.
Lane, Philip R. (2019a), “Climate Change and the Irish Financial System,” Central Bank of Ireland
Economic Letter 2019–1.
Lane, Philip R. (2019b), “Tail Risks and the Irish Economy,” Speech at University College Dublin
School of Economics (April 16 2019).
McKinsey  Global  Institute  (2019), Globalization  in  Transition:  The  Future  of  Trade  and  Value
Chains.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly, Princeton University Press.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
