Carlos da Silva Costa: Portugal - reform and growth within the euro
area
Opening speech by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Bank of
Portugal-International Monetary Fund conference "Portugal - Reform and Growth within the Euro
Area", Lisbon, 25 March 2019.
As prepared for delivery.
Good morning,
 It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to our joint conference with the International Monetary
Fund on the paths for reform in Portugal, as a euro area member. 
Growth periods like the one we are currently in involve a greater propensity to take on excessive
risk  and  to  postpone  structural  reforms.  We  also  know  regulation  tends  to  be  procyclical,
meaning that it is loosened when it should be tightened and vice versa. This is why it is crucial in
the current environment to bear in mind the lessons from the last crisis and, above all, to prevent
the resurgence of the factors that led up to it.
With this in mind, I think now is an important time to speak about: 
1.  the process leading up to the crisis that hit the Portuguese economy, 
2.  the adjustment initiated with the financial assistance programme, and 
3.  the current challenges to sustainable growth.
Before the assistance programme
The  process  that  led  Portugal  to  the  most  recent  assistance  programme  started  in  the  mid-
1990s, in a context of broad internal and external balance.
Financial liberalisation and the prospect of joining the euro made financing cheaper and more
accessible, bringing about a strong credit expansion and a fall in the household savings rate.
Between 1995 and 2007, credit to the private sector, measured as a percentage of GDP, almost
tripled from 52% to 131%. During the same period, the household savings rate almost halved,
reaching 7% in 2007. The largest slice of credit was channelled to financing consumption and
low-return investments, largely in non-tradable sectors.
Credit to the private sector grew much faster than GDP
Loans to non-financial corporations and households, as percentage of GDP
  1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: Banco de Portugal
In parallel, the rise of Asian competition in the low-technology sectors and the challenge posed by
the enlargement of the EU to Central and Eastern European Countries, which captured foreign
direct investment in the medium-technology sectors, brought difficulties to Portuguese exports.
Such reshuffling of comparative advantages had a bearing on the performance of firms operating
in the tradable sector.
As a result of these different shocks, Portugal lost export market share in international markets,
imports grew and the current account deficit deteriorated, without a corresponding expansion of
the economy’s growth potential. Between the mid-1990s and the eve of the global financial crisis
in 2007, the Portuguese current and capital account went from near balance to a deficit of 8.6%
of  GDP,  whereas  gross  external  debt  rose  from  approximately  60%  to  195%  of  GDP. At  the
same time, annual potential growth declined from around 3% to just below 1%.
Domestic demand grew faster than potential output, contributing to external deficits
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: Banco de Portugal and Statistics Portugal
External indebtedness was to a large extent intermediated by the Portuguese banking system.
Banks raised (mostly short-term) funds in the euro money market and converted them into (long-
term)  loans  to  the  private  sector,  creating  an  important  maturity  mismatch  in  their  balance
sheets. The loan-to-deposit ratio for the whole banking system rose from 89% in 1998 to 156% in
2007.
A macroprudential policy and a countercyclical fiscal policy would have helped contain the risks
associated  with  the  expansion  of  domestic  demand.  However,  macroprudential  policy  was
simply not part of the standard toolbox and the mostly pro-cyclical fiscal policy that was followed
aggravated the macroeconomic imbalances. In the period from 1995 to 2007, the budget deficit
averaged 4.3% of GDP, and was always above the Maastricht threshold of 3% of GDP. 
When the international financial crisis broke, the weak potential output growth and rising external
indebtedness fuelled investors’ doubts about the capacity of Portuguese economic agents to pay
their debts. Between 2009 and 2011, external financing to banks fell by around 30 percentage
points of GDP. As a result, banks had to turn to the Eurosystem, whilst at the same time the
volume of Portuguese sovereign debt placed with domestic banks increased.
In the first half of 2011, following twelve months in which interest rates on ten-year government
debt  had  almost  doubled  to  just  over  9%,  mounting  doubts  among  investors  about  the
sustainability  of  the  public  finances  and  external  debt  lead  to  a  shutdown  of  access  to
international  funding  markets.  Recourse  to  external  financial  assistance  became  unavoidable,
under a programme negotiated with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund.
This was not the first time Portugal had to resort to official financial assistance. As many here in
the audience will remember well, we had already negotiated adjustment programmes with the
IMF in 1977–1978 and 1983.
The  root  cause  of  the  accumulated  imbalances  was  then  essentially  the  same:  excessive
domestic  demand  growth  in  relation  to  the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy,  leading  to
external debt accumulation. 
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, given that we were not part of a monetary union and had full monetary autonomy in the
1970s and 1980s, the symptoms of the crisis and the policy prescriptions produced at the time
show some important differences when compared to the most recent crisis episode.
In  a  context  of  monetary  sovereignty,  the  imbalances  translated  into  currency  depreciation,
international reserves depletion and high and rising inflation rates. 
With monetary policy fully available at national level, financial repression was the name of the
game. The policy prescription consisted of interest rate increases, credit growth targets, capital
controls  and  the  devaluation  of  the  escudo  to  contain  domestic  demand  and  restore  export
competitiveness. 
As a result of the adjustment strategy, the real value of wages, pensions and savings declined
sharply  and  wealth  was  transferred  from  creditors  to  debtors.  Money  illusion  blurred  the
perception of the adjustment costs and of the fundamentally unbalanced burden-sharing. Also,
as  nominal  variables  were  targeted  and  competitiveness  was  restored  in  the  short  term,
structural  supply-side  imbalances  and  long-term  competitiveness  failed  to  be  properly
addressed. As a consequence, the country’s competitiveness remained fragile and anchored in
low wages.
In the first decade of the 2000s, being part of a monetary union facilitated a longer and larger
accumulation  of  imbalances.  Nominal  stability,  low  interest  rates  and  ample  credit  availability
created  the  illusion  that  credit  constraints  had  disappeared  and  masked  persistent  losses  of
competitiveness for more than a decade. 
The  symptoms  of  the  emerging  crisis  no  longer  included  persistent  exchange  rate  pressure,
reserve depletion or high and rising inflation, but rather a sudden unwillingness on the part of
international investors to finance the Portuguese economy. 
Without the monetary instrument, money illusion was no longer there and the policy prescription
had  to  be  different. As  a  result,  the  need  for  deleveraging  and  structural  supply-side  reforms
became inescapable. 
The financial assistance programme
The  execution  of  the  economic  and  financial  assistance  programme  set  out  in  2011  brought
about noteworthy progress:
The  budget  deficit  declined  significantly,  which  created  the  conditions  for  the  current
downward trend of sovereign debt;
the private sector initiated a deleveraging process; and
the banking sector became more robust, with stronger liquidity, higher solvency and, in the
most recent period, improved asset quality.
This success was based on three key factors:
the  urgency  and  even-handedness  of 
first, political ownership, socioeconomic awareness and social dialogue. Policymakers
were  committed  to  the  programme’s  goals  and  showed  deep  knowledge  of  the  virtuous
response mechanisms to be activated in the critical sectors. On the other hand, the public
understood 
the  programme.  The  political
compromises achieved between policymakers and social partners were key to ensuring a
broad and collective ownership of the programme, which in turn determined its effective and
timely execution. 
second, the positive, intense and fast response by the export sector, which grew by
around 45% in real terms between 2008 and 2017. This contributed to the correction of the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
current account deficit, to put external debt on a downward trajectory, and to mitigate the
impact of lower domestic demand on the non-tradable sector. This positive response by the
tradable sector was much stronger than expected and was not driven exclusively by foreign
markets’ growth, given that there were important market share gains during this period.
third, the maintenance of the general public’s confidence in the financial system, as
evident  in  the  consistent  stability  of  aggregate  deposits.  This  allowed  the  financing  of  the
economic activity to proceed without major disruptions and prevented the resort to capital
controls.  The  fear  and  deposit  drain  observed  in  other  economies  that  were  subject  to
assistance programmes did not occur in the Portuguese case. This was not by accident,
since there was an active and persistent effort by the authorities to preserve confidence in
the financial system throughout the implementation of the programme.
After the assistance programme
The macroeconomic adjustment initiated by the economic and financial assistance programme
has continued after the programme ended in 2014, with encouraging results. 
GDP has been growing at an average annual rate above 2%, reflecting the continued dynamism
of the export sector and, more recently, the rebound of private investment. Fiscal consolidation
proceeded,  with  the  budget  balance  expected  to  be  around  –0.5%  in  2018  and  public  debt
entering a downward trend. The current and capital accounts were kept in surplus and the clean-
up of banks’ balance sheets has intensified, with NPLs declining from over 50 billion euro in June
2016 to about half this amount in end 2018.
Despite the undisputed progress, there is no room for complacency. The history of the past 40
years teaches us that the initial impact from an assistance programme will only be sustainable if
there are structural changes that foster higher potential growth. 
Over the recent past, Portuguese per capita GDP has remained 30–40% below the European
Union average, without converging towards the richest economies. A lasting trajectory of growth
and convergence towards our European partners depends on our ability:
to  promote  efficient  resource  allocation,  namely  through  sustained  maximisation  of
investment returns, and reallocation towards the tradable sector;
to reach higher levels of productivity;
to generate and maintain high levels of employment; and
to ensure that the combination of capital and labour generates an output that is desired and
valued by the market.
Public policy has a key role to play by upholding continued structural reforms that will, inter alia,
help:  
increase aggregate savings in the economy; 
strengthen firms’ capitalisation; 
provide, through capital markets, adequate instruments to finance innovation and exports; 
promote  regulatory  and  tax  predictability  and,  more  generally,  a  business-friendly  legal
framework; 
the separation between firm ownership and firm management; 
red tape reduction; and 
a better functioning of the judicial system. 
Such reforms are, on the one hand, imperative for pursuing the correction of the macroeconomic
imbalances  that  led  Portugal  to  the  past  crises  and,  on  the  other  hand,  extremely  hard  to
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
implement after the conclusion of the assistance programme.
Why do I say that structural reforms are extremely hard to implement in the current context? Let
me highlight three critical challenges.
1.  First, in the current context of strong global competition, firms need to adapt permanently to
the fast-changing competition, requiring accordingly adaptable support services by the State.
This means that we need a State that is lean and efficient, while being able to safeguard
social cohesion at the same time.
2.  Second, transferring resources towards the tradable sector is crucial for avoiding a return to
external imbalances, but may jeopardise social cohesion. Indeed, adapting to competition is
always  challenging  and  there  are  losers  in  this  process.  These  situations  have  to  be
supported by sustainable social safety nets.
3.  Finally, in the absence of a sense of emergency, of imminent financial market pressure and
of money illusion, reform ownership by policymakers and social consensus become much
harder.  The  costs  from  each  reform  become  clearer  and  must  be  carefully  balanced  by
perceived offsetting benefits.
The  nature  of  these  challenges  transcends  pure  economic  models,  encompassing  social
equilibria.  Overcoming  them  requires,  thus,  social  and  political  consensus,  only  attainable
through an open, broad and informed debate.
I am confident that this conference will contribute to such a debate and that by the end of the day
we  will  have  gained  many  useful  insights  into  what  paths  to  take  for  effective  reform  and  the
strategies to adopt in order to remove the obstacles in the way.
Thank you very much for being here.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
