  31.08.2019 
 The European economic policy response to a scenario of lower growth 
and inflation 
La Granda Summer Courses 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Distinguished  rector,  honourable  mayor,  academic  authorities,  dear  students,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. Let me begin by extending my particular thanks to Professor Velarde for his kind 
invitation to participate in the closure of the 2019 La Granda summer courses.  
It is an honour for me to be here in this building, whose doors are open to all those interested 
in discussing and delving into the essential issues ever-present in these courses.  
Today I would like to share some thoughts with you on the complex economic outlook the 
European Union (EU) and, in particular, the countries comprising the euro area currently 
face. This is at a time when free trade, the bedrock of the European project and an essential 
source  of  the  improvements  in  economic  well-being  in  recent  decades,  is  subject  to 
continuous threats.  
I shall first describe the latest economic developments and the main challenges ahead. Then 
I  shall  analyse  what,  in  my  opinion,  the  economic  policy  responses  to  these  challenges 
should be.  
The return of protectionism  
Only  two  years  ago  the  global  environment  was  a  favourable  one.  It  was  marked  by  a 
synchronised expansion of the emerging and advanced economies, reflected in the highly 
robust world trade performance.  
But the international economic setting turned more unfavourable in 2018. This situation has 
run  into  2019  to  date,  with  a  slowdown  in  growth  (acutely  so  in  manufacturing)  and,  in 
particular, in trade.  
Indeed, the latest information shows that economic activity is expected to have continued 
worsening  in  recent  months.  This  is  evident  in  the  manufacturing  Purchasing  Managers’ 
Index (PMI), which has since the start of the year stood below 50, a level indicative of a 
contraction in activity. The reduction in the last few months in the global service sector PMI, 
which  had  held  firmer  to date,  in  expansionary  territory,  suggests  an increased  risk of  a 
greater slowdown in global activity.  
This downturn in activity has also been accompanied by more marked divergences across 
geographical areas.  
Among  the  advanced  economies,  activity  has  remained  relatively  robust  in  the  United 
States,  underpinned  by  the  fiscal  expansion  and  the  soundness  of  private  demand. 
However, the gradual tailing off of the effects on activity of tax cuts, the signs of a global 
slowdown and the absence of clear inflationary signals have already prompted a shift in the 
Federal Reserve’s monetary policy. This has taken the form of the announced conclusion of 
the balance sheet reduction process as from September and, last July, the first interest rate 
cut since 2008. Moreover, the financial markets anticipate further cuts in rates in the rest of 
2019 and in 2020.  
In other geographical areas, GDP growth has been increasingly weak. This has been the 
case in the European economy, to which I will refer later.  
 3/16 
 Among the emerging economies, China remains beset by the difficulties of managing in an 
orderly fashion its much-needed economic rebalancing and deleveraging process, despite 
the significant stimulus measures approved this year by its authorities. China is important 
for the global economy: it accounts for almost one-fifth of global GDP, in purchasing power 
parity terms, and it has contributed almost 1 percentage point to annual average global GDP 
growth since 2005. And clearly, an additional slowdown in its growth rate would have major 
global  implications,  through  the  trade  and  financial  channels,  and  through  the  prices  of 
commodities, for many of which it is the main source of demand.1  
Some of the emerging economies with the greatest vulnerabilities, such as Argentina and 
Turkey,  have  been  particularly  affected  by  the  financial  tensions  and  continue  to  face 
significant challenges. In Argentina especially the situation has worsened considerably in 
recent weeks, against a backdrop of great political uncertainty.  
As mentioned, the slowdown in activity has been particularly acute as regards trade. Various 
factors are behind this downturn. They include most notably the impact of trade conflicts, 
especially between the United States and China, and the uncertainty associated with Brexit. 
The  trade  conflict  has  unfolded  in  various  phases.  In  spring  2018,  higher  US  tariffs  on 
different products (mainly imports from China) came into force, with the countries affected 
retaliating  accordingly.  Moreover,  the  US  government  threatened  to  extend  and  step  up 
tariff rises (including, in particular, those on vehicle imports, a sizeable portion of the bilateral 
trade with Europe).  
The second half of 2018 saw some positive events: the signing by the United States, Mexico 
and Canada of the pact replacing the North American Free Trade Agreement; the opening 
of negotiations for a US/EU agreement; and the temporary truce called between the United 
States and China to settle their differences.  
More recently, however, in May and June this year, there was a fresh escalation in trade 
tensions between China and the United States. US tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese 
product imports were raised from 10% to 25%, and the response by the Chinese authorities 
was to raise tariffs on US imports.  
At  the  G20  summit  in  Osaka  in  late  June,  the  two  countries  reached  an  agreement  to 
reinitiate  trade  negotiations.  Yet  despite  this,  and  the  fact  that  the  United  States 
subsequently announced the suspension of certain restrictions on US companies selling 
technological  equipment  to  specific  Chinese  firms,  August  saw  a  new  episode  in  the 
escalation of tensions in the trade war between the two countries. Moreover, the United 
States, which has accused the Chinese authorities of manipulating the exchange rate, has 
postponed  until  November  its  decision  on  potential  tariff  increases  on  cars  and  their 
components, a measure that would mainly harm the EU and Japan.  
                                                                                              
1 See Box 1.1, “The global impact of a hypothetical economic slowdown in China”, in the Annual Report 2018, Banco 
de  España,  and  Box    2,  “Economic  policy  room  for  manoeuvre  in  China”,  in  the  “Quarterly  report  on  the  Spanish 
economy”, Economic Bulletin, 2/2019, Banco de España. 
 
4/16 
  The  economic  literature  fairly  unanimously  considers  that  trade  openness  in  the  world 
economy in recent decades has been fundamental for global growth and social well-being.2 
Against this background, the proliferation of protectionist measures is one of the greatest 
threats to the world economy. Along with their direct repercussions on global activity, such 
measures generate additional adverse effects through their impact on global confidence. 
And  these  effects  are  so  far  proving  significant.  Accordingly,  any  future  proliferation  of 
additional  protectionist  actions,  further  undermining  confidence  and  affecting  financial 
conditions  (and,  therefore,  business  investment),  might  ultimately  impact  global  GDP 
severely.3  
Turning to Brexit, it is over three years since the UK referendum on EU withdrawal. Doubts 
persist over how the exit process will be resolved, and Brexit remains a primary source of 
uncertainty for global economic activity and, especially, for the rest of the EU. After the latest 
developments, including the new prime minister’s decision to suspend parliament until mid-
October, the markets now consider a hard Brexit to be more likely.  
On the simulations available, a Brexit with a trade agreement would have a relatively limited 
effect. But the adverse consequences of a no-deal Brexit would be significant, especially 
for the UK economy.4 Against this background of uncertainty, UK GDP has already posted 
negative growth in the second quarter of this year.  
The economic situation in the euro area: economic slowdown and low inflation 
The more open European and East Asian economies have been those most affected by 
these international trade developments. However, the adverse effects have spread to many 
other economies through global value chains.  
The euro area, in particular, has slowed significantly since early 2018. This is mainly due to 
the strong easing in its exports. As a result, average GDP last year grew by 1.8%, 0.7 pp 
down on 2017, and year-on-year growth in late 2018 and early 2019 fell to around 1%.  
The euro area’s high degree of openness (its trade flows with third countries account for 
50%  of  the  area’s  GDP,  compared  with  38%  for  China  and  28%  for  the  United  States) 
means it is particularly sensitive to external shocks and to the slowdown in world trade. 
Moreover,  the  above-mentioned  uncertainty  over  Brexit  has  prompted  a  contraction  in 
exports to the UK economy in recent years.  
Also  contributing  to  the  slowdown  in  growth  in  the  euro  area  have  been  specific 
circumstances  in  certain sectors  and  countries.  I  refer  in  particular  to  the  difficulties  the 
automobile industry is undergoing in adapting to the new environmental regulations, to new 
production technologies and to protectionist threats.  
                                                                                              
2 For a summary of this literature, see, for example, A. Estrada, J. Martínez-Martín and F. Viani (2018), “Una revisión de 
la  literatura  económica  sobre  los  efectos  de  la  globalización  en  el  crecimiento  y  la  distribución  de  la  renta”,  Notas 
Económicas, Boletín Económico, 2/2018, Banco de España. 
3 See Box 1, “An estimation of the impact of the recent protectionist measures”, in the “Quarterly report on the Spanish 
economy”, Economic Bulletin, 2/2018, Banco de España; Box 1, “Implications of rising trade tensions for the global 
economy”, in Economic Bulletin, 3/2018, ECB; and International Monetary Fund (2018), “Scenario Box 1. Global Trade 
Tensions”, World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth, October, pp. 33-35. 
4 See IMF (2018), “Euro Area Policies: Selected Issues”, and J. L. Vega (coord.) (2019), “Brexit: current situation and 
outlook”, Occasional Papers, no 1905, Banco de España. 
 5/16 
 Among the European countries, Germany’s industry and export-based growth model has 
been greatly affected by external developments. But Italy has been the most beleaguered, 
given its weak GDP growth, the result of the uncertainty over the course of its economic 
policy.  
Indeed, the latest available information generally points to a slowdown in the growth rate 
across  the  euro  area,  concentrated  especially  in  the  industrial  sectors.  Moreover,  the 
weakness  of  the  external  sector  is  also  spreading  to  investment.  That  means  the 
sluggishness of external demand, heightened political uncertainty in some countries and the 
easing in corporate profits are already bearing down on firms’ spending plans. Furthermore, 
the leading indicators of euro area exports show no signs of having touched bottom.  
The  flash  estimate  for  euro  area  GDP  in  the  second  quarter  shows  quarter-on-quarter 
growth of 0.2% (compared with 0.4% in the first quarter), with negative growth of 0.1% in 
Germany and stagnation in Italy. Some countries, such as France and Spain, which have 
remained more buoyant in this period, have also posted slowdowns – to 0.3% and 0.5%, 
respectively – in the second quarter of the year. 5 
In contrast, the most favourable factor since the onset of the economic recovery in the euro 
area has been the improvement in the labour market. This has been at the root of household 
income growth. During the current upturn, employment has responded forcefully to GDP 
growth. The unemployment rate currently stands at 7.5% of the labour force, very close to 
the historical low seen in the pre-crisis years.  
Strong job creation has contributed to reducing labour market slack. This has begun to be 
mirrored  in  wage  growth  and  in  an  increase  in  labour  income,  which  has  enabled 
consumption  to  play  a  key  role  in  euro  area  growth.  That  said,  labour  continues  to  be 
underutilised in some economies in the area.  
Yet in the euro area as a whole, the rise in wages and in unit labour costs has not fed through 
to  prices,  which  has  prompted  a  contraction  in  business  mark-ups.  In  fact,  the  globally 
prevalent moderate inflation and growing competitive pressures, along with the increased 
uncertainty over future euro area exports, would account for firms’ heightened caution when 
passing through labour cost increases to the prices of their products.  
The upshot is that, excepting the oscillations associated with more volatile items such as 
energy or certain services (e.g. tourist packages), the various measures of core inflation are 
holding  at  very  moderate  levels  of  around  1%,  far  removed  from  the  monetary  policy 
reference. Indeed, since 2013 euro area inflation has averaged 0.9%, practically half that 
observed during the first 10 years of EMU (2.1%).  
In parallel, the financial markets-based indicators of long-term inflation expectations have 
fallen forcefully since late last year and are holding at very low levels. That broadly coincides 
with the signals captured in opinion-based surveys. These indicators are habitually used to 
ascertain how anchored inflation expectations are with respect to the ECB’s medium-term 
objective (inflation rate at below, but close to, 2%). True, most of the reduction in inflation 
expectations according to the market indicators appears to be due to the decline in the 
                                                                                              
5 In France, real GDP rose by 0.4% quarter-on-quarter in the last quarter of 2018, while in Spain it rose by 0.7% in the 
first quarter of 2019.  
6/16 
  inflation risk premium. But the level of this premium is in negative territory, indicating that 
agents would appear to be hedging against the risk of very low or even negative inflation 
rates.  
As  regards  the  medium-term  outlook,  the  latest  ECB  survey  of  professional  forecasters 
showed an average forecast of annual HICP-based inflation of 1.3%, 1.4% and 1.5% for 
2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively, marking a downward revision of 0.1 pp for each year 
compared  with  the  previous  forecast.  For  2021  it  is  even  below  the  Eurosystem’s  June 
projection, which placed it at 1.6%.  
There is also evidence that euro area economic agents are setting greater store by recently 
observed inflation when determining their inflation expectations and, therefore, their price 
and wage-setting decisions. The persistence in recent years of very moderate inflation rates 
might be behind this.6 
In this setting, the risks to the euro area growth outlook remain clearly tilted to the downside. 
They reflect the prolonged presence of protectionist tensions; the uncertainty associated 
with geopolitical factors (such as Brexit and the political uncertainty in Italy); the doubts over 
the intensity of the ongoing slowdown in China and the possible repercussions for the global 
economy as a whole; and the vulnerabilities that some emerging economies, such as Turkey 
and Argentina, continue to evidence.  
There  are  also  some  structural  factors  suggesting  that  a  setting  of  low  growth,  modest 
inflation and, consequently, low interest rates might prevail over time.  
Among the main determinants is population ageing. This is a common trend in the advanced 
economies whose consequences go far beyond public finances and health systems. Ageing 
alters economic agents’ patterns of saving, investment and labour supply, and affects the 
potential growth of economies by reducing the working-age population and its productivity, 
among other factors.  
The  other  major  challenge  the  European  economies  must  face  is  the  lower  rate  of 
productivity growth. This is admittedly common to other advanced economies, and is in 
contrast to the technological progress of recent decades. But we cannot ignore the fact that 
productivity growth in Europe is far lower than that observed in the United States. In some 
countries,  such  as  Italy,  productivity  per  employee  has  even  stagnated  in  the  past  two 
decades.  
Low inflation is a common trait of other advanced economies and a fundamental challenge 
for most central banks. It therefore continues at present to be one of the central matters for 
discussion in the academic arena and on the monetary policy boards of the Eurosystem, 
the Federal Reserve and other central banks.  
In  its  latest  Annual  Report,  the  Banco  de  España  dedicated  special  attention  to  these 
matters.  The  report  highlights  the  considerable  uncertainty  over  the factors  that  may  be 
checking  the  rise  in  inflation  at  the  global  level.  They  include  most  notably  structural 
phenomena, such as population ageing, globalisation, the expansion of value chains and 
                                                                                              
6 See Chapter 2, “The determinants of low inflation in the euro area and in Spain”, in the Annual Report 2018, Banco de 
España. 
 
 7/16 
 the  attendant  increase  in  competition,  along  with  swift  technological  progress  and  the 
emergence of new forms of marketing and major sales platforms. Moreover, at certain times 
more transitory factors may have played a part, such as low oil prices and the considerable 
slack in some labour markets further to strong job destruction during the crisis.  
The monetary policy response to an extended scenario of slow growth and moderate 
inflation  
The complexity this setting poses for economic policies in Europe is most considerable. I 
shall refer first to monetary policy.  
The context of low inflation and slow growth has given rise to a broad consensus on the 
ECB Governing Council. This is namely the need to maintain a significant monetary policy 
stimulus  that  can  help  anchor  the  economic  expansion  and  ensure  that  inflation  is  on  a 
sustained path towards the medium-term reference.  
Since  the  end  of  the  asset  purchase  programme  (last  December),  the  main  tool  for 
maintaining the monetary stimulus and anchoring agents’ expectations has been interest 
rate policy and forward guidance. In June 2018, then, it was determined that policy interest 
rates would hold at current levels until, at least, the summer of 2019 and, in any event, until 
inflation  should  converge  in  a  sustained  manner  towards  levels  compatible  with  price 
stability. That is to say, our forward guidance has twin strands: the first is linked to a specific 
date until which the Governing Council commits not to raising interest rates; and the second 
makes these increases conditional upon convergence towards our medium-term inflation 
aim.  
Forward guidance has also been strengthened by the maintenance of the policy to reinvest 
the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  asset  purchase 
programme for an extended period of time past the date when the Council starts raising the 
key ECB interest rates. 
However,  in light of the weakness of the macroeconomic  figures,  the  decline in inflation 
expectations and the conjunction of numerous sources of risk, communication by the ECB 
Governing  Council  has  progressively  been  adjusted  towards  a  more  accommodative 
monetary policy.  
Specifically,  at  its  July  meeting,  the  Council  added  further  accommodative  bias  in  its 
communication on policy interest rates. It signalled that it expects rates to remain at their 
present or lower levels at least through the first half of 2020, and in any case for as long as 
necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to its aim over the 
medium term. 
The Governing Council also acknowledged that inflation rates, both realised and projected, 
have been persistently below levels that are in line with its aim. That is to say, the actual and 
projected inflation levels I have referred to cannot be considered to be compatible with the 
ECB’s mandate. 
8/16 
  It further stressed that, if the medium-term inflation outlook continues to fall short of its aim, 
the Governing Council is determined to act, in line with its commitment to symmetry in the 
inflation aim.7  
The notion of symmetry here means that the ECB can tolerate both upward and downward 
deviations in relation to our inflation aim of “below, but close to, 2%”, provided it is foreseen 
that inflation will converge on our medium-term objective. It also means that the figure of 
2% is a reference for average medium-term inflation, but it is not a cap that prevents prices 
from temporarily increasing at rates of over 2%. Moreover, the concept of symmetry reveals 
that  the  Governing  Council  is  committed  to  acting  resolutely  both  whether  inflation  is 
persistently above or whether it is below 2%. It may also be inferred from this symmetry 
that,  since  inflation  has  been  below-target  in  recent  years,  fulfilment  of  the  aim  in  the 
medium term may require it to be above the aim at some time in the future.  
Consequently, the ECB Governing Council has announced that it stands ready to adjust all 
of  its  instruments,  as  appropriate,  to  ensure  that  inflation  moves  towards  its  aim  in  a 
sustained  manner.  Against  this  background,  we  have  tasked  the  relevant  Eurosystem 
Committees with examining options, including ways to reinforce our forward guidance on 
policy rates and options for the size and composition of potential new net asset purchases. 
There is a possibility that durably low or even negative interest rates may have effects on 
financial stability and bank profitability. It is true that Eurosystem estimates suggest that so 
far the positive effects, in terms of greater economic activity and improved credit quality, 
offset the adverse effects on banks’ net income. But it is necessary to monitor this matter 
continuously in order to determine whether measures are needed to mitigate the adverse 
effects of low rates on the banking system’s intermediation capacity. The Governing Council 
has  thus  also  requested that the Eurosystem’s technical  committees  analyse  a  potential 
tiered system for reserve remuneration. 
It should be recalled that, in March, new quarterly longer-term financing operations were 
announced.  These  will  begin  to  be  implemented  in  September,  under  very  favourable 
financing conditions, with the aim of maintaining the current low costs of bank funding and, 
therefore, of overall borrowing by households and firms.  
It is perhaps worth reiterating here that the ECB’s monetary policy has had very positive 
effects on euro area activity and inflation. 
In  fact,  by  easing  financial  conditions  and  reducing  financial  market  fragmentation,  the 
ECB’s expansionary monetary policy has substantially contributed to the improvement in 
the euro area economy. At the same time, it has prevented the period of negative inflation 
rates experienced by the European economies further to the crisis-induced recession from 
turning into a deflationary spiral.  
Specifically, according to some ECB papers8 and to in-house Banco de España estimates, 
it  is  believed the  set of monetary  policy  measures  adopted  since  mid-2014  will  have  an 
                                                                                              
7 See M. Draghi (2019), “Twenty Years of the ECB’s monetary policy”, ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 18 June 
2019. 
8 Hammermann et al. (2019), “Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net asset 
purchases”, Economic Bulletin, 2/2019, ECB.  
 9/16 
 overall impact on the euro area’s real GDP growth and inflation. In both instances this is 
expected to be cumulatively of the order of around 2 pp between 2016 and 2020.  
It should also be underscored that these effects have arisen from the combination of the 
various  instruments  used.  Beyond  their  individual  impact,  these  instruments  mutually 
complement and reinforce one another. Hence, the joint application of short-term interest 
rate  cuts,  asset  purchases,  special  financing  operations  aimed  at  banks  and  an  active 
communication policy of the part of the ECB Governing Council have all allowed the yield 
curve to ease in recent years. This has had a most notable impact on financing conditions 
for all agents, public and private alike, within the area.9  
It  is  important  this  complementarity  be  maintained  with  the  new  measures,  should  they 
prove necessary, in order to maximise their effectiveness.  
Indeed,  following  the  adjustments  recently  made  to  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s 
communication, market interest rates in all segments have continued to decline, and the 
yield on the GDP-weighted euro area 10-year sovereign bond has fallen to below 0.2%. The 
sovereign  bond  risk  premia  relative  to  the  German  benchmark  and the  yield  spreads on 
corporate bonds have also declined.  
Notwithstanding the monetary policy decisions that may have to be adopted in the short 
term, I believe this setting also calls for some thoughts on the medium-term monetary policy 
strategy.  
It should be borne in mind that, insofar as interest rates hold at levels close to their effective 
lower  bound  for  a  longer  period,  central  banks  will  have  less  headroom  to  cut  rates  in 
response  to  future  crises.  They also  have  to  resort  more  frequently  to  less  conventional 
measures to increase their balance sheets.  
This situation has led some central banks to discuss possible alternatives to the current 
monetary policy strategy, aimed at countering the constraint of the effective lower bound of 
interest  rates.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has  been  most  prominent  in  this  connection, 
conducting a far-reaching review of its operational framework.  
In this connection, I am of the opinion that the ECB should launch a similar exercise. Among 
other factors, it should reflect on a clarification of our quantitative price stability objective, 
in order to align it with the specific definitions of other developed countries’ central banks 
and provide for better communication and anchoring of agents’ expectations.10 The latest 
Annual  Report  of  the  Banco  de  España,  to  which  I  referred  earlier,  analyses  the  most 
favourable and least favourable aspects of several possible strategic options in this area. 
                                                                                                 
9 See P. Lane (2019), “Policy and Below-Target Inflation”, address delivered at the Bank of Finland on 2 July 2019. 
10 See Chapter 3, “Monetary policy design in the medium and long term”, in the Annual Report 2018, Banco de España. 
10/16 
  The contribution of non-monetary economic policies is pivotal 
That said, the participation of non-monetary economic policies is essential for shoring up 
the  recovery,  entrenching  higher  growth  rates  and,  thereby,  smoothing  convergence  by 
inflation towards its medium-term reference.  
The need to create a fiscal stabilisation instrument in the euro area  
Recent  experience  has  highlighted  the  difficulty  of  achieving  a  more  appropriate 
macroeconomic policy mix for the euro area as a whole under the current framework of rules 
and institutions in which European fiscal policy operates.  
In  the  euro  area  each  country  decides  its  fiscal  policy.  Monetary  policy,  meanwhile,  is 
designed taking into consideration the situation of the euro area as a whole. Attaining an 
appropriate mix of both would require effective coordination mechanisms or the creation of 
a fiscal stabilisation capacity for the entire area.  
As regards fiscal coordination mechanisms (based on the Stability and Growth Pact), there 
is  consensus  on  the  need  for  a  far-reaching  review.11  SGP  arrangements  have  become 
excessively  complex  over  time,  which  hampers  transparency  in  their  application,  their 
implementation and, ultimately, their fulfilment. The most evident consequence of this is, 
across the board, that fiscal policy design has been procyclical in numerous countries and 
in the euro area as a whole.  
In recent years, some countries running expansionary public finances are those whose high 
debt  and  structural  deficits  would  have  advised  a  fiscal  consolidation  drive.  The 
restructuring of public finances in these countries is a priority if it is wished to count fully on 
fiscal policy as a national macroeconomic stabilisation instrument ahead of any potentially 
more adverse scenario.   
In such a scenario, those countries with more fiscal space might provide a greater budgetary 
stimulus  to  their  economies,  especially  bearing  in  mind  that  they  have  been  particularly 
affected by the recent slowdown as a result of their heavy exposure to international trade 
flows.  In  the  current  setting  of  very  low  interest  rates,  the  positive  impact  of  the  fiscal 
expansion would not only be greater in the countries pursuing it; it would also spread to the 
other partners, giving rise to positive spillover effects for the area as a whole. Yet as I have 
indicated, in the current euro area fiscal framework these decisions are the responsibility of 
national governments, which hampers their adoption.  
The composition of spending is also important. In particular, the growth of public investment 
continues to be very moderate, following the cuts to it during the crisis. This is set against 
the major challenges we must face in the coming years in various areas, such as digital 
transformation,  the  energy  transition,  population  ageing  and,  generally,  the  necessary 
adaptation of our productive system to a more complex and demanding global environment. 
In light of this, it is a great concern that the euro area should still not have fiscal policy tools 
capable of contributing to a common response to these challenges and promoting a greater 
                                                                                              
11 See P. Hernández de Cos (2017), “Rules and Institutions for Fiscal Governance in Europe”, Chapter 9, Euro Yearbook 
2017. Fundación ICO. 
 11/16 
 degree  of  cyclical  stability  for  the  Union  as  a  whole.  Indeed,  recent  Banco  de  España 
studies12 point out that while in the United States the federal budget smooths economic 
shocks by close to 10%, in Europe this mechanism is non-existent. 
The recently created instrument for convergence and competitiveness, while a step in the 
right direction, lacks stabilisation capacity. It does not incorporate some of the potentially 
most  effective  elements,  such  as  European  unemployment  insurance  and  the  use  of 
European funds to mitigate the impact of specific shocks on certain economies. 
The lack of effective macroeconomic policy coordination mechanisms in the euro area is 
exacerbated when monetary policy comes up against its effective interest rate limits. As I 
said earlier, this circumstance might become more frequent in the future if we move into a 
more persistent setting of low rates. Moreover, it is in this setting that the effectiveness of 
fiscal policy may prove greater.13  
There is thus a pressing need to create some type of common cyclical insurance mechanism 
in the euro area. This instrument would help automatically absorb adverse shocks at the 
aggregate  level  (symmetric)  or  idiosyncratic  shocks  in  certain  countries  (asymmetric).  Its 
dual aim would be to smooth effects in individual countries and safeguard the stability of 
the euro area as a whole.  
Some  recent  analyses  suggest  that  it  would  be  possible  to  design  a  mechanism  which, 
without committing major funds (fewer than the current European budget) and without it 
entailing permanent cross-State transfers, would provide for a similar stabilisation capacity 
to that achieved with the US transfer system.14  
The role of macroprudential policy  
We should not forget the role that so-called “macroprudential policy” can and should play.  
The introduction of macroprudential instruments to complement the stabilising capacity of 
monetary and fiscal policies is probably one of the most significant advances in the wake of 
the international financial crisis.  
For  the  countries  belonging  to  a  monetary  union,  the  introduction  of  these  tools  is 
particularly important. This is because it is one of the few instruments available nationally to 
ensure the stability of the domestic financial system.  
In my opinion, macroprudential policy has a dual role to play in the current setting.  
First,  continuing  low  or  even  negative  interest  rates  over  an  extended  period  may  have 
adverse effects on financial stability. Macroprudential policy should be primarily entrusted 
with reacting if some of these risks emerge, actively combating potential excessive debt 
growth and protecting financial institutions against the hypothetical materialisation of these 
                                                                                              
12 See Chapter 4, “Fiscal policy in the euro area”, in the Annual Report 2016, Banco de España. 
13 See Arce et al. (2016), “Policy spillovers and synergies in a monetary union”, International Journal of Central Banking, 12(3), September, 
pp. 219-277. 
14 See Chapter 4, “Fiscal policy in the euro area”, in the Annual Report 2016, Banco de España. 
12/16 
  risks. This policy action should affect both the banking sector and the non-bank financial 
sector, depending on where the signs of exuberance are perceived.  
Second,  some  macroprudential  instruments,  such  as  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer 
(CCyB), can be used to build up capital buffers at financial institutions in times of plenty that 
can  be  deployed  when  conditions  worsen.  The  use  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation 
mechanisms, such as the CCyB, is particularly significant in a setting, such as the present 
one, in which monetary policy scope is more limited.15 
Structural reforms conducive to raising potential growth must be undertaken  
It is also imperative to address the structural shortcomings hampering productivity and the 
generation and harnessing of investment opportunities in the euro area. At the same time, 
measures  should  be  introduced  geared  to  making  all  citizens  party  to  the  benefits  the 
European Project entails.   
These  structural  reforms,  insofar  as  they  are  expansionary  supply-side  policies,  are 
especially appropriate in the international setting I have described, in which the main growth 
shocks  and  risks  (such  as  protectionist  tensions  and  the uncertainty  surrounding  Brexit) 
place constraints on the global supply of goods and services, competition and productivity 
and harm the production capacity of the economies affected through the negative effects 
of uncertainty on business investment. 
In  addition,  and  as  regards  the  need  discussed  above  for  fiscal  policy  to  provide  a 
macroeconomic stimulus where there is space for this, recent economic literature suggests 
that there is considerable potential for positive synergies between structural reforms and 
demand-side  expansionary  policies.  In  other  words,  the  same  structural  reforms  may 
provide  a  greater  boost  to  economic  activity  if  they  are  implemented  in  parallel  with 
expansionary monetary and fiscal policies.16   
In this setting, the slow progress made by the euro area member countries in implementing 
the  European  Commission’s  structural  reform  recommendations  in  the  2019  European 
Semester  is  worrying.  Reform  headway  is  particularly  slow  as  regards  the elimination  of 
obstacles  in  the  provision  of  professional  services  and  in  the  network  industries,  and 
improving the business environment by reducing the administrative burdens that hinder new 
start-ups.  
Greater  efforts  should  be  a  priority in  at  least  two  areas.  First,  we  must improve human 
capital and active employment policies to promote the rapid reallocation of workers towards 
the growth industries. Second, public and private spending on innovation must increase to 
create  new  business  opportunities.  Europe  cannot  stand  on  the  sidelines  as  new 
                                                                                              
15 See P. Hernández de Cos (2019), “A framework for the Countercyclical Capital Buffer”, opening address at the Second 
Financial Stability Conference, Banco de España/CEMFI. 
16 The reason for this is that supply-side expansionary policies tend to be deflationary. This limits their expansionary 
effects in a setting such as the present one in which the capacity of monetary policy to accommodate these inflationary 
pressures by means of further interest rate cuts is relatively limited. See Ó Arce, S. Hurtado and C. Thomas (2016), 
“Policy  Spillovers  and  Synergies  in  a  Monetary  Union”,  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  12(3),  September, 
pp. 219-277. In addition, structural reforms may be particularly effective in the euro area economies where the private 
sector remains immersed in a deleveraging process; see J. Andrés, Ó. Arce and C. Thomas (2017), “Structural Reforms 
in a Debt Overhang”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 88, pp. 15-34. 
 13/16 
 technologies  are  developed and  as  the  United  States  and China battle  for  technological 
supremacy. 
In the financial arena, for example, most of the most successful technology companies are 
headquartered in the United States or in Asian countries.  
The increase in public investment should focus on improving transport and communication 
infrastructures  to  maintain  connectivity  with  business  centres  and  to  promote  the 
development of European value chains and, thereby, regional cohesion.  
Moreover, we should not forget the impact that all the latest technological developments 
may have on income distribution, and nor that of education on employability.  
The  Banking  Union  should  be  completed  as  soon  as  possible  and  a  single  capital 
market created17 
Turning to European governance, in addition to the review of the fiscal framework and the 
creation  of  supranational  macroeconomic  stabilisation  instruments,  we  should  progress 
swiftly towards creating a single capital market and completing the Banking Union.  
These two initiatives are key both to the funding of investment and of business innovation, 
and to achieving a more robust and resilient monetary union in the face of adverse shocks.  
Capital markets in Europe are not only less developed than in other advanced economies 
(few companies tap the capital markets for funding); they are moreover fragmented as a 
result of differences in regulations (e.g. on insolvency proceedings) and in the tax treatment 
of debt versus equity.  
This  has  negative  consequences  for  business  financing,  and  for  European  countries’ 
capacity to diversify risks and withstand adverse shocks. Whereas in the United States more 
than  40%  of  economic  shocks  are  absorbed  by  the  capital  markets  (through  the  cross-
ownership of equity), in Europe this percentage is almost five times smaller.  
Less-developed capital markets in Europe hamper business start-ups. It is difficult for them 
to obtain financing in the initial stages of operating, particularly at those more innovative 
companies with a higher level of risk, where research and the business concept are pivotal. 
These intangible assets are difficult to collateralise in a bank loan: therefore, the resort to 
capital markets is crucial.  
Thus, the number of high-growth business start-ups in Europe is almost 10 times less than 
in the United States and four times less than in China. And nor does the fragmentation of 
capital markets encourage the savings in some countries to be routed towards profitable 
investment projects in others.  
The  financing  of  European  firms  would  also  benefit  from  the  completion  of  the  Banking 
Union before a hypothetical crisis arises.  
                                                                                              
17 See P. Hernández de Cos (2019), “The need for deepening euro area integration”, speech at City Week 2019: The 
International Financial Services Forum, and P. Hernández de Cos (2019), “Monetary Union: the dangers of a work in 
progress”, Euro Yearbook 2018. pp. 45-64. 
 
14/16 
  This is a far-reaching project of the utmost importance for European construction, which is 
why it is vital it should not be left incomplete. Following the launch of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism and the Single Resolution Fund, efforts should focus on reaching agreement on 
the start-up of European Deposit Insurance. 
Currently, decisions on the supervision and resolution of banks are taken at the European 
level,  while  the  responsibility  for  financing  deposit  guarantee  schemes  falls  on  national 
insurance arrangements. This divergence is not only fertile ground for potential political and 
institutional conflicts, but it also hinders the creation of a true European banking system.  
To progress in this area, it will be necessary to further reduce risks (bank and sovereign 
alike).  But  political  momentum  will  also  be  required  to  allow  a  better  alignment  of 
responsibilities with effective decision-making capacity and, above all, to provide for the 
better  harnessing  of  the  opportunities  afforded  by  the  EU  to  bring  about  better  risk-
diversification and risk-sharing among its members.  
Finally, we should also explore creating a common safe asset for the euro area as a whole. 
The operations of financial markets and intermediaries require a broad set of sufficiently 
liquid  assets  with  minimal  counterparty  risks.  This  need  is  greater  at  times  of  financial 
turmoil, given that investors tend to react by accumulating low-risk assets. Within the euro 
area,  the  volume  of  these  low-risk  assets  is  insufficient,  since  the  debt  of  only  a  small 
number of countries is considered risk-free. That gives rise to a shortage of such assets and 
to  financial  fragmentation.  Evidently,  an  improvement  in  countries’  fiscal  positions  might 
help increase the amount of risk-free assets available. But a common safe asset would have 
additional benefits. It would contribute to weakening the link between bank and sovereign 
risks, preventing capital movements towards safe assets that might prove destabilising at 
times of financial tension. And, more generally, it would promote the fairer provision of more 
stable safe assets for the euro area as a whole.  
Conclusion 
In short, the global economic situation, and that of the euro area in particular, has recently 
continued to weaken, weighed down – among other factors – by adverse international trade 
developments. 
Against this background, some of the main risks that have loomed for several quarters over 
the area’s growth prospects have increased and are denting the euro area economy. As I 
stated earlier, the Eurozone is particularly sensitive to the course of international trade and 
is directly exposed to the uncertainty Brexit is causing.  
Both actual and projected inflation rates have held persistently below the ECB’s objective. 
Against this backdrop, the ECB Governing Council has underscored its determination to act 
if  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  remains  below-target,  adjusting  all  its  instruments 
appropriately.  
In parallel, improving the workings of the euro area before any future crisis should occur is 
a  pressing  concern.  To  achieve  this,  progress  without  delay  is  needed  towards  greater 
financial  integration  with,  namely:  the  development  of  a  capital  markets  union;  the 
completion of the Banking Union with the creation of a common deposit insurance scheme; 
 15/16 
 the introduction of fiscal instruments that improve the whole of the euro area’s economic 
stabilisation capacity; and the creation of a common safe asset.  
We  must  also  achieve  healthy  fiscal  positions  at  the  national  level.  These  can  enable 
budgetary policy to fully develop its stabilising role, resolutely tackle population ageing and 
address  the  structural  shortcomings  hampering  productivity  and  the  generation  and 
harnessing of investment opportunities in the euro area.  
Lastly,  macroprudential  policies  should  be  adopted  when  risks  to  financial  stability  are 
perceived  and  so  buffers  may  be  built  up  that  can  be  used  ahead  of  more  adverse 
macroeconomic situations.  
Thank you. 
  16/16 
 