Olli Rehn: Counter-cyclical burden-sharing of fiscal and monetary
policy
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Bank  of  Finland
Seminar on the 2018 Annual Report of the European Fiscal Board, Helsinki, 18 March 2019.
Professor Thygesen, Dr Szczurek,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Let me welcome you to this Bank of Finland Seminar on euro area fiscal policy, more specifically
on the Annual Report 2018 of the European Fiscal Board. We are honoured and glad to have
Professor Thygesen and Dr Szczurek present the report to us today.
Let  me  open  this  seminar  with  brief  remarks  on  the  interaction  between  fiscal  and  monetary
policy, which also explains the Bank of Finland’s strong interest on the issue.
GDP growth in the euro area turned out to be unexpectedly sluggish in the fourth quarter of 2018,
and  recent  indicators  point  to  substantially  weaker  than  expected  activity  also  in  2019.  A
combination of global uncertainties and adverse domestic factors in some euro area countries
are likely to continue to weigh on euro area activity in the short term.
On  the  back  of  the  weakened  economic  outlook,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  recently  took  a
number  of  important  decisions  in  pursuit  of  its  price  stability  objective:  first,  a  commitment  to
keep  the  key  policy  interest  rates  unchanged  for  an  extended  period  of  time;  second,  a
commitment to continue reinvesting maturing securities under the asset purchase programme
for  an  extended  period  of  time;  and  third,  launching  a  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO-III), starting in September 2019.
In the press conference on 7 March, President Draghi underlined that to reap the full benefits
from the ECB’s monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute more decisively to
raise  the  growth  potential  and  reduce  vulnerabilities.  For  the  longer  term,  implementation  of
structural reforms is key to boost euro area productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal
policies, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance today and the operation of automatic
stabilisers are providing support to economic activity.
However, the prolonged low interest rate environment, as well as the available alternatives to the
interest rate as a monetary policy instrument, pose their particular challenges for monetary policy
design  and  transmission.  Therefore,  it  may  be  asked  whether  a  more  even  balance  between
monetary and fiscal policy stances would be desirable in order to sustain the growth momentum
in the current conjuncture.
This point has been brought up, among others, by the IMF in its advice on the optimal policy mix
for the euro area. While countries with elevated public debt levels should focus on consistent
consolidation  of  public  finances,  those  with  available  fiscal  space  should  use  it  to  increase
growth-enhancing public investment.
In its global policy agenda, the IMF has underlined the added value of coordinated action, helping
to address challenges related to constrained policy space at national level. The same point was
recently raised by Reza Moghadam, former Director of the IMF’s European Department, arguing
for a more widespread coordinated fiscal easing in the euro area in order to prevent a slowdown
from slipping into a recession.
While  several  caveats  must  be  taken  into  account,  any  such  fiscal  easing  should,  if  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
slowdown  is  judged  persistent,  be  undertaken  within  the  limits  of  debt  sustainability  and  be
differentiated according to fiscal space available. In this way, one would enable a more balanced
macroeconomic policy mix. That’s why there are obvious merits in the idea. As the saying goes,
monetary policy should indeed not be the only game in town.
Without further ado, or say, let me again welcome Prof. Thygesen and Dr. Szczurek, and now
give the floor to them!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
