Yannis Stournaras: Climate change - threats, challenges, solutions
for Greece
Keynote address by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Symposium
on  "Climate  Change  -  Threats,  Challenges,  Solutions  for  Greece",  The American  College  of
Greece, Athens, 3 April 2019.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to share my
thoughts on climate change: the threats, the challenges and the solutions for Greece.
Climate  change  is  gradually  shaping  a  new  environment.  Research  so  far  confirms  that  the
current  and  projected  implications  of  climate  change  pose  such  threats  to  society  and  to
sustainable development that we cannot continue with a “business as usual” scenario. We need
to address challenges and to work on solutions, shifting to a low-carbon economy, managing the
risks and adapting to the changing climate.
During  the  past  decade,  environmental  risks  have  progressively  dominated  the  global  risks
landscape.  It  is  telling  that  in  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  report ,  in  2019  for  the  third
consecutive year, three of the top five global risks, in terms of both likelihood and impact, are
environmental and all three are associated with climate change.
1
Historically, climate change can be attributed primarily to the actions of the large, industrialised
countries. However, its impacts are diffused to all countries, whether small or large, developed or
developing.  This  global  nature  of  climate  change  means  that  cooperation  and  action  at
international level is important. Therefore, the international community, through long negotiations,
has succeeded in reaching global agreements, such as the Kyoto Protocol and the more recent
Paris Climate Agreement, in order to address the problem on a global scale.
Greece,  along  with  other  small  countries  in  the  climate-sensitive  Mediterranean  region,  is
expected  to  incur  adverse  effects  from  climate  change. Acknowledging  this  fact,  the  Bank  of
Greece  has  been  one  of  the  first  central  banks  worldwide  to  actively  engage  in  the  issue  of
climate  change  and  invest  significantly  in  climate  research.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  the
interdisciplinary  Climate  Change  Impact  Study  Committee  (CCISC)  of  the  Bank  has  been
working  on  all  aspects  of  climate  change, 
to  environmental
macroeconomics,  highlighting  climate  change  as  a  key  factor  that  should  be  horizontally
integrated into policymaking as it affects almost all sectors of the Greek economy.
from  climate  science 
Awareness of the economic value of ecosystem goods and services, which form the basis of the
global economy, promotes the sustainable utilisation of natural resources and good management
of  natural  systems.  Within  the  Climate  Change  Impact  Study  Committee,  environmental  and
energy  economists,  working  with  climatologists,  physicists,  biologists,  engineers  and  social
scientists, study the issue of climate change, analyse the economic, social and environmental
consequences for Greece, and advise on the way forward.
The studies highlight the wealth of Greece’s natural resources, but also the risks to the country’s
natural and human environment. Climate change appears to be a major threat, as the impact on
almost  all  sectors  of  the  national  economy  is  expected  to  be  adverse.  Under  an  inaction
(“business  as  usual”)  scenario,  the  Greek  GDP  could,  ceteris  paribus,  fall  by  2%  annually  by
2050  and  even  further  by  2100,  while  the  total  cost  to  the  Greek  economy  could  reach  a
cumulative €701 billion by 2100. ,    
2 3
Furthermore, according to a vulnerability assessment   that  quantifies  and  ranks  the  expected
climate risks for Greece, agriculture is the sector expected to be most severely hit by climate
4
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
change in Greece, while the impact on tourism and coastal systems will also considerably affect
household  income  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  the  adverse  impact  of  climate
change on the water reserves sector is also of particular significance, given its implications for
agriculture and water supply.
Recognising  the  importance  of  well-informed  economic  policymaking,  the  Bank  of  Greece
released  last  year  the  book  The  Economics  of  Climate  Change,  which  provides  a
comprehensive, state-of-the-art review of the economics of climate change and the emerging
area  of  environmental  macroeconomics,  focusing  on  the  design  of  economic  policy  aimed  at
controlling the climate externality. This publication aims to lay the foundations both for addressing
the role of monetary policy under conditions of global warming and for exploring the link between
monetary  policy  and  climate  change,  a  topic  that  remains  high  on  our  research  agenda.  It
acknowledges, of course, that monetary policy is not the primary tool for tackling climate change
but rather plays a supplementary role alongside fiscal, environmental and structural policies.
Decarbonising  the  energy  system  and  financing  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy,
consistent with the “well below 2 Celsius degrees” goal set out in the Paris Climate Agreement,
are among the major challenges of our time. Climate change and global warming are linked to
anthropogenic activity, in particular  the  use  of  fossil  fuels  and  carbon  emissions.  Current  and
future impact on society and sustainable development is such that renders the use of fossil fuels
prohibitive. We need to mitigate climate change by rapidly and drastically reducing emissions,
adopting appropriate energy management and high efficiency practices, financing green energy,
fostering energy-saving investment and promoting a low-carbon economy.
Along these lines, the adoption of policies and technologies leading to a low-carbon Greece, in
the  context  of  European  policies  for  climate  change,  can  accelerate  a  transformation  of  the
Greek  economy  that  offers  opportunities  for  economic  activity.  Likewise,  efficient  adaptation
programmes, necessary as a damage control measure that has been found to reduce the cost
of climate change by almost 30% , could provide a promising opportunity for Greece to boost its
growth performance and competitiveness, while implementing climate policies.
5
In  this  process,  there  are  certain  transition  risks  arising  from  the  adjustment  to  a  low-carbon
economy, for example potential stranded assets, business costs and disruptions. Yet, a careful
and  timely  transition  will  also  open  up  opportunities,  associated  with  the  development  of
innovative and renewable energy products, investment in energy saving, new infrastructure and
new  jobs.  The  transformation  of  the  economy  towards  decarbonisation  cannot  but  have  a
positive  net  outcome,  as  long-term  value  creation  is  a  matter  of  transition  to  a  low-carbon
6
economy and effective climate risk management .
Since January 2019, the Bank of Greece has been a member of the Network of Central Banks
and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) . The NGFS brings together central
banks  and  supervisors  and  comprises  34  members  and  six  observers  with  the  common
objective of strengthening the global response required to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement
and enhancing the role of the financial system in managing risks and mobilising capital for green
and low-carbon investments, in the broader context of environmentally sustainable development.
The members of the network aspire to exchange experiences, share best practices, contribute to
the  development  of  environment  and  climate  risk  management  in  the  financial  sector  and
mobilise mainstream finance to support the transition to a sustainable economy.
7
NGFS  members  acknowledge  that  climate-related  risks   are  a  source  of  financial  risk.  It  is
therefore  within  the  mandates  of  central  banks  and  supervisors  to  ensure  that  the  financial
system is resilient to these risks. This is why central banks further support transparency and the
disclosure of data that will enable markets to lead the transition to a low-carbon economy so that,
with the right information, they can price in the cost of doing business, the climate risk and, most
importantly, evaluate new business opportunities. The proper assessment and supervision of the
8
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial risks stemming from the transition to a low-carbon economy are important factors in
promoting  sustainable  development  and  safeguarding  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial
9
system .
In this context, the banking sector can also play an important role in addressing the threats and
challenges of climate change. The United Nations, through the Environment Programme Finance
Initiative (UNEP FI), sets out sustainability principles in the framework of contemporary banking
practice. Currently under consultation, the Principles for Responsible Banking  aim to define the
role and the responsibilities of the banking sector in a sustainable future, where banks align their
business practices with the global community goals and create value for society. The Principles
set out the criteria for responsible and sustainable banking, through a holistic evaluation of risks
and opportunities stemming from banks’ activities. Furthermore, they encourage banks to identify
and  assess  the  effect  of  their  asset  allocation  decisions  and  be  transparent  on  the  resulting
positive and negative impacts on society and the environment.
10
As  part  of  a  roadmap  towards  sustainability,  the  Principles  support  and  accelerate  the
fundamental changes needed to achieve shared prosperity for current and future generations. If
we are to meet the Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations and the objectives of
the Paris Climate Agreement, the banking sector needs to maximise its contribution and align
itself  with  these  goals.  Last  month,  the  Bank  of  Greece  officially  endorsed  the  Principles  for
Responsible Banking and, in its capacity as the national central bank, strongly urges all banks
within its remit to do the same and set ambitious targets.
Towards a sustainable future, scientific research and current developments confirm the need for
a  dynamic  strategy  and  an  action  plan  to  adapt  to  the  changing  climate.  Climate  change
adaptation, as a process of adjusting to climate effects in order to moderate the negative and
enhance  the  potential  positive  impacts  of  climate  change,  is  a  crucial  issue  spanning  across
multiple economic, social and environmental policy areas.
Therefore, under a memorandum of understanding signed with the Ministry of Environment and
Energy  and  the Academy  of Athens,  the  Climate  Change  Impact  Study  Committee  drafted  in
2015 the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, setting out the general objectives, guiding
principles and implementation tools for an effective and growth-oriented adaptation strategy, in
line with European directives and international experience.
Furthermore, fostering the adaptation process, the Committee is currently working, alongside the
Ministry  of  Environment  and  Energy  and  other  key  national  actors,  on  the  Life  IP  programme
“AdaptInGR − Boosting the implementation of adaptation policy across Greece”. The programme
aims  at  advancing  the  implementation  process  of  the  National  Climate  Change  Adaptation
Strategy  of  Greece  by  addressing  specific  objectives  such  as  the  systematisation  and
improvement  of  decision  making  for  climate  change  adaptation,  the  promotion  of  adaptation
policies  and  actions  in  all  sectors,  the  establishment  of  monitoring  mechanisms  for  the
evaluation and review of adaptation policies and the strengthening of the adaptive capacity of the
Greek society through awareness and dissemination actions.
Apart  from  public  policies,  the  process  of  addressing  climate  change  can  undoubtedly  be
accelerated if established growth models are adjusted in order to ensure long-term sustainability.
Under conditions of depletion of natural resources worldwide, a focus on more efficient use of
resources  and  minimisation  of  waste  emerges  is  the  obvious  solution.  The  model  of  a  linear
economy  prevailing  today  (sourcing  –  manufacturing  –  use  –  disposal),  on  which  most
economies since the Industrial Revolution have relied, is no longer sustainable. Just like nature,
which  operates  in  a  circular  manner,  business  activity  can  become  sustainable  by  switching
from  the  linear  model  to  a  circular  one.  Circular  economy  means  that  the  value  of  products,
materials  and  resources  is  maintained  in  the  economy  for  as  long  as  possible  and  waste
generation is minimised.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  transition  to  a  circular  economy  requires  interventions  on  the  supply  side,  such  as  eco-
design and longer life cycles of products, as well as on the demand side, through a change in
consumption  patterns  and  a  more  efficient  management  of  waste,  with  appropriate  financial
incentives and community engagement. This transition is expected to have a positive effect on
production, employment, climate, nature, natural resources and social well-being (11).
Along these lines, consumers can modify their behaviour and favour more sustainable practices,
as  consumer  demand  can  be  a  powerful  driver,  encouraging  companies  to  switch  to  more
sustainable production practices and environmentally-friendly products. Another example is our
dietary habits that have a devastating effect on the planet’s natural resources, land and water
reserves. A lower consumption of meat and dairy products would bring substantial savings on
cultivated  land  and  water  resources,  reduce  carbon  emissions  and  help  to  gradually  restore
forests and wildlife.
Focusing further on solutions, probably the most important thing we can do is educate the youth.
Education  is  a  vital  element  of  the  global  response  to  climate  change,  as  it  supports  young
people  to  understand  the  impact  of  global  warming,  inspires  changes  in  their  behaviour  and
increases climate literacy, limiting the scope for controversy over this serious issue.
It is for these reasons that the Bank of Greece, through the work of the Climate Change Impact
Study  Committee,  addresses  climate  literacy  and  has  in  the  past  decade  organised  a  large
number of conferences, workshops, seminars and round-table discussions, as well as a public
consultation on climate and energy issues, ahead of the Paris Convention in 2015.
Furthermore, the Bank of Greece and the Goulandris Museum of Natural History signed in 2018 a
memorandum  of  cooperation  for  the  design  and  the  implementation  of  an  educational
programme for young students, based on the research work of the CCISC. By educating the
youth we are empowering the next generation, the one that will be facing most of the impact of
climate  change,  to  act  and  address  climate-related  problems  and  to  build  a  new  sustainable
society.
This  focus,  in  part,  explains  my  presence  here  at  the  American  College  of  Greece,  an
educational institution that acknowledges the importance of climate change and is committed to
develop  a  sustainability  culture  throughout  its  educational  practices.  Today’s  symposium,
exploring how Greece can tackle climate change, offers an opportunity for all, and especially for
the students, to be exposed to a variety of actors on climate change issues, stakeholders and
best practices. I would like to congratulate the organisers for taking this initiative and wish them
the best of success.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The 
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_Report_2019.pdf
Report 
Global 
Risks 
2019, 
14th 
Edition, 
World 
Economic 
Forum,
GDP contraction relative to base year GDP at constant 2008 prices.
CCISC (2011), The environmental, economic and social impacts of climate change in Greece, Bank of Greece,
pp. 453–457, available at: www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/ClimateChange_FullReport_bm.pdf
Τhe vulnerability analysis is included in CCISC (2015), National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS),
pp. 7-13, available at: www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/National_Adaptation_Strategy_Excerpts.pdf
CCISC (2011), The environmental, economic and social impacts of climate change in Greece, Bank of Greece,
pp. 453–457, available at: www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/ClimateChange_FullReport_bm.pdf
Carney,  M.,  “A  transition  in  thinking  and  action”,  speech  at  the  International  Climate  Risk  Conference  for
Supervisors,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  Amsterdam,  6  Αpril  2018,  available  at:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/speech/2018/a-transition-in-thinking-and-action-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf?
la=en&hash=82F57A11AD2FAFD4E822C3B3F7E19BA23E98BF67
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
www.banque-france.fr/en/financial-stability/international-role/network-greening-financial-system
According to Mark Carney (Governor of the Bank of England) and Michael Bloomberg (chair of the Task Force on
Climate-related  Financial  Disclosures),  “…  financial  disclosure  is  essential  to  a  market-based  solution  to
climate change. A properly functioning market will price in the risks associated with climate change and reward
firms that mitigate them. As its impact becomes more commonplace and public policy responses more active,
climate change has become a material risk that isn’t properly disclosed..”, The Guardian, 14.12.2016, available
at: 
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-
information-investors-deliver-solutions
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.mepletter171010_Urtasun.en.pdf?
utm_medium=email&utm_source=nefoundation&utm_content=8+-+response&utm_campaign=banks-22-
Nov&source=banks-22-Nov
 www.unepfi.org/banking/bankingprinciples/
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
