   NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Opening remarks at the presentation of the Inflation 
Report – May 2019  
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
          Belgrade, 15 May 2019 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the May Inflation Report. We will give you an overview of the current 
macroeconomic developments, our new inflation and economic activity projections, as well as monetary 
policy decisions in the period since the previous Report. 
To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  positive  economic  trends  have  continued  in  2019  – 
macroeconomic and financial stability have been preserved, economic, investment and external trade 
activities  have  increased,  while  the  share  of  our  country’s  public  debt  in  GDP  has  contracted  even 
further.  All  of  this  has  been  achieved  despite  the  adverse  effects  of  some  factors  from  the 
international environment, notably the slowdown in euro area growth.  
For six years in a row, inflation has been low and stable, and we expect it to remain so in the coming 
period as well. 
In accordance with our expectations, inflation has continued to move within the  bounds of the target 
tolerance band (3.0±1.5%) in 2019. In April this year, consumer price growth equalled 3.1% y-o-y, with 
more than half of the increase attributable to the rise in the prices of vegetables on account of the low 
base  and  last  year’s  dampened  yield  in  other  parts  of  Europe  as  well.  Other  than  that,  inflationary 
pressures remained low on both the cost and supply sides, as attested by the core inflation of 1.4% in 
April. As announced in February, we expect inflation to slow down during the next 12 months due to the 
base effect from vegetable prices. We expect it to come close to the target midpoint over the medium 
term, which will be  facilitated by growth in aggregate  demand.  To put it briefly, inflation will remain 
low and stable within the bounds of the target tolerance band until the end of the projection horizon, 
i.e.  over  the  next  two  years.  These  are  also  the  expectations  of  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors. 
Anchored  inflation  expectations  are  indicative  of  monetary  policy  credibility,  which  contributes  to 
greater resilience to potential negative effects of developments in the international environment. 
 Financial conditions in the domestic market have remained favourable. 
The favourable financial conditions in the domestic market are also evidenced by movements in loan 
rates, which dropped to their lowest levels in the dinar segment of the market at the start of the year. 
The  declining  interest  rates,  coupled  with  the  rising  economic  activity  and  positive  labour  market 
1 
 
developments,  contribute  to  the  increase  in  lending  activity.  Although  the  y-o-y  growth  in  lending  is 
measured in two digits, the share of loans in GDP is stable and poses no risk to either price or financial 
stability.  Through  our  activities,  we  have  bolstered  banking  sector  stability  additionally  in  the  prior 
period  –  the  share  of  NPLs  in  total  loans  declined  to  5.5%  at  end-March  2019,  its  lowest  level  on 
record.  
  Favourable fiscal trends have been maintained.  
As  in  the  past  two  years,  2019  has  also  seen  a  fiscal  surplus,  which  measured  0.9%  of  GDP  at  the 
consolidated  level  in  Q1,  while  the  central  government  public  debt  declined  further  and  equalled 
50.9% of GDP at end-March. The fiscal policy, in full coordination with the monetary policy, stimulates 
economic  growth,  without  giving  rise  to  inflationary  pressures  –  growth  in  the  government’s  capital 
expenditures contributes to the increase in investments, while rising public sector wages and pensions 
provide support to sustainable consumption growth.  
  2 
 
Stable  economic  growth  is  driven  by  investments,  propped  by  the  improved  macroeconomic  and 
financial climate.  
According to preliminary data of the Serbian Statistical Office, GDP growth in the first quarter this year 
equalled 2.3% y-o-y. Excluding the seasonal effect, quarterly GDP growth equalled 0.9%, meaning that 
economic  activity  has  upheld  the  upward  trajectory  for  18  consecutive  months.  Though  growth  in 
external demand slowed down as of mid-2018, according to our estimate, the achieved GDP growth is 
attributable  to  domestic  factors.  A  key  contribution  to  growth  came  from  fixed  investments,  which 
posted an s-a growth of 7.4% in the first quarter – namely, private investment by 8.0%, and government 
by  4.7%.  Serbia’s  economy  has  become  more  attractive  to  investors  mainly  owing  to  the  improved 
business  climate  and  favourable  financial  conditions,  while  the  implementation  of  infrastructure 
projects  has  also  accelerated.  In  regard  to  this,  we  should  note  the  increased  profitability  of  the 
economy, which ended the previous year with a net profit of RSD 500 bn. This is an important source of 
investment and indicates that investment in our economy pays off. Our growth forecast for this year has 
been  retained  at  3.5%,  and  we  expect  it  to  pick  up  to  around  4%  in  the  coming  years,  with  growth 
resting on firm grounds, primarily owing to the preserved macroeconomic stability. 
  Growth  sustainability  is  also  confirmed  by  the  greater  integration  of  our  economy  in  the  global 
economic flows – both trade and capital, since FDI inflows are on the rise.    
Although  affected  by  the  slack  in  external  demand  and  steel  quotas,  the  export  of  goods  recorded  a 
7.9% y-o-y increase in Q1 2019, owing to the expansion of supply on account of earlier investments and 
accelerated sale of the surplus of agricultural commodities carried over from 2018.  On the other hand, 
the  expansion  of  output  and  investment  boosted  the  import  of  equipment  and  intermediate  goods 
and, in turn, the overall import  of goods by 9.9% y-o-y. At the same  time, the inflow of capital in the 
financial  account,  largely  on  account  of  FDI  of  over  one  billion  euros  since  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
covered the current account deficit and brought the FX reserves up. Since most of the FDI inflow went to 
tradable  sectors,  in  the  medium  term  we  expect  a  further  rise  in  exports  and  a  gradual  narrowing  of 
external imbalance.  With external debt on a downward trajectory, this further strengthens the external 
position of the country.   
3 
  Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
What has previously been said clearly indicates that Serbia’s economic agenda continues to yield robust 
results, reflecting favourably on the credit rating and country risk premium. Let us remind you: at the 
end of the last year Standard & Poor’s upgraded the outlook from stable to positive, while Fitch affirmed 
a  stable  outlook  in  early  May,  citing  economic  policy  continuity  aimed  at  further  strengthening  of 
macroeconomic  indicators  and  public  debt  reduction.  Lower  risk  premium,  measured  by  EMBI,  which 
almost reached its historical low  in early May, also speaks in favour of the previously mentioned fact, 
and this is also backed up in practice by investments of foreign investors in securities, as witnessed by 
this  month’s  successful  implementation  of  seven-year  dinar  securities  auctions.  We  believe  that  the 
good  results  of  our  economic  programme  will  also  be  confirmed  by  the  findings  of  the  current  IMF 
mission. 
The  achieved  success  was  facilitated  by  the  adoption  of  adequate,  well-coordinated  and  timely 
economic  policy  measures.  Integral  to  that  is  the  monetary  policy  which,  through  provision  and 
preservation of price and financial stability, significantly contributed to the sustainable acceleration of 
economic  growth.  The  fact  that  the  results  were  achieved  amid  uncertainties  in  the  international 
environment  only  confirms  the  efficiency  of  the  monetary  policy  and  the  measures  the  NBS  takes  in 
order to strengthen the resilience of our economy.  
In the coming period too, monetary policy will continue  to be predictable and consistent in delivering 
low  and  stable  inflation  in  the  medium  term.  As  the  key  risks  in  the  monetary  policy  pursuit  still 
emanate  from  the  international  environment,  the  NBS  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  and  analyse 
movements in the international financial and commodity markets and assess their impact on economic 
developments in Serbia. 
Allow me to conclude by saying that our economic policy has made the economy more vital and capable 
of addressing the market challenges we had faced in the past and those that lie ahead. Serbia is now a 
country where doing business and finding a job is easier and the living standard is rising on sustainable 
grounds. Of course,  further improvements are still possible, first  and foremost by means of structural 
4 
 
reforms which will sustain a further rise in investment, competitiveness, profitability and employment. 
This will enable us to preserve the achieved results and respond to future challenges. 
I will end my introductory address  here  and give the  floor to my colleagues from the Department for 
Economic  Research  and  Statistics  to  present  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  current  developments  and  our 
latest macroeconomic projections. 
 5 
