Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with Politico
Interview by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  Politico,
conducted by Politico on 14 January 2019 and published on 17 January 2019.
Are we heading for a clash between regulators and banks?
 No, I don’t believe so. Firstly, the kind of increases in capital requirements you will see are an
improvement of the rules in regards to risk sensitivity, which are very bank specific, depending on
their business model. It is not an average increase of capital for all banks, as such. Second, the
Basel implementation is spread over nine years until 2027 — nine years!
Are banks overplaying this?
I think that most of them are overplaying it. You always need to look at whether risk sensitivities
are  considered  adequately.  But  that  is  up  to  the  supervisor.  The  rules  in  Basel  are  general
abstract rules.
Former  ECB  executive  board  member  Vítor  Constâncio  warned  against  the  risks  of
shadow banking, and Luis de Guindos has continued along that line …
I fully agree with him. As banks are regulated more strongly, some business has become much
costlier for them to take on. A lot of business moved over into the shadow banking sector, which
is interlinked to the banking sector. This is why this sector is so important to look at, not as a
banking supervisor, but from a financial stability point of view.
For me, the first step would be to ensure that you have much more knowledge about a sector
that is growing and increasing in importance. They influence liquidity in some asset classes in
the market and might thus have strong implications for financial stability.
How do we do that? Stronger disclosure rules?
I would first like to know what is the exposure, what is the risk, what are the interconnections in
the sector. Then I’d ask myself, do we need more rules? So, more reporting, yes. A different way
of reporting.
Because the current setup is insufficient?
Yes, it is insufficient. Somebody has to look into it. If these are global players, perhaps the global
standard setters should look at it. And not only in a static way. The mistake you should never do
is only to look at what you have in your balance sheet. You also need to look at the flows in and
out.
On to monetary policy. Inflation has been dipping since October.
Which we projected. So, nothing surprising.
You wouldn’t say we’ve been overly dependent on quantitative easing?
This is a little too much of a link to QE. We expected a dip in the inflation ratio. It was clear that
with the base effects of the energy prices, the inflation rate would drop. That’s why we’ve always
said  that  we  need  to  see  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation;  not  a  change  in  the
month that we just had but a sustained adjustment. The core inflation rate didn’t dip that much.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
You said in November that you expect rates to rise this year. Do you still think that?
I’ll wait for the projections coming in March before I change my view. I’m data-driven in this, and I
think that as we are still in the environment we projected. I do not feel disheartened yet and then
you have to think where you will start with a rise in interest rates. We have different key rates, not
only one.
I  wanted  to  ask  you  about  the  ECB  jobs:  Has  the  appointment  process  become  too
political?
There  are  appointment  rules,  they  have  to  be  complied  with.  It’s  not  in  the  ECB’s  power  to
appoint. Other people appoint. We have to accept the rules.
But do you not have a view on it?
For me, it’s important to have people proposed that can do their job because of their experience
and their knowledge. That for me is the most important thing.
Soon,  we’ll  have  a  new  European  Parliament,  a  new  Commission,  and  a  new  ECB
president. What’s the next focus for supervisors and regulators?
Looking forward to the next five years, for sure we have to work further on getting the banks to
clean up their legacy, to strengthen their resilience, not only in regard to capital and liquidity but
also in regard to risk management. This is a very important issue.
What  we  will  do  in  the  next  two  years,  among  other  things,  is  to  look  at  credit  underwriting
standards.  This  is  very  important  when  the  sun  has  been  shining  for  so  long,  with  so  much
liquidity in a low interest rate environment. This is usually the environment where banks drop their
credit underwriting standards, which then lays the ground for the next crisis. So, we will look into
credit underwriting standards, in particular in real estate and leveraged finance.
When will we see development in credit underwriting?
This year. It’s in our supervisory priorities. We will have dedicated onsite inspections to assess
the quality of specific asset class exposures. We are already starting on drafting a methodology.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
