Carlos da Silva Costa: The quality of management
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  Conference
organised by the Economic and Social Council (CES) “The Quality of Management, Lisbon, 10
May 2019.
As prepared for delivery.
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  President  of  the  Economic  and  Social  Council, António  Correia  de
Campos, for the kind invitation to join you today. I am delighted to be here.
The  subject  of  management  quality  is  of  paramount  importance  for  the  sustained  economic
development of our country and I believe it is very relevant that we also discuss it in the context of
social dialogue.
This is a subject that concerns not only investors but also workers, suppliers and creditors and
the customers of a firm, as well as the community the firm is a part of. All social partners depend
upon and determine the quality of the firm’s management. They have a role to play in promoting
the quality of management. They are also creditors and beneficiaries of the gains resulting from
our firms’ management quality.
The  civic  and  institutional  environment  determines  the  principles  and  values  that  guide  the
management  of  organisations,  in  as  much  as  the  legal  framework  determines  such
management and, in particular, how sustainably it performs. 
This  reflection  is  all  the  more  pressing  given  that  any  society  is  living  in  a  constant  state  of
tension between the aspirations for consumption and well-being of the population and the ability
of its firms and organisations to generate income in order to meet such aspirations. 
This is the case of Portuguese society. Today, we are living in a phase of economic growth that
is already distant from the emergency situation we experienced at the beginning of the decade.
However, Portuguese society’s aspirations to individual well-being and social equity exceed the
production capacity of the economy. And this misalignment between aspirations and possibilities,
which is dynamic, can only be addressed with more and better economic growth.
Over  the  last  two  decades,  Portuguese  GDP  per  capita  has  remained  30–40%  below  the
European Union average , a gap that was not overcome by the convergence observed in the
most recent past. This shows how much leeway there is for us to make up.
1
It is therefore important to identify and implement conditions that promote the sustainable growth
of the potential output — that is to make the Portuguese economy structurally able to grow at
higher rates in the medium and long term, regardless of cyclical oscillations.
We know that what separates the Portuguese economy from the best performing economies in
terms  of  per  capita  output  are  the productivity differences for every hour worked, rather
than the number of hours worked. The solution to achieving sustainable growth of our GDP
per capita should therefore focus on activating the ‘levers’ that determine the productivity of our
workers.
From among the main productivity ‘levers’, it is usual to highlight the following four:
1.  Employee skills; 
2.  Capital levels per worker; 
3.  The innovation ecosystem; and 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4.  The attractiveness of the business environment. 
Two  ‘levers’  are  often  ignored,  which  are  decisive  if  all  others  are  to  achieve  their  maximum
potential:  these  are,  on  the  one  hand,  the entrepreneurial  capacity  (I  would  call  it  the
‘entrepreneurial drive’ of a given community) and, on the other hand, the nature, robustness
and quality of the management models.
For the combination of capital and labour to result in the production that is desired by the market,
a firm needs an entrepreneur, an organisation and a management model.
I will focus today on the importance of the model and the quality of management for firms and
organisations’ sustainable development and, consequently, 
For potential output growth; 
For  the  capacity  of  a  given  community  to  strike  a  balance  between  aspirations  and
possibilities;
And, through redistribution, for safeguarding social cohesion, or containing causal factors of
conflict or social disharmony.
The  management  model  reflects  the  way  in  which  the  manager  coordinates  environment,
organisation  and  strategy.  That  is,  the  management  model  defines  an  organisation,  which
designs  a  strategy  in  such  a  way  as  to  take  the  best  advantage  and  even  influence  the
environment that surrounds it.
This  coordination  can  lead  to  a  differentiation  of  the  firm’s  performance  from  that  it  would
naturally have had, if it had only passively adjusted to its environment.
One example of this differentiation can be seen in the comparison between the evolution of large
textile  manufacturers  in  Vale  do Ave  and  Galicia  in  the  last  few  decades.    The  differences  in
performance are not found in the sectoral category, which is identical, or in the workers, who
come from the same social stratum, or in their geographical location, as they are close to each
other.  The differences arise precisely from the management models used.
Widely known academic studies, written namely by Professor John Van Reenen, estimate that
approximately 30% of the productivity differences between countries are explained by differences
in management quality. For the specific case of the Portuguese economy, this estimate is not
very  different: 27 % of the productivity gap between Portugal and the most productive
economy under analysis – that of the US – is related to the difference in management
quality.
As evidenced in the latest edition of the Global Competitiveness Index published by the World
Economic  Forum,  there  are  15  European  Union  economies  ahead  of  Portugal.  In  the  list  of
indicators  where  our  country 
to
entrepreneurship and management models, namely: 
is  worst  classified,  some  are 
intimately  connected 
Attitude towards risk, in which we are 80th in 140 economies;
Willingness to delegate authority – position 70 out of 140;
And integration of disruptive ideas – position 46 out of 140. 
While these international comparisons point to an important margin for progress in our country,
national  data  also  show  a  significant  potential  to  promote  productivity  through  improved
management. 
Statistics Portugal launched the first edition of the Management Practice Survey in 2017. This
survey  was  targeted  at  senior  managers  of  firms  based  in  Portugal  and  aimed  to  gather
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
qualitative  information  on  their  management  practices,  in  a  variety  of  areas,  from  strategy  to
organisation, monitoring of objectives and decision making.
This is a means for assessing the impact of management practices on productivity and on other
performance indicators of Portuguese firms.
Based on the results of this survey, Statistics Portugal has constructed a composite indicator
allowing  the  sample  of  firms  to  be  divided  into  two  groups,  depending  on  the  quality  of  their
management practices. Compared to others, the firms with the best practices have,
Higher returns, 
Higher turnover and gross value added growth rates; 
Higher investment rates; 
A greater increase in the number of employees with higher education levels;
And a greater use of information and communication technologies.
In addition, firms with better management practices also have higher gross value added per
worker, i.e. they have higher levels of productivity per worker.
The  promising  nature  of  these  first  results  certainly  merits  further  development  and
consolidation. That said, they suggest that improving our management models could make our
economy more productive.
I would like to draw attention to three ways in which the management models of the Portuguese
business fabric can progress. 
The first of these is the quality of the organisation. A well-conceived organisation adapted to
the challenges faced by the firm can trigger the functions and competences most relevant to its
success.  Empirical  research  shows  that when  Portuguese  firms  are  reorganised  in
response  to  an  external  shock, adding  a  new  hierarchical  level  of  managers,  their
productivity accelerates.
A second vector that promotes management quality is the size of the organisation. Today,  any
firm with ambition is facing global, complex, extensive and constantly changing markets.
Responding to such challenges requires large organisations, able to capitalise on and mobilise
quality  resources.  There  are  already  empirical  studies  that  confirm  this  positive  link  between
company size and management quality.
With a productive fabric like ours, largely made up of family-run businesses transitioning to the
3rd generation, the increase in the size of the organisations is closely linked to the business view
of the families holding the equity. 
This  leads  the  way  to  the  third  vector  which  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to: the
relationship between ownership and management.
Empirical research has also found evidence that firms where there is share capital from outside
the founding family are associated with best management practices.
Data also suggest that the mere separation of ownership and management is beneficial: as a
general  rule,  the  quality  of  the  management  is  higher  when  it  is  entrusted  to  people
outside the family that owns the firm. 
Professionalisation of management is therefore a necessary condition to ensure the survival and
long-term sustainability of family businesses and thus preserve their share capital.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, the separation of ownership and management makes it possible to strike the right
balance between the legitimate interests of the different stakeholders in the firm, thereby also
contributing to its sustainability.
Meaning that, in a context where family businesses are predominant and where a large number
is  transitioning  to  the  3rd  generation,  or  is  already  controlled  by  the  3rd  generation,  serious
consideration needs to be given to the separation of entrepreneurial, ownership and managerial
functions. Specifically with regard to firms in the stage of generational transition, it is important to
ensure that the ownership function is not only distinct from the management function but also
exercised through decision-making mechanisms established in the firm’s articles, with a view to
the sustainability of the organisation and the empowerment of the management. Firms should
prevent  the  decision-making  mechanisms  coming  to  a  standstill  owing  to  lack  of  interest  or
differences  between  heirs,  rendering  management  powerless  and  calling  into  question  the
continuity of viable firms.
In addition, public policy should favour the segregation of these functions so as to ensure that
there is room for management professionalisation and thus improve the quality of management.
In  fact,  public  policy  can  encourage  management  professionalisation  in  family-run  firms  in
different ways:
First,  by  re-analysing  the  tax  treatment  of  profit  distribution  to  encourage  differentiation
between  ownership  and  management,  and  to  foster  a  suitable  balance  between  profit
distribution and reinvestment;
Second, making the requirement for firms to present audited accounts widespread in order
to  give  the  manager  the  necessary  leeway  to  balance  the  various  legitimate  interests  –
stakeholders – in the most beneficial way for the firm;
And  third,  by  developing  and  providing  a  new  figure  or  “legal  entity”  that  congregates  the
shareholdings of a given family and awards the function of ownership of a given firm to an
institution,  i.e.  creating  the  “family  holding”  figure,  through  the  legal  classification  of  a
centralised management model of the holdings of the members of one family; this model
should be optional, supplemental and adjusted to the specific features of family businesses,
with a statutory and tax treatment that:
 – promotes the holding company’s commitment towards its holdings and their locations; 
– guarantees the necessary legal certainty;
– is simple and easy to access by smaller firms.
Finally, economic policy actors can make an important contribution by fostering widespread
knowledge and open discussion on the impact of the quality of management on business
productivity  and  the  well-being  of  society.  This  contribution  is  being  made  today  by  the
Economic and Social Council.  The same contribution is also made by Banco de Portugal,
 – through the inclusion of the topic of management quality in its research agenda;
– through the production, publishing and analysis of quality statistical information that can
support the study of the topic; and
–  by  raising  the  banking  system’s  awareness  of  the  strategic  importance  of  considering
management models, in addition to the actual collateral, in the risk assessment of firms and
their projects.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In short, there is no doubt that the quality of management is central to the challenge of promoting
productivity. The good news is that Portugal still has much to gain from activating this ‘lever’.  In
our  day  and  age,  marked  by  such  a  strong  heterogeneity  and  weak  overall  productivity,  it  is
imperative that we do not miss this strategic opportunity.
Finally,  let  me  thank  you  again  for  the  invitation  to  be  with  you  at  this  conference.  I  will  be
available should you wish to comment or ask any questions.
References
Bandiera,  O.,  Guiso,  L.,  Prat,  A.,  and  Sadun,  R.  (2015), Matching  Firms,  Managers,  and
Incentives, Journal of Labor Economics 33, no. 3 (Part 1): 623-681
Bloom,  N.,  Eifert,  B.,  Mahajan, A.,  McKenzie,  D.  and  Roberts,  J.  (2013), Does  Management
Matter? Evidence from India, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, vol.
128(1), pages 1-51 
Bloom,  N.,  R.  Sadun  and  J.  Van  Reenen  (2016), Management  as  a  Technology?,  NBER
Working Paper No. 22327, Revised in October 2017
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2015), Do Private Equity Owned Firms Have Better
Management Practices?, American Economic Review, 105 (5): 442-46
Caliendo,  Mion,  Opromolla  and  Rossi-Hansberg  (2015), Productivity  and  organization  in
Portuguese firms, NBER Working Paper 21811
Statistics  Portugal  (2018), Enterprises  with  more  structured  management  practices  present  a
better economic performance, more qualified employees and higher ICT usage - 2016, Press
Release
Lemos,  R.  and  Scur,  D.  (2018), All  in  the  family?  CEO  choice  and  firm  organization.  CEP
Discussion  Papers  (CEPDP1528).  Centre  for  Economic  Performance,  London  School  of
Economics and Political Science, London, UK.
Office for National Statistics, United Kingdom (2018) Management practices and productivity in
British production and services industries - initial results from the Management and Expectations
Survey: 2016 
1
Nominal data (Source: Eurostat).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
