Ed Sibley: Functioning of the insurance market, key industry issues
and challenges ahead
Address by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
to Insurance Ireland Annual Industry Lunch 2019, Dublin, 8 May 2019.
 With  thanks  to  Brian  Balmforth,  Cathal  Lafferty,  Stephen  Marrey,  Deirdre  Mullally,  Tim
O’Hanrahan and Michael O’Sullivan for their assistance with these remarks.
Introduction
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. I would like to thank Insurance Ireland for the invitation to
speak at today’s Annual Insurance Lunch.
As you all know, insurance serves a critical role in the functioning of a modern society, through
reducing  uncertainty  by  protecting  people  and  businesses  against  the  risks  of  future  events.
Policyholders rely on insurance to provide support in the event of loss or serious accident, to plan
for retirement, to enable them to confidently invest in and run their businesses and much more
besides. On the other side of their balance sheets, insurers provide a stable flow of funds to
support the investment flows modern economies and societies need.
In other words, a functioning financial services system that sustainably serves the needs of the
economy and its consumers, needs functioning and trustworthy insurance markets and firms. In
Ireland,  the  Central  Bank  applies  a  risk-based  supervision  of  insurance  firms  in  line  with
international  norms  anchored  by  our  PRISM  methodology.  It  strives  to  deliver  effectively  in
ensuring that the system as a whole is, and individual firms operating within it are, appropriately
resilient. It seeks to ensure that regulated firms:
have  sufficient  financial  resources  (capital  and  liquidity),  including  under  a  plausible  but
severe stress;
have sustainable business models to allow them to prosper through the economic cycle;
are well run, appropriately governed, have effective risk management and control functions
and appropriate cultures; and
can recover if they get into difficulty, and we can resolve them without significant externalities
or taxpayer support if they cannot.
1
So with this, and the strategic theme  of today’s event in mind, I will cover the functioning of the
insurance market today, key issues that affect the whole industry and discuss the challenges
ahead that need to be addressed. 
Market functioning
Of course, to speak of one insurance market is a gross oversimplification. There are multiple
markets, most of which function well, covering life, non-life and health sectors; with domestic
markets served by firms authorised in Ireland and abroad and significant volumes of insurance
services  exported  from  Ireland .  Our  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  must  be
appropriate,  proportionate  and  effective  for  all  these  markets  and  the  complex  array  of  firms
operating within them. To this end, we seek to operate to and influence the European norms of
3
regulation and supervision . 
2
Our focus on improving the resilience of Irish authorised insurance firms from both a financial
resources and a business model perspective, together with driving improvements in governance,
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
risk management and culture should contribute to the stability of those insurance markets while
ensuring that policyholders can continue to have confidence that their policies will pay-out when
required.
Of all these different markets, the domestic non-life insurance market spends the most time in
the  spotlight,  due  to  both  its  importance  and  the  challenges  in  it,  including  the  volatility  of
premiums  over  the  last  few  years  and  the  availability  of  insurance  in  certain  sectors  and  for
certain risks.
Before, moving into areas within the remit of the Central Bank, it is important to emphasize that
all  actions  that  reduce  the  frequency  and  impact  of  injuries  are  obviously  worthwhile.
Improvements  in  transport  infrastructure;  enforcement  of  road  safety  rules;  public  awareness
campaigns; and on-going emphasis on health and safety can all contribute to a reduction in the
frequency and impact of injuries. There is also work underway to reduce the impact of fraudulent
claims and uninsured driving.
The Irish non-life market is served by firms authorised in Ireland and elsewhere in the European
Union.  Indeed,  this  provision  of  service  from  abroad  is  an  important  element  of  the  market  in
Ireland, as it facilitates: 
 greater competition,
 lower premiums than otherwise would be the case; and
 greater choice.
Nonetheless,  as  we  have  seen  with  the  failure  of  overseas  insurance  providers,  there  are
inherent  risks  with  this  model,  which  require  continued  work  at  a  European  level  to  drive
improved convergence of supervisory practices and, critically, greater consistency in insurance
protection schemes and the approach to resolving failing insurance firms. This continues to be a
priority  in  our  engagement  at  a  European  level.  It  also  requires  those  intermediating  between
some of these firms and Irish consumers to take more responsibility for assessing the financial
soundness and resilience of the underlying insurer.
The actions from the Cost of Insurance Working Group  are focused on addressing some of the
underlying  factors  contributing  to  insurance  costs  being  higher  in  Ireland  than  many  other  EU
countries. I welcome these measures, including those set out within the second Personal Injuries
Commission (PIC) report  to bring greater consistency and standardisation to personal injuries
awards.
5
4
The Central Bank has delivered on the various actions relating to our mandate arising from the
Cost of Insurance Working Group. These actions include: 
providing  greater  transparency  to  policyholders  at  the  point  of  renewal  for  certain  non-life
insurance products;
providing for the extension of the renewal period;
establishing  the  national  claims  information  database  (NCID),  initially  for  private  motor
insurance; and 
preparing to publish the first report on the data collected in the NCID in the second half of
this year.
Given  the  concerns  regarding  the  availability  and  cost  of  Employers’  Liability  (EL)  and  Public
Liability (PL) insurance, and the associated impact on small and medium-sized enterprises in
particular,  the  Central  Bank  will  report  to  the  Working  Group  this  year  on  the  feasibility  of
including EL and PL data in the NCID.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The courts system also plays a vital role in the functioning of the insurance market. It provides an
independent,  fair  and  impartial  mechanism  to  settle  more  complex  insurance  claims.  This
process also sets precedents for settlement of other claims.
However, as recognised by the Honourable Mr. Justice Frank Clarke, Chief Justice, “an overall
set  of  judge  made  guidelines  would  contribute  not  only  to  consistency  but  also  to  the  proper
calibration  of  the  overall  level  of  awards” .  I  also  note  the  views  expressed  by  many  at  the
7
Personal Injuries Assessment Board (PIAB) conference of 10 April, that the Judicial Council Bill
needs to be progressed. One of the tasks of the Judicial Council, once established, will be the
compilation of guidelines for general damages for various types of personal injury.
6
This is important as average premium rates over an insurance cycle are driven by the overall
cost of claims. This includes a risk margin to deal with the potential uncertainty of the cost of
settling  the  claim.  The  greater  the  uncertainty,  the  greater  the  risk  margin  and  overall  claims
charge.  Policy  actions,  such  as  judicial  guidelines,  that  lead  to  greater  certainty  and  reduced
volatility  of  claims  and  create  a  more  stable  reserving  environment  for  insurance  firms  are
needed. A more stable claims environment could contribute to an increase in the availability of
insurance,  and  a  reduction  in  premium  levels,  providing  the  insurance  industry  shares  the
benefits of the changes with their customers. 
Key issues
In considering future strategy, it is important to consider the current landscape, issues and risks
as well as the desired future. In this context, I will cover seven issues relevant to all sectors and
firms.
a) Brexit
To  touch  briefly  on  Brexit,  since  the  June  2016  referendum,  the  Central  Bank  has  sought  to
ensure that all insurance firms operating in the state are appropriately prepared for a ‘hard’ Brexit,
the  risk  of  which  remains,  and  that  risks  to  consumers  are  mitigated  to  the  greatest  extent
possible.
We  have  also  seen  significant  volumes  of  financial  services  firms  seeking  authorisation  to
protect their ability to provide services across the European Union. In Ireland, we have approved
14  Brexit-related  insurance  applications  for  new  authorisations  and  notifications  of  material
changes of business for existing firms.
The business models we have received and considered to date typically include:
Domestic Irish risk - that has been written from the UK on a Freedom of Services (FOS) /
8
Freedom  of  Establishment  (FOE)  basis.  This  includes  material  levels  of  with-profits
business; and
Pan-European specialty risks - that have previously been written from the UK on an FOS/
FOE  basis  -  this  includes:  marine,  aviation,  trade  credit  and  political  risk,  and  cyber  risk
insurance.
As  well  as  discharging  our  critical  gatekeeper  role,  by  ensuring  these  firms  meet  our
requirements,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  enhancing  the  regulatory  and  policy  framework  to
reflect  changes  in  the  sector,  for  example,  making  enhancements  to  our  framework  for  third
country branches and with profits insurance.
b) Operational Resilience
Operational  resilience  is  a  broad  and  increasingly  important  topic.  The  management  of
outsourcing  arrangements  and  safeguarding  IT  resilience  are  two  critical  components  of
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
operational resilience.
Many firms outsource a significant amount of their activities to an intra-group service company or
third party. With all outsourcing arrangements, boards and senior management must understand
that  they  are  placing  the  resilience  of  their  firm  into  the  hands  of  a  third-party  (or  a  group
company) and while they may be able to monitor the service during normal operations, when
something goes wrong, they are reliant on someone else to fix it.
To my mind, in some firms and for some risks, the levels of outsourcing are potentially excessive
and bring into question the substance of the operation of the firm in Ireland. We have taken action
to address specific instances where this is the case, and will continue to prioritise improvements
in this area, including the use of service companies. As noted by my colleague, Derville Rowland
last  week:  “when  it  comes  to  outsourcing  arrangements,  governance  and  risk  management
standards are emphatically not where they need to be.”   From the board down, this needs to
change,  such  that  insurance  firms  can  demonstrate  that  they  are  discharging  all  of  their
obligations  when  they  outsource  any  insurance  activities,  as  if  they  were  performing  them
themselves. Among other things, the Central Bank expects:
9
boards to have appropriate oversight and awareness of outsourcing arrangements and the
associated risks;
operational  oversight  to  be  clearly  designated  to  relevant  individuals,  functions  and/or
committees;
firms to make sure they have the appropriate skills and knowledge to effectively oversee and
understand arrangements, and their associated risks, from inception to conclusion; and
firms to prepare for the worst – considering what the loss of service providers would look
like, identify the potential triggers for this and finally, what actions would the company take to
minimise consumer detriment and interruption of service in such circumstances.
Turning  to  IT  resilience,  the  dependence  on  technology  in  insurance  services  continues  to
increase.  Too  many  firms  are  still  not  getting  the  fundamentals  right,  including  regarding  IT
security and continuity of services. This is not a solid foundation for the building of digital-based
strategies and greater investment in technology, processes and people is required.
Within  the  Central  Bank  we  have  a  developed  a  common  methodology  across  all  financial
sectors  to  assess  technology  risk  within  regulated  firms,  and  are  continuously  updating  our
approach in line with regulatory developments and best practice. For 2019, we are continuing to
push  firms  to  focus  on  the  fundamentals  while  also  enhancing  their  cyber  and  operational
resilience to be able to withstand, absorb, and recover from IT incidents.
c) Reinsurance
The  overall  levels  of  reinsurance  across  the  Irish  insurance  industry  are  relatively  stable.
However, we do see some firms increasing their levels of risk cession  and in particular firms
with a heavy reliance on other group entities. We have seen firms seeking to rely on significant
levels  of  outsourcing  and  reinsurance  to  the  extent  that  the  firm  and  its  board  cannot
demonstrate  it  is  discharging  its  responsibility  and  capacity  to  manage  the  risks  that  it  has
written. This should be outside of the board’s risk appetite, it is certainly outside of ours.
10
Where  individual  firms  use  extensive  reinsurance,  both  counterparty  and  concentration  risks
need  to  be  closely  managed  and  exposures  may  need  to  be  collateralised  to  reduce  the
associated risks.
d) Investments
Recent  Solvency  II  returns  are  showing  a  slow  but  noticeable  shift  towards  a  riskier  asset
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
allocation at the industry level. In particular, we have seen a marginal shift from sovereign debt
towards corporate debt
. In the search for yield, this is understandable. I would emphasise that
the  prudent  person  principle  under  Solvency  II  expect  firms  to  consider  the  security,  quality,
liquidity and profitability of their portfolio when assessing their investment exposures. While the
shifts  we  are  seeing  may  increase  the  yield  on  investments,  it  is  important  that  boards  and
executive management are ensuring that these changes are not at an undue cost to security,
quality or liquidity.
e) Individual Accountability and the Fitness and Probity (F&P) regime
The Central Bank continues to see significant shortcomings in compliance with F&P obligations
and  a  lack  of  awareness  in  the  industry  regarding  the  scope  of  the  F&P  regime.  This  is
concerning given firms are the first line of defence under the F&P regime, which is why Derville
12
Rowland and I wrote to all firms  early in April 2019 to highlight obligations and areas where
compliance was found to be lacking.
As  you  are  aware  the  future  ambition  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  introduce  an  Individual
Accountability  Framework  which  will  provide  more  powers  to  make  senior  management  in
regulated undertakings accountable for their actions. This would also see enhancements to the
current F&P regime, with further obligations on firms.
Regulated  firms  can  expect  to  see  a  continued  supervisory  focus  on  F&P.  I  expect  that  the
boards and senior management of all firms to be fully aware of their F&P responsibilities and to
ensure that all individuals within firms comply with F&P Standards.
f) Recovery planning
Internationally and in Ireland, insurance is behind banking in recovery planning, both in terms of
the regulatory framework and firms’ preparedness. This needs to change.
Effective recovery planning, should include “triggers” for implementation, escalation processes,
recovery  options,  and  the  identification  of  financial  or  operational  impediments  to  recovery.  I
expect you to be formally considering recovery planning as part of strategy setting and capital
planning,  including  consideration  of  the  some  of  the  issues  I  have  discussed  already  –
outsourcing, reinsurance, IT resilience and so forth. I also expect firms to address impediments
to resolution as they are identified. 
The Central Bank’s and EIOPA’s focus on resolution planning will continue to increase. The 2020
Review of Solvency II for example, which the Central Bank is taking an active role in, is wide
ranging in scope covering many fundamental areas of the regime, including insurance guarantee
schemes and recovery and resolution.
g) Diversity
In March 2019, the Central Bank published its third annual report on the levels of gender diversity
of the most senior appointments in the Irish financial services sector
13
. 
On both an absolute and comparative basis, there is a woeful lack of gender diversity at senior
levels  in  the  insurance  sector.  In  insurance,  22%  of  applications  for  approval  for  these  most
senior roles were for women, compared to 23% in 2017. In other words, the insurance industry
went  backwards  in  2018.  Applications  for  board  positions  increased  to  36%  in  2018  in  the
banking sector with insurance stuck at 20%.
The analysis continues to show a pronounced gender imbalance at board level and in revenue
generating roles. In the insurance sector, in revenue generating roles, the male to female ratio is
currently  6:1  at  directorship  level  (15%  female  representation).  For  risk  management/  control
roles, the male to female ratio is 4:1 (20% female representation).
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
While some firms are starting to make progress, much more needs to be done to increase the
diversity of experience, thought, background and attributes at senior levels to:
reduce the likelihood of groupthink;
reduce overconfidence and improve decision-making;
enhance culture and improve risk management; and
increase the level of internal challenge in firms and reduce excessive resistance to external
challenge.
The Future
Turning now to considering the future. Thinking about our uncertain future and preparing for the
opportunities and risks that it presents should be in the DNA of insurance firms, but we are not
seeing enough of this thinking. Insurance is at the front line of so much of this uncertainty – be it
climate change, technology disruption, or demographic changes. Not only does the insurance
industry need to adapt to these changes, but it can also shape the wider societal response to
them. Each of them could be the subject of speeches on their own, but in the interests of the
limited time I have left, I will be brief. 
The  insurance  industry  is  materially  exposed  to  climate  change.  Physical  risks  will  impact
liabilities (including the costs of claims) and assets; and transition risks could be extremely costly
on the investment side. EIOPA has calculated that 13% or €1.4trn of European insurers' assets
are exposed to climate transition risk - i.e., the change in asset values that might occur in the
shift to a low-carbon economy. But, this also presents an opportunity for the insurance industry
14
to play a positive and proactive role in shaping the wider response to the climate change risks
– in terms of the investment choices that you are making.
Ihave  already  touched  on  the  fundamentals  of  IT  resilience  and  risk  management.  I  expect
insurers to be able to assess the financial and operational impacts of a cyber-attack on their own
systems,  but  also  to  quantify  the  cyber  risk  exposures,  including  so  called  “hidden”  cyber
exposures, within the policies they have underwritten. More broadly, technological changes will
affect both how insurance is offered, and what is insured. The increasing use of technology and
data analytics to understand and influence customer behaviour also raises important ethical and
cultural  questions  regarding  the  use  of  this  data  and  the  significant  asymmetry  of  information
between firms and their customers. This requires active board consideration.
Finally, insurance also has a critical role to play in the changing demographics in Ireland. It is
estimated that by 2050, 40-47% of Ireland’s population will be over 65, compared with 20% in
2016   .  Insurance  solutions  will  be  required  to  contribute  to  the  challenges  of  an  aging
population including pension provision, health-care, non-life insurance and housing.
15
Assessment  of  the  long-term  resilience  of  the  insurance  sector  is  a  fundamental  part  of  our
supervisory mandate. As such, regulated firms can expect the Central Bank to increase its focus
on the adequacy of firm’s emerging risk management. In particular, I expect firms to:
use scenario analysis and stress testing to help determine the potential impact of their exposure
to emerging risks;
evidence how they will mitigate these risks, including a credible plan in place for managing
exposures; and
disclose in a clear, meaningful and timely way, for example through the ORSA and SFCR.
Conclusion
The insurance industry is facing a period of uncertainty and change. Effective strategy setting is
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
difficult in such times; delivery of strategy even more so. Both require:
solid foundations;
a strong understanding and effective management of risk; and
an ability to anticipate, plan for, and be agile in the face of future developments.
More  work  is  required  by  all  of  you  to  be  confident  that  you  have  sufficient  strength  in  these
areas. Improvements are required for you to be confident that you can sustainably the serve the
needs of all your policyholders and the wider economy long into our uncertain future. 
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Strategic priorities of the Insurance industry.
Gross  Written  Premium  Year  to  Date  Quarter  4  2018  –  Life  €34,869m,  Non-Life  €16,068m,  Reinsurance
€16,703m; Source Central Bank of Ireland Regulatory Returns.
Sibley, Ed: Innovation and insurance in Ireland: a supervisory perspective (2017).
See  Department  of  Finance: The Cost of Insurance Working Group. The Cost of Insurance Working Group,
chaired by Minister of State Michael D’Arcy TD, has undertaken a review of the factors which are influencing the
increased  cost  of  insurance.  The  Working  Group  brings  together  all  the  relevant  Departments  and  Offices
involved with the process. Its objective is to identify immediate and longer term measures which can address
increasing costs, while bearing in mind the need to maintain a stable insurance sector. The first phase involved
an examination of the Motor Insurance sector. The second phase involved an examination of the Employer
Liability Insurance and Public Liability Insurance sectors.
Department  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Innovation: Second  and  Final  Report  of  the  Personal  Injuries
Commission (2018)
Clarke, Frank: Statement on the occasion of the Opening of the New Legal Year (2018).
Humphreys, Heather: Launch of the PIAB Conference 2019, Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation
(2019).
A with-profits policy is typically one that allows the policy to participate in the profits of a life insurance company,
through a ring-fenced fund with its own characteristics and specific fund rules.
Rowland, Derville: Opening remarks at the Central Bank Outsourcing Conference (2019).
Cession refers to the portions of the obligations in an insurance company’s policy portfolio that are transferred
to a reinsurer. Ceding a portion of risk to a reinsurer allows an insurance company to more effectively and
efficiently manage its overall risk exposure. The agreement between the ceding insurance company and the
reinsurance company will include comprehensive terms under which the cession is ceded.
The percentage of total non-linked investments allocated to Sovereign debt reduced from 34% to 28% while the
percentage of total non-linked investments allocated to corporate debt increased from 25% to 31% from Q1
2016 to Q4 2018. Source: Central Bank of Ireland Regulatory Returns.
Central Bank of Ireland: Compliance by Regulated Financial Service Providers with their Obligations under the
Fitness and Probity Regime (2019).
Central Bank of Ireland: Demographic analysis of PCF Applications (2019).
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority: Financial Stability Report (2018).
Central Statistics Office: Population and Labour Force Projections (2018).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
