Ed Sibley: Central Bank of Ireland’s views on the No Consent, No
Sale Bill 2019
Introductory statement by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central
Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and  Reform,  and
Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 2 April 2019.
Chair, Committee members,
 Thank you for the invitation to discuss the Central Bank’s views on the No Consent, No Sale Bill
2019 (‘the Bill’). I am joined by Gráinne McEvoy, Director of Consumer Protection and Vasileios
Madouros, Director of Financial Stability.
Consumer protection
The Central Bank serves the public interest by safeguarding monetary and financial stability and
by working to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests of consumers and
the  wider  economy.  We  treat  the  dual  arms  of  our  mandate  –  safeguarding  stability  and
consumer protection – with equal weight. Our work in each domain is mutually reinforcing.
Over  the  last  decade,  the  Central  Bank  has  proactively  worked  in  conjunction  with  the
Oireachtas,  the  Government,  state  agencies  and  international  counterparts  to  strengthen  the
solvency and stability of the financial sector and enhance protections for consumers.
We  believe  that  a  strong  consumer  protection  framework  is  essential.  This  is  particularly  the
case for mortgage borrowers, as a mortgage is the most significant financial commitment for
most families and individuals.
That  is  precisely  why  we  advocated  for  a  legislative  regime  whereby  borrowers  would  be
protected regardless of whether their loan was held by a bank or a non-bank. This is now the
case. Customers whose loans are sold to another firm maintain the same regulatory protections
they had prior to the sale, including under the various statutory Codes of Conduct issued by the
Central Bank. Firms must comply with these Codes by law.
This includes the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), which was put in place in 2009
to  ensure  the  fair  and  transparent  treatment  of  financially-distressed  borrowers.  The  CCMA
includes requirements that arrangements be sustainable and based on a full assessment of the
individual circumstances of the borrower and that repossession be used only as a last resort.
Firms must also follow the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process when dealing with borrowers
facing arrears.
Within the broader Irish consumer protection framework, there is significant support for those in
arrears,  including  the  Money  Advice  and  Budgeting  Service  (MABS),  the  national  Mortgage
Arrears  Resolution  Service  (Abhaile),  the  Personal  Insolvency  regime,  and  a  Court  Mentor
service.  
Collectively,  these  protections  have  kept  the  vast  majority  of  distressed  borrowers  in  their
homes, despite the scale of mortgage arrears experienced following the financial crisis.
At the end of 2018, less than one in sixteen mortgages relating to private dwelling homes are in
arrears over 90 days. In 2018 there were over twenty two thousand (22,171) new restructure
arrangements for mortgages relating to private dwelling homes.
This brings the total number of private dwelling homes loans categorised as restructured to over
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
one hundred and ten thousand (111,504) as at the end of 2018. In addition, over three thousand
distressed borrowers have secured Personal Insolvency Arrangements, which return borrowers
to solvency, while keeping them in their home in over 95% of cases.
The  enactment  of  this  Bill  will  not  offer  new  or  existing  borrowers  any  additional  regulatory
consumer  protection  and  it  could  have  negative  consequences  for  the  functioning  of  the
mortgage market, with wider implications for all mortgage borrowers.
Functioning of the mortgage market
The enactment of the Bill in its current form would hamper the ability of banks to access market-
based sources of financing using mortgages as collateral, such as securitisations and covered
bonds. Access  to  such  forms  of  finance  helps  diversify  the  funding  base  and  achieve  lower
funding  costs  relative  to  issuing  unsecured  bonds.  Constraints  on  the  ability  to  mobilise
mortgages as collateral to raise funding through these market-based channels could ultimately
limit the availability, or increase the cost, of mortgage credit.  
At  a  time  when  the  severe  dysfunction  in  the  Irish  mortgage  market  is  finally  easing,  this  Bill
could, unintentionally, slow or even reverse that progress. It would certainly give further pause for
thought  for  any  firm  considering  entering  the  Irish  market  by  increasing  the  cost  of  doing
business in Ireland and effectively limiting the funding available for mortgage lending. We do not
believe this in the interests of current and future mortgage borrowers.
Financial stability
During the financial crisis, the ability of Irish banks to post securitisations and covered bonds as
collateral was crucial to allow them to borrow from the eurosystem to meet their acute liquidity
needs. Total monetary policy lending provided to Irish-domiciled banks rose to a high of €140
billion  towards  the  end  of  2010,  of  which  approximately  40%  was  collateralised  by  mortgage-
related securities.
The  Bill  would  render  the  type  of  asset  transfers  required  to  use  these  financial  instruments
effectively  impossible.  The  eurosystem  would  have  concerns  about  the  realisation  of  such
collateral  in  the  event  of  a  counterparty  default.  This,  in  turn,  has  the  potential  to  restrict  the
capacity of Irish banks to access central bank funding.
If banks cannot mobilise collateral quickly in times of financial stress, crises can get worse, very
quickly. Whilst the bill makes an exception for Failing Or Likely To Fail institutions, this is not
sufficient. If banks are close to the point where they are deemed failing or likely to fail, they are
likely to have taken actions (such as reducing availability of credit) that will harm the economy.
The  entire  focus  of  the  resilience  changes  made  over  the  last  decade  have  been  to  try  and
prevent institutions getting into a situation where they are failing or likely to fail, precisely to guard
against the kind of events that trigger damage to the system, to businesses, households and
consumers.
 The  financial  crisis  serves  as  a  stark  reminder  of  the  severe  costs  of  financial  instability  to
society  as  a  whole.  While  there  has  been  significant  progress  towards  repairing  the  banking
system, legacy vulnerabilities from the crisis remain. The restrictions imposed by the Bill would
reduce the ability of the banking system to absorb shocks in the future. Ultimately, these costs
will be faced by households and businesses in Ireland.
Over the last decade, a lot of work has been undertaken to enhance the resilience of the banking
system. This has included increasing capital, reducing non-performing loans (NPLs) and making
funding sources more stable.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We continue to expect banks to use a full toolkit to reduce NPLs. The ability to sell portfolios –
while ensuring full compliance with statutory consumer protections – is important.
Since  the  2013  peak,  the  stock  of  NPLs  held  by  the  retail  banks  has  declined  by  €67  billion.
Around 12 percent of that reduction was achieved through residential loan portfolio sales. 
In our view, the introduction of this Bill will significantly constrain the ability of banks to engage in
portfolio  sales  and,  so,  limit  their  ability  to  deal  with  outstanding  vulnerabilities  from  the
crisis. These constraints will hinder the continued post-crisis recovery of the banking system.
And,  crucially,  it  will  reduce  the  ability  of  the  banking  system  to  deal  with  any  future
macroeconomic downturn and the accompanying deterioration in asset quality.
Put simply, this means the banking system is more likely to be impaired in times of stress and
less capable of supplying credit to households and businesses.
Conclusion
To conclude, and as the Governor noted at this Committee on March 26, the Central Bank has
grave concerns about this Bill, given its potentially far-reaching implications for the operation of
the banking system and for consumers.
While  designed  to  give  effect  to  a  voluntary  code  dating  from  1991,  the  regulated  financial
services  sector  has  changed  fundamentally  in  the  intervening  three  decades,  and  consumer
protection has been strengthened. The voluntary code has been superseded by statutory Codes
of Conduct and wide-ranging and strong regulatory powers which are underpinned by intrusive
supervision.
As  such,  our  view  is  that  this  Bill  will  not  offer  borrowers  any  additional  regulatory  consumer
protections,  and  instead  could  have  significant  unintended  consequences  to  the  longer  term
detriment of all borrowers.
In that respect, we concur with the ECB’s view that the Bill, at a minimum, should undergo a
thorough impact assessment to ensure it is in the best interests of consumers as a whole.
I look forward to your questions. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
