 News conference 
   Berne, 13 June 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
Introductory remarks by Andréa M. Maechler 
 
I would like to start by outlining developments in the financial and foreign exchange markets. 
I will then make a few comments regarding the SNB policy rate and the replacement of Libor. 
Finally, I will provide some background information on the SNB’s recent decision to join the 
Network for Greening the Financial System. 
Financial and foreign exchange markets 
In Q1 2019, the risk markets – especially the equity markets – recovered from the downturn in 
Q4 2018. This was partly due to the Federal Reserve signalling its willingness to be ‘patient’ 
on further interest rate hikes, and partly to the fact that economic data for Q1 2019 painted a 
more benign picture than the markets had expected at the end of 2018. In April, equity market 
indices briefly rose to new highs in several countries. In May and early June, many of these 
indices declined in response to a weaker economic and inflation outlook and, in particular, the 
abrupt escalation of the trade dispute between the US and major trading partners like China 
and Mexico. In aggregate, the major equity markets in North America and Europe have 
gained over 5% since the last news conference in December 2018. 
By contrast, over the last six months, yields on government bonds have fallen significantly 
overall in most advanced economies. Market developments were shaped by the more 
pessimistic assessment of the economic outlook and expectations that monetary policy could 
remain expansionary for longer. At the end of May and beginning of June, deteriorating risk 
sentiment triggered a flight to safe havens and a corresponding decline in government bond 
yields. 
These developments on the equity and bond markets had only a limited effect on the foreign 
exchange markets. In the major currencies, trading ranges were generally narrow and risk 
premia low, despite heightened macroeconomic and political risks. Swiss franc volatility also 
remained moderate. The trade-weighted exchange value of the Swiss franc has barely changed 
  Page 1/3 
  News conference 
 Berne, 13 June 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
overall since the last news conference, and the currency remains highly valued. The Swiss 
franc depreciated in April following the postponement of the UK’s exit from the EU, however 
in May, the escalation of the US-China trade dispute and concerns about Italy’s budget 
situation reversed this depreciating trajectory. 
The risk of renewed upward pressure on the Swiss franc is high, given the many hotspots 
around the world. This explains why it still costs more to hedge against Swiss franc 
appreciation than against Swiss franc depreciation on the options market. The franc thus 
continues to be in demand as a safe-haven currency and the situation on the foreign exchange 
market remains fragile. The negative interest rate and the SNB’s willingness to intervene in 
the foreign exchange market as necessary therefore remain essential. 
The transition from Libor to SARON 
Let me now turn to the SNB policy rate and the transition away from Libor. 
As Thomas Jordan has explained in his remarks, we are introducing the SNB policy rate as 
the future of Libor is uncertain. This adjustment does not entail any change in the SNB’s 
current monetary policy stance.  
However, the move away from Libor presents the financial markets, and those operating in 
them, with a very challenging task. I would like to discuss three aspects of this transition in 
greater detail: first, the choice of the Swiss Average Rate Overnight (SARON) as the 
alternative reference rate; second, the importance of using SARON in financial products and 
developing a liquid, SARON-based yield curve; and third, the issue of how interest payments 
should be calculated over longer periods. 
As regards the first aspect – the choice of a new reference rate: In Switzerland, the National 
Working Group on Swiss Franc Reference Rates (NWG) recommended SARON as the 
alternative as early as 2017. Switzerland, like other currency areas, has thus chosen an 
overnight rate as its preferred alternative to Libor. SARON has been in existence for ten years 
and, unlike Libor, is based on trades and binding quotes for overnight transactions on the 
secured Swiss franc money market. This market segment is broader and more liquid than the 
unsecured money market on which Libor is based.  
Moving on to the second aspect – the importance of using SARON more actively in financial 
products and developing a liquid, SARON-based yield curve: To date, Libor has been widely 
used in financial products, however market participants are now working hard on transitioning 
to new, SARON-based products. These include derivatives, especially interest rate swaps, 
which can be used to hedge against changes in interest rates.1 A SARON-based interest rate 
swap market was set up back in 2017. Trading activity in this market remains low, however it 
is expected to pick up once SARON becomes more widely used in cash products (such as 
loans, mortgages and capital market instruments) and investment products. The SARON-
 1 An interest rate swap allows a contractually agreed, fixed interest rate (e.g. for a period of five years) to be exchanged periodically for a 
floating interest rate. The floating interest rate portion of the contract is determined by a reference rate. 
   Page 2/3 
  News conference 
 Berne, 13 June 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
based yield curve will then be able to take over the role of the current, Libor-based yield 
curve. Yield curves are important benchmarks for market participants and serve as the basis 
for pricing medium and long-term financial products. 
And, finally, the third aspect – how should interest payments be calculated for a period of 
three months, for example? Libor provided a three-month rate which could, among other 
things, be directly applied to the calculation of interest payments on money market mortgages. 
If one were to use SARON in such cases, interest payments would theoretically have to be 
made daily, which is impractical. The NWG has recommended using average SARON values 
(‘compounding approach’), and has proposed several possible options. Market participants are 
currently working on implementing this recommendation. 
Let me conclude this section by emphasising that SARON is establishing itself as the leading 
reference rate for financial products. It is the responsibility of market participants to 
systematically complete the remaining transition work and prepare themselves for the post-
Libor era. As they do so, they can draw on the recommendations of the NWG, whose 
activities the SNB supports. The faster SARON is integrated into financial products, the 
smoother the replacement of Libor will be. The creation of a liquid, SARON-based yield 
curve is fundamental as it will enable our money and capital markets to continue running 
efficiently. This is very important not only for our country’s financial system but also for the 
transmission of the SNB’s monetary policy. 
SNB joins network dedicated to ‘greening the financial system’ 
To conclude, I would like to say a few words about our decision to join the Central Banks and 
Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). As climate change is a 
global phenomenon, institutional and technical knowledge must be analysed and exchanged 
globally. 
The SNB joined the NGFS, which now comprises 36 central banks and supervisors, in April 
2019. The network provides a forum in which members can conduct in-depth analysis and 
seek answers to some key questions. For instance: What kind of financial risks do climate and 
environmental threats pose for the finance industry? And could these risks weaken the 
resilience of the financial system, or indeed affect macroeconomic variables and monetary 
policy? 
The SNB’s goal in joining the NGFS is to engage in dialogue and share knowledge in order to 
better understand – and anticipate – the potential impact of climate risks. 
  Page 3/3 
 