Ravi Menon: Future of finance jobs
Opening remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore,
and Chairman of the Institute of Banking and Finance, at the Launch of the Study on Future of
Finance Jobs, Singapore, 23 April 2019.
 Mrs  Josephine  Teo,  Minister  for  Manpower,  members  of  the  IBF  Council,  ladies  and
gentlemen, welcome to IBF. 
IBF will be turning 45 this year.  It is hard to imagine the financial sector today without the IBF.
Not all countries have the equivalent of an IBF.
Fewer still have as strong a collaboration as we do here in IBF – among financial institutions
and between financial institutions and the regulator.
And all for a common cause that has been consistent for the last 45 years – to equip the
professionals  in  our  financial  sector  to  do  their  jobs  better,  and  to  make  the  Singapore
financial centre more competitive
IBF began life in much simpler times. 
Its primary aim in the 1970s through the 1990s was to provide training for the financial sector
professionals.  
In  the  2000s,  IBF  shifted  its  focus  to  setting  competency  standards  and  facilitating  skills
development for the industry.
Looking to the future, the jobs and skills landscape in the financial industry is a lot more complex
and uncertain.  
Technology is transforming finance – the way financial services are produced, distributed,
and consumed.
This means that jobs in financial services will also be transformed.
We need to take a more sophisticated, integrated, and purposeful approach to prepare our
workforce for the future of jobs. 
This is why MAS and IBF commissioned Ernst & Young to study the impact of data analytics and
automation – the two most immediate technologies – on jobs in the financial sector.
The study takes a three to five year time horizon.
It reviewed 121 distinct job roles in the financial industry, examining how data analytics and
automation are likely to change the individual tasks in these 121 job roles.
It identified the additional skills that would be necessary to perform these new tasks.
The study took nine months to complete and the findings have been validated extensively
with more than 80 industry participants.
Many of you here contributed to this study.
You will be hearing from Ernst & Young later on the study findings, and Minister Teo will speak
more  on  this,  including  how  the  industry,  the  labour  movement,  and  government  are  coming
together to put into action the key strategies emerging from the study.
I want to make three key points that I think are worth keeping in mind:
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the biggest impact of technology is to transform jobs rather than to destroy existing
ones or create new ones.
Second, our strategy to help finance professionals must address skills, jobs, and careers in
an integrated manner.
Third,  workforce  transformation  must  become  a  core  business  capability  for  all  financial
institutions.
Let me elaborate.
First,  the  main  effect  of  technology  is  to  transform  jobs  rather  than  create  or  destroy
them. 
Go to any conference on technology and the future of jobs, and the most frequently asked
question is: will technology create jobs or destroy jobs? 
The  question  misses  the  main  point  –  which  is  that technology  affects  tasks  within  jobs
rather than entire jobs. 
Many of the jobs we have been doing all these years have not disappeared, but the tasks we
do within jobs have changed substantially because of technology.
And these new tasks require new skills.
And this is what the E&Y study also finds.
Data analytics and automation will augment one out of two job roles in the financial sector. 
In other words, workers will be able to deliver over and beyond what would traditionally be
expected.
While some rules-based tasks will be automated, data analytics and automation will amplify
the importance of tasks requiring human judgement.
The study also finds that one out of three job roles will be heavily transformed.
This  means  that  a  proportion  of  tasks  within  these  jobs  will  be  substituted  using  data
analytics  and  automation,  and  the  remaining  tasks  will  converge  into  new  job  roles  that
require more judgement, customisation and creativity.
In some other cases, most of the tasks could become automated and these job roles could
be displaced.
The key take-away from all this: focus on tasks that will be affected by data analytics and identify
the skills necessary to perform these new tasks.
Second, we need to look at skills development, job placements, and career pathways in
an integrated manner. 
We cannot look at skills in isolation from job roles. 
And we cannot look at job roles in isolation from careers.
In other words, skills are the engine that will propel career mobility – laterally or upward.
This is why IBF took two important steps last year.
In April, IBF began to facilitate the implementation of Professional Conversion Programmes
for the industry.
Then,  in  August,  IBF  launched,  together  with  our  tripartite  partners,  the  IBF  Careers
Connect, providing career advisory and job matching services.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
IBF is now the one-stop, single point of contact for all matters relating to jobs, skills, and careers
in the financial industry.
It  is  too  early  to  tell  if  this  new  integrated  approach  will  work,  but  the  preliminary  signs  are
promising.
IBF has secured commitment from 19 financial institutions to reskill 4,000 existing finance
professionals – to equip them with the skills necessary to take on new or expanded roles
against the backdrop of transformed business activities.
IBF has also provided career advisory and job matching services to more than 600 finance
professionals whose jobs have been affected by change.
Third, we cannot do business transformation without workforce transformation. 
But workforce transformation is a capability that financial institutions are only beginning to
build up. 
Traditionally  –  and  this  is  true  of  the  industry  globally  –  financial  institutions  dealt  with
business transformation through a simple hire-and-fire strategy: hire from the market people
with the skills to do the new emerging jobs and fire those in jobs that have become less
relevant. 
This strategy will no longer work. 
The combination of deep domain skills, broad lateral skills, and the digital skills of the future does
not often come in a package. 
The superior strategy is to continually train, upskill, and transform the existing workforce. 
This calls for a comprehensive workforce transformation strategy that is closely aligned to
the business strategy.
All the industry CEOs that I have spoken to understand this well.  Together, let us build an agile
and responsive training ecosystem that will transform the financial sector workforce.
Let me now invite Mrs Josephine Teo, Minister for Manpower, to deliver her keynote address.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
