Michelle W Bowman: Confirmation hearing
Testimony  by  Ms  Michelle  W  Bowman,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban Affairs,  US  Senate,
Washington DC, 5 June 2019.
 Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the Committee, it has been just over
a  year  since  this  Committee  first  recommended  my  nomination  as  a  Federal  Reserve  Board
Governor. While I am not the first community banker to serve on the Board, I am humbled by the
opportunity you gave me to serve as the first Governor to fill the role the Congress designated for
someone  with  community  banking  experience  on  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  I  am  deeply
honored the President has renominated me to serve in that capacity.
I am also grateful to my family for their continued support. My husband, Wes, and our children,
Jack  and Audrey,  are  here  with  me  today.  The  rest  of  my  family  are  watching  from  home  in
Kansas.
Since my confirmation last year, I have worked to fulfill my unique role on the Board by traveling
widely  and  listening  closely  to  community  bankers,  consumers,  small  business  owners,  and
community leaders. I have visited with farmers, workers, and business leaders from across the
country to discuss the economy. I am making sure these unique perspectives are represented in
the Federal Reserve’s deliberations and decision making on both monetary policy and regulatory
matters.
During my time at the Board, I have also drawn on my experience as a community banker and
regulator  to  ensure  that  our  work  is  guided  by  a  deep  understanding  of  the  practical  realities
confronting bankers and the communities they serve across the country. The work done after the
crisis to address the weaknesses in the U.S. financial system and ensure its future resilience
was essential. However, during my time at my family’s community bank, I saw firsthand how the
regulatory  changes  created  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  impacted  community  financial
institutions.  Small,  solid  institutions  like  this  one  are  essential  to  so  many  of  our  citizens  and
communities. As regulators, we need to ensure that we are not imposing unnecessary burdens
on community banks. That is why one of my priorities as a Governor has been to appropriately
tailor  our  supervision  and  regulation  to  the  size,  complexity,  capacity,  and  risks  posed  by  an
institution.
To  further  this  effort,  I  recently  formed  a  working  group  of  experts  from  across  the  Federal
Reserve System to launch a comprehensive review of our supervisory work with smaller regional
and  community  banks.  While  serving  as  the  Kansas  State  Bank  Commissioner,  I  was
committed to treating every consumer and institution fairly and respectfully and fostering open
communication. This working group will follow those same principles. We are looking for ways to
optimize our supervision and regulation to ensure it adapts to the on-the-ground realities of an
evolving  industry  and  changing  consumer  expectations  while  maintaining  the  safety  and
soundness of our banking system.
Let  me  close  by  saying  a  few  words  about  monetary  policy  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual
mandate. As a community banker, it was my job to support local businesses and consumers. I
draw upon this experience often when thinking about monetary policy, because it has given me a
personal and practical understanding of how the Federal Reserve’s goals of fostering maximum
employment and stable prices directly affects individuals as well as the broader financial system
and  economy.  The  Congress  has  given  the  Federal  Reserve  independence  to  pursue  these
goals,  because  our  work  is  critical  to  our  economy,  to  businesses,  to  families,  and  to
communities. I am deeply committed to fulfilling this mandate.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
If confirmed by the Senate, I will continue the important work I have begun and be committed to
accountability, transparency, and clear communication in all of my responsibilities at the Federal
Reserve.  Thank  you  for  the  honor  of  this  hearing,  and  I  look  forward  to  answering  the
Committee’s questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
