Benoît  Cœuré:  Exchange  of  views  with  members  of  the  High
Council of Public Finance
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, prior to an informal exchange of views with the High Council of Public Finance,
Paris, 17 July 2019.
 Thank you for inviting me to the High Council of Public Finance. It is a pleasure to engage in an
informal exchange of views with you on the monetary policy of the European Central Bank (ECB)
and more broadly on Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), with a specific focus on issues of
relevance to fiscal policy.
Allow me to start by briefly discussing the economic situation of the euro area.
The euro area economic outlook
The euro area economy grew by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2019, following
an increase of 0.2% in the fourth quarter of 2018. However, incoming economic data and survey
information point to somewhat weaker growth in the second and third quarters of this year. This
reflects  the  ongoing  weakness  in  international  trade  in  an  environment  of  prolonged  global
uncertainties, which are weighing in particular on the manufacturing sector.
Looking ahead, the euro area expansion will continue to be supported by favourable financing
conditions, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance, further employment gains and rising
wages, and the ongoing – albeit somewhat slower – growth in global activity. This assessment is
broadly  reflected  in  the  June  2019  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro
area,  which  foresee  annual  real  GDP  increasing  by  1.2%  in  2019,  1.4%  in  2020  and  1.4%  in
2021.
The  risks  surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  continue  to  be  tilted  to  the  downside,  on
account of the prolonged presence of uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, the rising threat
of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in June 2019,
unchanged from May 2019. Based on current futures prices for oil, annual HICP inflation is likely
to  decline  over  the  coming  months.  Adjusting  for  the  temporary  factors  behind  the  recent
volatility, measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted.
Looking  further  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  increase  over  the  medium  term,
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  economic  expansion  and  stronger
wage  growth.  This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  June  2019  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections for the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  HICP  inflation  at  1.3%  in
2019, 1.4% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
The ECB’s monetary policy and its impact on the euro area economy
The benefits of our monetary policy measures have been sizeable and tangible. Lending rates for
euro area firms and households are at historic lows and have converged across the euro area,
while growth in bank lending volumes has recovered significantly since the beginning of 2014,
thereby supporting investment and job creation.
There are now 10.8 million more people in employment in the euro area than there were in the
second quarter of 2013, when the number of people in work fell to its lowest point during the
crisis.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  decline  in  the  pace  of  the  euro  area  expansion  and  the
prolonged  presence  of  uncertainties,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  in  June  took  a  number  of
policy  decisions  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  on  a  sustained  path  towards  levels  that  are
consistent with our inflation aim – a rate of inflation which is below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term.
First, we updated our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates and now expect them to
remain at their present levels at least through the first half of 2020, and in any case for as long as
necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  consistent  with  our
inflation aim.
Second, the Governing Council reaffirmed its intention to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal
payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme. This will
continue for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the key ECB interest
rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an
ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Third,  we  decided  on  the  modalities  of  the  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO III) that was announced after our March meeting. We decided that
the interest rate will be set at a level that is 10 basis points above the average rate on our main
refinancing operations, but for banks whose eligible net lending exceeds a benchmark, the rate
applied can be as low as the average deposit facility rate plus 10 basis points. This new series of
TLTROs will help preserve favourable bank lending conditions and the smooth transmission of
monetary policy.
Looking ahead, the Governing Council is determined to act in case of adverse contingencies and
also stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues
to move towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
Completing Economic and Monetary Union
To reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute
decisively  to  raising  the  longer-term  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  and  reducing  its
vulnerabilities.
Sound fiscal and economic policies at the national level are the first line of defence to make the
euro area stronger. Economic reform needs to be substantially stepped up in euro area countries
to increase resilience, reduce unemployment in a lasting way and boost productivity.
On the fiscal side, Member States often fail to make sufficient use of economic upswings to build
fiscal  buffers.  This  leaves  those  with  fragile  fiscal  positions  ill-prepared  to  face  economic
downturns.
At the current juncture we expect the aggregate euro area fiscal stance to be mildly expansionary
in  2019,  which  provides  welcome  support  to  economic  activity  at  a  time  when  growth  has
decelerated.  However,  the  aggregate  picture  masks  the  suboptimal  differentiation  across
countries. In particular, countries with high levels of debt are, with few exceptions, not building
fiscal buffers, thereby risking a repeat of the mistakes of the pre-crisis period. Countries with
fiscal  space  could  use  some  of  it  to  strengthen  public  investment  and  increase  their  growth
potential.
The European Fiscal Board has recently issued a report  recommending a broadly neutral euro
area fiscal stance for 2020, based on the expectation of a gradual pick-up in economic activity as
of  the  second  half  of  2019.  This  is  also  our  baseline  scenario,  but  we  are  aware  that  it  is
surrounded by a multitude of downside risks. If those risks were to materialise, additional fiscal
support may be needed. To be clear, such support should come from countries that have fiscal
1
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
space.  But  while  not  all  countries  have  the  space  to  spend  more,  all  have  the  opportunity  to
spend better.
The  euro’s  benefits,  however,  will  not  fully  materialise  for  as  long  as  the  architecture  of  EMU
remains incomplete.
Material  progress  has  been  achieved  in  recent  years.  The  European  Stability  Mechanism
provides  an  important  safeguard  and  reforms  currently  under  discussion  will  strengthen  its
precautionary and crisis resolution toolkit.
The creation of banking union, meanwhile, has considerably strengthened the resilience of the
euro area financial sector and, together with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, has
created instruments to combat banking crises in a swifter and fairer way.
Banks directly supervised by the ECB have built up strong capital positions in recent years, with
a Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of 14.3% in the first quarter of 2019 compared with 11.3%
at the end of 2014. They have also substantially reduced their non-performing loan ratio, which
stood at 3.7% in the first quarter of 2019 compared to 7.5% in the second quarter of 2015. These
are important steps forward as euro area firms rely heavily on bank credit to finance growth and
investment.
So what more should be done at the European level?
First,  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to  contribute  to  economic  stabilisation  should  be
strengthened.  During  the  crisis,  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  reversed  and  it  has  only
gradually recovered over the past few years.
The  creditworthiness  of  banks  remains  linked  to  that  of  national  governments.  Unlike  in  the
United States, cross-border investment is not a significant buffer against economic shocks. The
euro area still lacks genuinely integrated capital markets, which hinders the efficient allocation of
European  savings,  private  cross-border  risk-sharing 
to  smoothen  consumption  during
idiosyncratic shocks and the use of the euro as an international currency.
Recent legislative steps are commendable but do not measure up to the initial ambition of the
capital markets union project. Brexit will further accentuate the need to develop and integrate the
EU’s  capital  markets.  A  large  number  of  banks  and  investment  firms  are  in  the  process  of
establishing or expanding their euro area presence, possibly resulting in the development of a
multi-centric European financial system.
While  the  landscape  may  evolve  further  in  the  future,  in  a  financial  system  with  a  number  of
increasingly  important  hubs,  as  opposed  to  one  dominant  hub  in  London,  it  will  be  more
important than ever for these hubs to be able to efficiently interact with one another and to avoid
differences across Member States providing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage.
Second, the banking union needs to be completed. In particular, a fully fledged European deposit
insurance scheme (EDIS) is a key missing element. In this context, the ECB has proposed that
EDIS  could  be  accompanied  by  risk-based  contributions  by  banks  linked  to  their  sovereign
holdings.
Third, further efforts are needed to deepen fiscal union in the euro area.
European fiscal rules are complex, opaque and plagued with exceptions and exemptions which
have accumulated over time. They rely excessively on measures of cyclical positions which are
controversial  and  prone  to  manipulation .  Simpler  and  more  credible  and  effective  rules  are
needed to ensure that euro area countries safeguard fiscal sustainability and build the necessary
buffers to create room for countercyclical stabilisation in economic downturns. Recent proposals
2
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to focus the fiscal framework on a debt anchor complemented by an expenditure rule deserve
3
further consideration.
EMU also needs a central fiscal stabilisation mechanism to enhance countercyclical stabilisation
during severe recessions. Past experience shows that the aggregate fiscal stance in the euro
area  is  often  suboptimal.  During  the  European  debt  crisis,  for  example,  it  was  strongly
contractionary, thereby reducing the effectiveness of an expansionary monetary policy stance.
While  the  euro  area  budgetary  instrument  currently  under  discussion  is  a  welcome  step  to
support  convergence,  it  is  not  designed  to  fulfil  this  stabilisation  function.  Work  on  the  fiscal
architecture  of  EMU  therefore  needs  to  continue  to  ensure  that  fiscal  policies  can  play  an
effective stabilisation role.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The euro, which celebrates its 20th anniversary this year, enjoys broad support among European
citizens,  with  three  in  four  people  in  the  euro  area  in  favour  of  it.  Its  growing  popularity  is
testimony to the fact that people have trust in the currency and in the ECB’s strong commitment
to price stability, which supports investment and job creation.
To  preserve  this  trust,  we  need  to  step  up  our  efforts  at  both  national  and  euro  area  level  to
strengthen  the  architecture  of  the  single  currency.  Much  has  been  achieved  but  some  of  the
failings that caused and perpetuated the crisis remain unresolved.
At  a  time  of  heightened  global  uncertainty,  completing  the  euro  area’s  architecture  is  also
necessary  for  Europe  to  be  able  to  achieve  its  other  objectives.  Europeans  won’t  be  able  to
foster cooperation on security and defence, or to speak with one voice on international affairs, or
to complete the Single Market if they repeatedly have to tackle economic crises which are largely
of their own making. A sound and sustainable euro area will help redirect political capital where it
is most needed.
Thank you.
1
2
3
See the European Fiscal Board’s latest Assessment of the prospective fiscal stance appropriate for the euro
area, published on 25 June 2019.
See B. Cœuré (2018), “Scars that never were? Potential output and slack after the crisis”, speech at the CEPII
40th Anniversary Conference, Paris, 12 April.
See, for instance, Christofzik, D.I., Feld, L.P., Reuter, W.H. and Yeter, M. (2018), “Uniting European Fiscal Rules:
How to Strengthen the Fiscal Framework”, German Council of Economic Experts Working Paper, No 04, and
Darvas, Z., Martin, P. and Ragot, X. (2018), “European fiscal rules require a major overhaul”,  Les  notes  du
conseil d’analyse économique, No 47, September; Eyraud, L., Debrun, X., Hodge, A., Lledó, V. and Pattillo, C.
(2018),  “Second-Generation  Fiscal  Rules:  Balancing  Simplicity,  Flexibility,  and  Enforceability”, IMF  Staff
Discussion Notes, 18/04.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
