Ed Sibley: Safety and soundness - strategic priorities for the next
three years
Address by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
to  the  Banking  &  Payments  Federation  Ireland  (BPFI)  Risk  Management  "Future  Supervisory
Landscape", Dublin, 17 January 2019.
Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen.
 I would like to thank the Banking & Payments Federation Ireland for the invitation to speak here
today, at this conference on the “Future Supervisory Landscape.”
My role often requires that I take a somewhat pessimistic perspective, that I consider downside
risks, and ask questions such as what can or is going wrong.  However, I am an optimist at
heart, particularly at this time of the year, when days are getting a little longer, plans are freshly
minted, new year’s resolutions are not yet totally forgotten, and we have high hopes for the year
ahead. 
So, with this in mind, together with the topic of the conference, my focus today is primarily on
looking forward.
Having said that, I am also a keen student of history. “History carries good lessons to all who
heed them” , and so in order to look forward we need to be cognisant of where we are today and
the lessons from the past.
1
In this context, it is worth remembering that financial crises recur. There is evidence, that this is
somewhat attributable to the pro-cyclical approach to regulation, which research shows is often
weakened in a highly damaging way at the top of the cycle at precisely the moment that it needs
to be strongest.  The effect of the “regulatory pendulum” has been a feature of financial booms
and  busts.    It  is  important  then  that  we  do  not  let  memories  fade.    We  must  recognise  the
important role of strong regulatory and supervisory frameworks in delivering a resilient financial
2
system.
With  all  this  in  mind,  I  will  focus  on  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland’s  (“Central  Bank”)  strategic
priorities for the next three years , particularly in the context of the safety and soundness of the
financial system.  By covering our five strategic priorities with this prudential lens, I will note that
there has been considerable progress in enhancing the resilience of the financial system, and
the  banking  system  in  particular,  but  there  is  much  more  to  be  done  to  deliver  a  trustworthy
financial system that is sustainably serving the needs of the economy and its consumers.
3
I  will  also  outline  that  while  Brexit  will  undoubtedly  be  damaging  for  Ireland,  difficult  for  the
financial  system  and  its  consumers,  the  most  immediate  and  material  ‘cliff  edge’  financial
stability risks arising from Brexit have been largely mitigated. 
The Central Bank’s five strategic priorities
As  the  Governor  remarked  at  the  launch  of  our  strategy,  “Our  priority  is  to  serve  the  public
interest  by  safeguarding  monetary  and  financial  stability  and  by  working  to  ensure  that  the
financial system operates in the best interests of consumers and the wider economy. A core
element  of  our  approach  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  strengthened,  increasing
resilience  against  risks  so  that  it  can  better  withstand  future  shocks  and  crises  and  that  the
4
impact of these events is mitigated .”
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  public  service  mandate,  together  with  the  specific  responsibilities  laid  out  in  legislation,
underpins  all  that  we  do,  and  connects  our  five  strategic  priorities  for  the  next  three  years.
Specifically:
1.  Resilience;
2.  Brexit;
3.  Strengthening consumer protection;
4.  Engaging and influencing; and
5.  Enhancing organisation capability.
I will discuss each of these points in turn, recognising the links between them:
Resilience
Ireland has a small, open and volatile economy.  This volatility has been starkly evidenced in the
last couple of decades, but it is not unique to this period. The Irish economy continues to expand
at a robust pace and is in its sixth year of recovery, supported by strong domestic demand and
employment growth.  While there remains some unevenness to it, this is undoubtedly positive
and is well beyond what could have been reasonably anticipated in the depths of the crisis.   
This recovery and growth has contributed to, for example:
5
the recovery in Government finances ;
household debt-to-disposable-income (DTI) declining to its lowest level since 2004;
overall reduction in non-performing loans of €65bn  since peak;
considerable  progress  in  reducing  mortgage  arrears,  with  the  number  of  PDH  accounts
more than 90 days past due reduced by over half to 46,008 , primarily through restructuring;
and
the enhanced resilience of the domestic retail banking system, which now holds three times
as  much  capital  per  risk-weighted  assets  as  it  did  in  2007  and  is  largely  deposit  funded
rather than through short-term wholesale funding.    
6
7
However,  while  we  can  consider  the  glass  to  be  half  full  regarding  much  of  this  progress,
significant vulnerabilities remain.  Notably,
overall  government  debt  levels  have  been  relatively  stable  over  the  last  four  years  at  c.
€200bn, and while it has fallen, Gross General Government Debt still remains over 100%  of
GNI*.
Irish households remain the fourth  most indebted in the EU; and
46,008 or 1 in 16  primary dwelling home (PDH) mortgage accounts are in arrears greater
than 90 days.    
10
8
9
Ireland  is  more  exposed  because  of  these  vulnerabilities  to  material  external  risks,  including
those  arising  from  Brexit  and  other  geopolitical  risks,  and  the  wider  international  trade
environment.  
While the Central Bank can do little to mitigate these global risks, we do, together with others –
including many of you in this room – have a role in trying to mitigate how they affect Ireland. 
Building a more resilient financial system is critical to doing that successfully, with the aim that
the financial system helps to smooth the peaks and troughs rather than accentuate them.
It  is  important  to  look  at  why  this  is  relevant  for  the  economy  and  society.    For  example,  the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
shortage of housing is one legacy of the financial crisis that is still being felt acutely today.  If
housing completions over the last 20 years were plotted on a graph, it would show the ups and
downs of a rollercoaster
.  In 1997, there were a little over 30,000 completions. In 2007, they
were  in  the  order  of  90,000.  In  2012  and  2013,  they  were  barely  5,000.  They  are  forecast  to
recover to a little under 30,000 by 2020.
11
In other words, the hard stop in the financial system in 2008, arising from the lack of resilience of
the system and the individual banks operating within it, contributed to the collapse and painfully
slow recovery in the construction of new homes, and is a causal factor in the challenges in the
housing market today, more than a decade later.
This is why we will continue to focus on building resilience in the financial system, such that it
can continue to support the economy and its customers in good times and in bad.  This will build
on  the  strong  foundations  established  over  the  last  decade  at  a  European  and  national  level,
which have delivered, inter alia:
12
an entirely new European regulatory and supervisory ecosystem ;
more intrusive supervision;
13
more consistent rules on capital and funding ;
new rules for mitigating the risk of an managing failure; and
macro prudential tools to enhance lender and borrower resilience.    
these 
foundations  and 
Building  on 
through  delivering  assertive,  analytical,  outcomes-
focused, risk-based supervision, underpinned by a robust regulatory framework and the credible
threat of enforcement, we will employ multi-year supervisory strategies by firm or by sector (for
lower impact firms) to:
address the remaining issues from the financial crisis with finality, including the high level of
non-performing loans;
drive  further  improvements  in  the  governance,  culture,  diversity  and  risk  management  of
firms, so they are better able to demonstrate capability to identify, manage and mitigate the
risks that they face;
drive enhancements in IT risk management and operational resilience across all firms; and
enhance firms’ ability to recover, progress resolution planning and our own financial crisis
preparedness and management capability.    
We must and will look forward.  For example, threats to operational resilience of individual firms
and the system as a whole continue to increase and grow more complex. In a connected way,
the opportunities and challenges presented by innovation continue to grow.    
I expect regulated firms to be actively considering and acting on these issues, and the Central
Bank  will  be  ensuring  that  you  are,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  regulated  financial  services
firms:
have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;
have sustainable business models over the long-term;
are  well  governed,  have  appropriate  cultures,  with  effective  risk  management  and  control
arrangements, and
can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.    
I also expect regulated firms to be looking forward, to be anticipating future significant risks and
opportunities  to  ensure  that  they  remain  resilient  over  the  long  term.    This  is  not  sufficiently
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
evident. To take one example, climate change needs to move higher up the agenda of the Irish
financial services system.
The effects of climate change could result in serious impacts for financial services firms, with
climate  related  financial  risks  acting  as  a  driver  of  other  risks,  including  market,  credit  and
operational risk.  
The physical risks that arise from events like storms, floods and droughts can result in damaged
properties leading to lower asset values and creditworthiness.  In addition, as society adjusts to a
low-carbon  model,  the  risks  of  being  exposed  to  assets,  which  would  no  longer  be  able  to
recover their investment as intended, could lead to significant losses.
Policy  changes  are  already  afoot. At  the  EU  level,  policy  responses  to  achieving  the  targets
contained  in  Paris  Agreement  of  2015  have  gathered  pace.  From  an  EU  perspective,  the
publication in 2018 of the EU Commission’s action plan on sustainable finance and, shortly after,
the  first  draft  of  legislative  proposals  to  initiate  parts  of  the  plan,  is  indicative  of  a  growing
momentum amongst policy makers and market participants to push this agenda forward.
The  Commission’s  legislative  proposals  require  that  financial  market  participants  will  have  to
consider the risks arising from sustainability factors in their investment and advisory processes.
This  will  result  in  a  requirement  to  disclose  to  end  investors  and  clients  their  assessment  of
sustainability  risk  and  the  potential  resulting  impact  on  returns.  This  drive  for  greater
transparency  is  intended  to  assist  the  redirection  of  public  and  private  capital  flows  towards
sustainable investments and is at the heart of the Commission’s action plan.
The  challenge  for  the  international  financial  system  is  to  manage  and  fund  the  contraction  of
carbon-intensive sectors and the expansion of environmentally sustainable sectors .  For the
Central Bank, as a member of the international regulatory community, this agenda will drive our
work over the coming years.
Brexit
14
This  week  has  continued  to  demonstrate  the  considerable  uncertainties  and  challenges
connected with Brexit.  Brexit has short-term and long-term implications for the structure of the
Irish economy. Any form of Brexit will be damaging for Ireland, with a hard Brexit especially so. 
While I am sure that most of you in this room continue to hope for the best, we have to continue
to plan for the plausible worse case.
Recognising these risks, the Central Bank has been focused on Brexit risks since before the
2016  UK  referendum.      We  continue  to  analyse  and  seek  to  mitigate  the  risks  posed  to  the
economy, consumers, the financial system, and the regulatory environment.
We have taken a transparent approach to this work, recognising the importance of and interest in
16
it. We publish the work of our Brexit Task Force , answers to frequently asked questions ,
18
have held several stakeholder roundtables , and published numerous reports and speeches . 
This  research  and  analysis  has  been  done  to  inform  our  own  work  and  to  assist  other  key
stakeholders and policy makers to do theirs.
15
17
For the wider economy, the effects will be uneven, with indigenous sectors (such as agriculture),
which  are  likely  to  be  larger  employers  in  rural  areas,  facing  heightened  risks  of  disruption  to
exports and supply chains.
In recent months, we have stepped up our work on mitigating the most material ‘cliff-edge’ risks
of a hard Brexit. From a financial regulation perspective, our work has sought to ensure:
the financial system is resilient enough for a hard Brexit not to cause significant financial
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
stability risks;
that financial services providers are discharging their responsibilities by taking all necessary
steps to protect their businesses and customers to the risk of a hard Brexit;
that risks to consumers are mitigated to the greatest extent possible; and
we are delivering a proportionate, robust, efficient and effective authorisation process in line
with European regulatory norms, for those firms seeking authorisation in Ireland as a result
of Brexit.
Financial Stability
Considerable progress has been made in mitigating the associated financial stability risks. There
have been important developments in the last few weeks, including progress on the finalisation of
memorandums  of  understanding  between  the  UK  and  EU  authorities.  The  European
Commission statement of 19  December
 sets out a package of measures, to be implemented
to  deal  with  the  limited  number  of  areas  where  the  no-deal  scenario  would  create  major
disruption  for  citizens  and  businesses  in  the  EU27,  including  central  clearing  of  derivatives,
central depository services and OTC derivative contract novation.    
19
th
Based on our work, the actions taken by regulated firms, and these recent developments, I am
satisfied that from a financial stability perspective that the most material and immediate risks are
now manageable.  This is not to say that a hard Brexit will not be bumpy for the economy, and for
the financial system.  Indeed, some level of market disruption would be inevitable, but the system
as a whole should be resilient enough to withstand these bumps. 
Consumers
There are some remaining risks of consumer detriment.  The Irish and UK financial systems are
closely  connected,  with  UK  firms  and  firms  from  Gibraltar  providing  financial  services  to  Irish
consumers, including insurance and payment services.  The Central Bank has worked with the
European and UK authorities to ensure that those firms providing services to Irish consumers
are able to continue to do so in the event of a hard Brexit.  The vast majority of UK based firms
have taken appropriate action, but not all have to date. 
In  this  context,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Central  Bank  is  working  with  the  Department  of
Finance to support the drafting of legislation to protect customers of insurance products in event
of no deal Brexit. The  draft legislation provides for a temporary run-off regime, which will allow
certain  UK/  Gibraltar  insurers  and  brokers  to  continue  to  service  existing  insurance  contracts
with Irish policyholders in the event of a “no deal’’ Brexit.
The legislation does not allow these firms to write new business, including renewal of existing
policies; it is exclusively for the servicing of contracts (policies) that were in place prior to Brexit.
Even with this mitigation, there will be negative consumer impacts.  For example, the supply of
niche insurance products may reduce or end altogether, given the increased costs and frictions
of serving EU customers from the UK.
Authorisations
The nature, scale and complexity of the Irish financial system is changing because of Brexit. 
New authorisations and expansions of existing operations is increasing the size of all sectors.
From large investment banks through to small payment servicing firms, well over 100 firms have
applied for new authorisations or for permission to expand their businesses.
Our  gatekeeping  role  is  hugely  important  in  mitigating  financial  stability  risks  and  protecting
market integrity and customers in Ireland and across Europe. So, it is imperative that any new
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
business authorised here as a result of Brexit meets the high standards that are expected of any
such firm authorised in the EU – consistent with them effectively being, in many cases, an EU
head  office  responsible  for  business  undertaken  in  multiple  jurisdictions.  We  have  taken  a
pragmatic  approach,  but  we  continue  to  ensure  that  we  operate  to  European  norms  of
supervision and if regulatory requirements are not met, we will not grant an authorization.
The level of authorisation activity has necessitated the Central Bank to make hard choices. We
have increased headcount, recruited heavily and re-allocated senior and experienced resources
from other important tasks to ensure that we deliver effectively, efficiently, predictably and in a
timely  fashion.  We  continue  to  have  to  de-prioritise  and  defer  other  less  high  priority  work  to
accommodate our work on Brexit.
We also continue to be active internationally to ensure that the risk of divergence between EU
jurisdictions  in  how  they  handle  relocations  from  the  UK  is  mitigated.  In  order  to  address  the
concern  of  regulatory  divergences  and  the  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage  between  EU  member
States, we have long been engaging closely with the European Central Bank, across the Single
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  European  Supervisory Authorities  to  agree  European-
wide  approaches  to  the  key  policy  and  supervisory  issues,  stances  and  decisions  that  have
arisen from Brexit.
Regulatory Framework
While  not  a  cliff-edge  risk  as  such,  Brexit  has  already  started  to  have  an  effect  on  financial
services regulation and supervision in Europe.
London is a truly global financial services centre operating within, and serving a very material
amount of the financial services needs of, the EU. While undoubtedly the role of London and its
interconnections with the EU will change post Brexit, it is critically important for the EU economy
and all its citizens that it continues to have a financial services system that delivers within the
EU, but also has deep global connectivity beyond it, including with London. 
From a regulatory perspective, it is desirable, given the size and role of London as a financial
centre,  that  some  form  of  sustainable  link  between  the  EU  and  the  UK  is  found.   As  I  have
already  touched  on,  I  am  confident  that  the  necessary  MOUs  will  be  in  place  to  facilitate  the
continued high level of cooperation between UK and European authorities, including on a bilateral
basis. It is reasonable for firms to plan on the basis that MOUs will be in place by 29  March.
Firms that delegate portfolio management to the UK can have sufficient confidence that this will
continue to be allowed post 29  March.
th
th
On  a  more  practical  level,  the  UK’s  departure  from  the  EU  will  result  in  a  significant  loss  of
regulatory experience and expertise. Whilst this might sound like a relatively minor issue given
the  other  challenges  Brexit  presents,  I  believe  it  is  something  that  we  need  to  be  mindful  of,
particularly in Ireland, which has a similarly high degree of export focused financial services firms
as the UK.
London’s role as the pre-eminent financial centre in Europe results in more than a hub for trading
and finance, but also a hub for the regulation of those activities. The loss of this voice is to be
mourned.
At the Central Bank, we understand that the UK’s departure will require increased engagement
on our part in the relevant EU and international fora, to convey our viewpoint and add our own
expertise to the mix. We have consistently and successfully been making a substantial effort in
this regard since the crisis. We will continue to prioritise our largely invisible work in this regard.
Strengthening consumer protection        
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Central  Bank  is  focused  on  seeking  to  ensure  that  the  best  interests  of  consumers  are
protected  and  confidence  and  trust  in  the  financial  system  is  enhanced  through  effective
regulation of firms and markets.
My  colleagues  Derville  Rowland  and  Grainne  McEvoy  have  outlined  our  approach  to
strengthening  consumer  protection   in  other  fora,  so  I  will  not  dwell  on  specific  conduct
initiatives here.
20
However,  I  would  emphasise  the  importance  of  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  in,  for
example,  protecting  investors  and  consumers  and  ensuring  that  they  can  trust  that  their
investments are protected, that deposits are safe and that they can be confident that insurance
policies will pay out when needed.  In fact, the majority of the work of prudential supervision has
more than an eye to the protection of consumers and investors.
Moreover,  prudential  and  conduct  supervisors  have  a  shared  interest  in  business  model
sustainability;  governance,  risk  management  and  control  arrangements;  and  the  culture  of
regulated firms.   
In this context, I would note that there is a road to travel to reach our aspiration of a resilient and
trustworthy  financial  system,  which  sustainably  serves  the  needs  of  the  economy  and  its
customers, in which firms and individuals adhere to a culture of fairness and high standards. 
To take one example, relying on inertia and customer loyalty to charge existing customers up to
50% higher interest rates for the same or similar products as new customers, as we see in the
mortgage  market,  is  unlikely  to  enhance  trust  in  the  system.  This  practice  is  not  unique  to
banking,  and  is  entirely  inconsistent  with  the  statements  on  customer  centricity  that  I  hear
espoused on a daily basis.
Engaging and Influencing                    
The Central Bank seeks to engage with and listen to the public and other stakeholders to inform
our  work  and  help  build  trust  in,  and  understanding  of,  the  Central  Bank’s  work .    We  will
continue to enhance our approach.
21
Further  afield,  we  take  a  strategic  and  outcomes  focused  approach  to  engaging  within  the
European  and  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  ecosystem.   As  I  noted  earlier,  this  is
largely invisible and yet becoming increasingly important due to Brexit and the drive for increased
convergence  across  the  European  regulatory  ecosystem.    To  this  end,  from  a  prudential
perspective, we are aiming to:
ensure that we are operating to and influencing European supervisory norms;
support the development of supervisory guidelines, standards and methodologies that are
proportionate and effective in the context of the domestic and internationally focused Irish
financial services system;
prioritise our engagement across the European bodies and internationally to maintain and
build our credibility and to influence developments where it most matters; and
to play our part and enhance our reputation by maintaining and growing the key leadership
positions in committees and working groups.     
Enhancing capability
The ability of the Central Bank to deliver our mandate depends on our ability to recruit and retain
experienced, skilled and motivated staff. We continually invest in our people including providing
opportunities  to  learn  and  develop.  We  are  committed  to  diversity  in  our  workforce.  We  have
significant  opportunities  for  professional  development  with  unrivalled  exposure  to  the  financial
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
services sector both in Ireland and internationally. We will continue to enhance the capability of
our team so we can deliver the important mandate of the Central Bank.
As well as investing in our people, we need to continue to evolve our organisation for today’s fast
moving  environment,  as  the  Irish  financial  system  and  the  associated  risks  are  rapidly  and
disruptively changing. The system, the regulatory environment and individual firms are becoming
more complex, increasingly reliant on technology, increasingly interconnected and the volume of
data is exploding.
“Changes  in  technology,  including  artificial  intelligence,  could,  over  time,  profoundly  affect  the
nature  of  the  financial  services  consumed  and  may  result  in  changes  to  the  structure  of  the
financial services industry…. What matters to us as prudential supervisors is the extent to which
the development of advanced analytics changes the risks to the safety and soundness of the
22
firms we supervise .”
In this context, we are in the process of enhancing our analysis and inspections capabilities, to
better support and challenge our day-to-day supervisory efforts, to:
ensure  our  supervisory  approach  uses  a  wide  range  of  information  to  make  evidenced
based decisions;
deliver robust and consistent inspection outcomes underpinned by a depth of technical and
practical risk capabilities; and
further develop risk expertise, peer and industry level analysis, and create the space to look
ahead and maximises our impact and influence at home and abroad.
I will conclude here. 
While  material  issues  remain  and  economic  recovery  has  not  lifted  all  boats,  it  is  clear  that
Ireland  has  emerged  from  a  period  of  focus  on  crisis  management  and  entered  one  of  crisis
prevention. 
The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  serving  the  public  in  delivering  this  effectively,  with  the
aspiration of a resilient and trustworthy financial system, which sustainably serves the needs of
the economy and its customers, in which firms and individuals adhere to a culture of fairness
and high standards. 
We  will  continue  to  regulate  and  supervise  the  financial  system  with  this  aspiration  to  the
forefront of our minds.  We will continue to strive to look forward, to anticipate future risks, and
we expect regulated firms to do the same. Moreover, to return to the trust issue, if the financial
system is going to demonstrate its trustworthiness, it should be taking a longer-term view than is
evident today in supporting the economy and its customers.
With thanks to Richard Kelly, Keith Farrell, Gina Fitzgerald, Deirdre Mullally and Tim O’Hanrahan
for their assistance in drafting these remarks.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gary B. Gorton (2012), “Misunderstanding Financial Crises: Why We Don’t See Them Coming.”
Regulatory cycles: Revisiting the Political Economy of Financial Crises by Jihad Dagher. IMF working Paper
(18/8).
See Central Bank of Ireland Strategic Plan 2019–2021
See Central Bank of Ireland Strategic Plan 2019–2021
Government of Ireland Surplus recorded in 2018 exchequer figures for the first time since 2006
Source: Central Bank regulatory returns
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
See  Central  Bank  of  Ireland Household Credit Market Report 2018. A total stock of 113,871 PDH mortgage
accounts were categorised as restructured at end-September 2018
For 2018 figures see NTMA.  For 2017 and prior years see Central Statistics Office
See Central Bank of Ireland Household Credit Market Report 2018
Page 12 – As at Q2 2018. See Central Bank of Ireland Household Credit Market Report 2018
See 
www.cso.ie/en/statistics/construction/newdwellingcompletions/
Central 
Ireland 
– Civic 
Bank 
of 
society 
roundtable 
presentation 
 See
Ed Sibley (2017) The Irish Financial Services sector: a Prudential Regulation Perspective
For example, the updated Capital Requirements Directive (CRDIV) and the Capital Requirements Regulation
(CRR)  revised  the  capital  requirements  and  also  introduced  a  significant  toolkit  of  measures  to  address
macroprudential risks and weaknesses. The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) agreed in 2014
provides tools for managing failing banks. Solvency II similarly introduced a new regime for insurance firms.
Philip R. Lane Macro-Financial Policies for the Short Term and the Long Term
Central Bank of Ireland – Brexit Task Force reports
See Brexit FAQ and Brexit consumer FAQ
See Roundtable on Brexit supply chain and Roundtable for Brexit stakeholders 
For example, see Gerry Cross Brexit Developments
See European Commission Preparing for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union on 30
March 2019: Implementing the Commission’s Contingency Action Plan
For  example,  see  Derville  Rowland Safeguarding  the  best  interests  of  investors  in  a  changing  landscape;
Grainne McEvoy Culture and consumer protection: The role of compliance; and Derville Rowland Bad barrels or
bad apples: How effective culture mitigates conduct risk
For example, see Civic society roundtable
See James Proudman, Bank of England Cyborg Supervision
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
