Mugur Isărescu: Central bank communication as a policy tool - an
ongoing challenge
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at "The 41th Meeting
of  the  Central  Banks  Governors’  Club  of  the  Central  Asia,  Black  Sea  region  and  Balkan
countries", Istanbul, 25 March 2019.
 As prepared for delivery
Distinguished audience,
Dear colleagues,
It is a great pleasure for me to address this distinguished panel on a topic that is both important
and challenging for central banking. The session’s title includes three key issues: effectiveness,
knowledge  and  trust,  all  in  relation  to  the  manner  in  which  central  banks  communicate  their
policies and actions.
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  general  thoughts  regarding  these  issues,  as  well  as  the
National Bank of Romania’s experience in this area over the recent years.
More transparency, commitments too
Views and practices concerning transparency and communication have evolved dramatically in
the last decade. Not long ago, the conventional wisdom was that monetary policymakers should
say as little as possible, take markets by surprise and be rather cryptic. Things have changed, as
the more independent central banks also became accountable for the ‘public goods’ they were
called to provide for: a credible and convertible currency, price stability, employment and growth
in  other  cases,  banking  sector  supervision  and  financial  stability.  People  tend  to  take  these
‘public goods’ for granted, appreciating their importance only when lost.
Clear communication of the central bank’s objectives, policy strategy and its decisions proved
essential  to  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  enhancing  monetary  policy  effectiveness.
However, most research works in this area show that increased transparency is not enough.
A  central  bank  must  demonstrate  commitment  and  ability  to  achieve  its  objectives
through a systematic implementation of its policies.  The  markets  and  the  public  at  large
need to be convinced by central banks through consistent and effective words and policy actions,
formulated as plainly as possible, in order to build knowledge and confidence – all vital for an
effective management of public expectations.
Despite a growing recognition of the importance of transparency in monetary policymaking, no
consensus has emerged yet – either among academics or central banks. There is still debate on
what is the appropriate degree of transparency or the best communication path, so that the two
factors  can  contribute  to  an  effective  achievement  of  policy  objectives  as  well  as  an  efficient
market functioning. The ‘best practice’ in the field depends, inter alia, on the size, structure and
complexity  of  the  economy,  its  global  interlinkages  and  policy  cycles,  the  monetary  policy
objectives  and  strategies,  the  political  environment  and  institutional  framework  of  a  particular
central bank, as well as on the extent and nature of uncertainty faced by policymakers.
When assessing communication, one should take into account various economic, political and
institutional factors in addition to the elements of uncertainty a central bank faces, no matter how
modern the communication tools it employs. Thus, central banks may implement, successfully,
different  communication  strategies  that  may  be  appropriate  and  optimal  given  the  above-
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
mentioned factors.
As most central banks, including the National Bank of Romania, have opened up a lot in recent
years – by reviewing, adapting and refining their strategies, using modern and social media tools
–, an effective communication approach should always include a degree of flexibility in
order  to  respond  to  a  rapidly  changing  economic  environment,  exceptional  circumstances  as
well as the level and appetite for financial knowledge in the society.
Forward guidance
The global financial crisis pushed central banks to expand and heavily use their monetary toolkits
besides identifying new instruments for the more delicate financial stability area. One weapon in
their arsenal, involving a strong communication approach, was forward guidance, which was
put to good use in the monetary policy field as central bankers attempted to calm the markets.
Wisely exploiting the power of words, forward guidance was aimed at improving monetary policy
transmission  by  offering  more  than  just  a  glimpse  at  the  central  banks’  next  moves.  Greater
predictability of the reaction function or an associated timing for the next actions enable market
participants to better calibrate expectations. It worked in several instances.
It also increased the initial framework to include, apart from the traditional policy rate, references
to some other parts of the central bank’s toolkit (asset purchases), offering markets nice hooks
to cling on in times of stress and heightened uncertainty.
Was this a too adventurous path to embark on? The toughest challenge for monetary authorities,
as financial markets become too addicted to central bank guidance, is to identify smart ways to
communicate in due course how and in which manner the shift to normalisation will take place,
while also clarifying the limits of their actions and influence. All for a pretty good reason: avoid a
possible addiction crisis that could in itself lead to turmoil and volatility.
The  real  test  for  forward  guidance  is  not  the  manner  or  techniques  used  to  disseminate
information, it rather occurs when the forward guided policies are implemented. That is the point
where the actions meet or not the expectations fuelled beforehand. Forward guidance relies on
the central banks’ credibility, validated in time by matching its commitments, a quick adjustment
of  messages,  clear  accountability  for  forecast  errors  and  even  for  misjudgements.  It  is  also
important to explain the context in which they operate.
In  monetary  policy  communication,  the  guidance  of  expectations,  constant  explanations  and
educational  projects  have  been  building  knowledge  and  trust.  Financial  stability  is  a  more
sensitive area, though. Central banks often come across different views of other public actors:
authorities, governments or parliament members.
Post-truth environment
In  a  world  of  uncertainty,  with  incomplete  information  about  the  prospects  and  state  of  the
economy,  information  about  central  banks’  strategy  is  a  necessary,  although  insufficient,
condition for the general public and market participants to understand decisions and shape their
expectations.
A careful calibration of wording is needed, along with greater efforts to explain the role and limits
of central banks in the financial field, in order to secure confidence. All this becomes even more
challenging  given  the  fast-moving, ‘post-truth’  environment  plagued  by  populism.  As
impatience  has  filtered  in  many  domains,  an  erosion  of  confidence  in  the  independent,
accountable  public  institutions  has  emerged,  as  did  the  risk  of  exposure  to  swings  in  the
economy, due to a change in sentiment.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
To cope with this, central banks across the globe have boosted their efforts to educate, increase
financial  literacy,  outreach  and  dissemination  capacities,  while  trying  to  deal  with  the  growing
challenges related to fake news and negative campaigns.
I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to some recent, new tools – first, an ECB educational
product  called  ‘Visitor  Centre...to  Go’  that  briefs  in  plain  language  the  institutions’  key
messages and knowledge in an easy-to-carry format – a suitcase! Any ECB expert can use this
kit during visits to schools or universities. Secondly, an interesting way to counterbalance fake
news  campaigns  is  the  one  used  by  the  central  bank  of  Ukraine  –  winner  of  2019  Central
Banking Publications award for transparency. They created a page on their website as well as
infographics, with simple and relevant data, to dismiss fake news about local banks as the sector
was struggling with a critical situation.
Therefore,  effective  central  bank  communication  for  the  whole  spectrum  of  its  policies  is  an
ongoing challenge.
The National Bank Romania’s experience
As  regards  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  one  key  challenge  to  policy  communication
the  apparent divergence  between  actual  inflation  and  that
effectiveness  concerns 
perceived by the public. In a country that saw annual inflation running at 300 percent back in
the 1990s and succeeded to tame prices in the single-digit zone for over more than a decade,
this divergence has gradually declined.
This issue has steadily been in our focus. In 2005, two years before Romania’s EU accession,
the shift to a flexible inflation targeting strategy and redenomination of the local currency brought
about  more  discipline  in  communication  and  transparency.  Thus, regular  media  briefings
(almost every six weeks), more specialised publications, as well as educational materials,
conferences  and  seminars,  livestreams  and  online  tools,  dedicated  outreach  projects
which  put  at  good  use  our  territorial  network,  increased  social  media  presence  with
tweeting, videos, tutorials and educational games or blogging (actually, we were among
the  pioneers  in  blogging)  became  part  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania’s  standard
communication practice.
The diversification of instruments and audiences came in swiftly. Some steps came only recently
(2016)  –  amid  fears  of  misleading  or  misunderstanding  by  the  general  public  that  was  yet  to
grasp  the  very  essence  of  the  banking  and  financial  business,  not  to  mention  central  bank
activities –, such as publishing the summary of accounts of monetary policy meetings and the
pay  thresholds  or  even  regular  parliamentary  presence. As  Romania’s  financial  literacy  is  the
lowest  among  EU  Member  States,  the National  Bank  of  Romania  has  devoted  special
energy  to  promoting  financial  knowledge  across  the  country  via  educational  projects  in
cooperation with the Ministry of Education, universities, academia or other authorities.
As regards the forward guidance, I have to say it was not among the preferred options given the
specifics  of  monetary  transmission  mechanism  in  Romania,  where  the  struggle  was  to  cope
with  high  currency  substitution  amid  harsh  transition  from  a  controlled  economy  to  functional
markets and with large capital inflows on the eve of EU accession. Our policy statements such
as  the Inflation Report,  the Financial  Stability  Report,  the Annual Report,  besides  our  regular
briefings, conferences or interviews have always offered clear perspectives.
Nevertheless, as negative inflation numbers, short lived in our case, popped up, I believe it is
important  to  deepen  our  understanding  and  address  the  causes  of  the  public  misperceptions
regarding the divergence between actual inflation and that perceived by the public in order to build
and strengthen confidence.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With inflation tamed in the single-digit zone and the Romanian leu fully convertible, the National
Bank  of  Romania’s 
the  positive  perception,
strengthening our reputation.
transparency  helped 
increased 
to  boost 
On  the  flipside  however,  oversized  expectations  have  also  emerged,  with  people  demanding
answers and solutions from us to all the problems in the economy, hoping that the National Bank
of Romania, like all central banks, could make up for the policies that naturally belong to other
institutions.
People  worry  about  price  moves;  a  rise  will  boost  emotions  although  today’s  puzzle  lies  with
prices’  stubbornness  to  stay  too  low  for  so  long.  But  money  loss  gives  them  more  shivers,
pushing  most  into  dire  straits  when  that  risk  materialises. In  an  emotional  and  fretful
environment, any message about the safety of our pockets – the essence of financial
stability – may be easily distorted, thereby fanning fears. Sometimes, central bankers’ talk
seems too strong, on other occasions too vague for both markets and the public at large.
Confronting volatility, uncertainties, mistrust or even panic and scepticism only via the
monetary  toolkit  is  not  enough.  Central  bankers  are  struggling  to  address  some  of  these
issues,  to  make  them  understood  by  using  all  the  modern  and  persuasive  communication
methods or tools. Nevertheless, their effort is poorly matched by the fiscal policy and by the often
delayed structural reforms.
In our case, as the global financial crisis unfolded, it took a while until the loss of confidence in
the main actors of the financial industry filtered in to also affect the National Bank of Romania.
Thus, a few years ago, the public perceptions started to be influenced by local fake-news
campaigns  echoing  the  ‘post-truth  era’  that  pointed  to  the  NBR  as  being  ‘the  banks’
lawyer’.
Moreover,  as  loose  or  uneven  fiscal  moves  or  reckless  legislative  initiatives  hindered  the
efficiency of the overall macroeconomic policy mix in Romania, the central bank openly voiced its
concerns regarding the sustainability and impact on growth potential of such populist measures,
triggering harsh criticism from their promoters.
The global crisis proved once again that price stability cannot be achieved in the context of
financial instability, whose resolution calls for far more than monetary policy words and
deeds and by far more knowledge and confidence.
Austerity measures, the recession, slower-than-expected recovery, along with the view that the
banking sector alone is to be blamed for these misfortunes – even though in Romania,
unlike  elsewhere,  no  bail-outs  were  resorted  to  –  created  a  mood  that  eroded  the  high
prestige that the National Bank of Romania had enjoyed prior to the crisis. A reputation that had
been earned thanks to a more transparent, flexible, effective policy and to a greater openness to
the general public. We were not alone. That sentiment became mainstream across the globe, as
well.
Central bankers are nowadays cornered to deliver more in their countries, to actively punish the
offenders of fiduciary and prove more empathic with debtors and, why not, more compliant and
tolerant  with  populist  measures  that  affect  the  financial  sector  and  macroeconomic  stability.
Otherwise  their  independence  would  be  put  at  risk,  as  it  is  already  challenged  by  public
representatives.
Given the rapid change in perceptions in a ‘post-truth’ environment, with few impartial media and
the increase in populism, most central banks across the world, including the National Bank of
Romania, may face a possible delay in recovering the public trust to the pre-crisis levels. Even if
they spoke more plainly or loudly, using all the modern communication toolkits, the slow bridging
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the trust gap should not crush the contribution of independent central banks to the efforts to
avert  crises,  achieve  economic  progress  and  be  an  open  and  responsible  institution  in  the
society.  And,  in  the  National  Bank  of  Romania’s  case,  its  legacy  is  an  important  pillar  of
Romania’s modernisation.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
