Yannis Stournaras: A systemic approach towards improving asset
quality of Greek banks
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event "Tackling NPLs
within the Greek Banking  System",  hosted  by  the  Hellenic  Bank Association  and  facilitated  by
PwC, Athens, 24 January 2019.
 It is a real honour for me to participate in this event and to be given the opportunity to discuss the
crucial issue of dealing with non-performing loans (NPLs), by far the most significant legacy of
the  crisis  and  a  major  constraint  on  the  efforts  of  the  real  economy  to  achieve  faster  and
sustainable growth.
The completion of Greece’s third financial support programme signaled the end of a long period
of  adjustment  for  the  Greek  economy.  In  this  context,  several  structural  reforms  have  been
implemented, although further changes will be needed in the years ahead. This is our only option
if we are to ensure that the progress achieved thus far will not be reversed.
The  protracted  and  deep  crisis  that  Greece  experienced  over  the  past  ten  years  has  brought
about three major changes that are relevant to its growth model. First, bank lending, which used
to be the main source of financing for households and businesses, has declined dramatically.
Second,  private  investment  has  shrunk.  Third,  the  production  structure  has  become  more
outward-oriented, although this has occurred against a background of recession in the domestic
economy.
Starting with the changes in the real economy, the transition to a new, more extrovert growth
model  has  already  begun  and  can  be  expected  to  continue.  However,  developments  in
productive investment, as a key driver of growth, have been less encouraging, pointing to a need
for more progress in this area.
In 2017, net capital investment of enterprises, i.e. gross investment less depreciation, stood at –
2.8 billion euros or 1.6% of nominal GDP; this disinvestment trend has since strengthened, with
net capital investment amounting to –3.7 billion euros or –2.0% of nominal GDP in the second
quarter of 2018 in annualised terms.
However,  in  order  to  increase  the  capital  stock  and  thus  the  potential  output  of  the  Greek
economy, positive net capital investment is indispensable. For this to happen, private investment
must grow by about 50% within the next few years. In other words, the Greek economy needs an
investment shock, with a focus on the most productive and extrovert business investment, to
avoid output hysteresis and foster a rebalancing of the growth model in favour of tradeable goods
and services.
In  an  environment  of  domestic  bank  lending  scarcity  and  tighter  credit  standards,  businesses
have  sought  to  cover  their  financing  needs  through  alternative  types  of  external  financing,  in
addition to their own resources. At the same time, the domestic banking sector was faced with
severe  liquidity  problems,  as  banks  for  a  long  period  of  time  had  limited  market  access  and
difficulties,  due  to  lack  of  eligible  collateral,  to  get  financing  through  the  Eurosystem’s  main
refinancing operations and could only raise funds through the Emergency Liquidity Assistance of
the Bank of Greece.
  In  addition,  during  the  adjustment  period,  credit  institutions  faced  strong  pressures  on  their
profitability and capital base, with the combined effect of:
 (a) continuous outflows of deposits;
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
  (b)  the  recession,  but  also  the  “strategic”  choice  of  non-repayment  of  loans  by  a  rather
significant percentage of borrowers, effectively deteriorating the quality of loan portfolios;
 (c) the restructuring of public debt;
 (d) the inability to access international markets; and
 (e) capital controls.
Policy response by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Greece was crucial to
restoring and strengthening monetary policy transmission to the real economy. At the European
level, credit growth has returned to positive territory for some time now, while in Greece it would
have  been  much  more  negative  without  the  interventions  to  support  the  domestic  banking
system and liquidity.
Moreover, the domestic banking sector has undergone a major transformation, characterised by
unprecedented consolidation, significant rationalisation of the cost structure and cost-cutting, and
a re-orientation of banks’ business model through deleveraging and increased focus on domestic
banking activities.
Restoring confidence in the Greek banking system crucially hinges upon a successful tackling of
the high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs), which are mainly a result of the protracted crisis
and its adverse impact on businesses and households. On a positive note, the decline in credit
contraction, on an annual basis, which characterised the Greek crisis, appears to have eased,
particularly  as  regards  non-financial  corporations.  In  particular,  the  amount  of  new  originated
loans to non-financial corporations with an agreed maturity increased in 2017, and this trend is
confirmed for the first eleven months of 2018. Overall, credit to the private sector has contracted
by 1.4% on average, slightly more intensely relative to the previous year.
Improving  asset  quality,  through  effective  management  of  non-performing  loans,  is  the  most
important  challenge  for  the  banking  industry  today.  This  will  not  only  ease  the  burden  on
borrowers but will also enable credit institutions to free up funds that could be channeled to the
most dynamic and extrovert businesses, thereby contributing to the overall restructuring of the
economy in favour of the tradable goods and services sectors and raising total productivity and
potential growth.
The rapid resolution of “bad loans” has been recognised as a matter of paramount importance
for restarting the economy and restoring significant and sustainable growth rates. The benefits
stand to be even greater in a small and open economy, such as Greece, where bank lending is
the predominant source of corporate and household finance.
Greek banks have already made substantial progress in reducing their NPLs. I will refer to this
substantial  progress  later.  However,  and  despite  the  fact  that  Greek  banks  fully  achieve  the
targets set by the supervisor, individual bank loan sales, write-offs and curing will not lead to a
rapid convergence of their NPL ratio to the European average, which is already less than 4%. If
we think that it is desirable for the NPL ratio to converge rapidly to the European average, the
Greek authorities must quickly form a consistent and coordinated approach to address the issue
of NPLs in a systemic way, on top of banks’ individual efforts. I believe that the Bank of Greece
proposal, about a sizable NPL&DTC carve-out, is effective since it systematically addresses two
major problems in one go: NPL and DTC reduction. However, if the government decides to adopt
the Asset Protection Scheme (APS), we will support it, since it is a step in the right direction.
Ideally, both schemes should be assessed and banks should be provided with any alternative
consistent with state aid rules and supervisory guidelines.
Before proceeding to a brief presentation of the Bank of Greece systemic proposal, I would like to
clarify  once  more  that  banks  have  individual  plans  to  reduce  NPLs  aggressively,  and  are
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
executing them with tangible results. The two additional tools under discussion are supporting
banks’ efforts aiming at a rapid convergence of their NPL ratio to the European average without
diluting private shareholders.
The  Bank  of  Greece  recently  outlined  its  proposal  aimed  to  rapidly  reduce  the  stock  of  NPLs
through the setting up of several privately managed Asset Management Companies (AMCs) as
well as through market-based funding. The proposal is intended to provide a systemic solution to
this problem, without imposing any additional burden on the Greek taxpayer.
As said before, this proposal effectively addresses two key issues faced by Greek banks: NPLs
and deferred tax credits (DTCs), currently accumulated on banks’ balance sheets.
At present, capital adequacy ratios remain satisfactory and significant capital buffers are in place,
although  the  probability  of  posting  additional  losses  is  limited  by  the  possibility  of  triggering
legislation on deferred tax credits. Under the current legal framework, a credit institution which in
a given financial year records losses as a result of transfer, write-off or impairment of NPLs must
increase its capital in favour of the State, by an amount equal to the share of the deferred tax
asset, i.e. 29%. In effect, the State receives compensation in the form of new equity, thus diluting
private shareholders.
It is therefore understood that there is a limitation on credit institutions as regards the effective
use of their own funds for the purpose of improving the quality of their balance sheets. Possible
conversion of a sufficient portion of these credits into shares would cause the drastic reduction
of  the  participation  of  private  shareholders  and  the  acquisition  of  an  overwhelming  majority  of
equity by the State.
Instead, a move along the lines proposed by the Bank of Greece would bring about a direct and
drastic reduction in the ratio of non-performing loans and would allow, under certain conditions,
to target a single-digit ratio within three years. Moreover, it would establish favourable conditions
for supporting operating profitability and internal capital generation, because of improved asset
quality  and  resilience  to  shocks  in  the  event  of  a  future  crisis.  Finally,  it  would  enable  the
reshaping of the business model of banks and alleviate the uncertainty regarding their medium-
term prospects.
It should also be noted that the implementation of such an initiative would benefit the sector by
correcting what is currently perceived as a large share of DTCs in capital adequacy ratios, while
it would allow banks to access market opportunities through a different investment case.
The main elements and characteristics of the Bank of Greece proposal are as follows:
The proposed scheme envisages the transfer of a significant part of non-performing loans
(NPLs) along with part of the deferred tax credits (DTCs), which are booked on the banks’
balance sheets, to a number of Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). Loans will be transferred
to the net book value (net of loan loss provisions). The amount of the deferred tax asset to
be transferred will match additional loss so that the valuations of these loans will approach
market  prices.  Subsequently,  legislation  will  be  introduced  in  order  to  transform  the
transferred deferred tax credit to an irrevocable claim of the SPVs against the Greek State
with a predetermined repayment schedule (according to the maturity of the transaction).
To finance the transfer, the Special Purpose Vehicles will proceed with a securitization issue
where  (indicative)  there  will  three  classes  of  notes  (senior,  mezzanine,  subordinated
junior/equity).
The valuation of the loans to be transferred will be carried out by independent third parties
and  the  final  structure  of  the  transaction  (including  the  tranches  of  the  three  classes  of
notes) by the arrangers subject to market conditions. It is anticipated that private investors
will  absorb  part  of  the  upper  class  of  securities  (senior)  and  the  vast  majority  of  the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediate part (mezzanine).
The scheme will be managed exclusively by private investors (servicing companies for loans
and credits) and apparently there will be an asset class separation for each transaction and
management  operation  (business,  housing,  consumer,  etc.).  It  is  understood  that  the
mandates  to  managers  will  arise  following  a  competitive  process  and  the  management
framework will be in line with international transparency and supervision practices.
It must be noted that, before completion of the transaction, banks are expected to proceed, in
consultation with the supervisory arm of the European Central Bank (SSM), to a restatement of
targets for NPL reduction, with the ultimate goal of achieving a single digit rate within three years.
An absolutely indicative example can assess the immediate impact of a transfer of about €40
billion of NPLs, namely all denounced loans and €7.4 billion of DTCs. In particular, it is estimated
that (according to 1st half 2018 data) the following results are expected:
Reduction in the stock of NPLs by 47%.
Reduction of the coverage ratio to 41% from 49%.
Double digit capital adequacy ratios for all systemic banks. Those estimates have not taken
into  account  benefits  from  staff  transfer,  strengthening  of  pre-tax  income  and  possible
adjustment of risk weights for risk undertaken upon completion of the transaction.
Limit contribution of DTCs to regulatory capital to 30% from 57%.
Improvement of NPL management as the Special Purpose Vehicles receive and manage
mostly denounced loans.
It  is  certainly  positive  that  very  important  steps  have  been  taken  in  recent  years  in  terms  of
legislation, regulation and actions of credit institutions, towards the effective management of non-
performing loans.
The strategy for NPL reduction has so far moved along three lines of action.
The  first  line  of  action  is  associated  with  the  strengthening  of  the  existing  legislative  and
regulatory framework governing the management of NPLs.
At an operational level, Greek banks now have:
set up specialized units for the management of non-performing loans;
established clear criteria for the transfer of non-performing loans to these units;
adopted the necessary internal procedures and manuals;
finalised proper segmentation of non-performing loan portfolios;
developed a range of short- and long-term loan restructuring options.
It must be noted however that, until recently, a rather disproportionate part of NPL restructurings
were  of  a  short-term  nature,  which,  far  from  offering  a  real  solution  to  the  problem,  simply
postpones a final decision to the future. Effective management of common borrowers is also a
challenge,  requiring  coordinated  action  and  good  cooperation  among  the  multiple  creditors
involved.
The second line of action is associated with the removal of obstacles to active management of
non-performing loans.
The Bank of Greece, in cooperation with the State, proposed a series of legislative initiatives that
aimed at lifting various obstacles to the effective management of NPLs.
In particular, by amendments to the Code of Civil Procedures and the Bankruptcy Code, Greek
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
authorities were able to:
 (1) enhance the seniority of the rights of secured creditors in the distribution of NPL liquidation
proceeds;
 (2) set up a framework for electronic auctions;
 (3) introduce an out-of-court workout (OCW) framework in order to accelerate restructuring of all
types of debt (owed both to private and public entities);
 (4) simplify procedures for filing bankruptcy claims for small businesses;
 (5) establish, under the auspices of the Hellenic Bank Association, a special platform to address
the issue of common borrowers;
 (6) provide legal protection from civil and criminal liability for public sector and bank employees
involved in loan restructuring and write-offs.
Moreover, the Bank of Greece, in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance, took certain initiatives
aimed  at  removing  tax  obstacles  to  the  active  management  of  non-performing  loans.  In
particular,  differences  between  the  treatment  of  IFRS  (International  Financial  Reporting
Standards)  and  Greek  GAAP  (Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles)  were  addressed
through relevant legislation in order to allow for proper reporting of accounting losses resulting
from loan write-offs and sales. With the latest amendment, deferred tax assets, converted into
DTCs, can be offset against the income tax due for a period of 20 years. The same period is also
provided for the gradual depreciation of losses due to write-offs and disposals of non-performing
loans, provided that the origin of the losses is clearly identified.
The  third  line  of  action  is  associated  to  the  development  of  a  secondary  market  for  the
management of non-performing loans.
Greek  authorities  established  a  comprehensive  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  for  the
licensing  and  supervision  of  servicing  companies  for  NPLs.  Specifically,  the  law  lays  down
different provisions for companies that intend to exercise only loan management and for those
who intend to engage in refinancing of such obligations. It should be noted that, based on this
framework,  there  are  now  sixteen  licensed  companies  operating  in  Greece,  which  are
supervised by the Bank of Greece and subject to strict rules regarding consumer protection.
The  development  of  this  secondary  NPL  market  will  also  facilitate  portfolio  sales,  providing
prospective investors with multiple options for effective management.
As mentioned before, thanks to the administrative and legislative measures under the three lines
of  action  outlined  above,  coupled  with  the  significant  efforts  of  supervised  banks,  substantial
progress  has  been  made,  as  reflected  in  a  reduction  in  the  volume  of  non-performing  loans.
NPLs reached €84.7 billion at end-September 2018, down by about €9.7 billion from December
2017 and by around €22.5 billion from their March 2016 peak. The decline in the stock of NPLs
during 2018 was mainly due to write-offs (€4.4 billion) and sales (€5.2 billion). The ratio of non-
performing loans to total loans remained high in September 2018 at 46.7%.
Greek  banks  have  already  submitted  revised  operational  targets  for  NPLs  covering  the  period
until  2021.  In  the  period  ahead,  loan  sales,  collections,  collateral  liquidation  and  curing  are
anticipated to be the key drivers for the NPL ratio to drop below 20% by the end of 2021. This
figure,  however,  although  significantly  lower  than  today,  will  still  be  well  above  the  European
average, which, as already mentioned above, is currently less than 4%.
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  repeatedly  stressed  the  importance  of  a  systemic  solution  to  the
problem  of  the  high  stock  of  NPLs,  if  Greek  banks  are  to  converge  to  the  EU  average  in  the
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
foreseeable future.
 If these targets are achieved, the drastic reduction of the high stock of NPLs will have a major
effect on economic activity and productivity, through two channels:
 (a) an increase in loan supply; and
 (b) the effective restructuring of major productive sectors.
According  to  Bank  of  Greece  research,  the  decrease  of  the  NPL  ratio  would  help  to  reduce
financial  risks  and  funding  costs  for  banks,  thus  improving  their  internal  capital  generation
capacity. Moreover, it is estimated that a significant reduction of the NPL ratio would improve
core profitability on a sustainable basis.
Greek  banks  continue  to  accumulate  loan  loss  reserves  of  about  2%  of  their  risk-weighted
assets on average on an annual basis. These costs cannot be reduced as long as the NPL ratio
is around 40%. Additionally, considering the minimum capital requirements under Pillar 2, there
appears  to  be  no  reasonable  scenario  that  these  requirements  will  fall,  unless  there  is  a
significant improvement on the NPL front.
This improvement would enable a gradual increase in loan supply and a decline in borrowing
costs for businesses and households. At the same time, we can expect a reduction in business
and  household  financial  risk  as  the  economy  recovers,  thus  increasing  the  valuation  of  their
existing assets and their collateral value, due to higher net returns on capital and real estate. As a
result, households and businesses will gradually become more creditworthy, and more likely to
obtain bank credit to finance their investments.
Ladies and gentlemen,
A wide array of measures and policies has been successfully implemented so far and we are
clearly in a much better position than we were in previous years. However, it cannot be stressed
enough that, despite all the reforms completed to address the issue of non-performing loans, the
stock of NPLs remains very high compared with the European average.
In fact, even if the operational targets are fully attained by the end of 2021, the NPL stock will
continue to be significantly higher than any European average benchmark.
Therefore,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  all  relevant  authorities,  Greek  and  European,  take
additional policy initiatives, in order to support the banking sector and address the NPL problem
in a decisive and systematic way. This will allow banks to focus on what really matters for the
future:  modern  business  models,  finding  new  profitable  growth  opportunities  and  activities,
exploiting digital technologies, and above all, financing the real economy.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
