Mario Draghi: Debate about the Annual Report
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at plenary debate of the
European Parliament about the ECB’s annual report 2017, Strasbourg, 15 January 2019.
 Mr President of the European Parliament,
Mr Vice-President of the Commission,
Honourable Members of the European Parliament,
I am very pleased to be here to discuss with you the ECB’s activities and your draft resolution on
the ECB’s Annual Report 2017.
20 years ago, on 1 January 1999, the euro was officially introduced and the Eurosystem started
its  monetary  policy  operations.  Establishing  a  single  currency  area  between  11  European
countries was a historic step for our continent and a quantum leap in economic integration. Its
twentieth anniversary gives us an opportunity to reflect on its successes, but also to consider
what still needs to be done for the euro to deliver its full benefits.
In this context, I would like to use my remarks to take a look back at the ECB’s monetary policy,
to take stock of what we have learned and to highlight the challenges that remain. I will mostly
focus on the past seven years, which coincide with my term as ECB President.
The evolution of the ECB’s monetary policy
The two decades in which the euro has existed could hardly have been more different. The first
decade was the culmination of a thirty-year period of macroeconomic stability – the era known as
the  “Great  Moderation”.  The  second  decade  then  produced  the  worst  economic  and  financial
crisis  since  the  Great  Depression.  Naturally,  these  periods  required  very  different  monetary
policy responses and different tools to implement them.
As the pre-crisis period was characterised by moderate swings in the economic cycle,  the ECB
was  able  to  ensure  price  stability  mainly  by  adjusting  its  policy  rates.  But  the  crisis  of  2008
fundamentally changed the economic and financial landscape in which the ECB operated. New
instruments  became  essential  to  safeguard  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy  and
stabilise the euro area economy. This in turn required us to refine our approach to central bank
communication and accountability.
1
When  I  arrived  at  the  ECB  in  November  2011,  the  euro  area  faced  a  very  challenging  set  of
circumstances.  The  economy  had  bounced  back  from  the  post-Lehman  crisis  in  a  similar
manner to other jurisdictions. But from 2010 onwards, a loss of confidence in the sustainability of
sovereign debt had produced a vicious circle of rising borrowing costs, financial fragmentation,
and contracting economic activity. Cuts in key ECB interest rates were not being passed on to
firms  and  households  to  the  same  extent  in  every  euro  area  country.  We  were  witnessing  a
serious disruption in the monetary policy transmission mechanism which, if left untended, would
have posed a profound threat to price stability.
The ECB responded with two sets of policies. First, central bank liquidity was made available to
banks for up to three years, and the range of collateral that banks could use to access central
bank  money  was  expanded.  This  helped  reduce  fragmentation  in  banks’  funding  conditions.
Second,  the  ECB  announced  outright  monetary  transactions  (OMTs)  in  the  summer  of  2012,
which  removed  redenomination  risk  in  government  bond  markets  stemming  from  fears  of  a
possible euro area break-up.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yet the sovereign debt crisis left a deep scar on the economy. Unemployment rose steeply, firms
cut back on investment and loan delinquencies increased. Even though financial fragmentation
was diminishing, banks began to shrink their balance sheets and became less willing to lend.
This  produced  a  renewed  cycle  of  contracting  credit  growth  and  weak  demand  dynamics.
Inflation drifted downwards.
With inflation now well below our objective, the ECB faced a new type of policy challenge. We
needed not only to repair the transmission problems created by deleveraging banks. We also
needed to expand our policy stance to counteract deflationary pressures.
So in June 2014 we launched our targeted longer-term refinancing operations, which once more
provided long-term liquidity to banks – but conditional on extending credit to the private sector.
We  introduced  negative  rates  on  excess  reserves  to  further  encourage  banks  to  lend  to
households  and  businesses. And  soon  after,  we  announced  our  asset  purchase  programme
(APP),  buying  asset-backed  securities  and  covered  bonds.  Faced  with  a  continued  decline  in
inflation and a heightened risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, in January 2015 we
expanded the APP to include public sector securities.
Since  then,  both  the  size  and  duration  of  our  asset  purchases  have  been  recalibrated  in
response  to  changes  in  the  inflation  outlook.  Our  asset  purchases  have  also  been
complemented by further cuts in policy rates and the use of forward guidance. Communicating
our expectations about future policy, along with the conditions that would warrant a change in the
policy stance, has successfully contributed to reducing uncertainty around the expected future
path  of  short-term  interest  rates,  thereby  helping  to  preserve  accommodative  financial
conditions.
Supported by these policy measures, the euro area economy has steadily recovered. We have
now seen 22 consecutive quarters of economic growth. There are 9.6 million more people in
employment in the euro area than there were in the second quarter of 2013 (when the number of
people in work fell to its lowest point during the crisis). The unemployment rate has declined to
7.9%, its lowest level since October 2008. And the employment rate of people aged 15-74 has
risen from 54% in 1999 to 59% in the second quarter of 2018, the highest rate ever recorded in
the euro area.
The main motor of the recovery has been the domestic economy, driven by a strengthening in
domestic demand and improving labour markets. That underlying strength of the economy has
underpinned our confidence that inflation would converge towards our inflation aim in a sustained
manner.  As  such,  since  2017  we  have  gradually  reduced  the  monthly  pace  of  net  asset
purchases.  We  decided  to  end  our  net  purchases  in  December  last  year,  confident  that  the
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim would proceed.
At  the  same  time,  recent  economic  developments  have  been  weaker  than  expected  and
uncertainties,  notably  related  to  global  factors,  remain  prominent.  So  there  is  no  room  for
complacency. A  significant  amount  of  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still  needed  to  support  the
further  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and  headline  inflation  developments  over  the
medium  term.  Our  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  reinforced  by  the
reinvestments  of  the  sizeable  stock  of  assets  we  have  acquired,  continues  to  provide  the
necessary degree of monetary accommodation for the sustained convergence of inflation to our
aim.
Lessons for monetary policy and the monetary union
So what have we learned from this experience? The ECB’s monetary framework rests on three
elements: a clear mandate to achieve price stability; independence over the instruments we can
use to achieve our mandate; and a strong accountability framework. The importance of each of
these elements has been reinforced by the crisis.
 
2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, we have seen that a well-defined mandate is vital for our credibility with the public, because
it guarantees that the ECB will always act in the interest of the whole euro area, and will not be
swayed by interest groups.
Second,  we  have  seen  that  instrument  independence  is  key  to  an  effective  monetary  policy,
since  it  allows  the  central  bank  to  act  quickly  and  flexibly  to  shocks,  especially  in  exceptional
times. Indeed, a well-equipped toolbox, comprising both standard and non-standard instruments,
has proven indispensable in conditions where monetary policy transmission is impaired or where
space for interest rate cuts is limited.
Third,  we  have  seen  the  importance  of  a  strong  accountability  framework,  particularly  when
central banks have to use new tools that are not well-understood by the public. Central banks are
powerful and independent, but they are unelected. This combination can only be squared if they
are held accountable by elected authorities.
In light of this, we have stepped up our efforts to improve our communication and strengthen our
accountability in recent years. The Governing Council has started to publish the accounts of its
monetary policy meetings. The ECB and the European Parliament have increased the intensity
and focus of their exchanges.  All this has provided us with more opportunities to explain our
decisions and demonstrate how the ECB is acting in accordance with its mandate, which is a
fundamental pillar of its legitimacy.
2
The crisis has offered many lessons beyond monetary policy, too. The euro area entered the
crisis with an incomplete institutional and regulatory framework, not only for the banking sector
but also in other areas of economic policy.
The creation of the banking union and the European Stability Mechanism has strengthened the
ability of EU authorities to intervene decisively in future crises. Reforms at national level, and the
strong  political  commitment  to  the  euro  shown  by  European  policymakers,  were  equally
instrumental  in  strengthening  the  foundations  of  our  common  project.  But  the  necessary
changes took time, and it was time that the euro area lost in its recovery. Our monetary union is
now in better shape, but further progress can and should be made.
As I had the opportunity to discuss during my regular hearing before the Committee on Economic
and Monetary Affairs, and as your draft resolution points out, the priority now is to increase the
resilience of the euro area. This would also strengthen the transmission of monetary policy in
future downturns.  Resilience depends on the euro area being able to use a broad policy mix
4
involving monetary, fiscal, prudential and structural instruments.
Conclusion
3
Let me conclude.
The first two decades of the euro area have seen an evolution in the way the ECB conducts its
monetary policy. Faced with unprecedented threats to price stability, the ECB adapted its policy
instruments to continue delivering on its mandate. We will continue to do so if and when needed,
in compliance with our mandate as defined by the EU Treaties, and with all the independence
over our tools as defined by our legal framework.
Today, we can say that the euro area has emerged from a crisis so severe as to threaten at
times  its  existence.  We  are  out  of  it,  primarily  because  of  the  resilience,  the  energy,  and  the
entrepreneurial capacity of European citizens, as well as their trust in their leaders’ commitment
to the euro. Our policy response and the important changes to the architecture of the EMU in the
meantime also helped the euro area out of the crisis. In many ways we have a stronger monetary
union today than we had in 2008. This is also reflected in the euro’s popularity among euro area
citizens,  which  is  currently  at  its  highest  level  since  it  was  introduced.  But  more  work  is  still
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
necessary to complete the EMU, so as to make it more resilient in the face of future crises.
To deliver its full benefits, the European Union requires permanent political commitment, at both
national and European levels, and across policy areas.
In this respect I can testify to the essential role the European Parliament has played during the
challenging years of the crisis. And I am certain that it will also be fundamental in carrying out the
remaining work until the completion of the EMU.
The credibility of the ECB rests on its independence and this is based on its accountability with
respect to its mandate, as enshrined in the EU Treaties. The European Parliament in holding the
ECB to account gives legitimacy to its independence. And since this is my last hearing before
this plenary as ECB President, let me thank all of you for how this process has been carried out
during my mandate, for the valued interactions with you, and the opportunity you have given me
to explain the ECB’s policies.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
See  Hartmann,  P.  and  Smets,  F.,  “The  first  20  years  of  the  European  Central  Bank:  Monetary  Policy”,  ECB
Working Paper Series No 2219, December 2018.
See “The evolution of the ECB’s accountability practices during the crisis”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB,
2018.
Introductory  statement  by  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  ECB,  at  the  ECON  committee  of  the  European
Parliament, Brussels, 26 November 2018.
“Unemployment in the euro area”, speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, at the Annual central bank
symposium in Jackson Hole, 22 August 2014.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
