Yves  Mersch:  Remarks  at  the  "Challenges  in  Understanding  the
Monetary Transmission Mechanism" conference
Remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the "Challenges in Understanding the Monetary Transmission Mechanism" conference, Warsaw,
22 March 2019.
 Should we radically rethink the role of cash to deal with the lower bound on interest
rates?
The lower bound on interest rates has been a major challenge for central bankers in the multiple
crises over the last ten years. It threatens the effectiveness of monetary policy by preventing it
from  steering  financial  conditions.  Moreover,  the  continuous  decline  in  both  the  real  rate  and
confidence in the central bank, as well as resistance at the retail level, raises the question of
whether negative rates should be part of the standard toolkit of central banks.
In  the  context  of  the  Eurosystem’s  asset  purchase  programmes,  the  combined  package  of
negative nominal interest rates and lending schemes that incentivise banks to increase lending
(e.g. the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, or TLTROs) have been an effective and
appropriate way to combat these challenges. While cash represented the largest part of central
bank balance sheets before the crisis, other elements of the balance sheet have since gained
more prominence in the operational framework of monetary policy.
Some people want to abolish cash by taking advantage of recent technological advances, such
as  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT),  or  replace  public  money  with  private  money,  in  total
denial  of  people’s  trust  in  liabilities  issued  by  central  banks  and  the  fact  that  their  continued
demand  for  cash  exceeds  GDP  growth.  Others  argue  for  the  introduction  of  a  dual  currency
scheme  where  the  central  bank  would  divide  the  monetary  base  into  two  separate  local
currencies – cash and electronic money (e-money). E-money would be issued only electronically
and  would  pay  the  policy  rate  of  interest,  and  cash  would  have  an  exchange  rate  –  the
conversion rate – against e-money, which could be manipulated to match negative rates on e-
1
money by setting the conversion rate for cash lower than one to one.
I have experienced the nightmare of dual exchange regimes before the euro and I have doubts
about  these  arguments.  Our  unconventional  measures  have  proven  sufficient  to  meet  the
challenges of low inflation. The Governing Council has confidence in the sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation. Recent evidence supports the hypothesis that there is some substitutability
2
between conventional and unconventional monetary policies.
Additionally,  while  being  able  to  set  significantly  negative  rates  may  work  smoothly  in  an
economic model, I am less certain how the general public would react, particularly after millennia
of  positive  nominal  rates.  Not  only  would  such  rates  be  deeply  unpopular,  there  may  also  be
unintended changes in behaviour that could dampen the effectiveness of the measure.
The  fact  that  banks  do  not  pass  negative  rates  on  to  most  depositors,   and  notably  not  to
households, is a warning sign for central banks of how people may react if attempts were made
to extend the lower bound of rates downwards by replacing cash with some form of remunerated
digital currency. What assets the central bank ought to hold against these widely held liabilities
driving bank disintermediation and deleveraging?
3
A potential decision to issue a central bank digital currency (CBDC) needs to be assessed in
relation to the impact on the financial system. In an extreme case, during a systemic banking
crisis,  holding  risk-free  central  bank-issued  CBDC  could  become  vastly  more  attractive  than
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank deposits. There could be a sector-wide run on bank deposits, magnifying the effects of the
crisis.
Even  in  the  absence  of  a  crisis,  readily  convertible  CBDC  could  crowd  out  bank  deposits  –
putting the two-tier banking system at risk. Then, the efficient flow of credit to the economy would
likely be impaired. The central bank – now holders of deposit funding – would have to decide
which  projects  to  finance,  either  directly,  by  replacing  commercial  banks,  or  indirectly,  by
deciding which banks would receive funding. This would lead to a situation in which the central
bank  pretends  to  know  better  than  the  established  system  of  the  decentralised  allocation  of
credit.
Overall, there is currently no convincing motivation for the Eurosystem to issue CBDC to the
general public. It is unnecessary and appears to be disproportionate to the aims put forward by
its  proponents.  There  is  no  need  to  fix  something  that  is  not  broken.  If  anything,  one  could
imagine a digital representation of cash that replicates the features of cash in the reasonably
distant future, if people demanded it. And I have not even mentioned the insufficient robustness
or reliability of some technologies like DLT, or their energy insufficiencies and dependencies.
How  does  technological  change  affect  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  and
monetary policy?
Technological change has multifaceted effects on the transmission mechanism. It is important
not  to  jump  to  conclusions,  for  example  that,  because  the  Phillips  curve  has  become  flatter,
monetary policy needs to be more aggressive. Let me add that, beyond technological changes,
additional liquidity demand factors also stem from regulatory change, fragmentation and the fact
that the banking union is incomplete.
I will consider how technological change affects the following three broad channels of monetary
transmission,  without  focusing  on  the  consequences  structural  changes  will  have  for  the
operational framework:
1.  How policy rates affect market interest rates and financial conditions.
2.  Labour markets and the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU).
3.  Price-setting and the Phillips curve.
Financial innovations have the potential to impact the way the economy is financed
A change from bank-based to market-based financing has been taking place for some time in the
euro area, partly related to financial innovation. This has led to firms having a more diversified
financing  structure  and  has  improved  their  resilience  to  shocks  emanating  from  the  banking
system. At the same time, corporate exposure to volatility in market rates has increased.
Fintechs  can  lead  to  further  bank  disintermediation,  but  also  financial  deepening,  by  allowing
otherwise  constrained  households  and  firms  to  borrow.   In  addition,  fintech  can  strengthen
unregulated  lending  activities,  posing  challenges  to  financial  stability.  This  might  affect  the
transmission mechanism, although how it will do so is not yet clear.
Labour markets and the NAIRU
4
The possible disruption from technological change is likely to be felt in labour markets. Email,
videoconferencing,  secure  VPN   connections  and  outsourcing  across  countries  all  enable
services  to  be  provided  from  a  distance,  and  permit  a  greater  degree  of  flexibility  in  working
practices – a massive socioeconomic shift.
5
In the labour market the internet enables more services to be offered with less intermediation at
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
lower prices. Fragmentation of labour time is shown in the diverging results of compensation per
employee and compensation per hour worked.
For some workers this is a positive development, allowing them to participate in the workforce
where  previously  they  were  excluded.   For  others,  the  greater  individualisation  can  lead  to
insecurity, affecting households’ income. More individualised roles can also weaken the power of
7
collective bargaining to maintain the labour share of income.
6
While  the  productivity-enhancing  aspects  of  digitalisation  might  tend  to  raise  potential  output
growth, the effects operating through labour and capital are more uncertain, and might even work
in different directions.
There  may  be  some  substitution  of  labour  for  capital,  with  possible  repercussions  for  the
bargaining power of workers, and a shift in investment to the IT sector as a result of digitalisation
and servicification. If there is a skill bias in the transition to digital technology, this could lead to a
greater mismatch in labour  markets,  and  therefore  a  higher  NAIRU  and  lower  potential  output
growth.
On  the  other  hand,  digital  production  and  supply  chains,  and  digital  communication  and
connectivity,  would  tend  to  lower  the  NAIRU  and  raise  potential  output,  because  of  the
productivity  increases  resulting  from  faster  collection  and  evaluation  of  data,  and  the  greater
efficiency of digitally underpinned production.
The  overall  effect  of  digitalisation  and  new  technologies  on  demand  and  supply  therefore
depends  on  many  factors.  These  include  the  initial  conditions:  economies  with  high-quality
institutions  and  governance  are  likely  to  see  faster  adoption  and  implementation  of  digital
technologies and a faster impact on potential output.
From a monetary policy perspective, it is important to monitor the digital transformation of the
economy.  Some  economists  argue  that  output,  productivity,  intangible  investment  and  prices
have become more difficult to measure as a result of digitalisation. Literature suggests that, even
though  some  mismeasurement  exists,  its  impacts  may  not  necessarily  be  greater  than  in
8
previous episodes of technological change.
But the analysis is ongoing, with various opinions and sometimes conflicting results. Of course,
the fast pace of change across all areas of the economy also requires us to update our tools for
monitoring  it,  and  leverage  the  opportunities  modern  technology  gives  us,  including  new  and
better data.
Price-setting and the Phillips curve
Technological  progress  poses  a  particularly  acute  challenge  because  of  its  direct  impact  on
businesses’ price-setting behaviour; behaviour that directly underlies the inflationary process.
The  growing  importance  of  e-commerce,  rapid  product  introduction  and  substitution,  and  the
quality  adjustment  of  new  products  also  pose  their  own  challenges  for  measuring  inflation.
Technological  progress  has  resulted  in  the  creation  of  products  such  as  smartphones  and
internet  service  providers  that  had  no  equivalent  in  the  past;  failing  to  properly  measure  the
quality improvements in new products can result in an upward bias in measured inflation. On the
other  hand,  the  reduction  in  shelf-life  of  many  products  and  the  heavy  discounting  of  less-
9
fashionable older versions could instead create downward bias in traditional price indices.
Technological  changes  to  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour  have  much  deeper  relevance  for
central  banks  than  just  the  measurement  of  inflation.  The  speed  and  extent  of  how  inflation
reacts to shocks affects the optimal monetary policy response:
 3 / 5
10
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
13
12
11
flexible 
  Not  only  are
E-commerce  may  result  in  suppliers  changing  prices  more  frequently.
Amazon’s  prices  more 
than  prices  of  brick-and-mortar  stores,  Amazon’s
competitors  are  forced  to  adjust  prices  more  often  for  products  that  are  also  offered  by
Amazon. More  frequent  price  changes  result  in  a  steeper  Phillips  curve  –  prices  react
more quickly and strongly to changes in costs and output. This could also mean that inflation
reacts much faster to monetary policy.
Since  online  stores  effectively  offer  the  same  price  across  locations,  e-commerce  may
restrict the ability of businesses to set prices that deviate substantially from those of large
online retailers while reflecting local conditions. So prices may change more often, but they
may be more uniform, which in turn may restrict the ability of prices to reflect idiosyncratic
and regional shocks.
E-commerce changes not only how firms set prices but also how consumers shop. It has
revolutionised  the  transparency  of  pricing  both  within  and  across  countries,  allowing
consumers to easily compare prices and swap one product for another. This can result in
higher demand elasticities, eroding the monopolistic and monopsonistic power of suppliers
and reducing mark-ups. Profit margins at Amazon (less than 4%) are much lower than at
Walmart (more than 20%).
 Such a change in demand elasticities and mark-ups can be
viewed as a flattening of the Phillips curve.
Finally,  the  emerging  prevalence  of  e-commerce  can  create  new  opportunities  for
consumers to switch their shopping outlets over the business cycle. For example, there is
evidence that households actively exploit price differentials across stores and “trade down”
in recessions (e.g. switch from a regular grocery store to a discounter). It could be predicted
that  this  switching  will  be  amplified  in  the  future  because  switching  to  an  online  store  is
particularly easy. As a result, aggregate “true” inflation may be more cyclically sensitive than
is suggested by headline inflation.
14
15
The  impact  of  e-commerce  on  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve  is  uncertain,  and  studies  have
generally struggled to find large effects on annual inflation. Given the overall difficulty in estimating
the slope of the Phillips curve, this is not entirely a surprise.
Conclusions
As  with  measuring  consumer  price  indices,  the  greater  availability  of  more  granular  data  has
enabled a much greater understanding of how businesses set prices. But while policymakers
should  adapt  policy  to  take  into  account  changes  in  the  underlying  price-setting  process,  we
should also exercise due prudence, given the uncertainty surrounding model estimates.
Price stability-oriented monetary policy needs to monitor innovations and their impact on financial
conditions,  economic  growth  and  inflation.  And  we  have  to  be  mindful  of  changes  in  the
information content of the indicators that central banks use as a basis for policy decisions (e.g.
monetary aggregates and inflation rates).
As the impact of innovations cannot be estimated in advance with sufficient certainty regarding
the direction, size and duration of the effects, and uncertainty therefore prevails, monetary policy
should act prudently and be forward-looking.
1
2
3
See Argawal,  R.  and  Krogstrup,  S., blogs.imf.org/2019/02/05/cashing-in-how-to-make-negative-interest-rates-
work/. Specifically, when setting a negative interest rate on e-money, the central bank would let the conversion
rate of cash in terms of e-money depreciate at the same rate as the negative interest rate on e-money. The value
of cash would thereby fall in terms of e-money.
See De Bortoli, D., Galí, J. and Gambetti, L. (2018), “On the empirical (ir)relevance of the zero lower bound
constraint”, UPF Working Paper No 1594.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See Heider, F., Saidi, F. and Schepens, G. (2018), “Life below zero: Bank lending under negative policy rates”,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
See  Eichenbaum,  M.,  Rebelo,  S.  and  Wong,  A.  (2018),  “State  Dependent  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy:  the
Refinancing Channel”, NBER Working Paper No 25152; and Faia, E. and Paiella, M. (2018), “P2P  Lending:
Information Externalities, Social Networks and Loans’ Substitution”.
VPN = Virtual private network.
Bloom,  N.,  Liang,  J.,  Roberts,  J.  and  J.  Zichun  (2015),  “Does  working  from  home  work?  Evidence  from  a
Chinese Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 165–218 find a 13% increase in productivity of
workers who work from home.
International Monetary Fund (2017), “Understanding the downward trend in labor income shares”, IMF World
Economic Outlook, April.
See for example Brynjolfson, E., Rock, D., Syverson, C., (2018), ‘Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity
Paradox: A  Clash  of  Expectations  and  Statistics’,  chapter  1  in  The  Economics  of Artificial  Intelligence: An
Agenda,  NBER,  Gordon,  R.J.  (2018),  ‘Declining  American  Economic  Growth  despite  Ongoing  Innovation’,
Explorations in Economic History, vol. 69, pp. 1-12, Mokyr, J. (2018), ‘The past and the future of innovation: Some
lessons from economic history’, Explorations in Economic History, vol. 69, pp. 13–26.
The direction of the bias for the aggregate index is less certain. In Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. (2010), “Product
Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price Implications”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100(3), pp. 691–
723, the authors find that failing to take into account product creation across the index creates an upward bias to
traditional “fixed good” indices.
Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  Talavera,  O.  (2017),  “Price  setting  in  online  markets:  basic  facts,  international
comparisons and cross-border integration”, American Economic Review, Vol. 107(1), pp. 249–282, January.
Cavallo, A. (2018), “More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviour”, NBER Working Paper No
25138, presented at the Jackson Hole Symposium 2018.
Nevertheless, early evidence suggests that online prices are as unresponsive to macroeconomic shocks as
offline prices – see Gorodnichenko, Y., Sheremirov, V. and Talavera, O. (2018), “The responses of internet retail
prices to aggregate shocks: A high-frequency approach,” Economics Letters, Vol. 164(C), pp. 124–127.
In  Cavallo, A.  (2017),  “Are  online  and  offline  prices  similar?  Evidence  from  large  multi-channel  retailers”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 107(1), pp. 283–303, the author finds price levels are identical around 72% of
the time.
Gorodnichenko, Y. (2018), Discussion of Cavallo, A., Jackson Hole Symposium 2018.
See Nevo, A. and Wong, A. (2018), “Measuring inflation in the modern economy – a micro price-setting view”,
ECB Forum on Central Banking.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
