Benoît  Cœuré:  The  rise  of  services  and  the  transmission  of
monetary policy
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 21st Geneva Conference on the World Economy, Geneva, 16 May 2019.
 One of the biggest mysteries currently facing central banks around the world is why inflation has
1
failed to pick up more forcefully after years of extraordinary monetary stimulus.  This is one of
the most fiercely debated topics in macroeconomics, with few definitive answers.
Many explanations have been put forward, including discussions on the appropriate measure of
economic  slack,  the  role  of  inflation  expectations  and  the  effects  of  globalisation  and
2
digitalisation.
One aspect that has received much less attention in the public discussion, however, relates to
the impact of the structural transformation of our economies on inflation dynamics and monetary
policy transmission.
There are many dimensions to this transformation to which central banks should remain alert,
including the impact of ageing and, looking forward, climate change.  In my remarks this evening,
I  will  focus  on  another  dimension. Across  advanced  economies,  secular  forces  have  shifted
economic  activity,  employment  and  consumption  expenditure  away  from  manufactured  goods
and towards services.
3
In my remarks this evening, I will argue that these secular forces are likely to have played, and
continue to play, a non-negligible role in explaining the sluggish response of inflation to economic
activity and monetary policy in recent years.
I  will  start  by  presenting  some  stylised  facts  that  illustrate  the  extent  of  past  changes  in
consumption and production patterns in the euro area, the United States and Japan. I will then
explain how these changes, and the shift towards services, are likely to have affected monetary
policy transmission on both sides of the Atlantic.
In short, prices in the services sector change much less frequently than in other sectors and are
less  sensitive  to  exchange  rates.  This  means  that  it  takes  longer  for  inflation  to  respond  to
changes in monetary policy and economic activity than it did a few decades ago.
I will also suggest that the rise of the services sector in our economies has only affected the
pace of the response of inflation to shocks, but not the overall effectiveness of monetary policy. In
other words, the effects of monetary policy take longer to pass through the economy but they
have not become less powerful.
Finally, I will argue that policies that can help raise productivity and competition in the services
sector may contribute to reduce the lags with which monetary policy is transmitted to consumer
prices.
The rise of the service economy
One of the most striking trends in advanced economies over the past few decades has been the
growing importance of the services sector in aggregate economic activity.
4
Three stylised facts document this rise.
First, from 1970 to 2010, the share of services in total gross value added increased by more than
 1 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
20 percentage points in the euro area and by about 14 and 16 percentage points in the United
States and Japan respectively. You can see this on my first slide.
Second,  and  unsurprisingly  given  that  many  services  are  labour  intensive,  there  has  been  an
even greater increase in the percentage of the workforce employed in the services sector. You
can see this on my next slide. In 2010, the services sector accounted for three-quarters of the
jobs in the euro area, while in 1970 this figure was about 45%. The situation in the United States
is even more stark. In 2010, the services sector accounted for nearly 85% of jobs.
 2 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
And, third, over the past 40 years we have seen a significant increase in the consumption of
services by households.  You can see this on my next slide. Services in the euro area today
account for more than 50% of final consumption, compared with less than 40% in 1980. In the
United  States,  households  today  spend  nearly  70%  of  their  consumption  expenditure  on
services, and in Japan, this figure is 60%.
5
 3 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
These developments have been studied widely in the literature.  William Baumol’s famous “cost
disease” channel, for example, predicted that lower productivity growth would raise the relative
price of services compared with manufacturing, which in turn would affect the sectoral allocation
7
of consumption and labour.
6
You  can  see  this  clearly  on  my  next  slide. Across  advanced  economies,  the  output  price  of
services  relative  to  manufacturing  goods  has  risen  steadily  as  productivity  gains  in  the
manufacturing  sector  have  outpaced  productivity  gains  in  the  services  sector.  As  a  result,
households in advanced economies are allocating less and less of their expenditure to goods,
which are getting cheaper, and are instead spending more on services, whose relative prices
8
increase with income over time.
 4 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Work by David Autor and others, on the other hand, has documented how technological progress
and  globalisation  have  caused  profound  sectoral  shifts  in  employment  in  the  United
States.  Their research focused mainly on the flipside of the developments in the services sector
– that is, on the stark decline in manufacturing employment.
9
You can see this on my next slide. Since the 1970s, the manufacturing sector’s share of total
jobs in the United States and the euro area has practically halved. Today, only around 15% of
workers in the euro area are employed in the manufacturing sector.
 In the United States, the
figure is less than 10%. The research by David Autor and others has sensitised policymakers to
the  challenges  that  global  trade  and  automation  may  bring  in  terms  of  inequality  and  social
cohesion.
10
11
 5 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Services, inflation and the transmission of monetary policy
A question that has received much less attention in central banking circles, however, is whether
and how the rise of the services sector has affected the transmission of monetary policy, and
whether it has contributed to the stubbornly weak inflationary pressures that we are observing
today.
There are at least two broad and complementary channels through which this may happen.
The first channel relates to a composition effect – that is, to the changing weight of services in
the  consumption  basket. As  final  consumption  expenditures  shift,  so  do  the  weights  used  to
calculate inflation. You can see this on my next slide. The weight of services in euro area core
inflation has increased by around 10 percentage points since the launch of the single currency in
1999.
 In the United States, services today account for three-quarters of the core CPI basket.
12
 6 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
If prices in the services sector differ in terms of level, volatility and persistence compared with
other sectors, this can be expected to affect aggregate inflation dynamics.
The second channel relates to a transmission effect – that is, differences in how the economy
reacts  to  monetary  impulses  from  the  central  bank.  If  services  and  manufacturing  differ  with
respect  to  their  nominal  and  real  rigidities,  or  feature  different  interest  and  exchange  rate
sensitivities, then monetary policy will be transmitted differently through the economy. To put it
simply, the investment-saving (IS) curve may have a different slope depending on the weight of
services in the economy.
In  what  follows  I  will  argue  that  both  the  composition  and  transmission  effects  could  help  us
improve our understanding of recent inflation dynamics across advanced economies.
The composition effect
Idiosyncratic shocks in the services sector account for a larger share of aggregate fluctuations
today than they did in the past. Today, an arbitrary increase in service price inflation raises euro
area core inflation by nearly 25% more than it did in the mid-1990s. On my next slide you can see
that, all else being equal, euro area core inflation would have been around 15 basis points lower
in 2018 were it not for the increase in the weight of services in the euro area HICP.
 7 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
So,  consistent  with  Baumol’s  cost  disease  effect,  the  shift  towards  services,  whose  relative
prices increase over time, has tended to lift the level of core inflation.
 This is also consistent
with  the  limited  support  often  found  in  the  literature  for  global  factors  in  driving  domestic
underlying inflation, and with evidence of a declining pass-through of exchange rate changes to
final consumer prices since the 1970s and 80s.
13
14
Put  differently,  those  products  that  are  most  exposed  to  international  competition,  that  are
imported or that have a large import content have gradually become less significant drivers of
aggregate inflation outcomes over time. For example, the import content of non-energy industrial
goods is close to 20% in the euro area HICP, compared with just 8% for services. I will come
back to this in a minute.
The transmission effect
Even more relevant for policymakers, however, is the effect of structural transformation on the
persistence of inflation. This can be best illustrated when considering the impact of the second
channel I mentioned before, namely the way monetary policy propagates through the economy.
To measure the effects of services deepening on the economy, Eurosystem staff have used a
structural model of the euro area to compare how the changes in the structure of the euro area
economy between 1970 and 2010 have affected the response of inflation and output to an easing
of monetary policy.
15
On my next slide you can see the results. Three observations stand out.
 8 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  today  the  (simulated)  immediate  reaction  of  inflation  to  an  easing  of  monetary  policy  is
roughly 20% smaller than it was in 1970.
 You can see this by the blue dashed line being well
below the red line for the first year or so.
16
Second,  over  a  longer  horizon,  monetary  policy  affects  inflation  outcomes  more  strongly  than
previously, meaning its effects are distributed more evenly over time.
Third, the real effects of monetary policy – that is, its effects on employment and growth – have
changed much less over the past few decades and are, at the margin, even slightly stronger
today. You can see this on the right-hand side.
Let me now try to make sense of these three observations.
Services and price rigidities
The key insight for understanding these three effects is the different behaviour of price-setters
across economic sectors. In particular, there is a large and growing body of evidence that shows
that  prices  in  the  services  sector  are  considerably  “stickier”  than  in  all  other  sectors  in  the
economy – that is, they adjust less frequently.
17
Take the micro evidence presented by the Eurosystem’s Inflation Persistence Network. In the
euro area, 5.6% of prices in the services sector change each month, compared with 9.2% for
non-energy industrial goods and 28% for unprocessed food.
18
Housing services, meanwhile, which account for a quarter of the services weight in the euro area
HICP,  are  among  the  most  rigid  prices  in  the  economy.  Apartment  rents  in  Germany,  for
example,  remain  unchanged  for  more  than  four  years,  on  average.
  Ranking  industries  by
19
 9 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
frequency  of  price  changes  produces  remarkably  consistent  results  across  economies,  both
within and outside the euro area.
20
Estimates  of  sectoral  Phillips  curves  corroborate  these  findings.  For  France,  for  example,
estimates show that the frequency of price changes across sectors ranges from a single quarter
to almost two years. In virtually all service industries, the frequency of price changes is towards
the upper end of this range.
21
There  are  at  least  two  factors  that  may  help  explain  why  services  prices  may  react  more
sluggishly to changes in firms’ external conditions. One is that wages account for around 40% of
input costs in services, compared with 20% in the manufacturing sector.
22
Just think of education, health, childcare, restaurants and so forth. Wage rigidity implies that the
costs of producing most services are relatively stable over time, resulting in less need for price
adjustments.
Another factor relates to competition. Evidence shows that markups in the services sector are
higher,  on  average,  than  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  partly  reflecting  reduced  exposure  to
foreign  competition.
  Although  the  share  of  services  in  total  global  trade  has  increased
somewhat  since  1970,  they  still  only  account  for  around  a  fifth  of  total  global  exports
today.
 Lower competition may allow services firms to adjust their prices less frequently.
23
24
The  implication  is  that  the  rise  of  the  services  sector  has  measurably  lowered  the  median
frequency of price changes in the economy and, therefore, the response of inflation to changes in
demand and monetary policy in the short term, as you can see on the left-hand side of my slide.
But in the medium term, as more and more firms readjust their prices as economic conditions
improve, inflation will respond more forcefully. The model predicts that, after around two and a
half years, the cumulative effects of monetary policy on inflation are higher today than in 1970. To
sum up, services deepening implies that monetary policy takes more time to be transmitted to
inflation, but its effectiveness has not diminished.
This is also true for the impact of monetary policy on growth and employment, as you can see on
the  right-hand  side.  In  a  nutshell,  there  are  two  opposing  forces  at  work.  On  the  one  side,
services are, on average, less interest-rate sensitive – that is, the IS curve is flatter, which in
principle makes a service-based economy less responsive to monetary policy.
But because prices are now more rigid on the whole, more of the adjustment in the economy
needs to happen through changes in quantities rather than prices. Rigid prices are the reason
why monetary policy has real effects in the first place. This latter effect may more than offset the
reduced interest rate sensitivity, leading to the picture you can see on the right-hand side.
The rise of services as a production input
25
And yet, one may correctly argue that, even when taking into account the transmission effect,
underlying inflation in the euro area today remains too low, given how much time has elapsed
since we launched our monetary stimulus. Low inflation appears even more of a puzzle when
considering the composition effect, which should cause inflation to rise over time, all else being
equal.
Of  course,  a  number  of  factors  may  currently  be  at  play,  many  of  which  we  do  not  yet
understand  properly,  such  as 
  Structural
transformation  is  also  still  ongoing.  Consider  Spain.  The  services  sector’s  share  of  total
employment has increased by more than 8 percentage points, to 78% since the start of 2008
alone.  The  unwinding  of  imbalances  is  often  the  catalyst  for  large  reallocations  of  economic
firms’  state-contingent  pricing  decisions.
26
 10 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
activity across sectors, which may further delay the pass-through of policy changes.
But I would argue that part of the puzzle may also relate to structural changes within the services
sector, which is itself subject to transformation. I would like to highlight two of these changes.
First, all services are not made equal. Recent research shows that some services industries,
mostly those that can be delivered at distance, such as telecommunications and finance, are
among the most productive and thriving industries in the economy.
 As a result, a portion of
services  have  been  found  to  feature  a falling  relative  price  as  income  rises,  much  like
manufacturing industries.
27
28
Indeed, on my next slide you can see that the difference between price inflation for services and
non-energy goods has been steadily trending downwards over time, reducing overall inflationary
pressures in the economy. In other words, the pace with which the relative price of services is
increasing over time – Baumol’s cost disease channel – has gradually started to decelerate, at
least in the euro area.
29
The second structural change relates to the input-output structure of our economies. Services
not only account for a much larger share of consumption and employment, they also make up a
growing share of intermediate inputs used in the production of both services and manufacturing –
a development that some have coined “servicification”.
30
You can see this on my next slide for the case of the United States, where reliable long time
series data are available. For the manufacturing sector, the proportion of total inputs accounted
for by services increased from around 28% in 1970 to 32% in 2010. For the services sector, the
increase is even more striking. Intermediate services increased their share of total inputs by 14
percentage points, to 87%, over the same period.
 
11 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The implication is that sticker services prices spread much more widely through the economy via
their  effect  on  firms’  marginal  costs.
  On  my  next  slide  you  can  see  the  impact  on  the
transmission of monetary policy. Eurosystem staff have calibrated the same model I mentioned
before, but this time for the US economy, also taking into account the change in the input-output
structure.
31
 12 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly, the “servicification” of the US economy has contributed to further dampening the impact
of monetary policy impulses on inflation in the short term, meaning it takes even longer to see the
full effects of monetary easing. Data on input-output structures for the euro area suggest that the
effect is likely to be of a similar magnitude on this side of the Atlantic.
32
Again, current inflation outcomes are likely driven by a host of factors. But, all else being equal, it
is now easy to see that the increase in wages that we have observed over the past year or so
can be expected to take longer to pass through to final consumer prices than it did in the past.
Conclusion
I will leave you with three key takeaways tonight.
The first is that the rise of services in production and consumption over the past few decades
has contributed to lift core inflation across advanced economies – making current low inflation
appear even more puzzling.
The  second  key  takeaway  is  that  services  deepening  has  had  a  profound  impact  on  the
transmission of monetary policy, also in the euro area. It has lowered the median frequency of
price changes in the economy, increasing the lag with which monetary policy is transmitted to
consumer price inflation.
The third and final takeaway is that the service sector itself is subject to change. The rise and
expansion of “modern” services that can be delivered at distance means that competition and
aggregate  productivity  may  increase  over  time,  thereby  contributing  to  reducing  price  rigidity.
Completing the single market for services in Europe, and reducing barriers to trade for services,
33
would support this process and thereby also facilitate a faster transmission of monetary policy.
 13 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
I would like to thank Omar Rachedi, Derry O’Brien and Chiara Osbat for their contributions to this speech. I
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
For  an  overview,  see  Ciccarelli,  M.  and  Osbat,  C.  (2017),  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and
consequences”, Occasional Paper Series, No 181, ECB; Draghi, M. (2019), “Monetary policy in the euro area”,
speech at the conference “The ECB and Its Watchers XX”, Frankfurt am Main, 27 March; Powell, J. H. (2018),
“Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and Low Unemployment”, speech at the
“Revolution or Evolution? Reexamining Economic Paradigms”, 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association
for Business Economics, Boston, Massachusetts; and Cœuré, B. (2017), “Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the
euro area”, speech at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “Monetary policy and climate change”, speech at a conference organised by the Network
on Greening the Financing System, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Council on Economic Policies, Berlin, 8
November; and Nerlich, C. and Schroth, J. (2018), “The economic impact of population ageing and pension
reforms”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, ECB.
Data  on  gross  value  added  and  employment  may  differ  from  national  accounts  data  due  to  differences  in
sectoral allocations. See Timmer, M. P., de Vries, G. J., and de Vries, K. (2015), “Patterns of Structural Change in
Developing Countries”, in J. Weiss, and M. Tribe (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Industry and Development, (pp.
65–83), Routledge.
Consumption data availability is more limited. The analysis therefore focuses on the three largest euro area
countries and covers the period since 1980.
For an early reference, see Kuznets, S. (1959), “Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations: IV.
Distribution of National Income by Factor Shares”, Economic Development and Cultural Change,Vol. 7, No 3,
Part  2,  pp.  1-100.  See  also  Herrendorf,  B.,  Rogerson,  R.  and  Valentinyi, A.  (2013),  “Two  Perspectives  on
Preferences  and  Structural  Transformation” , American  Economic  Review,  Vol.  103,  No  7,  pp.  2752–2789;
Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R. and Valentinyi, A. (2014), “Growth and Structural Transformation”, in Aghion, P. and
Durlauf, S. N. (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, pp. 855–941, Amsterdam: North-Holland. For the
impact of the decline in manufacturing on GDP volatility, see: Carvalho, V. and Gabaix, X. (2013), “The Great
Diversification and Its Undoing”, American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No 5, pp. 1697–1727; and Moro, A.
(2012), “The structural transformation between manufacturing and services and the decline in the US GDP
volatility”, Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 15, No 3, pp. 402–415.
See  Baumol,  W.,  and  Bowen,  W.  (1966),  Performing Arts,  The  Economic  Dilemma:  a  study  of  problems
common to theater, opera, music, and dance, M.I.T. Press.
Developments  in  per  capita  income  are  associated  with  changes  in  consumption  patterns,  a  well-known
regularity  that  dates  back  to  Engel,  if  not  further.  See  Engel,  E.  (1857),  “Die  Produktions-  und
Konsumverhältnisse des Königreichs Sachsen”, in Zeitschrift des Stat. Büros der Kgl. Sächs. Ministeriums des
Inneren.
See Autor, D., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. (2013a), “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import
Competition in the United States”, American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No 6, pp. 2121–2168; Autor, D. and
Dorn, D. (2013b), “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor Market”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 103, No 5, pp. 1553–1597; and Ngai, L. R. and Pissarides, C. (2007), “Structural Change
in a Multisector Model of Growth”, American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No 1, pp. 429–443.
There are, of course, notable differences across euro area countries.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “Taking  back  control  of  globalisation:  Sovereignty  through  European  integration”,
contribution  to  the  2018  Schuman  Report  on  Europe,  28  March;  and  IMF  (2018),  “Manufacturing  Jobs:
Implications for Productivity and Inequality”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April.
Core inflation refers to the euro area HICP, excluding food and energy.
For the United States, see, for example, Wolman, A. and Ding, F. (2005), “Inflation and Changing Expenditure
Shares”, Economic Quarterly, Vol. 91, No 1, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Winter 2005. Of course, such
simple comparisons suffer from the endogenous relationship between the relative prices of services and their
 14 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
impact on changes in nominal consumption weights. Yet, a large share of the increase in the consumption of
services also happened in real terms.
See, for example, ECB (2017), “Domestic and global drivers of inflation in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 4; Cœuré, B. (2017), “The  transmission  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  in  standard  and  non-standard
times”, speech at the workshop “Monetary policy in non-standard times”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 September;
Mikolajun, I. and Lodge, D. (2016), “Advanced economy inflation: the role of global factors”, Working  Paper
Series,  No  1948,  ECB;  and  Eickmeier,  S.  and  Pijnenburg,  K.  (2013),  “The  Global  Dimension  of  Inflation  –
Evidence from Factor Augmented Phillips Curves”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 75, No 1, pp.
103–122.
See Galesi, A. and Rachedi, O. (2018), “Services Deepening and the Transmission of Monetary Policy”, Journal
of the European Economic Association, pp. 1-33.
In  reality,  inflation  responds  to  monetary  impulses  with  a  delay  and  features  a  so-called  hump-shaped
response, with the peak some four to eight quarters after the initial impulse. This effect is often achieved in
models by introducing inflation indexation. The precise dynamic response of inflation is not relevant for the
purpose of this exercise, however. See also Dixon, H. and Kara, E. (2006), “Understanding inflation persistence:
a comparison of different models,” Working Paper Series, No 672, ECB.
See, for example, Bouakez, H., Cardia, E. and Ruge-Murcia, F. (2009), “The Transmission of Monetary Policy in a
Multi-Sector Economy”, International Economic Review, Vol. 50, No 4, pp. 1243–1266; Bouakez, H., Cardia, E.
and Ruge-Murcia, F. (2014), “Sectoral Price Rigidity and Aggregate Dynamics”, European Economic Review, Vol.
65(C), pp. 1-22; and Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2008), “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
Cost Models”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 123, No 4, pp. 1415–1464.
See Álvarez et al. (2006), “Sticky Prices in the Euro Area: A Summary of New Micro-evidence ”, Journal of the
European Economic Association, Vol. 4, No 2/3, pp. 575–584. To the extent that e-commerce is contributing to
further increasing the frequency of price changes of goods sold online, the difference between services and
goods is likely to grow further. See Gorodnichenko, Y. and Talavera, O. (2017), “ Price Setting in Online Markets:
Basic Facts, International Comparisons, and Cross-Border Integration”, American Economic Review, Vol. 107,
No 1, pp. 249–82.
See Hoffmann, J. and Kurz-Kim, J.-R. (2006), “Consumer price adjustment under the microscope: Germany in a
period of low inflation,” Working Paper Series, No 652, ECB.
In the United States, prices are, in general, more flexible. 15% of prices in the services sector are changed each
month, compared with 22% in non-energy industrial goods. See Álvarez et al. (2006), op. cit.
See Imbs, J., Jondeau, E. and Pelgrin, F. (2011), “Sectoral Phillips Curves and the Aggregate Phillips Curve”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 58, No 4, pp. 328–344.
See Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I. (2019), “The link between labor cost and price inflation in
the euro area”, Working Paper Series, No 2235, ECB.
See Cavalleri et al. (2019), “Concentration, market power and dynamism in the euro area”, Working  Paper
Series, No 2253, ECB.
See IMF (2018), op. cit.
See also Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2010), “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost Model”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125, No 3, pp. 961–1013; Pastén, E., Schoenle, R. and Weber, M. (2018),
“The Propagation of Monetary Policy Shocks in a Heterogeneous Production Economy”, NBER Working Paper,
No 25303; and Llaudes, R. (2007), “Monetary Policy Shocks in a Two-Sector Open Economy: An Empirical
Study”, Working Paper Series, No 799, ECB.
See Bobeica et al. (2019), op. cit.
See IMF (2018), op. cit.; and Stiroh, K. (2002), “Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do
the Industry Data Say?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No 5, pp. 1559–1576.
The  trend  increase  in  the  relative  price  of  aggregate  services  is  thus  mostly  driven  by  large  expenditure
categories, such as housing, government and healthcare. See Duarte, M. and Restuccia, D. (2017), “Relative
Prices and Sectoral Productivity”, NBER Working Paper, No 23979; Eichengreen, B. and Gupta, P. (2013), “The
 15 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
two waves of service-sector growth,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 65, No 1, pp. 96–123; and Berlingieri, G.
(2013), “Outsourcing and the Rise in Services,” CEP Discussion Papers, No 1199.
This can also be seen on slide 4. The relative price of services in the euro area increased by 33% from 1970 to
1989 and by 21% from 1990 to 2009.
See, for example, Baldwin, R., Forslid, R. and Ito, T. (2015), “Unveiling the Evolving Sources of Value Added in
Exports”, IDE-JETRO Joint Research Program Series, No 161. See also IMF (2018), op. cit. For a more general
discussion, see Acemoglu et al. (2012), “The Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations”, Econometrica, Vol. 80,
No 5, pp. 1977–2016.
See also Pastén, E., Schoenle, R. and Weber, M (2018), op. cit, and Anderton et al. (2017), “Sectoral Wage
Rigidities and Labour and Product Market Institutions in the Euro Area”, Open Economies Review, Vol.28(5),
pp.923–965. Changes in the input-output structure have also been found to have affected sectoral reallocation
of labour, in particular though outsourcing. See Berlingieri, G. (2014), “Outsourcing and the Rise in Services”,
CEP Discussion Paper, No 1199.
The World Input-Output Database suggests that, for the largest five euro area countries, the gross input share of
services in the production of final services has increased by 5 percentage points, to 81%, from 1995 to 2011.
For goods, it has increased by 2 percentage points, to 38%.
See also Masuch et al. (2018), “Structural policies in the euro area”, Occasional Paper Series, No 210, ECB
29
30
31
32
33
 16 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
