Peter Praet: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Detlef Fechtner and Mr Mark Schrörs on 11 February 2019 and
published on 18 February 2019.
Mr Praet, how badly is the euro area economy doing?
 We have lately seen a marked increase in the risks for the euro area economy. That is why we
revised our assessment at the last meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council in January. We see
the constellation of risks surrounding the economic outlook, in other words the balance of risks,
as  tilted  to  the  downside.  That  is  a  significant  change  in  our  communication  and  reflects
concerns about the general economic situation. At the same time, however, we said that our
baseline  scenario  has  so  far  remained  intact.  In  March  we  will  have  new  macroeconomic
projections from ECB staff and we will then re-examine our assessment.
The December projections for 2019 to 2021 forecast growth of 1.7%, 1.7% and 1.5% and a
gradual rise in inflation to 1.8% in 2021 – so approaching the ECB’s target rate of below,
but close to, 2%. That surely can’t be upheld now, can it?
I expect that the projections for the near term, in particular, will be revised downwards. The data
since December have been much weaker than I had expected. But our discussion in the ECB’s
Governing Council does not focus so much on the short-term perspective. The medium-term
perspective  is  decisive  for  us,  most  especially  the  question  of  whether  we  are  dealing  with  a
temporary soft patch or with a more prolonged weakness.
And  your  response,  particularly  in  view  of  the  continuing  weak  data  since  the  last
Governing Council meeting?
First of all, the data since the January meeting have not only held negative surprises, they have
also contained a few positive signs such as the further decline in unemployment. But it’s also
true that growth in the third and fourth quarter of 2018 and most likely also in the first quarter of
2019 is well below the potential growth rate of the euro area economy. So growth will have been
below potential for three consecutive quarters and that’s not good news. The question now is
whether there will be a rebound in the second quarter and beyond. A rebound is likely, but it is too
early to say by how much.
So would you say that the ECB’s Governing Council is becoming less confident that we
are now merely seeing a temporary economic dip?
The economic slowdown is broader and more persistent than had been thought and growth in
the short term is likely to fall short of previous expectations. But as I said, what counts for us is
the medium-term outlook and we see positive and negative factors there.
What does that mean in practice?
On the positive side, the situation for households and so for consumption is still favourable. That
is  a  key  driver  of  growth.  Employment  is  still  increasing  and  wages  are  picking  up,  boosting
disposable income. Lower oil prices are also strengthening purchasing power. The fiscal stance
has  become  slightly  more  expansionary  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  That  is  not  a  major
development, but it helps a little. Euro area non financial firms are doing well too. Of course there
are  still  some  weak  spots  in  the  corporate  sector  and  these  pose  some  risk.  But  all  in  all,
corporate balance sheets are in good shape. So they have the capacity to invest. But there is
indeed a negative side too.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
And what’s on that side?
The biggest problem by far is that political uncertainties have been persisting for so long now –
whether they are related to protectionism, to Brexit, etc... The more time passes, the greater their
likely  negative  impact  on  the  economy.  In  the  context  of  persistent  uncertainties,  additional
shocks  can  have  large  effects  on  the  economy.  The  uncertainties  are  already  tempering
business  confidence  more  severely  than  expected.  The  state  of  the  UK  economy  shows  the
damage that can occur when uncertainty persists for too long. Investment in the United Kingdom
has fallen sharply. It is high time to put an end to these uncertainties in a positive way.
Is  your  main  concern  for  the  euro  area  economy  also  to  do  with  firms’  readiness  to
invest?
The uncertainties are increasingly affecting business confidence in the euro area and are likely to
affect investment in 2019. If confirmed, this would be bad news for the European economy that
needs  investment  following  years  of  underinvestment  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial
crisis. Moroever, the question is how the financial sector would react.
What exactly do you mean by that?
The financial sector often tends to act procyclically. Banks are a case in point, because they tend
to amplify cyclical developments. When the economy is performing well, they are willing to grant
credit, but when it is faltering, they are not so keen.
Do you see such a risk at present?
As far as the capital markets are concerned, credit risk premia have increased significantly over
the past months – for both high and low credit-rated firms. That tightens borrowing conditions for
firms on capital markets and weighs on the economy. On the other hand we have so far not seen
any  such  tightening  in  bank  lending  conditions  in  the  euro  area.  Overall,  in  light  of  these
developments, we consider that the probability of a recession remains low.
But are you worried that that will change, that the banks will tighten conditions too?
Banks in the euro area now hold much more capital than before and are better able to withstand
shocks.  They  also  have  larger  liquidity  buffers.  That’s  all  good  news. At  the  same  time,  bank
equity  prices  have  fallen  sharply  and  profitability  is  often  very  low,  as  is  also  reflected  in  the
banks’ very low price-to-book ratio of around 50%. In such a context there is a risk that the banks
could act even more procyclically than they usually do and would amplify the cycle. To be clear,
the  uncertainties  and  the  economic  slowdown  have  so  far  not  caused  banks  to  tighten  their
lending  conditions  or  to  grant  less  credit.  But  we  need  to  keep  a  very  close  eye  on  how  this
evolves. How will the banks behave if the economic slowdown continues?
Would  you  say  that  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  have  already
tightened significantly?
Financing conditions have tightened somewhat in recent months, but not significantly, thanks in
part  to  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates.  This  partly  compensates  for  such  effects.  But
you’re absolutely right, we as central bankers must always ask ourselves whether our monetary
policy stance is appropriate for us to attain our objective.
And what is your answer at the moment?
We  have  revised  our  assessment  of  risks  to  growth  downward.  I  would  say  that  is  a  clear
indication that the level of alert is higher than before.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Three  quarters  of  below-potential  growth,  higher  risks  and  at  least  slightly  tighter
financing  conditions  –  what  does  that  signify  for  the  inflation  outlook?  Is  the  ECB’s
Governing Council losing its confidence in reaching the target of 2% over the medium
term?
Three quarters of below-potential growth are certainly not good news. But we have a medium
term perpective. At our last monetary policy meeting, we upheld the assessment that inflation will
converge to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Wages are picking up
at a pace that is more or less in line with expectations from our models. One thing that has not
worked  out  as  expected  is  the  transmission  to  consumer  prices.  This  pass-through  is  not
working in line with projections. We are analysing this very carefully. But we remain confident that
it will eventually do so; we need to be patient and persistent.
But what if the economic outlook deteriorates further and more permanently?
In our baseline scenario, capacity utilisation will remain high and firms will be in a position to pass
higher wages through to higher prices. That would be more difficult if growth remained below
potential. Downside risks to growth could then lead to downside risks to inflation in the medium
term.  We  are  not  at  that  stage  yet,  but  this  will  be  an  important  discussion  point  at  the  next
meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council.
But if the outlook becomes gloomier, what will happen then? Will the ECB’s Governing
Council be even more careful in continuing on its cautious path towards monetary policy
normalisation or could there be another turn towards more easing?
I have never spoken about a normalisation of our monetary policy stance. I have always referred
to a normalisation of our instruments. There is a big difference. After the end of our net asset
purchases, the primary instrument to steer our monetary policy stance is again our key interest
rates. And  as  far  as  their  path  is  concerned,  we  continue  to  expect  them  to  remain  at  their
present levels at least through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to
ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2%
over the medium term. This rotation of instruments from net purchases to the rate path has been
implemented  in  such  a  way  as  to  preserve  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  We
have thus not tightened our monetary policy. Moreover, we have made it clear that, in any event,
we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues
to move towards our inflation aim in a sustained manner.
President Mario Draghi always stresses that the toolbox is full. But with interest rates at
or even below zero and the asset purchase programme at its self-imposed limits, what
else is really left?
If there is a problem, there needs to be a careful assessment to establish the cause. A financial
shock, for instance, is something different from a slowdown in growth for fundamental reasons.
In the case of an economic slowdown, interest rates are generally the instrument of choice. If the
euro area economy were to slow more sharply, we could adapt our forward guidance on interest
rates  and  this  could  be  complemented  by  other  measures.  But  one  thing  is  clear:  the  ECB’s
Governing Council will always find ways and means of acting if it needs to. In case we would
cease to be confident that inflation is converging to a level that is below, but close to, 2%, it would
be our mandate to act.
As  a  result  of  the  weaker  economic  data,  market  participants  have  shifted  their
expectations for a first interest rate hike from autumn 2019 to, in some cases, well into
2020  –  despite  the  Governing  Council’s  unchanged  outlook  that  interest  rates  will
remain  at  their  current  levels  “at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019”.  Do  you  feel
comfortable with that?
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First of all, it shows that our forward guidance is effective. Our forward guidance on key interest
rates  has  both  a  calendar-based  –  “at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019”  –  and  a  state-
contingent leg – “and in any case for as long as necessary”. The shift in market expectations
reflects the state-contingent leg of our forward guidance. Of course there will be a point in time
when the calendar-based leg of our forward guidance will be discussed and, if needed, adapted.
We have been very careful so far not to validate market expectations.
And at your meeting on 7 March – will that still be too early?
I can’t say at this stage.
Would new net asset purchases also be an option in an emergency?
Asset purchases are part of our current toolbox, President Draghi has been clear about that. But
that doesn’t mean that they are the preferred option in current conditions. And it should be said
that  if  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  is  credible  and  steers  expectations  in  the  desired
direction,  further  purchases  may  not  be  needed  at  all  to  ensure  that  financing  conditions  are
appropriate.
Observers  increasingly  expect  the  ECB  to  launch  new  longer-term  refinancing
operations for banks – TLTROs – and they make the case that this measure, especially in
conjunction with an increase in the deposit facility rate, could improve the situation for
banks and support lending. What would you say to that, especially in the light of your
concerns about the procyclical behaviour of banks?
Our  TLTROs  have  been  a  very  useful  tool  to  deal  with  impairments  in  the  transmission  of
monetary policy and are part of our toolbox. As the procyclical behaviour of banks is an important
reason why economic cycles sometimes end badly, we do need to monitor the transmission of
monetary policy through the banking system carefully. In March we will make an assessment of
the current and expected state of bank transmission.
You will be leaving the ECB at the end of May, having experienced and helped to shape
a period of great change at the ECB. Do you think that zero and negative interest rates,
forward  guidance  and  extensive  asset  purchases  are  the  “new  normal”  for  central
banks, including the ECB, or can there ever be a return to the old regime that existed
before the global financial crisis?
A return to greater normality will certainly take a long time. We are very cautious at the ECB
about estimates of the natural rate of interest…
… meaning the rate at which growth and inflation are in equilibrium…
… but there doesn’t seem to be any doubt that this rate, for reasons including demographics and
technological progress, is now lower than it used to be. And that also means that the likelihood of
reaching the lower bound on interest rates is much greater than previously thought. Then other
tools are needed.
As the Federal Reserve did after the global financial crisis, does the ECB need to have a
fundamental debate about its mandate, its objectives and its strategy, especially since
the last review, in 2003, was more than 15 years ago?
The  mandate  is  of  course  out  of  questions,  it  is  enshrined  in  the  Treaty.  However  after  the
experience  of  the  past  few  years,  it  may  also  make  sense  for  the  ECB  to  review  its  overall
monetary policy framework in the future. But now may not be the right time. Our strategy has a
medium-term  orientation,  which  gives  us  more  room  for  manoeuvre.  And  with  our  two-pillar
strategy,  with  the  monetary  analysis,  we  also  look  closely  at  aspects  of  financial  stability.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial cycles have become increasingly important. I think that our framework has strengths
that we should preserve.
Central bank independence is increasingly coming under attack around the world – not
just in the United States, but also in Italy, for example. How much does that worry you?
The independence of central banks is of key importance and should not be called into question.
Whatever  the  criticism  may  be,  every  other  regime  in  which  the  central  bank  is  closer  to  the
finance ministry is much worse than the current system.
But not everybody seems to agree.
There  may  be  populists  who  dream  of  something  different.  But  most  politicians  are  very
conscious  of  the  need  to  keep  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  separate. Any  other  approach  can
quickly turn dangerous.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
