     KEYNOTE ADDRESS ON THE FUTURISTIC ECONOMY: 
TECHNOLOGY-DRIVEN FUTURE OF BUSINESS & 
GOVERNANCE FOR ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION  
  by 
Dr. Ernest Addison 
Governor, Bank of Ghana 
        May 20-21, 2019 
Kempinski Gold Coast Hotel 
Accra, Ghana 
       
Mr. Chairman, 
His Excellency the Vice President,  
 Chiefs, 
Invited Guests, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
  Let me thank organisers of this Ghana CEO Summit for creating such 
a  unique  platform  where  over  400  CEOs  gather  at  one  place  to 
discuss  issues  of  relevance  to  the  businesses  and  the  economy  in 
general.  
Mr.  Chairman,  we  at  the  BoG  start  a  3-day  MPC  meeting  this  week 
which  we  will  review  developments  on  the  economy  and  take  a 
decision on where to place the policy rate. I will therefore not discuss 
Monetary  Policy  today.  However,  as  you  all  know,  in  the  last  two 
years, we addressed serious lapses in governance and weaknesses in 
the operational efficiency of some banks. The systemic nature of the 
infractions put  several  depositors’  funds  at  risk  and  weakened  public 
trust in the industry. We therefore took the challenge, daunting as it 
was,  to  clean  the  financial  sector  and  safeguard  the  solvency  and 
stability of the banking system in particular, and the financial system 
as  whole,  given  the  interconnectedness  of  the  banks  and  other 
Specialized Deposit Institutions.   
Page | 2  
 The  comprehensive  set  of  reforms  we  undertook  were  tough  but 
necessary.  Over  the  period,  we  have  recapitalised  the  banks  and 
implemented several regulatory reforms to underpin the stability and 
soundness  of  the  banking  sector.  We  now  have  a  well-capitalized, 
liquid,  solvent  and  resilient  banking  sector  to  effectively  execute  its 
core  mandate  of  financial  intermediation  within  a  stable  economic 
environment.  
Given this platform, permit me to enumerate some of the reforms that 
have  been  implemented  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial 
sector.  These  reforms  are  aimed  at  ensuring  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  individual  banks,  aligning  macro-and  micro-prudential 
risks  to  bank  capital  and  addressing  cross-sectoral  and  cross-border 
risks  to  the  industry.    In  order  to  address  the  overall  risks  of  the 
industry, and to properly risk-profile individual banks, we revised the 
current risk based supervision framework to take account of the 
current developments in the global banking environment.   
As  part  of  efforts  to  reduce  the  level  of  impaired  assets,  we  have 
required  that  banks  help  to  clean  up  their  books  and  remove  the 
structural  challenges  that  undermine  the  effective  credit  delivery 
process.  We  have  enforced  our  directive  on  loan  write-off  and 
require appropriate disclosure of written-off facilities in the published 
financial statements of banks.  
Page | 3  
   We reviewed the governing legislations on the credit reference 
system  to  require  banks  to  submit  both  positive  and  adverse 
information  on  borrowers  to  the  bureaus  through  a  new  portal  that 
has  been  developed.  The  BOG  also  worked  on  the  collateral 
registry  system 
to  address  some  outstanding 
issues  with 
foreclosure. We are also supportive of government efforts to enhance 
clarity  in  the  land  acquisition  process  which  transmits  into  the 
collateral perfection processes for banks. In addition, we are hopeful 
that  the  introduction  of  the  Ghana  Reference  Rate,  Ghana  Post  GPS 
and  the  national  identification  program  would  contribute  to  the  on-
going measures aimed at reducing the incidence of loan defaults.  
Mr. Chairman, to fight financial crime means we needed to invest and 
strengthen  our  AML/CFT  regime  by increasing  the scope of AML 
risk-based  supervision  and  collaborate  with  the  Financial  Intelligent 
Centre (FIC), Economic and Organized Crime Office (EOCO) and other 
law enforcement agencies to enforce the AML/CFT regulations. As we 
work  closely  with  these  agencies,  the  emerging  area  of  crime  that 
threatens the very existence of financial institutions is cybercrime.  
 Cyber criminals have managed to bypass security controls and to exploit 
breaches  or  vulnerabilities  within  the  cyber  and  information  security 
defenses of financial systems. In this regard, the Central Bank issued a 
draft  directive  on  cyber  and  information  security  to  the  banking 
industry.  
Page | 4  
     Mr.  Chairman,  we  also  issued  the  final  directive  of  the  Capital 
Requirement Directive (CRD) which addresses Pillar one (1) of Basel 
II/III  capital  regime.  The  Pillar  II  of  the  Basel  accord  is  expected  to 
strengthen  the  supervisory  review  process.  This  would  involve  the 
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) allowing 
banks to undertake an assessment of the capital commensurate with all 
their risk exposures.  We are also driving the disclosure requirements in 
conformity  with  pillar  III  of  the  Basel  accord  to  enhance  appropriate 
information flow to market participants.  
 The process of fully operationalising the BSDI Act, 2016 (Act 930), is in 
progress  and  will  continually  reviewing  the  existing  directives  and 
regulations  to  align  them with  the  Act.  In  line with  this, we issued  the 
“fit  and  proper”  directive,  financial  holding  companies  and  the 
mergers and acquisitions directive.  
 The Central Bank has adopted the accounting standard on financial 
instruments (IFRS 9) since January this year. IFRS 9 requires banks 
to  implement  the  expected  credit  loss  model  for  the  banking  industry. 
Though  it  was  expected  that  the  implementation  of  new  model  would 
increase credit impairment in the banks, the central  bank’s assessment 
of  the  impact,  revealed  that  increases  in  loan  loss  impairment  were 
largely contained within the regulatory credit risk reserve.  
 Page | 5  
   We  have  started  work  on  addressing  the  crisis  that  bedeviled  the 
industry focusing on enhancing customer confidence in the system. The 
implementation  of  the  deposit  protection  scheme  is  on-going  in 
line with the Ghana Deposit Protection Act, 2016 (Act 931) as amended 
to provide a safety net for vulnerable depositors in the event of a bank 
failure.  
 Going forward… 
 The financial sector continues to face some challenges.  
 First,  let  me  apprise  you  on  issues  associated  with  the  just  ended 
clean-up  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  state  of  the  Receivership 
process. The process has progressed slowly as out of the total loans of 
GH¢10.1 billion taken over by the Receivers, total recoveries so far is in 
excess  of  GH₵  731  million  and  this  has  been  achieved  through  loan 
repayments  by  customers;  repayment  of  placements;  sale  of  vehicles; 
liquidation  of  bonds;  and  from  other  incomes  sources  (largely  from 
interests  on  placements  and  refund  of  commissions  paid).  Loan 
repayments  by  customers  constitute  about  72  percent  of  the  total 
proceeds realized.  
  Page | 6  
 I  am  also  reliably  informed  that  the  Receivers  have  fully  engaged  the 
judicial  system  to  assist  in  the  recovery  of  certain  assets  and  monies 
from  some  of  the  shareholders,  directors  and  other  loan  defaulters  of 
these  erstwhile  institutions,  with  about  50  cases  currently  pending 
before the courts.  
 Despite  these  initial  steps,  the  recovery  process,  has  not  been  without 
challenges, with some individuals involved resorting to the court system 
to  frustrate  the  process  by  engaging  in  frivolous  actions;  while  low  or 
poor  documentation  has  also  made  it  difficult  for  the  Receivers  to 
identify  and  pursue  some  of  the  loan  defaulters  due  to  insufficient  or 
non-existent  information.  Investigations  so  far  have  also  revealed  that 
some  of  the  assets  were  not  registered  in  the  names  of  the  specific 
financial  institutions  but  in  the  names  of  related  or  connected  parties, 
making  it  difficult  to  dispose  of  the  underlying  collateral  to  offset  the 
outstanding  loans.  Some  of  these  loans  were  even  fictitiously  created 
and the directors are being pursued to recover such monies.  
 The  Second  issue  has  to  do  with  the  high  NPLs  which  is  of  serious 
concern and needs to be tackled with urgency.  As regulators, we have 
closely  monitored  the  developments  in  the  industry’s  Non-Performing 
Loans  (NPLs)  and  I  must  say  that  in  spite  of  the  improvements  made 
through  the  enforcement  of  our  loan  write-off  policy,  the  NPL  ratio 
Page | 7  
    remains  high  at  18.76  percent  as  at  end  March  2019.  This  level  by  all 
measures is not acceptable and more work is needed in this area.  
 The  high  NPL  situation  has  implications  for  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy  conduct  as  it  acts  to  impede  the  transmission 
mechanism.  Lending  rates  will  continue  to  remain  high  in  the  midst  of 
high  NPLs  with  implications  on  how  the  private  sector  responds  to 
macroeconomic  conditions  in  their  quest  to  be  innovative  and  support 
the real sector of the economy.  
 Here, I must say that the role of the judiciary is crucial in the scheme of 
things and an efficient adjudication of financial sector court cases would 
be  needed.  In  my  opinion,  designating  special  courts  and  judges  to 
adjudicate  matters  relating  to  specific  issues  arising  out  of  the  Bank 
resolutions and revocation of licenses given the public interest, and the 
enforcement of collateral agreements, will help speed up the process.     
 Without an efficient judiciary system that is prepared to deal with cases 
in  a  swift  and  decisive  manner,  all  the  work  done  in  sanitizing  the 
banking system will not yield the desired results/ expected outcomes.   
 The  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  track  the  Receivership  process  to 
ensure that resolution process yields the appropriate outcomes.   
  Page | 8  
 Before  I  conclude,  permit  me  also  to  also  commend  the  organizers  of 
this  year’s  CEO  Summit  for  a  well-timed  theme:  “The  Futuristic 
Economy: Technology-Driven Future of Business & Governance for 
Economic  Transformation”.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  recognises  that 
technology  remains  a  key  driver  of  financial  development  in  Africa  and 
that  is  why  we  are  collaborating  with  the  telecommunications  and 
financial technology companies (FINTECHS) to enhance the efficiency of 
the payments ecosystem and deepen financial inclusion. The successful 
implementation of the  Mobile Money Interoperability (MMI)  project  last 
year,  underscores  our  quest  to  leverage  on  the  increasing  digital 
revolution in the financial sector to broaden access to financial services 
for inclusive growth.  
 The  recently-enacted  Payments  System  and  Services  Act  provides 
opportunities for innovations that will make our payments system more 
efficient and in tune with the rapidly changing means of doing business, 
contribute  better  to  improved  access  to  financial  services.  This  new 
legislation  also  presents  great  investment  opportunities  particularly  in 
the fintech space.  
 The Bank of Ghana will continue to remain vigilant to all forms of risks 
and  vulnerabilities  to  the  economy  and  will  take  appropriate  actions  to 
mitigate  them  to  ensure  to  ensure  continues  macroeconomic  stability 
and financial stability.   
Page | 9  
   
 
I thank you your attention! 
    Page | 10  
