“Recent developments in tackling the Greek non-
performing loans problem” 
Keynote speech 
Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras 
Senior Deputy Governor 
Bank of Greece 
Former Deputy Finance Minister 
 by 
 at IMN’s 2nd Annual Investors’ Conference on Greek & 
Cypriot NPLs  
  Athens, 8 February 2019 
1. Introduction 
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  deliver  the  keynote  speech  at  the  second  Annual 
Investors’  Conference  on  Greek  and  Cypriot  NPLs,  a  very  welcome 
initiative that draws the attention of all the relevant stakeholders on the 
NPL issue, of great interest to the local regulator too, which justifies my 
presence  here  in  front  of  you.  I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  the 
organisers, the Information Management Network and Jade Friedensohn, 
for  the  kind  invitation,  and  all  of  you  for  being  here  so  early  in  the 
morning.  
Because of the criticality and the multidimensional aspects of the issue 
and  a  sense  of  urgency,  some  have  called  it  the  Achilles’  heel  of  the 
Greek banking system; others the elephant in the room. I personally call 
it a problem, a problem that can be resolved and I see that the time has 
come. Over the last decade, the European Union and its Member States 
  `1 
have  worked  hard  to  reduce  risk  in  the  banking  sector.  Indeed,  the 
European  banks  average  CET1  ratios  are  15%,  the  highest  level  since 
2014,  while according  to  the  latest  ECB’s  stress  tests  results  published 
last Monday, all banks improved capital basis with higher capital buffers 
than  in  2016.  Despite  that,  according  to  the  recent  SSM  risk  map  for 
2019,  NPLs  continue  to  pose  risks  to  economic  growth  and  financial 
stability with further efforts necessary to ensure that the NPL issue in the 
euro area is adequately addressed, while the ongoing search for yield, due 
to very low and negative interest rates, increases the potential for a build-
up of future NPLs (Chart 1).  
 
Chart 1. SSM risk map for 2019 
 As you can see from the chart above, NPLs rank higher than cybercrime 
and IT disruptions, and are second only to geopolitical uncertainties both 
in terms of risk impact and risk probability. 
The average NPL ratio in the EU stands at 3.4% and this compares with 
average  NPL  ratios  of  1.3%  and  1.5%  in  the  United  States  and  Japan, 
respectively. 
In what follows, I would like to highlight the European dimension to the 
NPL  issue  including  the  current  situation  of  NPL  secondary  markets 
across  the  euro  area,  in  other  words,  that  NPLs  is  not  only  a  Greek 
problem,  but  it  is  also  a  concern  to  other  South  European  countries, 
  `2 
including Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, etc. My focus will then be the recent 
developments  in  tackling  the  Greek  non-performing  loans  problem 
including the two recent systemic proposals, one by us at the Bank and 
one by the HFSF.  
 2. NPLs: The broader context across the European banking sector 
a. Recent developments  
NPL  ratios  continued  to  decline  last  year  across  the  European  Union, 
confirming the overall trend of improvement over recent years. The latest 
figures show that the gross NPL ratio for all EU banks further declined to 
3.4% (Q3 2018), to the lowest level since 2014, indicating that the NPL 
ratio is approaching pre-crisis levels again (Chart 2). The coverage ratio 
has  also  further  improved  and  has  risen  to  46%  (Q3  2018),  up  3 
percentage points since 2014. 
 
Chart 2. EU bank total non-performing loans  
 
Source: EBA, Risk Dashboard, Data as of Q3 2018.  
 
However, the situation continues to differ significantly between Member 
States  as  12  EU  Member  States  have  NPL  ratios  of  below  3%,  while 
there are  still  some  with  considerably  higher  ratios  –  9  Member  States 
have ratios above 5% (Chart 3). in Member States with relatively high 
NPL  ratios,  there  is  encouraging  and  sustained  progress  in  most  cases 
   `3 
due  to  a  combination  of  policy  actions  and  the  growth  impact.  For 
instance, in Cyprus, NPLs have continued to fall since the end of 2015 
with the NPL ratio around 34% and are expected to decline more sharply 
this  year.  In  Italy,  where  the  NPL  ratio  is  currently  around  9.7%,  the 
securitisation  scheme  supported  by  state  guarantees  (known  as  GACS) 
was  introduced  in  2016  and  extended  for  another  six  months  in 
September 2018. Several other market infrastructure initiatives are also 
helpful towards tackling NPLs. For example, in Portugal that has an NPL 
ratio  of  12.4%,  initiatives  targeted  at  promoting  smooth  coordination 
among creditors (to accelerate credit restructuring, NPL sales, etc.) are a 
welcome addition to the existing policy mix. 
 
Chart 3. NPL ratios in EU Member States  
Source: EBA, Risk Dashboard, Data as of Q3 2018.  
 
In this context, last December, the European Council Presidency and the 
European Parliament agreed on a new framework for banks to deal with 
new NPLs and thus to reduce the risk of their accumulation in the future. 
The  framework  provides  for  requirements  to  set  aside  sufficient  own 
resources  when  new 
loans  become  non-performing  and  creates 
appropriate incentives to address NPLs at an early stage. In particular, the 
new rules introduce a "prudential backstop", i.e. common minimum loss 
coverage for the amount of money banks need to set aside to cover losses 
caused  by  future  loans  that  turn  non-performing,  which  increases 
gradually over a period of 9 years. The full coverage of 100% for NPLs 
 `4 
  secured by movable and other CRR (Capital Requirements Regulation) 
eligible  collateral  will  have  to  be  built  up  after  7  years,  while  for  the 
unsecured NPLs the maximum coverage requirement would apply fully 
after 3 years. 
 
b. Current situation of NPL secondary markets in Europe 
 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  current  situation  of  NPL  secondary  markets  in 
Europe. These remain underdeveloped, given that: 
1.  Markets  for  NPLs  tend  to  be  characterised  by  comparatively  small 
trade volumes. Indeed, between 2014 and 2017, transaction volumes in 
secondary  markets  for  loans  in  the  EU  were  estimated  by  industry 
sources to reach between €100-150 billion per annum. 
2.  The NPL market has been highly concentrated on the buy side with a 
few large transactions involving a limited number of active investors. The 
10  largest  transactions  during  the  period  2015-2016  accounted  for  one 
third of the transaction volume, while the rest was spread over about 480 
transactions.  Moreover,  almost  40%  of  the  transaction  deals  was 
accounted for by the biggest five buyers, while about 70% of the market 
share in the EU is controlled by 20% of investors.  
3.  Transactions  have  been  strongly  clustered  in  four  countries:  Spain, 
Ireland, Italy and the United Kingdom. In the first three, NPL sales have 
contributed  substantially to  reducing  high  NPL  ratios.  There  have  been 
few transactions in other countries with high NPL ratios (Greece, Cyprus, 
Italy, Portugal, Slovenia) and sizeable market activity in countries with 
low NPL ratios (Germany, Netherlands).  
More precisely, of the 103 banks that disclosed transactions, only 40 had 
multiple transactions. The loan portfolios that banks sell include different 
asset  classes  and  according  to  market  sources,  some  buyers  are 
specialised in specific asset classes. The chart below gives a snapshot of 
market  shares  by  asset  class  based  from  a  sample  of  365  NPL 
transactions signed in 2015-2017 (Chart 4). 
  `5 
Chart  4. Loans and NPLs on bank balance sheets per asset class and 
country (June 2018) 
 Source: EBA. 
 
4.  There is lack of transparency of market prices and volumes with large 
bid-ask  spreads  when  counterparts  enter  negotiations.  Industry  sources 
estimate that prices vary strongly depending on the type of debt and the 
quality of the underlying collateral (Chart 5). 
 
Chart 5. Average price on face value of NPL portfolio transactions 
 
An optimal and sustainable solution that has the potential to address the 
current  sources of  market  failure  in  the  secondary  market  for  NPLs  in 
Europe, including asymmetry of information between sellers and buyers 
   `6 
and  high  transaction  costs,  is  the  establishment  of  a  European  Union-
wide NPL transaction platform where holders of NPLs – banks and non-
bank creditors – and interested investors can exchange information and 
trade, 
information  and  data 
availability.  This  could  be  turned  into  a  permanent  channel  through 
which future NPLs could be efficiently disposed of. 
 
increasing  competition,  harmonising 
3.  A glance at the Greek economy 
Before analyzing Greek banks’ NPL issue, allow me look into the recent 
developments on the Greek economy.  
  For  the  first  time  in  10  years,  economic  activity  returned  with 
solid  growth  at  1.5%  in  2017.  Indeed,  this  is  the  first  time  Greece  has 
achieved  6  consecutive  quarters  with  positive  GDP  change  since  2006. 
GDP  growth 
improved  external 
competitiveness  combined  with  solid  external demand  has  underpinned 
export growth. GDP growth is estimated at 2.1% and around 2% in 2018 
and this year respectively. 
is  mainly  export-driven,  as 
The  unemployment  rate  declined  further  to  18.3%  in  the  third 
quarter of 2018, remaining on a downward path, the lowest level since 
August 2011. 
  On the fiscal front, the 2018 general government primary surplus 
target of 3.5% was outperformed by a strong margin (4%) and according 
to the 2019 budget, it is projected to reach 3.6% of GDP. 
Looking  forward,  there  should  be  no  complacency  or  slackening  of 
effort on behalf of the national authorities especially this year, a multiple 
election  year  in  Greece.  The  government  must  commit 
to  the 
implementation  of  growth-enhancing  reforms  and  not  lag  behind  its 
post-bailout  commitments,  particularly  in  the  public  sector,  including 
administrative reforms and speeding up of judicial procedures. As I keep 
saying  in  the  last  eight  years,  on  every  opportunity  I  get,  the  country 
needs an investment shock. Reviving domestic and foreign investment is 
crucial to supporting the country’s economic recovery. This is why it is 
  `7 
important for the government to speed up the privatisation agenda, not 
so much as a revenue exercise, but as a first-class opportunity to attract 
FDI in key sectors of the economy, such as transport, energy, logistics 
and tourism. All the above, will enhance the country’s credibility in the 
eyes of international capital markets and credit rating agencies, making 
the investment grade within reach.  
 
Evidence on reduced sovereign risk 
Last  week,  the  Hellenic  Republic  raised  €2.5  billion  issuing  a  5-year 
government  bond  at  a  yield  of  3.6%  and  an  annual  fixed  coupon  for 
investors  of  3.45%.  This  was  Greece's  first  attempt  to  tap  the 
international  money  markets  after  the  country's  exit  from  the  third 
bailout programme last August. The issue was four times oversubscribed 
as  offers,  amounting  to  over  €10  billion  with  the  foreign  investors’ 
participation  exceeding  85%,  with  many  real  money  investors  and  not 
only hedge funds. As the Greek government yield curve has been rebuilt, 
its  slope  has  been  steepened  for  the  first  time  since  2015,  implying 
improved investor perceptions about the outlook of the Greek economy.  
In short, Greece is already in the markets with the only exception of the 
10-year  benchmark  new  issue.  Since  the  start  of  the  year  the  trading 
volume in the secondary securities market has been raised substantially 
from  €5  million  to  €20  million  on  a  daily  average  and  the  repo 
transaction volume has reached €22 billion from 0 three years ago.  
 
As  far  as  the  benchmark  is  concerned,  the  10-year  GGB  is  currently 
trading at a yield of around 3.9%, i.e. near the March 2006 – the pre-
crisis levels. Just to remind you that the 10-year GGB yield was 7.3% at 
the beginning of 2017. In my view, it is only a matter of time for a new 
10-year government bond issue. Apart from its obvious importance for 
the Greek economy, it is also of direct interest to all of you, in terms of 
the pricing of future NPL securitisation products, since their guarantees 
are  calculated  on  the  basis  of  a  basket  of  Greece’s  sovereign  CDS 
premium on the state guarantor. 
  `8 
4. Greek banking sector: Recent developments and their NPL issue 
Turning now to Greek banking sector: 
  For  the  first  time  since  2010,  and  after  three  rounds  of  capital 
injections  in  the  last  five  years,  amounting  in  total  to  €64  billion 
cumulatively,  all  four  systemic  banks  successfully  concluded  the  2018 
stress test conducted by the ECB, without any need for additional capital 
increases. 
In  this  context,  according  to  their  latest  announced  financial 
results for the third quarter of 2018, they remained in profitable territory 
with  their  capital  ratios  remaining  at  comfortable  levels  near  16%  on 
average.  However,  the  figures  remain  weak,  as  net  interest  income 
continues to decrease.  
  Banks’  dependence  on  the  ELA  emergency  lifeline  has  been 
 terminated.  
  Another  visible  improvement  in  the  financial  sector  was  the 
increase of the total deposits between end-June 2015 and January 2019 
by €20 bn (or 13%) to €150 bn. 
  Greece’s  four  systemic  banks’  covered  bonds  of  3  and  5-years 
maturity have been upgraded to BBB-. 
  Last  but  not  least,  since  last  October  capital  controls  on  domestic 
transactions  have  been  fully  lifted.  They  are  still  in  place  though  for 
money  transfers  abroad.  Reminding  ourselves  that  2019  is  a  year  of 
multiple  elections  in  Greece,  it  goes  without  saying  that  there  are 
downside risks by definition during electoral periods. I believe caution is 
the word here. Having said that, I would argue that it wouldn’t do any 
harm  if  the  authorities  preannounce  the  end-date  for  the  full  lifting  of 
capital controls, say, by the end of this year, signaling that the country is 
on the steady path towards fully restoring confidence. 
  `9 
   Greek banks’ NPLs: Where we stand now 
However,  the  most  important  pending  issue  for  the  Greek  banking 
industry  today  remains  the  high  stock  of  non-performing  exposures,  as 
Greece  remains  the  outlier  for  NPEs  with  a  ratio  of  46.7%  or  €84.7 
billion,  the  highest  level  across  both  the  European  Union  and  the 
eurozone.  
Compared to March 2016, when the Greek banks’ stock of NPEs reached 
its  peak,  there  is  significant  reduction  of  around  21%  mainly  due  to 
write-offs and loan sales, which reached the amount of €17 billion.  
More analytically, at end-September 2018, the NPE ratio was 44.7% for 
residential (amounting to €27.5 billion), 53% for consumer (€8.8 billion) 
and 46.9% (€48.2 billion) for the business portfolio (Chart 6). A major 
improvement has been made only on the consumer loans portfolio on the 
back of the latest sales. On the other hand, exceptionally high remain the 
NPE ratios in SMEs and SBPs (60.9% and 68.6% respectively). 
 Chart  6.  Greek  banks  NPE  ratio  per  asset  class  (%)  as  of  end 
September 2018 
Source: Bank of Greece. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  the  NPE  provisions  coverage  ratio  has  dropped  at 
47% from 49% previously (Chart 7). 
   `10 
Chart 7. Greek banks total coverage as of Q3 2018 
 
 Source: Bank of Greece. 
 
Examining the reasons behind this substantial surge in NPEs in Greece, 
this can be attributed to three factors: 
a.  First of all, the severity of recession that wiped out 25% of GDP in 
just five years and the subsequent rise in unemployment from around 8% 
in 2008 to 28% in 2013.  
b.  Bad bank practices. Imprudent lending with high leverage and dubious 
practices of lending on undeclared income, and high LTV ratios. 
the 
c.  Overborrowing  by  consumers  and  businesses 
introduction of the euro currency due to the sharp drop in interest rates.   
Greek banks have already submitted revised operational targets for NPLs 
at ratios around or lower than 20% of total non-performing exposures by 
the  end  of  2021.  Loan  sales,  collections,  collateral  liquidation  and 
potential  asset  protection  schemes  are  anticipated  to  contribute  more 
extensively towards NPE reduction.  
In  this  context,  Bank  of  Greece  (BoG)  has  designed  a  toolkit  for  the 
Greek NPLs including the following: 
•  Setup of a secondary market for NPLs. Seventeen AMCs have already 
received  licenses,  while  another  11  companies  are  in  the  queue  for  a 
license, either by submitting a file or by preparing it. 
•  Out-of-court settlements law ffocused on standardized procedures for 
SMEs and electronic auctions. 
following 
  `11 
•  The Bank of Greece issued a Code of Conduct for interaction of banks 
with borrowers in arrears. 
 
However, all banks have net NPE inflows for the third quarter of 2018, of 
around €1.8 billion mostly coming from re-defaults (Chart 8). Also, the 
quarterly cure rate remains near 1.8% and the default rate is 2.1%, thus 
further demonstrating the negative performance already observed in the 
first two quarters of 2018. 
 
Chart 8. Flow of NPEs in Q3 2018 at system level 
 
ALL BANKS NPEs Build Up
1.838 (1.594)
389
0
(459)
(329)
(3.145) (1.041)
105
88.955
84.720
100.000
90.000
80.000
70.000
60.000
50.000
40.000
30.000
20.000
10.000
0
 Source: Bank of Greece. 
 
Hence, despite the genuine effort on the part of Greek commercial banks, 
more drastic solutions are needed in the foreseeable future with a hands-
on approach. The speed up of efforts by both Greek banks and authorities 
is more than essential for a rapid convergence of the domestic NPL ratio 
to the European average.  
 
Looking at the various strategies put forward for the effective resolution 
of the Greek NPL issue, from my point of view, securitisation schemes 
are  probably  the  silver  bullet  for  the  Greek  NPL  problem.  It’s  an 
attractive, market-friendly idea because it converts bad quality assets to 
marketable securities, which could be of interest to a larger set of buyers, 
  `12 
including foreign institutional buyers. The advantage of securitization is 
that there is significant diversification of risk away from a single credit 
name,  and  with  the  issue  of  tranches,  investors  can  choose  the  risk-
reward  combination  that  best  reflects  their  preferences.  Securitisation 
also generally achieves a lower average cost of funding and, if guarantees 
are  provided  to  the  securitised  assets,  can  result  in  higher  NPL  prices 
than direct sales.  
Recently, two proposals are under discussion in order to address the issue 
of NPLs, one by the Bank of Greece and the other by the HFSF, which 
have both as a common ground, the ideas of securitisation and a systemic 
approach to the problem. They could be seen as complements, rather than 
substitutes. More analytically: 
 
The Bank of Greece’s proposal - Main characteristics 
 
The proposed scheme envisages the transfer of a significant part of non 
performing  exposures  (NPEs)  worth  of  around  €40  billion  along  with 
part of the deferred tax credits (DTCs) worth of around €8 billion, which 
are booked on bank balance sheets, to a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). 
Subsequently,  legislation  will  be  introduced  enabling  to  turn  the 
transferred deferred tax credit into an irrevocable claim of the SPV on 
the  Greek  State  with  a  predetermined  repayment  schedule.  To  finance 
the transfer, the SPV will proceed with a securitisation issue, comprising 
three  classes  of  notes  (senior,  mezzanine,  and  junior).  It  is  anticipated 
that  private  investors  will  absorb  part  of  the  upper  class  of  securities 
(senior) and the vast majority of the intermediate part (mezzanine). The 
scheme  will  be  voluntary  and  will  be  managed  exclusively  by  private 
investors  (servicing  companies  for  loans  and  credits)  and  apparently 
there  will  be  an  asset  class  separation  for  each  transaction  and 
management operation (business, housing, consumer, etc.).  
 
    `13 
Turning now to the HFSF’s proposal: main characteristics 
 
It  is  based  on  the  Italian  solution,  the  so-called  GACS  scheme, 
introduced in the beginning of 2016, which was conceived to help the 
country’s  banks  offload  their  bad  loans.    At  the  heart  of  the  GACS 
programme  is  a  state  guarantee  that  protects  buyers  of  the  safest  -  or 
most  senior  -  tranche  in  the  securitisation.  The  guarantee  will  be 
available only after a) the senior tranche gets a certain rating by rating 
agencies  (possibly  in  the  area  of  BB)  and  b)  at  least  (50%  +)  of  the 
junior tranche is sold to private investors. The scheme will be voluntary 
again. Each participating bank will sell selected, relatively homogeneous 
portfolios  of  NPLs  to  the  SPV,  which  will  issue  the  asset-backed 
security notes.  
 
After  all,  guarantee  certificates  are  not  something  new  in  Greece,  but 
have been used extensively by the banking sector since 2012 for central 
banking  liquidity  provision  purposes  (e.g.  MROs  and  ELA),  the  so-
called  GGGBBs,  which  amounted  to  around  €30  billion.  These 
guarantee certificates can be considered as a sort of credit enhancement 
device  with  the  following  advantages:  they  do  not  put  any  capital 
pressure  upon  banks,  they  do  not  mix  complicated  tax,  legal  and 
regulatory issues. 
 
With  all  the  above  firepower  initiatives  put  in  place,  plus  the  existing 
toolkit of liquidation, restructuring and outright sales, the new ambitious 
target lower than 20% NPE ratio for Greek banks within the next three 
years is within reach.  
 
    `14 
Epilogue 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
In  closing,  I  would  say  the  following.  Being  a  macroeconomist  by 
training, I can see a macro dimension in a drastic solution of the NPEs 
problem: to me, this is a unique opportunity, 
 
•  Not only for restructuring business bad debt, but also rebalancing 
towards  export-oriented  sectors,  while 
the  Greek  economy 
contributing to long-term growth.  
•  For reducing financial risks of the Greek banking sector, restoring 
their  profitability  and  improving  their  internal  capital  generation 
capacity, and 
•  Increasing  loan  supply  to  healthy  and  productive  enterprises  and 
enabling banks to focus on the new technological challenges ahead, 
including  fintech,  blockchain  and  the  digital  transformation  of 
payment systems. 
 
Thank you very much for your attention. I wish you all a productive 
conference and networking! 
  `15 
