Guido  Sandleris:  The  ongoing  need  for  tight  monetary  policy  to
fight Argentinian inflation
Speech  by  Mr  Guido  Sandleris,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  a  press
conference, Buenos Aires, 13 June 2019.
Good afternoon. Thank you all for coming.
 A  few  minutes  ago,  the  National  Institute  of  Statistics  and  Censuses  (INDEC)  released  the
inflation figure for May. I believe it is a good opportunity to share some thoughts about it, as we
did in the last three months.
Inflation went down in May once again. Headline inflation was 3.1%, down 0.3 percentage points
against April, whereas core inflation was 3.2%, down 0.6 percentage points. These figures are
still very high, though. They are far from an acceptable level.
I am convinced that inflation will go on decreasing if we stick to the tight monetary policy we have
conducted so far. In fact, we expect June’s inflation will be lower than May’s figure.
The inflation reduction process is slow and, as I have said many times, it is not linear. Let me
explain why inflation drops slowly despite the fact that we have met our target of zero growth in
the monetary base since we launched the scheme more than 8 months ago.
First, in Argentina, the exchange rate pass-through to prices and indexation are significant, after
over  a  decade  of  high  inflation.  That  is  why  the  great  depreciation  in  2018  caused  inflation  to
shoot up, which persisted over time. Something similar happened in March 2019, though to a
lesser extent.
Second, most increases in fares and utility rates occurred in the first months of the year, which
fueled  inflation  further.  Although  these  factors  were  identified,  the  way  in  which  they  were
combined and fueled by sectorial shocks resulted in a higher than expected inflation rate, which
in turn demanded extra effort from monetary policy.
Inflation will continue falling because the current macroeconomic conditions are finally conducive
to  this.  We  have  recovered  the  basic  macroeconomic  equilibrium:  fiscal  balance,  competitive
foreign  exchange  rate  and  undistorted  relative  prices.  We  will  continue  conducting  a  tight
monetary policy on these grounds.
Reaching a one-digit annual inflation rate will take time and effort. Perseverance is key to this
process. As I have already told you on previous occasions, we must take into consideration the
experience of Argentina’s neighbors that reported high inflation rates for decades. They put their
fiscal accounts in order, adopted consistent monetary policies and managed to control inflation.
I was saying that our monetary policy has to be tight. This is absolutely necessary for various
reasons. First, because inflation is still high. Second, because we have to combat the forces of
inertia  of  our  history.  But  also  because  monetary  policy  should  take  into  account  the  current
context  of  uncertainty,  with  the  top  two  world  powers  having  engaged  in  a  trade  dispute.  The
upcoming presidential election in Argentina is another source of uncertainty.
This endogenous rate reflects the current uncertainty. Let me briefly refer to the slight decrease
in the interest rate on liquidity bills (LELIQs) in the past few days. Such a drop should not be
mistaken as a loosening of monetary policy. It is explained by the drop in inflation and in expected
inflation in recent months.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, the real interest rate continues and will continue to be positive. The real interest rate
has been positive for nearly 9 months, a historical exception that should, actually, be the rule.
Our tight monetary scheme guarantees this result. In fact, as the LELIQ rate decreased in the
past few days, the real rate slightly increased. This is the endogenous dynamic of the interest
rate in the current context of uncertainty.
High  interest  rates  carry  a  cost  for  many  sectors  in  the  short  term.  However,  the  alternative
carries a higher cost in the current context. This monetary policy protects us from uncertainty,
whether domestic or external, and will bring about lasting benefits for society as a whole.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
