Yakiv Smolii: National Bank of Ukraine press briefing - changes in
the denominations of banknotes and coins of hryvnia
Speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  a  press  briefing  on
optimization of the denominations of banknotes and coins of hryvnia, Kyiv, 25 June 2019.
Dear colleagues,
 Today, we are holding meetings in many Ukrainian cities, Kyiv, Dnipro, Odesa, Kharkiv, Lviv and
Khmelnytskyi, to present to the public the changes in the denominations of banknotes and
coins of hryvnia that aim to harmonize  cash circulation.
Despite the fact, that cashless settlements are gaining more popularity in Ukraine, cash remains
the most used means of payment.
Our domestic currency, it’s banknotes and coins, is something that everyone of us, regardless of
their  location,  profession  or  age,  deals  with  on  a  daily  basis.  Therefore,  it  is  of  outmost
importance for us that hryvnia in any material form remains high-quality, secure, and stable, and
that payments in hryvnia are convenient.
Already this year we’ll take two important steps:
first, 1, 2, and 5 kopiika coins will cease to be means of payment in Ukraine and will be
withdrawn from circulation. Also 25 kopiikas, that is still used for payments, will be gradually
withdrawn
second, a new 1,000 hryvnia banknote will be introduced.
In  three  years,  after  complete  withdrawal  of  the  above  coins  and  the  introduction  of  the  new
banknote,  the  number  of  hryvnia  denominations  will  reduce  from  17  to  12. A  total  of  6  coin
denominations and 6 banknote denominations will remain.
This will streamline existing hryvnia denominations. 11–13 currency denominations are the most
common in the leading countries of various parts of the world, from the US to Canada, the UK to
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Switzerland and Australia.
Why are we introducing changes to the currency denominations?
I can give you three main reasons backing these decisions: customer convenience, economic
feasibility, and saving costs for the state and business.
Let me add some details.
The first reason is customer convenience.  The changes we present today will reduce the
average number of coins per Ukrainian almost by half, and the number of banknotes by almost a
third. Consequently, cash settlements and savings will be streamlined.
The second reason is economic feasibility.  Considering  the  growth  of  income  and  prices,
Ukrainians essentially have no need for low-denomination coins, instead there is demand for a
banknote with a denomination higher than 500.
The structure of cash in circulation has also changed. At present, 500 hryvnia banknotes account
for over 55%, and 200 hryvnia banknotes account for one third. Considering global experience,
the 50% threshold is indicative of the need for a higher denomination.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus, a new 1,000 hryvnia banknote is long overdue.
The third reason is saving costs for the state and business. The costs of the state and
cash circulation participants on producing, processing, transporting, and storing banknotes and
coins will be reduced.
Thus, when and how will these decisions be implemented?
The 1, 2, and 5 kopiika coins will cease to be means of payment in Ukraine from 1  October
2019. From that time onwards, these coins will no longer be accepted for cash payments for
goods  and  services,  and  the  NBU  will  commence  the  withdrawal  of  these  coins  from  cash
circulation.
At the same time, the public will be able to exchange these coins without limitation and free of
charge for coins and banknotes of other denominations during the next three years.
Furthermore, we intend to gradually withdraw 25 kopiika coins. Unlike 1, 2, and 5 kopiikas, 25
kopiikas will for now remain in cash circulation. You can use them to pay for goods and services.
But these coins, if received by banks, will not be returned into circulation. With time, their number
in circulation will decrease.
The new banknote denomination (UAH 1,000) will be put into circulation on 25 October 2019.
And now I present to you the new highest denomination banknote.
(Pause, the governor takes the tube in his hands)
According  to  the  procedure  for  disclosing  classified  information,  I  have  to  open  this  tube  and
show you an uncut sheet of the new banknotes.
(Opens the tube, demonstrates the banknote sheet and gives one minute for filming)
As you can see, the design of the new banknote is similar to the designs of the upgraded 20, 100
and 500 hryvnia banknotes.
The front of the banknote features a portrait of Volodymyr Vernadskyi.
The building of the Presidium of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine is at the back of
the banknote.
The new banknote incorporates top-notch design and security technologies.
The novelties announced today bring us forward to the completion of the current series of
banknotes and coins.  Meanwhile  we  are  also  preparing  to  develop  the  design  of  the  next
generation of more modern hryvnia banknotes.
Thank you for your attention! Now I would like to give the floor to my colleagues who will give you
a detailed description of the security features and design of the new 1000 hryvnia banknote.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
