Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with hr-iNFO
Interview by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  hr-iNFO,
conducted by by Ms Mariela Milkowa on 29 January 2019 and broadcast on 1 February 2019.
 Ms Lautenschläger, the Brexit dispute has been in the news for weeks and months now
but we still don’t know what will happen after the end of March. The British now want to
reopen negotiations on the Irish issue but the European Union has already said that it
was not willing to. To an outside observer it looks like quite a shambles. How do you feel
about what’s going on in London right now?
Well, for a start I deeply regret the British people’s decision to leave the EU. That’s my basic
emotion. Simply because I believe that we will only retain influence in the global arena if we stick
together in the EU. It pains me that the British think, mistakenly in my view, that going their own
way will give them more options when making future arrangements.
Many people are now afraid that Brexit will be the beginning of the end for Europe. Does
this worry you too?
Of course it worries me, because I’m such a firm believer in Europe and in the benefits that it
brings. But I am basically an optimist and I think that Brexit has in fact brought the other countries
closer together.
But  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  an  isolated  case.  There  are  nationalist  movements  in
some other European countries too.
Yes, I think they will always reappear and will continue to exist simply because a certain group of
people will be very unhappy or discontented. There are people who feel helpless and think that
retreating to their regional, national domain will give them more options and more control over
their own lives.
Where do you think this helplessness comes from?
My  view  is  that,  in  itself,  globalisation  offers  extensive  advantages,  but  it  naturally  has
disadvantages too and it does not centre around people; at the end of the day it centres around
economic  ties. And  that  makes  some  people,  those  who  are  probably  not  the  winners  from
globalisation, feel helpless. Yes, and perhaps it makes them more aggressive. This feeling of
helplessness  then  leads  people  to  believe  that  they  would  have  more  scope  in  a  national  or
regional setting. That is why we need to do more to explain what advantages Europe brings, for
each and every one of us, and what prosperity. We must again emphasise how important it is to
have peace and that Europe is a major reason why we have enjoyed peace for so many years
now.
You were born in 1964, for your grandparents’ generation, was the war a topic...
...that was very much alive.
...did your family talk about it?
Not  with  my  grandparents,  but  with  my  parents.  My  mother  was  with  her  sister  and  my
grandmother in Dresden when it was bombed. They were the only ones to come out of the cellar
alive.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
That was obviously something we talked about. Something very important. We also talked a lot
about what happened after 1945, how my mother had suffered from terrible hunger. She had lost
her father and the three women had to get by on their own. Yes, that was an extremely important
topic in our family. My parents came from East Germany, from Saxony and Thuringia, and both
escaped over the border. Perhaps I have a very particular background in that sense.
You are clearly a genuinely committed European. You’ve taken a pro-European stance
since, and I think this is really interesting, you were a young woman living in the United
States of all places. You spent a year there as an exchange student. What happened
there that made such an impression on you?
First of all, that year made a big impression on me as regards tolerance, because I felt what it
was like to be a foreigner. I was a foreigner for a year and I had to constantly justify why I held a
different opinion. One of my subjects at school was called “discussion and debate”. During those
special classes I joined the US pupils in learning how to discuss and debate issues, for one hour
a  day,  five  days  a  week.  It  was  the  early  1980s  and  the  teacher  took  full  advantage  of  a
European’s presence in her class. So every day, for a whole year, I stood up alone and defended
European ideas, European values. I lived in the Bible belt, the extremely conservative states in
the middle of the United States, and defended our European values every day.
So Europe is a driving force in your personal life in any case. Is it also a driving force for
you as a member of the ECB’s Executive Board?
That is my job. It would be appalling if it were any other way.
And Brexit? That’s an important issue for you now, isn’t it?
There are several major issues, but yes, Brexit is one of them. As a banking supervisor, I deal
with  it  on  a  daily  basis  as  we  are  making  preparations.  Brexit  will  make  certain  things  in  the
financial  market  more  difficult.  There  will  be  banks  that  also  need  to  have  a  licence  here,  for
example. That is all part of our day-to-day work. But as far as the ECB’s remit is concerned, we
feel that we have prepared ourselves as much as we can.
At the ECB meeting in Frankfurt last week, ECB President Mario Draghi took a rather
pessimistic view of the future and spoke of mounting risks for the economy. Looking at
what the experts are saying, a disorderly Brexit could have serious consequences for
Germany  and  for  Europe.  There  are  some  horror  scenarios:  chaos  at  the  borders,
collapsing exports, job losses. What is your most serious concern?
I can only give a reasonably good assessment for the financial markets. And as I said, we are
very well prepared. We will never be able to predict what the different market participants will do
on the anticipated Brexit starting date.
You don’t have a crystal ball?
Of course not, and if anyone claimed that they knew what was going to happen, I would be very
wary.
Your term as banking supervisor at the ECB expires in February, after five years. You
were born in Stuttgart, Ms Lautenschläger, studied law in Bonn and could perhaps have
become a lawyer or a judge. Why did you, as a lawyer, feel drawn to the world of banking
and finance of all things?
I  have  always  been  interested  in  economic  connections.  But  I  will  openly  admit  that  I  did  not
consciously study with a view to becoming a banking supervisor.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
That’s a relief!
To be honest, there was a vacancy and I applied for it.
Throughout your career, the role of supervisor emerges as a leitmotif even before you
joined  the  ECB  in  2014.  You  worked  for  the  Federal  Financial  Supervisory Authority,
BaFin, and then became Vice-President of the Deutsche Bundesbank where you were
also  responsible  for  banking  supervision.  What  do  you  find  so  sexy  in  supervising
banks?
Well, it is sexy, let’s be honest!
I don’t get it. But I’d like to understand.
That may take a while.
In a nutshell...
You’re working in an area in which not everything is governed by rules down to the last detail. So
you can be creative. You work in an area in which your counterparty is highly innovative. I’ve been
doing  that  now  for  almost  25  years  but  I  learn  new  things  every  day.  Every  day  brings  new
challenges and every morning you are asked questions that you don’t yet know the answer to.
And when you leave the office in the evening, you do know some of the answers that you didn’t
know that morning.
And you find that appealing?
Yes,  that  is  truly  delightful.  You’re  dealing  with  people  for  much  of  the  time  –  if  you  don’t  like
confrontation, you’re in the wrong place. You have to show that you’re assertive, that you can say
no, that you will keep on asking precise questions about certain things and will not be satisfied
with vague answers. So you do need to have a certain kind of personality to feel comfortable in
that role.
You’ve experienced some turbulent times, including the financial crisis in 2008. As Head
of  Supervision  at  the  BaFin  you  had  a  crucial  role  in  the  crisis  negotiations  on  the
German side. Your job probably wasn’t so much fun for you then. What affect did that
experience have on you?
In times of crisis the learning curve is especially steep and it does have an impact, I can tell you.
You learn an incredible amount about political connections and political constraints.
You’re raising your eyebrows as you say that.
Everyone  has  their  own  personal  experience.  You’re  right,  though,  at  that  moment,  in  that
particular case, it wasn’t much fun. But it does make you stronger and you come out of it with
your own set of “lessons learned".
So what were the most important lessons that you learned from the crisis?
Oh, I learned many lessons from it. I’m not sure if it’s possible to name the most important one.
We supervisors – and I think also the market participants, politicians and legislators – definitely
learnt that markets are far more interconnected than we had thought.
At the time we all clearly saw that a single domino could set off a whole chain reaction.
Exactly.  We  saw  that  banks  must  take  liquidity  far  more  seriously.  Supervision  has  its  own
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
distinct business cycle. After the crisis, supervisors are given many powers and large numbers
of staff. But then it tapers off, and it becomes increasingly difficult to push things through.
Would  you  say  that  your  experiences  during  the  financial  crisis  have  made  you  a  tad
tougher and more strict?
Oh yes, definitely.
Ms Lautenschläger, this is our interview box, we always use it in our interviews. I’ll pass
it over to you. For each guest we have on the programme, we put something appropriate
into this box. Would you like to open it?
Ah! Boxing gloves?
Yes, small boxing gloves that you can hang on your car mirror.
Lovely, thank you.
They’re a fitting gift for you, aren’t they?
Yes.
Could you sometimes use such boxing gloves when dealing with bank managers?
But  don’t  boxing  gloves  actually  soften  the  blows?  They  probably  wouldn’t  be  suitable...but  I
wouldn’t only think of them in connection with bank managers. But simply..
So you would prefer to be bare-fisted?
No,  I  prefer  transparency,  in  the  first  instance,  and  precise  instructions. And  I  think  if  you’re
working in a kind of authority, i.e. with the competence to take administrative measures – sorry,
but I am a lawyer, after all – you must give precise instructions. You should not be vague, but that
doesn’t have to be forbidding. The underlying tone does not have to be nasty; the message must
simply be very clear: That is not good enough. You have to remedy the issue. I will give you a
certain period of time in which to do so, otherwise.... And I think that every supervisor needs to
have that capacity if they want to succeed.
Staying with the boxing metaphor for the moment, could we say that you had to fight your
way up from modest beginnings.
No, I would not say that.
Your father was a pastry chef?
Yes, my father is a pastry chef. My mother was a waitress. So, in that sense, I suppose it’s fair to
speak of modest beginnings.
What kind of upbringing did you have?
I was brought up in the firm belief that I could do anything if I put my mind to it. My parents set
great store by me having the good education that they never had themselves.
There’s  something  else  for  you  in  the  box,  could  you  take  another  look?  You  see  I
figured  that  stress  tests  for  banks  were  part  and  parcel  of  your  job  as  ECB  banking
supervisor.  But  if  we  turn  the  tables,  are  there  any  stress  tests  for  the  supervisor?
There aren’t any, are there?
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Oh yes there are! Every stress test for the bank is also a stress test for the supervisor.
Ok, but I’ve nonetheless prepared a few very special stress cards for you in order to test
your personal stress resilience. Please go ahead and read out the first card.
It reads: “Your office manager calls in sick.”
Do you find that stressful?
Yes, in the first instance. But then I would simply put their calls through to me and get on with it.
So you would really do that?
Yes, of course I would. I’m a woman. I’m well able to multitask.
The next stress card.
It reads: “Someone hacks into your work computer which stores important sensitive bank data.”
How would you react?
I think that’s actually impossible. We have an extremely good security system at the ECB. You
want to know how I would react?
That would surely be a stress factor, wouldn’t it. Confidential data?
Yes, of course. But our IT experts would deal with it, and our colleague from Communications
would probably step in too and would then speak to you. It has never once happened to me, by
the way.
Next  card.  It  reads:  “You  need  to  fly  to  an  important  meeting,  but  the  pilots  go  out  on  strike
unexpectedly.” That has actually happened to me. That can happen occasionally and then you
ask...
You take that in your stride?
Yes, exactly, I would then return to the office and ask my staff to arrange a conference call. That
is easily done these days.
A video conference or something like that?
Yes, that’s right.
We’ve one more card, if you’d like to take it?
Yes! It reads: “You need to get to an Executive Board meeting at the ECB but you’re surrounded
by a group of Blockupy demonstrators as you enter the building.”
Is your heart racing?
Well, I assume that the demonstrators pose no threat to life and limb, they simply want to make
their views known, don’t they?
Yes.
Well, I’m in my element if I can put forward my side of the argument. As I mentioned, that one
hour a day...
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
... in the debating club.
The debating club, exactly. Of course my heart would race if my life was in danger.
In the past, the ECB was repeatedly the butt of criticism, ranging from the zero interest
rate policy to the purchase of government bonds of indebted countries. Do you ever
have any doubts about your own role?
Well, I think that if you never questioned your own role you would not be the right person for the
job. For each and every one of the decisions we take, I naturally ask myself: What is my task?
What interests are at stake? What is my statutory mandate? For the ECB, the mandate is to
preserve price stability. As banking supervisor, other things come into play such as contributing
to financial stability and that’s what I do every day. I ask myself: given this mandate, this task,
what do you think is the best way forward? In many cases, I then agree with the decision taken
by the majority in the ECB, but I sometimes think that other decisions would be better.
So you are quite self-critical?
Yes, of course. At any rate, I hope I am. I mean, one should never say that about oneself, but of
course I question myself.
Let me sum up. I think you’ve mastered the stress test very well. I would say that you’ve
passed.
Thank you!
The  stress  test  for  banks,  which  is  also  part  of  your  daily  business,  does  look  a  bit
different in terms of content, though. You test how susceptible banks are to crises, such
as a real estate bubble bursting somewhere, the economy falling apart or unemployment
going up. How are European banks faring right now? What is your assessment?
The banking sector in Europe is now much more robust. We have seen to it that banks have to
hold  more  capital,  more  liquidity.  We  are  taking  a  very  intensive  look  at  risk  management,  at
governance within the banks,  and  we  are  asking  them  to  make  improvements.  So,  European
banks are now more crisis-resistant, that’s certain.
But  when  you  conducted  the  last  stress  test  two  months  ago,  in  November,  which
involved 48 banks from 15 European countries, it’s true that none of the banks failed, but
the  German  banks,  for  example,  came  out  somewhere  in  the  middle.  You  can’t  be
satisfied with that, can you?
Well, someone has to be in the middle, of course – not all 48 banks can be top of the list. But
again, to be clear, a great deal has been done in the last five years to make European banks
more  robust,  more  crisis-resistant.  That  doesn’t  mean  that  everyone  has  done  all  their
homework  or  that  we  can  sit  back  and  say  that  everything  is  perfect  now.  Incidentally,  that’s
never  the  case  for  banking  supervisors,  because  banks  have  to  deal  with  the  economic
environment in which they find themselves. Banks are also a mirror image of the economy in
which they operate. You just mentioned the specific case of German banks. It must be said that
we have a very high number of banks facing a great deal of competition in Germany, and profit
margins are very, very low. If you look at other countries, it’s very clear that it’s much easier for
their banks to make a profit.
What do you think of the idea of banks merging, of banks that are in poor health hoping
that a merger will help them to survive? Do you think that is a good way forward?
There needs to be consolidation in the European banking sector, including Germany, because
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
we are “overbanked”, meaning that we have too many banks. I don’t know if it is still the case, but
five  years  ago  we  had  more  bank  branches  than  bakeries  in  Germany.  If  I  could  set  up  the
banking world of my dreams, I would like it to be diversified, with small, medium and large banks,
some of them operating at the regional level and others at the national level. But I would also like
there to be banks that could support the European real economy in its operations abroad. I would
like German firms to get from German or European banks the services they need to be able to
conduct business in Asia, the United States and South America.
In your business it is not just about ensuring that banks are able to withstand a crisis, it
is  also  about  the  negative  image  that  the  whole  sector  acquired  during  the  financial
crisis. And for many people that has led to an abiding loss of trust, and most of all to the
feeling that taxpayers’ money was used to save banks. Can you guarantee that nothing
like that could ever happen again?
I am convinced that the likelihood has fallen, because we have more capital, more liquidity and
better risk management. But I would never say “never”. I would never say that there will never be
a crisis again. The links in various markets to possible collapses beyond our sphere of influence
– beyond Europe, for example – could of course also affect financial stability in Europe. And in
that  case  the  European  banking  sector  would  definitely  be  more  robust  than  what  we  saw  in
2008. But I would never want to claim that there won’t be another crisis.
Your  term  as  Vice-Chair  of  the  ECB’s  Supervisory  Board  comes  to  an  end  in  a  few
weeks. The term of Mario Draghi, ECB President, finishes at the end of the year. Isn’t it
about time for there to be a woman at the top? Would you be interested in applying for
the job?
Quite honestly, I don’t see myself as ECB President. And I also wouldn’t reduce it to the leveI of
“it should be a man or a woman”. It should be somebody who is capable of taking on this position
of great responsibility. And if that person happened to be a woman, then I would of course be
glad.
Thank you, Sabine Lautenschläger.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
