Philip  Lowe:  Opening  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives
Standing Committee on Economics
Opening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 22 February 2019.
Chair
Members of the Committee
 My colleagues and I welcome this opportunity to share our views on the Australian economy and
the  RBA’s  important  policy  responsibilities.  These  hearings  are  an  essential  part  of  the
accountability process.
Two  weeks  ago,  we  released  our  latest  forecasts  for  the  Australian  economy.  Our  central
scenario is for GDP growth of around 3 per cent this year and around 2¾ per cent in 2020. The
outcome for the year just past is expected to be a bit below 3 per cent. These numbers are lower
than the ones we were expecting at the time of the previous hearing in August.
By contrast, the labour market outcomes have been better than we earlier expected. When we
met six months ago, we were not anticipating the unemployment rate to reach 5 per cent until
2020, but it has already been around that level for some months. The number of jobs created has
also exceeded our earlier expectations. We continue to expect the unemployment rate to move
lower over the next couple of years to around 4¾ per cent.
In terms of inflation, the recent outcomes have been a bit lower than we had been expecting. In
the September quarter, childcare costs declined substantially due to government policy changes.
And in the December quarter, petrol prices fell due to global developments, and a further decline
is expected in the March quarter. In underlying terms, inflation is above its trough of a couple of
years ago, but the pick-up is more gradual than we previously expected. By the end of 2020,
inflation is forecast to reach 2¼ per cent.
Putting this together, our central scenario for 2019 is for growth of around 3 per cent, inflation of
around 2 per cent and unemployment of around 5 per cent. In the broad sweep of our economic
history, this is not a bad set of numbers. Indeed, in many years in the past four decades we
would have welcomed such an outcome. It is important that we do not lose sight of this. The
economy  is  benefiting  from  increased  spending  on  infrastructure  and  a  pick-up  in  private
investment  as  capacity  utilisation  has  tightened.  The  strong  growth  in  jobs  is  also  supporting
spending, as is the sustained low level of interest rates.
Globally, the central scenario also remains a reasonable one. Inflation is low and unemployment
in many advanced economies is the lowest in many decades. Recently, however, the focus has
not been on this, but rather on the downgrading of forecasts for global growth by the International
Monetary Fund and others. What sometimes gets lost, though, is that the latest forecast is for
global  growth  to  be  around  average,  not  below  average.  We  need  to  remember  that  average
growth at a time when unemployment is low is a reasonable outcome.
What is of more concern is the accumulation of downside risks.
There are two major areas of risk globally that the Reserve Bank Board has been keeping an
especially close eye on.
The  first  is  what  I  will  broadly  label  as  political  risk.  Here  the  list  includes:  the  trade  and
technology  tensions  between  China  and  the  United  States;  Brexit;  the  rise  of  populism;  and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
strains in some western European economies. It is hard to be certain how these various issues
will  play  out.  But  it  is  conceivable  that  one  or  more  of  these  risks  crystallises  in  a  way  that
damages  confidence  and  the  global  economy.  It  is,  of  course,  also  conceivable  that  political
leaders respond to the mounting economic risks in a way that restores confidence. Time will tell.
In working through the various possibilities, one issue that many people have focused on is the
resilience of the global economy to a severe shock, whether it is generated in the political sphere
or elsewhere. In many countries, both public and private debt levels are already very high. Real
interest rates are also already very low. This means that there are fewer buffers in the global
system  than  there  once  were.  So  there  is  less  room  to  manoeuvre,  although  in  a  number  of
important dimensions the global financial system is more resilient than it used to be.
The second international risk we are monitoring closely relates to the Chinese economy. Growth
there has slowed, probably by more than the authorities had been expecting. The economy is
feeling  the  effects  of  the  tensions  with  the  United  States  and  the  squeezing  of  finance  to  the
private  sector  as  the  authorities  seek  to  rein  in  non-bank  financing.  The  authorities  have
responded by easing policy in some areas, but they are walking a fine line between supporting
the economy in the near term and addressing the debt problem.
Turning  to  the  Australian  economy,  the  Board  has  recently  been  paying  particularly  close
attention to the strength of household spending and to developments in the housing market.
Household consumption accounts for almost 60 per cent of total spending, so what happens on
this front is important. Recently, determining the underlying strength of consumption has been
complicated  by  volatility  in  the  consumption  data  in  the  national  accounts,  as  well  as  notable
revisions  to  the  history  of  both  consumption  and  household  income.  On  balance,  though,  the
available data suggest that the underlying trend in consumption is softer than it earlier looked to
be and this has affected the outlook for the economy.
There are a couple of important considerations here. The first is the protracted period of relatively
low growth in aggregate household income. The second is the decline in housing prices in our
largest cities.
Since 2016, aggregate household disposable income has grown at an average rate of around
2¾ per cent per year. This is down from an average of 6 per cent over the preceding decade. It is
plausible that households have responded to this extended period of weaker income growth by
progressively downgrading their spending plans. For many people, it has become harder to see
the lower growth in income as just a short-term development that can be looked through.
On this front, we are expecting better news ahead, with growth in disposable income forecast to
increase. Wages are rising more quickly in almost all industries and in all states than they were a
year  ago.  This  is  good  news  and  we  expect  this  gradual  lift  in  wages  growth  to  continue.
Disposable income will also be boosted by the announced tax cuts. Faster income growth will
support household spending. From a longer-term perspective, though, the key to boosting the
real income of households is lifting productivity. I encourage you to keep examining ways to do
this.
Looking  beyond  income  growth,  developments  in  the  housing  market  can  also  affect  overall
spending. Lower turnover means less of the spending that occurs when people move homes.
Declining housing prices also make some people feel less wealthy, so they spend less, although
this  effect  doesn’t  look  to  be  very  large.  Lower  housing  prices  are  also  associated  with  less
construction activity. So these are the areas we are keeping a close watch on.
We  do,  though,  need  to  keep  things  in  perspective.  The  adjustments  in  the  Sydney  and
Melbourne housing markets are occurring at a time of low unemployment, low interest rates and
strong  population  growth.  What  we  are  witnessing  is  largely  the  working  through  of  shifts  in
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
supply and demand for housing due to structural factors. In both markets it took a long time for
supply  to  respond  to  faster  population  growth,  so  prices  went  up. And  now  that  supply  has
responded, some of the earlier increase in prices has been reversed.
I understand that these swings in housing prices are difficult for some in our community. We
should, though, take some reassurance from the fact that our economy and our financial system
are resilient. This adjustment in the housing market is not expected to derail the economy. It will
put our housing markets on more sustainable footings and allow more people to purchase their
own home. So there is a positive side too.
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  monetary  policy.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  has  held  the  cash  rate
steady at 1½ per cent since August 2016. This is a stimulatory setting of monetary policy, which
has helped support job creation and a gradual lift in inflation.
When we met with the Committee six months ago, I said that if further progress on achieving our
goals of full employment and returning inflation to target is made, you could expect the next move
in interest rates to be up, rather than down. I also said that the Board did not see a strong case
for  a  near-term  adjustment  in  the  cash  rate,  given  that  the  progress  towards  our  goals  was
expected to be only gradual.
Today, the probability that the next move is up and the probability that it is down are more evenly
balanced than they were six months ago. This shift largely reflects the change in the outlook for
consumption that I have spoken about.
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  we  are  still  expecting  further  progress  towards  our  goals.  The
unemployment rate is forecast to decline further and inflation to increase, although only gradually.
If we do make this progress, it remains the case that higher interest rates will be appropriate at
some point. But it is also possible that the economy is softer than we expect and that progress
towards our goals is limited. If there were to be a sustained increase in the unemployment rate
and  a  lack  of  further  progress  towards  the  inflation  objective,  lower  interest  rates  might  be
appropriate  at  some  point.  We  have  the  flexibility  to  do  this  if  needed.  We  are  not  on  a
predetermined course.
The  Board  maintains  its  strong  focus  on  the  medium  term  and  is  seeking  to  be  a  source  of
stability and confidence. As was the case six months ago, it does not see a strong case for a
near-term change in the cash rate. With monetary policy already providing considerable support
to the Australian economy, it is appropriate to maintain the current policy setting while we assess
developments. Much will depend on what happens in our labour market.
I would like to turn to some other issues now.
Some years ago, this Committee held extensive hearings into the foreign bribery issues at Note
Printing Australia  (NPA)  and  Securency.  The  legal  proceedings  against  former  employees  of
these  companies  were  finally  completed  last  November.  As  a  result,  the  Supreme  Court  of
Victoria lifted longstanding suppression orders. This allowed the RBA to disclose that in 2011
NPA  and  Securency  entered  guilty  pleas  to  charges  of  conspiracy  to  bribe  foreign  officials
between 1999 and 2004. We were also able to disclose that the two companies paid substantial
fines and penalties, including under proceeds of crime legislation.
The Reserve Bank has sought to deal with this difficult matter as openly and transparently as
possible. The corrupt and unethical behaviour that was uncovered runs counter to everything that
we stand for.
A number of years ago, we sold our half share in Securency, the manufacturer of the polymer
material the notes are printed on. Securency is now owned by a Canadian firm. NPA remains a
fully owned subsidiary of the RBA and it prints Australia’s banknotes in Melbourne. The company
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
has  undergone  a  top-to-bottom  overhaul  of  its  governance  arrangements  and  its  business
practices.  I  am  confident  that  the  company  is  operating  to  the  very  high  standards  that  we
demand and that it will continue to do so.
On  a  more  positive  front,  over  recent  months,  NPA  has  been  printing  Australia’s  new  $20
banknote. We are today releasing the design of the new note and it will be issued into circulation
in October. It will have the same world-leading security features as the other new notes. It will
also have three raised bumps along each edge to assist people who are blind or have low vision.
The new $20 note will continue to recognise two significant Australians: Mary Reibey and the
Reverend John Flynn. Mary Reibey was a remarkable woman. She arrived in the colony of New
South Wales in 1792 as a 15-year-old convict. Then, through hard work and determination, she
rose  to  become  one  of  the  colony’s  most  successful  entrepreneurs. And  John  Flynn  is  best
known for establishing what we know today as the Royal Flying Doctor Service. This service has
helped countless Australians and is now the largest aero-medical service in the world. We are
very proud to celebrate the enterprise and ingenuity of these two Australians on the $20 note.
The Reserve Bank also continues to work on the upgrading of Australia’s electronic payments
system. We want to see a system that is reliable, secure and efficient, and meets the needs of
Australians. It is one year now since the New Payments Platform (NPP) was launched. Over
2½  million  Australians  have  registered  PayIDs  and  the  banks  are  progressively  adding
functionality  to  the  system.  Many  people  are  already  benefiting  from  faster  and  more  flexible
payments. We have, however, been disappointed that some of the major banks have not met the
originally  agreed  timelines.  This  delay  has,  regrettably,  slowed  the  pace  of  innovation  in  the
overall system, given the  substantial  network  effects  that  exist  in  payment  systems.  Late  last
year,  I  wrote  to  the  CEOs  of  the  major  banks  on  behalf  of  the  Payments  System  Board
expressing our concerns and seeking a commitment that the updated timelines will be satisfied.
It is important that these commitments are met. Notwithstanding these delays, I remain confident
that the NPP will provide the backbone for substantial innovation in Australia’s payment system
for years to come.
Thank you very much. My colleagues and I are here to answer your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
