   15.01.2019 
The Spanish economy: transformation and challenges 
Spain Investors Day 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Let  me  thank  the  Governing  Board  of  Spain  Investors  Day  and  its  chairman,  Benito 
Berceruelo, for their kind invitation to speak here today, together with the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, at the gala dinner of this 9th edition of Spain Investors Day. I am convinced that, as 
on previous occasions, the meeting will be a success. 
I will be focusing on the situation of the Spanish economy and on its banking sector. Along 
with a brief description of the current conjunctural setting, marked by a more complex and 
uncertain  international  economic  environment,  I  would  like  to  summarise  some  of  the 
improvements observed in the Spanish economy in recent years, in the wake of the latest 
and  acute  crisis  we  experienced.  I  shall,  moreover  set  out  various  challenges  and 
vulnerabilities which, in my opinion, need to be properly and resolutely addressed. The aim 
thereby would be, first, to shore up the potential growth of our economy in the long term 
and, further, to adapt our financial system to the new regulatory demands and to the new 
competitive and technological setting.  
Let us take the economic situation first. After growth equal to or higher than 3% over the 
three years spanning 2015 to 2017, and which eased somewhat last year to around 2.5%, 
the latest macroeconomic projections of the Banco de España, published last December, 
envisage  the  continuation  in  the  coming  years  of  above-potential  economic  growth, 
enabling the still-high level of unemployment to continue to be absorbed.  
However, the rate of expansion of GDP is expected to slow gradually in the coming years. 
This easing in growth essentially reflects the progressive exhaustion of the positive effect of 
various  exogenous  factors  that  have  been  operating  in  recent  years,  such  as  the 
expansionary demand-side policies (monetary policy, in particular) and strong world growth, 
which has already shown signs of dwindling to some extent in 2018. 
Beyond this baseline scenario, the downside risks to growth have been increasing. These 
risks, whose source is essentially external, include a possible resurgence of financial strains 
associated with the US economic policy mix and its potential effects on the more vulnerable 
emerging economies, and a hypothetical escalation in protectionist measures, which might 
affect the vibrancy of trade and global activity. In the European arena, the political vagaries 
in some European countries (particularly in Italy) and the uncertainty over the outcome of 
Brexit  entail  additional  sources  of  risk.  In  Spain,  the  current  parliamentary  fragmentation 
also adds uncertainty over the future course of our economic policies.  
Against  this  background,  it  should  be  stressed  that  notable  headway  has  been  made  in 
recent years in correcting some of the imbalances that had built up in the Spanish economy 
during the expansion prior to the crisis. Contributing factors here, in addition to the more 
temporary factors I have just mentioned, were certain structural reforms introduced during 
the crisis.  
Of  note,  first,  is  the  intense  deleveraging,  carried  out  by  households  and  non-financial 
corporations. Specifically, the corporate debt/GDP ratio has fallen by 42 percentage points 
(pp) from mid-2010, when it peaked, to 2018 Q3, meaning that this indicator now stands 
some 2 pp below the related figure for the euro area. In the case of households, the process 
has been slower (partly on account of the greater average life of the debt incurred), but also 
very significant. Over the same period, households’ debt ratio fell by 25 pp and its level is 
but 3 pp above the related euro area figure. Accordingly, in both cases, the deleveraging 
 3/7 
 process is at a very advanced stage, although some heterogeneity is evident. In particular, 
in the two sectors, certain agents continue to face situations of high financial pressure as a 
result of debt incurred.  
In  parallel,  the  banking  sector  has  been  subject  to  an  intense  process  of  clean-up, 
recapitalisation and restructuring. And in the past four and a half years its basic parameters 
– such as asset quality and profitability and solvency levels – have improved notably. From 
December  2013  to  September  2018,  non-performing  loans  have  declined  by  more  than 
€120 billion and foreclosures have contracted by €20 billion. Likewise, the return on equity 
has returned to positive territory above the euro area average since the 2012 collapse, when 
it stood at -25%. The total capital ratio, meanwhile, has increased by 1.7 pp in the past four 
years, whereas the leverage and liquidity ratios are above the European average. The recent 
European Banking Authority and Banco de España stress tests reveal that Spanish banks’ 
resilience to adverse scenarios is considerable.  
The  Spanish  economy’s  external  balance  has  also  undergone  an  intense  adjustment 
process. Just before the start of the crisis in 2007, the Spanish economy posted an external 
deficit of 9.6% of GDP, one of the highest figures among the advanced economies. As a 
result  of  the  deep-seated  recession  prompted  by  the  crisis,  but  also  of  the  structural 
adjustment carried out since, the Spanish economy has recorded current external surpluses 
in the past five years, which even exceeded 2% of GDP in the 2015-2017 period, despite 
the strong pick-up in domestic demand during those years.  
factors,  by  the  gains 
External surpluses, which have been relatively unusual in previous recovery phases in the 
Spanish  economy,  have  been  assisted,  among  other 
in 
competitiveness arising from the containment of labour and financial costs. Such gains have 
enabled  companies  to  compete  internationally  on  a  better  footing  and  to  increase  their 
exports. In particular, Spanish unit labour costs relative to the rest of the euro area fell by 
14%  from  2008  to  2018,  thereby  offsetting  practically  all  the  losses  in  competitiveness, 
measured by this indicator, built up during the previous expansion. This has been conducive 
both to across-the-board gains in share in international markets and to greater geographical 
diversification towards markets with high growth potential. As a result, goods exports rose 
from accounting, in real terms, for 19% of GDP in 2009 to 28% in 2018; exporting firms as 
a  proportion of  total  Spanish  companies  grew  sharply  as  from  2009;  and the  number  of 
regular exporting firms has increased in the past five years by 31%, with a notable increase 
in destinations such as Asia and North America.  
Likewise of note is that this period of growth has been accompanied by significantly buoyant 
investment in equipment. Specifically, from 2013 to 2018, this aggregate increased in real 
terms by almost 34%, compared with the cumulative 14.4% increase in GDP over the same 
period. Hence, the weight of this component in GDP stood in 2018 above 10%, the highest 
figure for the past three decades. Further, this improvement in productive investment has 
been  across  the  board  in  terms  of  productive  branches,  and  notably  sharper  than  that 
recorded in the euro area as a whole, a development closely linked to the competitive gains 
and  to  the  intensification  of  Spanish  firms’  export  orientation  in  recent  years  to  which  I 
referred. 
The  other  investment  component,  that  linked  to  construction,  has  undergone  a  most 
significant adjustment in the past decade. This means that, in 2018, following several years 
4/7 
  of  recovery,  this  GDP  component  was  still  at  around  16%  of  its  pre-crisis  level.  The 
downscaling of investment in housing entailed a decline in its weight in GDP to levels close 
to 5% in 2018, in line with Spain’s peers, compared with 12% pre-crisis. The reduction in 
housing  investment  activity  came  about  in  parallel  with  a  decline  in  house  prices  which, 
despite  the  growth  observed  in  recent  years,  remain  in  real  terms  some  32%  below  the 
nationwide levels observed in 2007, albeit with some cross-regional dispersion. All these 
developments better position this sector to support economic growth, as indeed has been 
the case in 2018. The weight of non-residential construction, for its part, has also diminished 
considerably,  largely  reflecting  the  impact  of  the  reduction  in  public-sector  investment 
spending. 
Beyond these improvements, as I stated in my introduction the Spanish economy remains 
prone to certain vulnerabilities and faces significant challenges, which I shall now set out.  
First, despite the notable above-mentioned reduction in private debt in recent years, on the 
latest available data for 2018 Q3 the negative net International Investment Position (IIP) of 
the Spanish economy stood at 81% of GDP, and that of gross external debt at 168% of 
GDP, levels that are high in relation to other advanced economies and which mark a factor 
of vulnerability for the economy as a whole. The reduction in the IIP to less vulnerable levels 
will require running current account surpluses for a prolonged period. The continuation and 
deepening of the gains in the economy’s competitiveness posted in recent years should, 
along with healthier public finances, contribute to entrenching a sustained path of external 
surpluses.  
Closely  related  to  the  foregoing  point,  the  second  factor  of  vulnerability  of  the  Spanish 
economy is that arising from the imbalance in public finances. The sectoral breakdown of 
the net IIP shows how, since the onset of the crisis, the general government’s net liability 
position  has  increased  notably,  with  the  liabilities  position  of  the  monetary  financial 
institutions and the rest of the resident sectors declining. Despite the considerable reduction 
in the budget deficit relative to GDP from its peak of 11% in 2009 to 23.1% in 2017, Spanish 
public  finances  continued  to  evidence  a  high  level  of  structural  deficit  (estimated  by  the 
European Commission to be 3% of GDP, the highest in the euro area) and of public debt, 
which currently stands at around 98% of GDP. Against this backdrop, it is worth bearing in 
mind that maintaining a very high level of public debt over a prolonged period may not only 
hamper economic growth but also lessen the stabilising capacity of fiscal policy in the face 
of future recessions.  
Spain  must  therefore  harness  the  current,  favourable  economic  setting  by  launching  a 
medium-term  programme  to  reduce  the  vulnerabilities  of  its  public  finances  and  thus 
generate budgetary room for manoeuvre, enabling it to face future crises. Reducing fiscal 
imbalances should be compatible with an improvement in the quality of public finances, as 
should  too  the  combination  of  a  fiscal  consolidation  drive  with  other  structural  reforms, 
which I shall later mention.  
Indeed,  improving  the  parameters  that  depict  the  public  finances  position  is  particularly 
necessary in our country, given the major challenges that population ageing poses in the 
medium and long term. The latest estimates augur a significant increase in public spending 
on  pensions,  health  and  long-term  care  as  a  result  of  the  significant  increase  in  the 
dependency  ratio  (measured  as  the  percentage  of  over-65s  relative  to  the  working-age 
 5/7 
 population), which is expected to practically double in the coming decades, according to 
the various demographic projections available.  
As regards the pension system, the 2011 and 2013 reforms included adjustments allowing 
the  effect  of  the  expected  increase  in  the  dependency  ratio  in  the  long  term  on  total 
spending  on  the  system  to  be  offset.  The  latest  legislative  developments  in  this  area, 
however, have softened the implementation of these mechanisms. As a result, ensuring the 
financial sustainability of the public pension system will require additional measures to be 
introduced, on either the revenue or expenditure side, so as to offset this added burden.  
In any event, it is important to stress that facing the challenge of population ageing (which 
is not exclusive to Spain, but is proving particularly acute in our country) will call for the 
adoption of a multidisciplinary strategy to encourage the participation of elderly workers, to 
adapt migratory policy to the needs of the labour market and to boost the birth rate. 
Despite strong job creation during the recovery, the unemployment rate remains very high, 
and its persistence (in particular among specific groups, such as the lesser skilled) raises 
the  risk  of  it  becoming  structural.  In  this  respect,  the  high  skills  mismatch  between  the 
employed and unemployed calls for active employment policies to boost the employability 
of each socio-demographic group, using those instruments which, further to appropriate 
assessment, have proven most effective.  
Furthermore, the number of temporary employees as a proportion of total employees stands 
in excess of 27% and there is some evidence of new temporary contracts being of shorter 
duration  in  the  recent  period;  in  addition  to  the  social  difficulties  that  generates,  human 
capital accumulation is also impaired. Reducing the incidence of temporary employment 
would call for boosting the attractiveness of permanent hires.  
Thirdly, I wish to refer to productivity. The Spanish economy has continuously posted very 
weak figures for this variable in recent decades, and this has prevented a greater degree of 
real  convergence with our  European  partners.  Improving  the dynamics of this  variable  is 
crucial for raising the economy’s potential growth in the long term, and the well-being of our 
citizens. That requires measures in various areas. In addition to the above-mentioned labour 
market reforms, human and technological capital improvements must also be made. In this 
connection, it is essential to improve the quality of the education system, adapting it to the 
challenges  posed  by  globalisation,  technological  progress  and  the  automation  of  tasks. 
Moreover,  the  presence  of  high  and  persistent  profit  margins  in  some  sectors  advises 
lowering  the  potential  barriers  to  competition  in  such  sectors.  It  would  also  be  worth 
mitigating  the  effects  of  those  factors  that  prevent  growth  of  the  most  productive  firms 
(chiefly, the regulatory thresholds linked to size).  
Finally, despite the progress made in recent years, the banking sector continues to face far-
reaching challenges, largely shared with other European financial systems.  
Spanish banks must firstly speed up the sale of their non-earning assets. These weigh down 
not only their profitability, but also their capacity to allocate resources to those economic 
activities that most contribute to growth. In addition, the reduction in non-earning assets 
originated  before  the  European  single  supervisory  and  resolution  mechanisms  were 
established may bring us closer to culminating a Banking Union. Such a Union would then 
6/7 
  allow  us  to  address  the  need  to  pool  macrofinancial  risks  within  the  euro  area  and  to 
strengthen its governance mechanisms. That would make the European financial system – 
and therefore the single currency – sounder and more resilient to future financial shocks.  
Secondly, banks should strengthen their capital and the liabilities susceptible to be used in 
the event of bail-ins in order to face on an optimal footing the regulatory challenges still 
pending,  particularly  in  respect of  resolution.  Thirdly,  the  financial sector  should  strive in 
particular  to  enhance  its  reputation  and  to  introduce  measures  mitigating  the  risk  of 
misconduct. Fourthly, banks should address the challenge of increasing their profitability, 
although this cannot be at the expense of an undue easing of lending standards. Finally, 
and  clearly  not  least  importantly,  the  new  technological  environment,  while  a  major 
challenge for the sector (in particular because of the emergence of new competitors and 
services), is also an opportunity that Spanish banks should take advantage of.  
Allow me to conclude by pointing out that, with a view to furthering the current growth phase 
and entrenching the Spanish economy’s potential, it is essential in my opinion to harness 
the still-favourable cyclical juncture to create budgetary space ahead of future recessions 
and introduce reforms to take over from the expansionary demand-side policies of recent 
years. It is likewise vital to address the challenges the banking sector has still to face, such 
as  the  reduction  in  non-earning  assets,  the  improvement  of  its  capital  structure  and 
profitability, the strengthening of its reputation and the optimal harnessing of technological 
developments.  
Finally,  in  order  to  endow  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  with  greater  stability  and 
soundness  ahead of  future  shocks,  it  is necessary  to  continue  enhancing  its  design  and 
governance as regards key aspects of the Banking Union and of the Capital Market Union, 
and the attendant implications for a future Fiscal Union. And with this final reminder of the 
importance of the European institutional framework for the economic future of our countries, 
it is an honour for me to give the floor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Union and 
Cooperation, Mr Josep Borrell. 
Thank you. 
   7/7 
