Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 10 April 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through  the  end  of  2019,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
We  intend  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past the date
when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure
that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim  in  a  sustained
manner.
Details on the precise  terms  of  the  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations
(TLTROs) will be communicated at one of our forthcoming meetings. In particular, the pricing of
the new TLTRO-III operations will take into account a thorough assessment of the bank-based
transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  further  developments  in  the  economic
outlook. In the context of our regular assessment, we will also consider whether the preservation
of the favourable implications of negative interest rates for the economy requires the mitigation of
their possible side effects, if any, on bank intermediation.
The  information  that  has  become  available  since  the  last  Governing  Council  meeting  in  early
March confirms slower growth momentum extending into the current year. While there are signs
that some of the idiosyncratic domestic factors dampening growth are fading, global headwinds
continue to weigh on euro area growth developments. The persistence of uncertainties, related to
geopolitical factors, the threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets, is leaving
marks on economic sentiment. At the same time, further employment gains and rising wages
continue  to  underpin  the  resilience  of  the  domestic  economy  and  gradually  rising  inflation
pressures.  However,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  remains  necessary  to
safeguard  favourable  financing  conditions  and  support  the  economic  expansion,  and  thus  to
ensure that inflation remains on a sustained path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%
over  the  medium  term.  Significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  being  provided  by  our  forward
guidance on the key ECB interest rates, reinforced by the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of
acquired assets and the new series of TLTROs.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area  real  GDP  rose  by  0.2%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2018,  following  an
increase  of  0.1%  in  the  third  quarter.  Incoming  data  continue  to  be  weak,  especially  for  the
manufacturing sector, mainly on account of the slowdown in external demand, which has been
compounded  by  some  country  and  sector-specific  factors. As  the  impact  of  these  factors  is
turning out to be somewhat longer-lasting, the slower growth momentum is expected to extend
into the current year. Looking ahead, the effect of these adverse factors is expected to unwind.
The euro area expansion will continue to be supported by favourable financing conditions, further
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
employment gains and rising wages, and the ongoing – albeit somewhat slower – expansion in
global activity.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside, on account of
the  persistence  of  uncertainties  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  the  threat  of  protectionism  and
vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.4% in March 2019,
after  1.5%  in  February,  reflecting  mainly  a  decline  in  food,  services  and  non-energy  industrial
goods price inflation. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to
decline over the coming months. Measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, but
labour cost pressures have strengthened and broadened amid high levels of capacity utilisation
and tightening labour markets. Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to increase over
the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion
and rising wage growth.
Turning  to  the monetary analysis,  broad  money  (M3)  growth  increased  to  4.3%  in  February
2019,  from  3.8%  in  January.  Looking  through  some  volatility  in  monthly  flows,  M3  growth
continues to be backed by bank credit creation, notwithstanding a recent moderation in credit
dynamics. The narrow monetary aggregate M1 remained the main contributor to broad money
growth.
The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  rebounded  to  3.7%  in  February
2019, from 3.4% in January, reflecting mainly a base effect. Looking through short-term volatility,
the annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations has moderated in recent months,
reflecting the typical lagged reaction to the slowdown in economic growth. At the same time, the
annual growth rate of loans to households remained broadly unchanged at 3.3% in February. The
euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  first  quarter  of  2019  suggests  that  overall  bank  lending
conditions remained favourable.
Our  monetary  policy  measures,  including  the  new  series  of  TLTROs  that  we  announced  in
March,  will  help  to  safeguard  favourable  bank  lending  conditions  and  will  continue  to  support
access to financing, in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the mildly expansionary euro area
fiscal  stance  and  the  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers  are  providing  support  to  economic
activity. At the same time, countries where government debt is high need to continue rebuilding
fiscal  buffers.  All  countries  should  reinforce  their  efforts  to  achieve  a  more  growth-friendly
composition of public finances. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of the
European Union’s fiscal and economic governance framework over time and across countries
remains essential to bolster the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of
Economic and Monetary Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing
work and urges further specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital
markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
