Philip  R  Lane:  2019-2021  strategic  plan  focuses  on  consumer
protection, resilience and Brexit
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, before the
Joint Oireachtas (National Parliament) Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform,
and Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 26 March 2019.
Chair, Committee members,
 I welcome the opportunity to meet with you today for our regular engagement. I am joined by
Derville Rowland (Director General for Financial Conduct) and Ed Sibley (Deputy Governor for
Prudential Regulation).
The Irish economy continues to perform well. While I will return to Brexit-related risks later in this
statement, our most recent projections are that underlying domestic demand will expand by 4.3
percent in 2019 and 3.9 percent in 2020. Unemployment is projected to average 4.9 percent in
2019  and  4.7  percent  in  2020.  The  improvement  in  the  labour  market  means  that  we  expect
wages  to  increase  by  3.4  percent  this  year  and  3.6  percent  next  year.  Given  the  recent
downgrades in European and global economic forecasts and the list of downside risks, we will
be  closely  monitoring  the  impact  for  Ireland  of  any  further  deterioration  in  the  external
environment.
The mission of the Central Bank is to serve the public interest by safeguarding monetary and
financial stability and by working to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests
of consumers and the wider economy. In terms of policy priorities, our new strategic plan for
2019–2021 highlights: (a) strengthening consumer protection; (b) resilience; and (c) Brexit. I will
address the issues listed in your invitation letter by reference to these strategic priorities.
Strengthening Consumer Protection
The protection of consumers is a priority for the Central Bank. Our aim is to enhance confidence
and trust in the financial system through high quality regulation, purposeful engagement, effective
gatekeeping,  assertive  supervision  and  robust  enforcement.  Consumer  protection  is  therefore
embedded in every key area of the Central Bank’s work.
For  instance,  the  macroprudential  mortgage  measures  are  designed  to  both  enhance  the
resilience of the financial system and protect borrowers from over-indebtedness. Our work on
mortgage arrears has also involved considerable collaboration and coordination across all parts
of the Bank and has been central to our analysis of non-performing loans (NPLs).
Furthermore,  the  work  of  prudential  supervision  in  driving  the  resilience  of  individual  firms  is
critical in ensuring that consumers can trust that deposits are safe, investments are protected
and  insurance  policies  will  pay  out  when  a  claim  is  due.  In  addition,  prudential  and  conduct
supervisors  have  a  shared  interest  in:  business  model  sustainability;  governance,  risk
management and control arrangements; and the culture of regulated firms.
Our  new  strategic  plan  builds  on  our  extensive  existing  consumer  protection  framework  and
reinforces our strategic focus on the conduct of firms. This is essential, given the wide range of
financial misconduct scandals internationally and domestically, including the Tracker Mortgage
scandal.  It  is  also  reflected  in  the  evolution  of  our  supervisory  approach  in  recent  years  to
strengthen its focus on conduct and cultural issues.
The supervisory phase of the Tracker Mortgage Examination is now in the final stages.  As of
end-February 2019, lenders have identified nearly 40,000 customers who suffered unacceptable
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
harm from tracker mortgages-related failures. This overall number is unchanged since our last
update  based  on  date  at  the  end  of  December.  Total  redress  and  compensation  paid  has
increased  by  €18  million  since  the  end  of  December  to  €665  million  now.  By  the  end  of  this
month, we expect the number of customer accounts awaiting redress to be down to about three
hundred, which will be mostly paid in April.
In finalising our supervisory work, our focus at all times is to ensure that all affected groups of
customers  have  been  identified  and  remediated.  This  work  has  now  been  completed  at  the
majority of lenders. In the case of the remaining lenders, we are working to ensure that these
have addressed satisfactorily any remaining issues affecting groups of customers and all eligible
groups of customers have been included for redress and compensation. We expect this work to
conclude in the coming weeks, with a final report published thereafter. While the “project” phase
of our supervisory work is nearing completion, any further individuals or groups that are identified
will receive the same treatment under our standard supervisory approach.
Finally,  our  enforcement  work  is  ongoing.  These  investigations  are  detailed  and  forensic,
involving the scrutiny of thousands of documents and the conduct of interviews to establish the
exact  circumstances  of  matters  under  investigation,  including  the  actions  of  regulated  entities
and individuals.
While we have a strong suite of existing powers, the findings of our Report into the Behaviour
and Culture of the Irish Retail Banks last year set out additional reforms that include the proposed
introduction  of  a  new  Individual Accountability  Framework.  This  would  ensure  clearer  lines  of
accountability within firms, as well as providing for an enhanced Fitness and Probity Regime and
a unified enforcement process. I appreciate the Committee is holding separate hearings on these
recommendations.
Looking at the PCP market, staff from the Central Bank published an overview in an Economic
Letter last year.  Data to the end of June 2018 show 69,668 outstanding PCP contracts (with a
total  value  of  €1,243  million)  provided  by  banks. As  part  of  the  Central  Bank’s  Central  Credit
Register (CCR) remit, from 30 June 2019, the CCR will collect information on personal contract
plans from all lenders that provide loans.
We  are  working  on  additional  measures  to  strengthen  consumer  protection  in  the  Licensed
Moneylending sector. In 2018, we published the ‘Review of the Consumer Protection Code for
Licensed Moneylenders Consultation Paper CP 118’, which proposed adding certain consumer
protection measures to this Code in order to raise the standard of consumer protection, while
recognising the specific nature of the sector.   We plan to introduce regulations to replace the
current Moneylending Code in the second half of 2019.  In developing these additional measures,
we  recognise  the  vulnerability  of  the  households  that  typically  engage  with  Licensed
Moneylenders and the high cost of moneylending loans.
Resilience – Capital Requirements, Interest Rates and NPLs
A core element of our strategic plan is to ensure that the financial system is resilient, so that it
can withstand future shocks and protect the wider economy from financial instability. The first set
of issues you invited me to address – capital requirements, interest rates and NPLs – can all be
captured under this objective.
In terms of capital, the domestic banking system is far more resilient than in the past.
Its capital position (relative to risk-weighted assets) has improved almost threefold relative to
2007.
Reliance  on  short-term  wholesale 
international  capital  markets  has
declined.  The  domestic  banking  system  is  now  primarily  funded  by  domestic  customer
deposits.
funding 
from 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Funding costs have declined and remain contained, despite recent market volatility.
The Central Bank has also introduced a range of macroprudential measures that aim to build
resilience in the system. As mentioned above, these include the mortgage measures designed to
enhance both bank and borrower resilience and mitigate the risks of credit-house price spirals
emerging. The countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) – set at one percent with effect from July
2019 – is a time-varying capital requirement designed to make the banking system more resilient
and less pro-cyclical by requiring firms to hold more capital at the appropriate time so they are
prepared  for  a  downturn.    Finally,  the  Other  Systemically  Important  Institutions  (O-SII)  buffer
looks to build additional resilience for institutions whose failure would have a systemic impact on
the economy and the financial system.
In  considering  prevailing  mortgage  rates,  a  number  of  factors  need  to  be  taken  into  account.
These include:
historical default rates and the levels of NPLs in Irish residential mortgage portfolios;
mortgages  in  Ireland  continue  to  be  issued  at  relatively  high  loan-to-value  ratios,  when
compared to levels within other jurisdictions;
the  small  scale  of  the  Irish  market  means  that  the  cost  base  is  higher,  in  view  of  the
increasing importance of fixed costs in banking (including the cost of IT systems);
lower levels of mortgage  switching  in  Ireland  than  that  observed  in  many  other  European
markets; and
the limited number of banks reduces competitive pressures on pricing margins.
Addressing NPLs in a sustainable way that provides strong protections for borrowers remains a
priority. This is essential in ensuring the resilience of the banking system and borrowers alike,
since elevated levels of NPLs compromise the capacity of both lenders and debtors to weather
future  downturns.  The  Central  Bank,  as  the  National  Competent Authority  and  as  part  of  the
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  continues  to  require  banks  to  reduce  NPLs  in  a
sustainable  way.  The  stock  of  NPLs  held  by  the  retail  banks  has  declined  by  €67.2bn  (c.79
percent) since the 2013 peak.
Multiple  tools  have  been  used  to  enable  this  reduction,  including:  re-engaging  with  borrowers;
restructures; accounting write downs; engaging through the Insolvency Service; loan sales; loan
securitisations; and seeking resolution through the courts.
The  approach  taken  by  the  Central  Bank  and  other  parts  of  the  State  consumer  protection
framework has ensured that the reduction in the level of non-performing mortgages has been
primarily achieved through the restructuring of loans. The Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears
(CCMA)  has  played  a  critical  role  in  ensuring  that  borrowers  are  protected.  The  CCMA,  and
within it, the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process, require that repossession be used only as a
last resort. The number of mortgage accounts for principal dwelling houses (PDHs) in arrears
over 90 days continued to decline in Q4 2018, marking the twenty-first consecutive quarter of a
fall in the number of accounts in this category. The number of PDH mortgage accounts that were
classified as restructured at end-December was 111,504. Of these restructured accounts, 87
per  cent  were  deemed  to  be  meeting  the  terms  of  their  current  restructure  arrangement,  the
same as last quarter.
Nonetheless,  secured  property  lending  does  require  that  the  underlying  property  can  be  re-
possessed as a last resort.  The extensive protections that are in place for distressed borrowers
do not preclude loss of ownership – although the CCMA and related protections has meant that
repossessions  in  Ireland  are  relatively  low  in  an  international  context.    In  2018,  877  primary
dwelling  properties  have  been  repossessed:  one  third  as  a  result  of  court  actions  and  the
remainder through the sale or surrender of the property.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are acutely conscious of the vulnerabilities of those borrowers at risk of losing their homes
and  maintain  the  focus  of  our  supervisory  work  on  ensuring  all  lenders  adhere  to  the  CCMA.
Furthermore, we continue to urge all borrowers and lenders to engage and seek solutions that
minimise loss of ownership.
Notwithstanding the extensive use of forbearance and restructuring, other tools also have a role
to play. In particular, the sale of loan portfolios to non-bank investment funds reduces the risk of
financial instability in the event of a future downturn, since the risk is spread more widely across
the financial system. In terms of national risk management, the transfer of credit risk and funding
risk  to  investment  funds  that  buy  loan  portfolios  constitutes  a  national  reduction  in  macro-
financial risk, given that investors in these funds are primarily overseas.
Critically, the sale of such portfolios does not affect statutory consumer safeguards – the strong
legislative  framework  ensures  that  borrowers  benefit  from  the  same  consumer  protections
regardless of whether their loan is held by a bank or a non-bank.
Our twin focus on  resilience  and  consumer  protection  explains  why  we  have  grave  concerns
about the “No Consent, No Sale” bill. Given that the consumer protection framework is identical
whether  a  loan  is  held  by  a  bank  or  a  non-bank,  the  bill  would  not  add  any  extra  degree  of
regulatory  protection  for  consumers. At  the  same  time,  it  would  severely  damage  resilience,
since the transferability of loans is a central feature in a modern financial system.  In addition to
its  impact  on  loan  sales,  the  bill  would  limit  the  ability  of  banks  to  securitise  loans  or  provide
collateral to obtain liquidity from the inter-bank market or from the eurosystem.
While  these  restrictions  would  be  costly  even  under  normal  conditions  and  thereby  raise  the
interest rates charged to households,  their impact would be especially de-stabilising in a crisis
environment,  since  the  ability  to  restructure  balance  sheets  and  tap  liquidity  is  essential  to
resilience under crisis conditions. While the bill makes an exception for a “failing or likely to fail”
(FOLTF) firm, such a designation is only made once a crisis is well advanced, whereas financial
stability is best maintained by ensuring that resilience-enhancing measures can be taken in a
timely manner, with the strengthening of balance sheets during good times allowing the economy
and the financial system to better withstand adverse economic and financial conditions.
Building resilience is also critical for the credit union sector. The Central Bank recognises the
important  role  played  by  credit  unions  in  Ireland.  Our  vision  of  “Strong  Credit  Unions  in  Safe
Hands” underpins our statutory mandate to ensure each credit union protects the funds of its
members and the maintenance of the financial stability and well-being of credit unions generally.
Our  recent  report  on  financial  conditions  in  the  credit  union  sector  that  was  published  in
December 2018 highlighted strong reserves, sustained lending growth and a continued reduction
in arrears.  However, financial challenges remain for the sector and individual credit unions in
terms of low loan to asset ratio (average c.28 percent), high cost income ratio (average c.74
percent) and low return on assets (average 1.0 percent). As the Registrar recently highlighted, it
is not the regulatory framework that inhibits future business model development.  Credit union
challenges are commercial in nature. Overcoming these challenges on a sustainable basis will
involve  credit  unions  enhancing  their  competence  and  capability,  addressing  operational
effectiveness and expanding revenue through loan growth and non-interest income.
Credit unions benefit from a tailored and proportionate regulatory framework. With a loan to asset
ratio  across  the  sector  ranging  from  11  percent  to  73  percent  today  under  the  same  lending
framework, some credit unions are faring better than others at meeting member lending needs.
Additional  lending  capacity  is  currently  being  considered  under  an  ongoing  consultation  on
‘Potential Changes to the Lending Framework (CP125).  This additional capacity would facilitate
further  longer  term  lending  on  a  prudent  basis  by  credit  unions  while  appropriately  managing
duration and concentration risks. It is clear therefore that credit unions have the required flexibility
to evolve their future business models.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit preparations and the economic impact of Brexit on the Irish economy
Finally, let me turn to Brexit. As is well understood by all here, any form of Brexit will be damaging
for Ireland, with a hard Brexit especially so. Recognising these risks, the Central Bank has been
focused on Brexit risks since before the 2016 UK referendum.   We continue to analyse and work
to mitigate the risks posed to the economy, consumers, the financial system, and the regulatory
environment.
We have taken a transparent approach to this work, recognising the importance of and interest in
it. For the wider economy, the effects will be uneven, with indigenous sectors (such as agri-food)
facing heightened risks of disruption to exports and supply chains.
In recent months, we have stepped up our work on mitigating the most material ‘cliff-edge’ risks
of a hard Brexit. From a financial regulation perspective, our work has sought to ensure that:
the financial system is sufficiently resilient for a hard Brexit not to cause significant financial
stability risks;
risks to consumers are mitigated to the greatest extent possible; and
we are delivering a proportionate, robust, efficient and effective authorisation process in line
with European regulatory norms, for those firms seeking authorisation in Ireland as a result
of Brexit.
The Central Bank – in conjunction with the wider European regulatory community and, in relation
to required legislative amendments, the Department of Finance – has worked to ensure that the
financial system is prepared for all Brexit scenarios. While a no-deal Brexit would constitute a
severe  economic  and  financial  blow,  our  work  to  improve  resilience  over  the  last  decade,
including in driving the material reduction in NPLs, means that the shock should not be amplified
by fragility in the financial system. We also continue to be busy in authorising and supervising
new firms and new lines of activity.
I welcome your questions.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
