  08.07.2019 
 The Banco de España and its promotion of economic history research 
Presentation of the “Guide to Historical Banking Archives in Spain” 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure for me to close this conference, which has presented the “Guide to Historical 
Banking Archives in Spain”. This publication, both for the quality of its information and the 
wealth of data it contains, will no doubt contribute to increasing knowledge on the historical 
development of the Spanish banking system.  
I  would  like  to  thank  all  those  who  have  participated  in  this  project  for  their  efforts.  My 
gratitude  in  particular  to  the  academic  historian,  Pedro  Tedde,  to  Professor  María  del 
Carmen  Angulo,  and  to  all  those  institutions  and  individuals  who  have  enthusiastically 
collaborated in the publication of the guides to their respective archives. And naturally, too, 
to the Banco de España teams behind this initiative. 
The value of the initiative lies in the very value of the Spanish banking and Banco de España 
archive  collections.  These  archives  are  fundamental  to  the  study  of  our  history  and  the 
development of Spain’s banking system. 
In this respect, I wish to highlight the importance of having historical archives that allow 
documents  to  be  held  and  conserved  and  that  guarantee  their  traceability  and  integrity. 
Without these archives, our knowledge of the past would no doubt be limited. Indeed, their 
subject matter provides for well-founded historical analysis and for a better understanding 
of  the  reasons  that  led to  specific  financial  decisions.  And,  in  light  of  the  central  role  of 
banking in our economic system, it also allows us to examine the conditioning factors of 
many  decisions  taken  by  bank  debtors,  i.e.  by  firms,  households  and  governments  over 
time. 
I therefore believe we should welcome a new publication which describes and identifies for 
the first time, in an orderly fashion, the contents of 10 different historical archives of banks 
or Spanish institutions and of the 218 documentary series they comprise. The publication 
also contains a full map of the development of the Spanish banking system from its origins 
until late 2017. Adding to it is the article by Pedro Tedde, which rigorously analyses the 
Spanish banking system during the twentieth century. 
A  reading  of  the  publication  offers  clues  that  the  process  of  change  has,  with  differing 
degrees of intensity, been continuous. Hence, while the current transformation in banking 
may have different causes and rhythms than those in the past, deep knowledge of previous 
events can also offer us significant lessons today on the challenges currently ahead of the 
Spanish financial system. 
In  any  event,  the  publication  we  present  today  is  a  good  exponent  of  a  long-standing 
tradition  that  has  led  the  Banco  de  España  to  promote  and  sponsor  economic  history 
research, and to highlight the value of the documentary and bibliographical collection in our 
Historical Archives and in our Library. 
The list of eminent personalities from our central bank noted for their love of history and its 
study is a long one. And it is this tradition that has enabled the Banco de España to continue 
promoting  economic  history  research.  Many  of  these  figures  were  my  predecessors  as 
governors or directors general of what was then known as the Research Department.  
  3/5 
Others, who collaborated with them, then went on, in many cases, to pursue brilliant careers 
in academia and research. Indeed, some are here with us today. For the sake of brevity, and 
so  as  not  to  run  the  risk  of  missing  anybody  out,  I  will  not  mention  in  detail  those  who 
continued the work of the pioneers Mariano Rubio, Ángel Madroñero and Joan Sardà back 
in the 1960s. 
As a tribute to their work and following in their wake, I shall, without being exhaustive, set 
out some of the projects that our Bank currently has under way or on the drawing board in 
terms of promoting economic history studies. 
Firstly, the Banco de España regularly organises conferences focusing on the discussion of 
aspects relating to economic history. This year, for example, on the occasion of the sixtieth 
anniversary of the Stabilisation Plan, the Banco de España will, next October, be organising 
a conference in Barcelona focusing on the analysis of the Plan. It will likewise pay tribute to 
the figure of Joan Sardà. I trust you will be able to join us at this conference. 
Also, since 2015 the Bank has organised annually a top-level international economic history 
conference  aimed  at  academia.  In  recent  years,  both  our  central  bank  researchers  and 
external  researchers  financed  by  us  have  been  selected  to  present  their  papers.  In  this 
year’s edition, the conference has been jointly organised with the CEPR’s Economic History 
section. 
Secondly, since 2009, the Banco de España has had a biannual programme in place for 
economic history research grants. Under the programme, universities commit themselves, 
following  an  agreement  signed  with  the  Bank,  to  pursuing  the  research  selected  and  to 
presenting  and  publishing  their  findings.  The  possibility  of  collaboration  between 
researchers from both institutions is also envisaged. 
Since 1980, under the initial backing of Luis Ángel Rojo, the Bank has published a collection 
of monographs relating to monetary and financial history, Spanish and international alike, 
under the name “Economic History Studies” (more familiarly known as the “Red Series”). To 
date,  this  collection  had  solely  included  papers  prepared  or  financed  by  the  Banco  de 
España. Currently, however, with a view to extending and maintaining its continuity, we are 
assessing opening it up to other research not necessarily financed by the Bank. 
To be added to the foregoing is all the sponsorship and funding activity of associations, 
universities and royal academies in the field of economic history. Actions of a differing nature 
and scope are involved, giving continuity to our long-standing and intense promotion work. 
I  am  particularly  gratified  to  be  able  to  share  with  you  today  my  satisfaction  at  the 
recognition recently granted by the Spanish Economic History Association to the supportive 
work by the Banco de España. In short, we have been designated as an honorary member 
of this entity. My thanks to the Association but, above all, to those who have made this work 
possible over the years, and to those continuing it and adding to its prestige today. 
Lastly,  allow  me  to  stress  another  of  the  grounds  for  a  publication  such  as  that  we  are 
presenting today. It is a question of transparency, understood as the possibility of sharing 
information with society as a whole. As I pointed out in one of my early public appearances 
as governor of the Banco de España, I consider making high-quality statistical information 
4/5 
  available  to  researchers  as  absolutely  crucial  for  sound  analyses  and  research  enabling 
better-founded economic policy decision-making.1 In this respect, we intend in the coming 
years  to  pursue  various  projects  that  allow  these  researchers  to  have  access  to  our 
statistical information, thereby enabling different avenues of analysis and research of benefit 
to society as a whole. 
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my satisfaction at these initiatives and to thank the 
efforts  and  contributions,  from  both  the  public  and  private  spheres,  of  those  who  have 
participated in this publication. In some ways, this substantiates the fact that these avenues 
for sharing information and making it available to society are enormously beneficial for all. 
Thank you. 
                                                                                               
1  See  my  “Welcome  address”  for  the  Second  Annual  Research  Conference  of  Banco  de  España,  2018,  at: 
https://www.bde.es/f/webbde/GAP/Secciones/SalaPrensa/IntervencionesPublicas/Gobernador/Arc/hdc030918en.pdf. 
 
 
 5/5 
