Gent Sejko: Aiming for a secure financial system and the key role 
of deposit insurers
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  IADI's  ERC
Regional Committee Meeting, Tirana, 4 April 2019.
 Dear ladies and gentlemen,
Dear Mr Boccuzzi,
Dear Guests,
Good morning and thank you for giving me the opportunity to warmly welcome you all to Tirana
and the Bank of Albania and address this international gathering.
It is a particular pleasure to have you here at the premises of the Bank of Albania today and to
host the meeting of the Europe Regional Committee (ERC) of the International Association of
Deposit  Insurers  (IADI).  After  this  opening  meeting,  the  agenda  will  then  continue  with  the
Technical Assistance Workshop for the rest of today and tomorrow. I hope you will enjoy it and,
most importantly, hold interesting and constructive discussions. I take this opportunity to thank
the  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers  (IADI)  and  the  Albanian  Deposit  Insurance
Agency (ADIA), who have made it possible for this event to be held in Tirana.
Throughout the development of ADIA, IADI’s contribution and input has been undeniable in setting
standards. In this regard, IADI has played an important role as a forum for deposit insurers from
around  the  world  to  gather  and  share  knowledge  and  expertise.  The  IADI  has  also  provided
intensive  training  and  educational  programs  and  has  produced  research  and  guidance  on
matters  related  to  deposit  insurance.  Such  examples  include:  establishing  new  deposit
insurance systems and enhancing existing ones and contributing to safeguarding the stability of
financial  systems,  by  promoting  international  cooperation  and  encouraging  wide  international
contact among deposit insurers and other interested parties. All these efforts have helped our
deposit insurance scheme grow.
Since the inception of the ADIA, the Bank of Albania has been strategically committed to creating
and  maintaining  an  efficient  and  effective  deposit  insurance  scheme  in  Albania.  From  the
beginning, one of the Bank of Albania’s responsibilities has been to develop a stable and safe
banking  system.  Its  efforts  towards  the  new  architecture  of  the  banking  sector  –  guided  by
international standards and consumer protection principles, and in coordination with government
– have helped in setting up the Albanian Deposit Insurance Agency. The Parliament approved the
ADIA  law  in  2002  to  restore  public  confidence  in  the  nation’s  banking  system.  The  Bank  of
Albania, by law, is the supervisory authority of the ADIA.
The role played by deposit insurers is essential in crisis prevention and management, as already
proved  by  the  experience  during  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  role  has  proactively  evolved
towards mitigating financial system vulnerabilities even in the absence of deposit runs or banks
in default. It is now a fact that deposit guarantee schemes mitigated the recent financial crisis,
using every possible instrument available to them, such as: increasing the deposits coverage
limit; expanding the scope  of  the  guarantee  scheme;  and  providing  faster  deposit  pay-outs  or
even liquidity support. The outcome of these developments is that a new focus is being placed
on  deposit  insurance  in  the  post  crisis  period.  Deposit  insurance  is  now  considered  as  an
essential  crisis  management  tool  and  an  important  instrument  for  orderly  liquidation  of  an
unsound  financial  institution.    A  well-designed  deposit  guarantee  scheme  largely  supports
financial stability and financial crisis resolution by mitigating risks of and maintaining trust in the
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial system.
However, recalling one of the most important lessons we learned from the global financial crisis,
despite the mandate given to any institution, no player can alone deal with a systemic crisis and
the  consequences  of  strong  spillover  effects  and  contagion  risks.  It  is  essential  that  each
element of the safety net develops robust mechanisms that aim to resolve financial institutions
and stabilize the financial system as smoothly as possible, minimizing the cost to the economy.
Moreover,  financial  stability  can  only  be  preserved  by  a  well-coordinated  financial  safety  net,
which  is  supported  by  a  resilient  legal  framework,  proper  tools  and  instruments  and  careful
contingency planning for each of its elements.
The Bank of Albania has dedicated much of the past 10 years to integrating the lessons learned
from  the  recent  financial  crises  into  a  new  regulatory  framework.  Our  financial  safety  net  is
further  aligned  with  international  best  practices,  as  we  coordinate  our  roles  as  supervisory
authority,  lender  of  last  resort  and,  recently,  resolution  authority  as  well.  Our  post-crisis
regulatory framework points towards a stronger banking sector, based on a more solid capital
foundation that ultimately serves to protect deposits and taxpayers’ money. In this perspective,
the  Bank  of Albania  has  reinforced  banks’  capital  position  with  higher  requirements  for  core
capital  and  is  developing  new  demands  for  macro-prudential  buffers,  to  build  up  the  loss-
absorbing capacity of banks in case of financial crisis. Moreover, the financial safety net already
in place was further strengthened with a new mandate for the Bank of Albania as the resolution
authority. A transposition of the BRRD, the new resolution law empowers the Bank of Albania
with the necessary tools and instruments to resolve failing banks, with no eventual impact on
financial stability.
Nevertheless, going back to the important lessons of the crisis, these efforts would be insufficient
unless  undertaken  in  coordination  with  all  the  relevant  institutions  and  players  of  the  crisis
management  platform.  Clearly,  effective  crisis  management  requires  ongoing  communication
and  coordination  among:  supervisors  and  resolution  authorities,  financial  market  authorities,
deposit insurers and the government. The Financial Stability Advisory Group (FSAG) is assigned
with the important role of assisting in safeguarding financial market stability in the Republic of
Albania.  The  FSAG  was  established  in  2006  and  comprises  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and
Economy,  the  Bank  of Albania,  the Albanian  Financial  Supervisory Authority  and  the Albanian
Deposit Insurance Agency.  A Memorandum of Understanding between the FSAG participants
has been in place since 2014, to support its work on monitoring developments and risks to the
banking  and  financial  system  and  engaging  in  contingency  planning  and  crisis  preparation  to
prevent and address systemic risks. 
Thanks  to  prudent  measures  undertaken  in  coordination  with  all  the  relevant  institutions,  the
Albanian  economy  enjoys  a  sound  financial  system,  with  healthy  banks,  ample  liquidity  and
prudent  behaviour  in  terms  of  risk-taking.  The  banking  sector  operates  in  a  sound  and  stable
macroeconomic environment, sustained by a well-functioning and robust financial system. We
are  happy  to  observe  that  credit  quality  has  improved  significantly  and  the  banking  sector  is
consolidating,  though  more  is  expected  in  terms  of  financial  deepening  and  credit  growth.
Standing from this point of view, our future efforts will certainly aim towards maintaining sound
prudential  practices  and  policies  and  further  developing  market  discipline  to  secure  a  resilient
financial system.
Staying in this line, the Bank of Albania and the Albanian Deposit Insurance Agency’s relationship
has constantly evolved over the years to become a strong partnership and cooperation, allowing
our institutions to fulfil their respective, but complementary, missions.
The topic of the Technical Assistance Workshop is also of great interest to the Bank of Albania
and  certainly  to  other  institutions  responsible  for  financial  stability.  The  Bank  of Albania  looks
forward  to  hearing  and  learning  about  the  different  perspectives  and  approaches  that  will  be
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
shared  in  this  workshop  or  on  the  topic.  Of  course,  the  topic  becomes  more  sensitive
considering the current global financial complexity and its fast-changing landscape, and in view
of  the  newly-acquired  functions  of  the  Bank  of Albania  and ADIA  under  the  new  law  “On  the
recovery and resolution of banks in the Republic of Albania”. According to this law, the Bank of
Albania has been assigned as the Resolution Authority, whereas the Albanian Deposit Insurance
Agency is responsible for the administration of the resolution fund, which encompasses investing
it in accordance with the policy approved by the Resolution Authority. Moreover, the law gives a
new role to ADIA as an important partner in drafting resolution plans, as well as a new source of
financing banks’ resolution, therefore increasing the pool of resources available to the Bank of
Albania for resolving failing banks.
So, to conclude, once again, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to you today. It is a
pleasure to have you here and I hope you enjoy the rest of your stay in Tirana.
I wish you all a successful event!
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
