   MONETARY POLICY REPORT  
PRESENTATION BEFORE THE  
FINANCE COMMISSION OF THE HONORABLE SENATE OF THE 
REPUBLIC 
 Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
10 June 2019 
                                                 
 The June 2019 Monetary Policy Report can be found on http://www.bcentral.cl.  
 I. 
Introduction 
 Mr President of the Senate’s Finance Commission, senator Ricardo Lagos-Weber, Senators members of this 
Commission, ladies, gentlemen,  
 
I  am  grateful  for  your  invitation  to  present  the  vision  of  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  on  recent 
macroeconomic developments, outlook and monetary policy implications. This vision is detailed in our June 
2019 Monetary Policy Report released this morning. Its contents also provide the background for the decision 
adopted by the Board in its monetary policy meeting of last Friday. 
 
There we decided unanimously to reduce the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) by 50 basis points, taking it to 2.5%. 
Key in this decision was our evaluation that the monetary policy had to be recalibrated, because the delivered 
impulse was not enough to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the 3% target in light of the new CPI 
figures and the new estimates for the activity gap and the neutral monetary policy rate. 
 
The vision that the macroeconomic scenario could need a different monetary impulse began to be forged in the 
March Monetary Policy Report, when the measurement of inflation with the new Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
showed us an increase in prices significantly smaller tan with the previous figures, postponing for about a year 
its convergence to the 3% target. As you will recall from the presentation we made on that occasion, we linked 
lower inflation to the possibility of greater capacity gaps as a result of the massive immigration of recent years, 
and to a lower pass-through from exchange rate variations to prices.  
 
When presenting that diagnosis, we said that the lower inflation as measured by the new CPI had implications 
for monetary policy, so we halted the normalization process that we had started in late last year. In addition, in 
order to fine-tune the diagnosis, we decided to advance to June the updating of the structural parameters—i.e. 
trend GDP, potential GDP and the neutral monetary policy rate. Then, at our May Monetary Policy Meeting, 
we discussed the option of reducing the MPR, advancing that such an adjustment would be justified in case of 
a significant widening of the gaps, or a lesser dynamism of the economy, a worsening of external conditions 
and/or a lower neutral MPR.  
 
At  last  Friday’s  meeting  we  verified  that  all  these  conditions  have  been  met.  First,  estimates  of  trend  and 
potential  economic  growth  have  increased  as  a result  of  immigration,  which translates into  greater  capacity 
gaps. Second, the neutral MPR is lower, partly because of the fall in the estimated neutral rates in the main 
economies. Third, in recent months, the dynamism of the economy has been below potential growth, helping to 
widen the activity gap. Finally, the external scenario has deteriorated, mainly because the balance of risks has 
become more negative. 
 
After considering these elements and the prospects for the economic scenario, the right move was to reduce the 
MPR. I believe it is important to stress that this decision is based on an important analytical effort of the Bank, 
backed by the search for more evidence and capacity to identify structural phenomena that affect the Chilean 
economy.  This  is  the  conclusion  of  an  announced  and  documented  process,  which  required  a  rigorous 
development before materializing in a change of the MPR, because monetary policy cannot be conducted on 
the basis of intuitions or perceptions. 
 
We have characterized this exercise as a monetary policy recalibration because it is largely derived from an 
update of the structural parameters that serve to characterize the macroeconomic situation and inform the policy 
rate decision. This translates into a one-time adjustment of the rate, whose exceptionality is reinforced by the 
unusual combination of changes in the parameters, including the new measurement of inflation.  
 
However, we must make it clear that this does not mean ignoring the recent performance of the economy. On 
the contrary, the effective growth rate of recent months is weaker when compared with a higher trend growth. 
 Page 1 of 18 
  Similarly, recalibrating the MPR does not mean that it cannot be adjusted in the future in the face of changes in 
the macroeconomic environment: rather it will allow for an adequate response to said changes to be evaluated 
on their own merits, without mistaking them for the factors that justified this adjustment. 
 
Going forward, activity will grow above potential over the next two years and inflation will converge to 3% 
during 2020. The beginning of the MPR normalization will depend on our conviction that inflation is in a clear 
process of convergence to 3%. Especially important for this evaluation will be the way the labor market absorbs 
the strong immigration flow, the response of investment and external developments. At the same time, there are 
important risks around these projections.  
 
Let me now describe this scenario and associated risks. 
II.  Macroeconomic scenario 
 
II.1. Recent evolution of activity and inflation 
 
In the first quarter this year, activity grew 1.6% annually, which combined a 3.6% fall in the mining sector and 
a 2.2% increase in the non-mining sectors (Figure 1). The high basis for comparison of the same period in 2018 
anticipated that first-quarter growth this year would underperform that of 2018, but the result was lower than 
expected. This combined the negative performance of mining—affected by climatic factors, downtime at some 
mines and the lower ore—and several of the more volatile sectors—linked to natural resources—of non-mining 
GDP. In particular, the worse-than-expected performance of agriculture, fishing, and electricity, gas and water 
stood out.  
 
Most of the non-mining sectors whose activity is more related to demand behaved in line with expectations, 
particularly construction and services. One exception was the export industry, which combined high bases for 
comparison, weak demand from its target markets—mainly Latin America—and stronger competition abroad. 
 
On the demand side, the main changes in the first quarter were the slowdown in investment in machinery and 
equipment and in exports (Figure 2). This coincides with the deterioration of the external scenario in recent 
quarters  and  an  inventory  buildup  that  has  not  been  undone  as  expected.  On  the  other  hand,  investment  in 
construction and other works and consumption evolved as expected, without major changes compared to the 
previous quarters. All in a context where various indicators show an increase in job creation.  
 
Headline inflation as measured by the CPI and core inflation (CPI excluding food and energy, CPIEFE) continue 
near 2% per year. In the case of the CPI, with a level that has increased somewhat in the most recent past (Figure 
3). In any case, the same phenomena identified in the March Report are still present: greater competition in 
certain markets, wider capacity gaps than previously estimated and lower pass-through of the accumulated peso 
depreciation than its historical averages.  
 
II.2. Updating the structural parameters 
 
As I just said, in this Report we have updated the estimates of the structural parameters that are used to assess 
the state of the economy, its outlook and the calibration of monetary policy. This allowed mainly to quantify 
the effect of the massive immigration flow of recent years on trend and potential growth, increasing both. It 
was also possible to compare the impact on the neutral MPR of a higher trend growth with that of the fall in 
international interest rates.  
 
Before I dive into the detail of the estimates, I would like to make a couple of precisions regarding the concepts 
of trend and potential GDP. In the first place, it is evident that estimating the growth capacity of an economy is 
very important when defining monetary policy and macroeconomic policies in general. In fact, not only the 
Page 2 of 18 
    Central Bank estimates trend growth, but also the Ministry of Finance to calculate the structural income of the 
Treasury. In our case, we estimate two concepts: trend GDP and potential GDP. The first has to do with the 
medium-term  growth  capacity  of the  economy,  while  the second  refers to the level  of  GDP  consistent  with 
stable inflation and, therefore, is adequate to measure the activity gap associated with short-term inflationary 
pressures. Although in the long term the potential and trend growth rates converge to the same number, in the 
short term there are transitory elements—such as temporary shocks to productivity and restrictions in the use 
of factors—that alter the productive capacity and cause differences between the two. Hence the importance of 
analyzing them separately (Figure 4). 
II.3. Trend GDP 
 
The  updating  of  our  trend  growth  estimate—which  dated  back  to  2017—had  the  purpose  of  measuring  the 
effects of the considerable immigration flow of recent years on the country's medium- and long-term growth 
capacity.  
 
A box in the Report identifies episodes of significant immigration flows into other economies. Although each 
case is, in some sense, unique, and international experiences are not easily transferable, its analysis provides 
some useful background to understand the Chilean case. The first is to confirm the exceptional nature of the 
Chilean  experience,  due  to  its  size  and  speed.  In  addition,  given  the  factors  that  motivate  migration—
particularly  from  Venezuela—one  can  think  that  it  will  not  be  reversed  any  time  soon.  Secondly,  recent 
immigration is characterized by an average population that is more qualified, younger and with a greater labor 
participation  than  the  Chilean  population.  Third,  relative  to  other  countries,  Chile  poses  fewer  legal 
impediments to enter the labor market, and unlike other migratory cases, shares the language and other cultural 
aspects with a majority fraction of the immigrant population. 
 
To update our trend growth estimate, we use the population projections for the period 1992-2050, published by 
the National Statistics Institute (INE) at the end of 2018. These reflect the significant immigration flow observed 
since  2015,  which  is  expected  to  continue  to  be  important  in  the  coming  years  (Figure  5).  This  affects  the 
projection  of  the  labor  factor  and,  through  it,  the  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  The  other  forecasting 
assumptions do not undergo major changes with respect to the fiscal year of 2017, except for the updating of 
the Quarterly National Accounts figures and an explicit modeling of the way in which capital and total factor 
productivity respond to the immigration-related increase in the labor factor. 
 
Despite the importance of the labor force increase, its impact on trend growth is not immediate or transmitted 
one for one. The economy must undergo a process of adjustment while the sharp increase in the supply of labor 
is completely absorbed, so that new workers are placed in positions that match their skills. The international 
experience is not conclusive regarding the duration of this transition, because, as I mentioned, the characteristics 
of the migratory processes have been very different. In any case, it can be expected that as the immigration flow 
is accommodated, a gradual increase in capital accumulation and productivity will be observed.  
 
Thus, we estimate that the trend growth of the Chilean economy is between 3.25% and 3.75% for the period 
2019-2028  (Table  1). This  estimate  compares  with  the  3.0%  to  3.5% range  that  we  considered  before.  It  is 
important to note that the use of a range reflects the uncertainty regarding several of the factors that have been 
mentioned. In particular, this projection considers that the total factor productivity of the non-mining sector will 
grow 1% in the next ten years. However, there is uncertainty in light of this variable’s volatility of recent years. 
II.4. Potential GDP 
 
The  updating  of  trend  GDP  is  important  for  determining  the  potential  GDP  of the  economy.  Regarding  the 
latter, we estimate that in the period 2019-2021 it will be around 3.4% (around 3.2% was the previous estimate), 
somewhat below its trend growth (Table 2). In this judgment, the initial fall in productivity is combined with 
Page 3 of 18 
     the increase in the labor force and the expected lags in the adequacy of the capital stock in response to this 
phenomenon. 
 
The updating of potential growth, together with the performance of the economy in the first quarter, drive the 
activity gap level (-0.7 percentage points) to be wider than previously considered (Figure 6). It is important to 
note that, with respect to last December, the estimated level of the activity gap is greater in the beginning—the 
first quarter of 2019—, but also throughout the projection horizon. Although first-quarter activity figures play 
a role in the former, in the latter the fundamental factor is the potential growth update. The baseline scenario 
assumes that the gap will gradually close along the projection horizon, although at a slower pace than previously 
expected due to the magnitude of the adaptation process that the economy will have to go through in the face 
of the migratory shock.  
II.5. The neutral MPR 
 
About the neutral policy rate, I think a couple of conceptual clarifications are in order. The neutral  MPR is 
defined as the rate that is consistent with a GDP in its equilibrium (trend) level and an inflation rate in the 3% 
target. All this, once the effects of transitory shocks in the economy have dissipated. For this reason, the neutral 
MPR is inherently associated with the long term, while the effective MPR gradually converges, in the absence 
of further disturbances moving the economy away from its trend level. Hence, the neutral MPR to which we 
refer is understood as a trend neutral rate. For operational effects, monetary policy is considered expansionary 
whenever the actual MPR is below the neutral MPR, and contractionary the other way around, i.e., the actual 
MPR is higher than the neutral MPR. This is why keeping an updated estimate of this measure of neutral interest 
rate is relevant for both monetary policy implementation and communication of future orientation. 
 
In  the  past  few  years  we  have  seen  several  developments  in  the  macroeconomic  scenario  that  could  have 
affected the level of the neutral MPR. Among them, we can mention the fall of external interest rates and the 
higher  growth  of  both  trend  and  potential  GDP  driven  by  the  massive  immigration  of  recent  years  I  just 
mentioned. Moreover, the Bank  has  developed  and  expanded  the  use  of  new  methodologies  to  estimate the 
neutral  rate,  following  the  practice  of  other  central  banks  and  the  need  to  reconcile  the  different  changes 
presented by the economy.  
 
Our set of estimates yields neutral interest rates of the order of 1% in real terms. Taking into account the range 
of values and the uncertainty surrounding this calculation, we consider that the neutral MPR lies within the 3.75 
to 4.25% range, that is, 25 basis points below the range we expected until March, partly reflecting the drop in 
interest rates around the globe (Figure 7). 
Baseline projection scenario 
III. 
 
The  convergence  of  inflation  to  the  3%  target  is  subject  to  a  baseline  projection  scenario  that  features  the 
following characteristics.  
III.1. Activity and demand 
 
On one hand, as I mentioned, it considers that the activity gap will close throughout the projection horizon, a 
period in which the economy will accumulate growth above its potential. This is consistent with GDP growing 
in 2019 between 2.75% and 3.5%. This range is below the range we expected in March, mainly reflecting the 
effects of the negative surprise of activity in the first quarter. Actually, this projection assumes that the economy 
will resume higher rates of annual expansion in the second half of this year. For 2020 and 2021, higher growth 
rates are foreseen, between 3% and 4% in both years (Table 3).  
 
Page 4 of 18 
  On the expenditure side, compared with March, the biggest adjustments are seen in gross fixed capital formation 
(GFCF), a component that, instead of growing 6.2% this year as projected, will grow only 4.5%. This revision 
owes to a great extent to the poor first-quarter performance of the machinery and equipment component. This 
weakness has continued, according to partial second-quarter data. It must be noted that this occurs in the context 
of  high  inventory  buildup  towards  the  end  of  2018  and  the  increased  uncertainty  surrounding  the  external 
scenario. 
 
In any case, the other part of investment—construction and other works—has remained dynamic and forward 
going forward signs are still positive. On one hand, related stock market data point to a favorable development. 
On the other, the large-scale investment projects that are currently in progress—especially in mining—do not 
register  delays  and  have  been  unfolding  according  to  plan.  Along  the  same  lines,  the  various  surveys  of 
investment  projects  have  not  seen  any  downward  and  continue  to  foresee  larger  amounts  for  2019-2020, 
compared with the amounts invested in the period 2017-2018 (Figure 8).  
 
Turning to concessions, the authorities have announced a significant increase in them as from 2020, in particular 
in hospitals, roads and airports. Add to this the announced approval of a set of complementary works that will 
be executed in 2019 and 2020. The information of the Association of Engineering Consulting Firms (AIC) for 
the first quarter of 2019 shows that detail engineering—which covers projects scheduled for one or two years 
ahead—shows high annual growth rates. In terms of housing investment, although it began the year with a zero 
contribution to construction GDP, sales remain high and the outlook reflected in the May Business Perceptions 
Report is positive. In any case, the Monthly Entrepreneurs Confidence Index (IMCE) for the construction sector 
posted a decline most recently but is still higher tan its all-time average. 
 
In the medium term, various elements suggest that investment will regain strength. For the time being, the lower 
basis for comparison that the adjustment will leave in its 2019 growth will help to raise the 2020 record, the 
year for which the baseline scenario estimates a 5.1% growth in GFCF. The capital-to-GDP ratio has remained 
low in recent years (under 22% in real terms), with productive investment—excluding mining and housing—
that practically grew zero in the 2016-2018 period. Plus, that the strong immigration of recent years reduced 
the capital/labor ratio. Absorbing this greater workforce requires adjusting the capital stock, so that, absent a 
more significant change in the vision about productivity, and/or the various costs associated with the formalities 
of investment projects, it should resume its former dynamism.  
 
The domestic conditions to finance this greater investment are favorable: local interest rates have remained low 
(Figure 9), something that will be reinforced with the decision of the last Monetary Policy Meeting. In the same 
way, external financing conditions have remained favorable and, in fact, the interest rates of US Treasury bonds 
are also low. All this occurs in a context of no imbalances in the local financial system, no elements hindering 
the flow of financing, and a bounded fiscal deficit.  
 
All in all, the first-quarter evolution of investment puts a note of caution in case the slowdown proves more 
persistent, especially because of the higher uncertainty abroad. For now, this has reduced asset prices and, with 
it, the incentives to invest. There is also the currency depreciation that could reduce the acquisition of imported 
capital goods imports. The behavior of inventories also poses a risk on the dynamics of investment. Already by 
the end of 2018 there had been an inventory buildup that at the time was believed would turn into investment, 
but that did not happen and, on the contrary, in the first quarter accumulated further. This, in a context in which, 
according  to  the  IMCE,  the  percentage  of  respondents  in  wholesale  trade  who  judge  their  inventories  as 
unwanted has risen, and in which the interviewees for the Business Perceptions Report in companies that trade 
in  machinery and equipment report sales below expectations, particularly in the northernmost regions. 
 
Consumption, meanwhile, has behaved as expected and the baseline scenario estimates that, after growing 3.1% 
in 2019, will grow an average of 3.5% in the next two years. Accordingly, the projection for this expenditure 
Page 5 of 18 
    component remains virtually unchanged from the March Report estimates. The higher growth rates foreseen for 
2020 and 2021 are consistent with the economy speeding up growth.  
 
The labor market has given more positive signals regarding employment, as can be seen from in the INE figures, 
the  administrative  records  and  the  information  obtained  for  the  Business  Perceptions  Report.  Imports  of 
consumer goods have remained high (with the exception of automobiles) and the expectations of the trade sector 
remain  optimistic,  as  indicated  by  the  IMCE.  All  of  this  in  a  context  in  which  financial  conditions  remain 
favorable, due to both the persistence of low interest rates and good credit lending conditions. 
 
It  is  important  to  warn  against  the  temptation  of  trying  to  extract  information  on  the  behavior  of  private 
consumption from indicators of retail activity. Although this practice can provide some information, there are 
differences  between  both  variables  that confuse the reading.  First, consumption  is  a  component  of  demand, 
while retail is a part of GDP, so they differ in their measurement, magnitude and components. Second, retail 
sales indicators are one of the sources on which household consumption is calculated in the National Accounts. 
However, formal retail trade represents only 15% of private consumption. Third, the consumption of goods 
must be added up to the consumption of all services (domestic and foreign acquired), which are almost half of 
household consumption and are not captured in retail sales indicators. Finally, when it comes to making the 
GDP retail figures compatible with consumption, we must keep in mind that this retail includes not only retail 
(related to household consumption) but also wholesale (related to companies). All this recommends using retail 
data with caution, given the important differences between this sector’s activity and private consumption. 
III.2. International scenario 
 
Internationally, in the baseline scenario, the impulse that the Chilean economy will receive from abroad in the 
next two years will be lower than in the two previous years and the one we expected in March. The correction 
with  respect  to  March  responds  to  the  negative  developments  in  the  external  scenario  in  recent  weeks, 
particularly as the escalation of the trade conflict has led to greater risk aversion, causing, among other effects, 
a global appreciation of the dollar and a reduction in most commodity prices, including copper. The latter is 
especially relevant due to its effect on the terms of trade (ToT). Thus, for the period 2019-2021 we assume that 
the  ToT  will  accumulate  an  increase  of  0.6%,  which  compares  with  the  increase  of  1%  expected  in  March 
(Figure 10). This projection considers a copper price whose annual averages will be closer to 280 cents per 
pound between 2019 and 2021, and not around 290 cents per pound, as we estimated in March.  
 
As for global growth, the baseline scenario adjusts slightly the expected expansion of our trading partners during 
this year, to 3.2% (3.3% in March). In this correction, a much lower performance of Latin America becomes 
important.  We  still  estimate  that  China  will  grow  around  6%  and  the  US  somewhat  above  2%  (table  4). 
Although our trading partners’ growth is adjusted only slightly, there has been a marked deterioration in world 
trade growth, which is captured in the less favorable evolution that is expected for Chilean exports (Figure 11). 
In the baseline scenario, we project that these will lose dynamism, particularly in 2019, due to the difficulties 
encountered  by  some  exporting  sectors.  Also  because  of  the  lower  copper  output,  which  will  impact  metal 
shipments.  Within  imports,  the  downward  adjustment  of  consumer  goods  stands  out,  in  response  to  the 
performance of car sales in the local market, but also to the decrease in the purchase of machinery and equipment 
(specifically trucks), which is estimated to  continue beyond the first quarter. This is reflected in the current 
account, which will have deficits of somewhat under 3% of GDP in the projection horizon. 
III.3. Working assumptions 
 
The baseline projection scenario is made using a set of information and analysis that determine how inflation 
will converge to the target. This includes the expected behavior of the activity gap—which factors in potential 
and actual growth—, the copper price, the oil price, the dollar in the world, etcetera.  
 
Page 6 of 18 
   The  baseline  scenario  also  includes  working  assumptions  for  variables  such  as  the  real  exchange  rate,  the 
behavior of fiscal policy and the  MPR. In particular, with respect to the real exchange rate, we foresee that 
during the next two years it will fluctuate around its averages of the last 15 and 20 years. In the fiscal area, it is 
assumed that in 2019 the economy will receive a boost consistent with the approved budget. From then onwards, 
it is assumed  that  the  structural  deficit  will follow the  path  of  gradual  descent defined  by  the  authority.  No 
modifications are introduced as a result of the recent announcements to streamline public investments given 
that, according to authorities’ statements, these will be made within the limits imposed by the structural balance 
target. This is notwithstanding a more intense operation of automatic stabilizers as a result of divergences in 
the behavior of cyclical revenues. 
 
About the MPR, the working assumption is that in the coming quarters it will stay flat and will begin a gradual 
normalization process during next year. Nonetheless, this is one of several alternative MPR paths compatible 
with achieving the target, so it must not be construed as a forecast or commitment with respect to the decisions 
that the Board will be making as more information is gleaned about the twists and turns of the economy. 
 
Taking all of this into account, the baseline scenario sees CPI inflation hovering around 3% during 2020, and 
the CPIEFE arriving to 3% by the turn of 2021. For the end of this year CPI inflation is foreseen slightly below 
3% (Figure 12).  
III.4. Risk balance 
 
As always, the baseline scenario I just presented reflects those events most likely to occur with the information 
at  hand  at  the  close  of  this  Report.  There  are  risks,  however,  that  if  come  true,  would  alter  not  only  the 
macroeconomic outlook, but also the course of monetary policy. 
 
On the external front, the balance of risks continues to be clearly biased downwards, increasing the probability 
of occurrence of negative events. The escalation of the trade dispute between China and the US has become the 
main risk and has begun to transcend other areas of these economies’ relationship. Moreover, US tariff decisions 
have been extended to other countries and with motivations not strictly commercial. All this has aggravated 
fears of a sharper slowdown in trade, a deterioration in the confidence of companies and households globally 
and a loss of dynamism in global activity. And there is also a resurgence of the possibility of a no-deal Brexit. 
 
Scenarios where these risks intensify could lead to an abrupt deterioration of financial conditions. In view of 
this, the main central banks are likely to make their monetary policies more expansionary; however, this could 
be insufficient to contain the loss of appetite for risk and the decreases in the prices of assets and commodities. 
The  high  level  that  the  prices  of  some  riskier  assets  have  reached—in  some  cases  matched  by  increased 
borrowing—shapes a much more complex scenario. In addition, the materialization of any of these scenarios 
could have a negative impact on local investment decisions and expectations. 
 
At home, it is estimated that the balance of risks for activity is biased downward. The baseline scenario projects 
that, beyond the result of the first quarter, investment will see a significant recovery in the next two years, which 
includes both large-scale mining projects and investment from other sectors. However, there are risks derived, 
for  example,  from  the  greater  uncertainty  of  the  external  scenario  and  the  various  costs  associated  with 
investment projects’ red tape. Also, worth mentioning are the risks coming from the mining sector. Although 
its  poor  performance  of  recent  quarters  has  responded  in  part  to  specific  factors,  there  are  more  permanent 
elements, such as the lower grade of mineral ore, that could prolong this weakness. 
 
Regarding inflation, the Board estimates that the risks are unbiased. The updating of structural parameters has 
a significant degree of uncertainty, particularly due to the macroeconomic effects of immigration. On the one 
hand, it is possible that the absorption of immigrants into the labor force is associated with a productivity fall 
that is more persistent, causing a lower potential growth in the projection horizon, a narrowing of the activity 
Page 7 of 18 
   gap and, therefore, higher inflationary pressures. On the other hand, it can happen that the increase in the labor 
supply occur with greater intensity, which would push up potential GDP growth, widen the activity gap, and 
reduce pressures on wages and prices. It should also be considered that the negative balance of external risks 
has exchange-rate effects that could raise short-term inflation beyond our current estimate (Table 5). 
 
Summing up, the evaluation of the macroeconomic scenario and its outlook, which include the updating of the 
structural parameters and the recent evolution of the economy, pointed to the need to recalibrate the monetary 
impulse. Consistent with this, we decided to cut 50 basis points off the MPR, taking it to 2.5%, in our Meeting 
of last Friday. We estimate that, by keeping this rate until we see clear signs of an upturn in inflation, it will be 
possible to  ensure the  convergence  of  inflation  to  the  target,  in  a  scenario  where the  capacity  for long-term 
growth is strengthened by the immigrants’ contribution. However, recent developments increase the downward 
risks, especially in the external economy, for which the Central Bank must be ready to respond. 
IV. 
Final remarks 
 
Mr President, dear Senators, the MPR cut decided by the Board last Friday has been described as “surprising” 
or “unexpected” by the observers. Indeed, it was an adjustment that most analysts did not see coming, in either 
its timing or magnitude. However, it was not an unpredictable change in light of the background, analysis and 
communication that the Bank had been delivering in the preceding months. Moreover, it is a decision based in 
depth on the report that I have presented today. 
 
Before I finish, I would like to draw your attention to the exceptional nature of the circumstances that led to 
this decision and its implications for the Bank’s communication and actions in the future. At the beginning of 
this presentation, I mentioned that we have defined this decision as a “recalibration” of monetary policy, as it 
is an adjustment of the MPR to generate a monetary impulse compatible with the inflation target in the face of 
significant and consistent changes in the estimates of capacity gaps, inflation and the policy rate. This time 
around there has been an unusual combination of new information for all the structural parameters plus the new 
inflation measurement, pointing in the same direction.  
 
Indeed, it is unusual for any economy to experience a change in the production factors of the magnitude and 
speed that immigration has triggered in Chile in the last three years. It is also unusual for an increase in potential 
growth  to  be  accompanied  by  a  reduction  in  the  neutral  MPR,  which  in  this  case  has  occurred  due  to  the 
magnitude and persistence of the fall in interest rates in the world. In previous episodes of CPI basket changes, 
we had not seen so important corrections to the inflation measurement as this latest one. 
 
Faced with this unusual configuration of circumstances, the Central Bank of Chile needed to be rigorous in its 
analysis, clear in its conclusions and quick in its response. It was helped by the research work and the updating 
of  his  models  that  have  been  progressing  for  some  time.  But  once  all  the  pieces  of  this  puzzle  have  been 
assembled, the Board has preferred acting over postponing a decision. It is an unusual action in the face of 
unusual circumstances. 
 
Central banks today are not prone to surprising the markets and ours is no exception. We do not seek surprises 
for the sake of them, and certainly we have not concealed anything in our communications of recent months 
regarding the analysis that we have conducted, nor have we distracted attention away from it. However, after 
accumulating evidence and reaching a downright conclusion about its implications for monetary policy, we saw 
few advantages and many more costs in postponing. Although our decision considered the option of waiting, 
signaling the possibility of this change before doing it, we believe that in the current situation taking immediate 
action  had  greater  value.  Not  because  the  economy  was  deteriorating  dramatically,  but  because  we  were 
convinced  of  the  consistency  of  this  analysis  with  the  persistence  of  low  inflation.  In  such  circumstances, 
delaying a decision would only be a waste of time, at a cost to the economy, at a time when more, not less, 
certainties are required. 
Page 8 of 18 
     
The adoption of the agreement at the Friday meeting had a communicational implication that surely did not 
escape the attention of the members of this Commission. Faced with an important decision and unforeseen by 
the market, it was very complex to postpone the dissemination of the background information that supported it 
for more than two days, until the release of the Monetary Policy Report. That led us to issue a statement that 
advanced some important data of the Report. I would like to be clear that this does not set a precedent for future 
opportunities in which the monetary policy meeting and the Monetary Policy Report will coincide. Any more 
permanent  change  to the  strategy  of  monetary  policy  communication  will  be  assessed in  depth and  we  will 
discuss it beforehand with this Commission. 
 
An additional dimension of the monetary policy decision of last Friday is to clearly separate the implications 
for  the  MPR  of  recalibrating  the  monetary  impulse  in  the  face  of  the  current  configuration  of  structural 
parameters and economic variables, of the responses that might be necessary in the face of the evolution of 
macroeconomic conditions.  
 
As I have stressed in this presentation, the world economy is experiencing a delicate moment, where a declining 
phase  of  the  cycle  is  combined  with  high  policy  uncertainty  in  the  world's  leading  economies  and  where 
financial  markets  rely  heavily—perhaps  too  much—on  the  will  of  the  central  banks  to  react  to  episodes  of 
volatility. Although the world economy continues to grow, we note with concern the escalation and expansion 
of trade conflicts, a stagnation of international trade, deteriorating expectations and frequent episodes of market 
volatility. 
 
In  these  circumstances,  as  we  have  pointed  out  before,  the  Chilean  economy,  despite  its  commercial  and 
financial openness, has powerful buffers, given by the exchange rate, the depth of the domestic financial market 
and  the  anchoring  of  expectations.  However,  it  also  has  room  for  robust  policy  responses,  particularly  of 
monetary policy. Having solved the past imbalances of the MPR helps us identify future phenomena and apply 
the proper responses. 
 
On other occasions we have said that the Central Bank of Chile is prepared to face new challenges. Recent 
decisions include an additional element in this statement: the evidence that we have the capacity to identify 
important changes and react with the necessary speed. These are attributes that we have been strengthening 
over time and that we must hold onto in the face of new challenges. 
 
At the same time, we must be aware that the specific scope of action of the Bank is the macroeconomy and, in 
particular, the control of inflation and the safeguarding of financial stability. The process of recalibration of 
monetary policy was triggered by  the drop-in inflation measured by the CPI and the policy response boosts 
economic activity because it seeks to reduce gaps in activity to ensure the convergence of inflation. Estimating 
greater trend and potential growth was the result of an analysis of macroeconomic phenomena and it influenced 
the  adjustment  of  the  MPR  but  does  not  ensure  all  the  microeconomic  or  institutional  conditions  to  take 
advantage of all the leeway that it potentially generates. Monetary policy may provide an additional cushion 
against external shocks, but it cannot shield the economy completely. 
 
For this reason, it is important that, at the end of this presentation, as in other opportunities, we understand the 
focus of the Board’s commitment: to keep inflation low and stable, as the main contribution that the Bank makes 
to the well-being of Chileans. The stability that this brings to the country should facilitate the contribution of 
other players to the same end purpose. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 Page 9 of 18 
      Page 10 of 18 
  Services CPI 
 Goods CPI 
   Page 11 of 18 
       Page 12 of 18 
        Page 13 of 18 
      Page 14 of 18 
      Page 15 of 18 
      Page 16 of 18 
        Page 17 of 18 
 