Sharon  Donnery:  Weathering  storms 
pressures, and global factors
Address  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Acting  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  MacGill
Summer School, Dublin, 22 July 2019.
-  Brexit,  overheating
1
Good morning .
 It is a personal pleasure to speak at MacGill Summer School. Over the last nearly forty years the
School has made an important contribution to public policy. And – I hope it will continue to do so
for the next forty.
The global environment is uncertain, and with Brexit looming, we should be ready to respond if
the risks they pose materialise. But at the same time, it is imperative that we are nimble and
2
ready to cool a potentially overheating economy on the other side .
Today, my main message therefore is:
We must not only be prepared, but prepared to act.
We must ensure the system is resilient, and continues to function into the future, come rain, hail
or shine.
To paraphrase a remark attributed to Mark Twain, ‘If you don’t like the weather in Ireland, just wait
a few minutes…’
The  weather  is  something  we  cannot  control.  It  is  not  very  consistent.  Most  importantly  it  is
something that can greatly affect the outcome of a trip.
The Irish economy is not dissimilar. We are a small open economy, greatly exposed to the global
environment. Crucially, we can’t influence many of these outside factors. So we need to make
sure we are resilient to them.
That we are prepared.
When global times are good, we do better. Similarly, when the global economy slows down, we
are  affected.  While  we  benefit  from  global  opportunities,  we  need  to  also  ensure  we  build
defences to the risks.
Now Brexit is a prime example of an external event that can affect the Irish economy. Although it
is unique to many other external or global risks. It will touch on all realms of Irish life: socially,
politically and economically.
Moreover, it is an historically emotive event, and due to its proximity, a risk that can overshadow
others.
However, focusing all our attention on one risk is a bit like packing the suitcase full of raingear
with no sun cream.
Risks: ‘the clouds on the horizon’
Brexit
Brexit is rightfully forefront to many minds when we think of risks to the Irish economy. Especially
given the rising likelihood of a no deal or a disorderly outcome.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
Just  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  the  Central  Bank  published  our  revamped  Financial  Stability
Review . Even if you don’t get through the whole report, I recommend the first couple of pages at
least. They highlight what we see as the key risks currently facing the Irish economy and financial
system. It also addresses how we can build resilience to these risks. 
A disorderly Brexit is one of the main risks on the horizon. As the possibility of a no deal scenario
looms ever larger, the uncertainty around the final outcome is already weighing on business and
consumer sentiment.
Within  the  Central  Bank,  we  have  been  working  on  Brexit  since  before  the  referendum .  The
work has focused on a few main areas:
4
First – Understanding the possible effects of Brexit, in terms of the risks to the Irish economy, to
the financial system, and to consumers. Since the referendum in June 2016, the main impact
thus far has been through the depreciation of sterling against the euro. However, the significant
trade and investment links with the UK mean that the Irish economy is more exposed to the risks
from the UK’s departure than any others, apart from the UK.
Second ensuring that existing Irish financial services firms understand and are planning for the
impact that Brexit will have on their businesses, so that firms can continue to serve customers
after the UK departs the EU.
The third important area has been wider contingency planning for the system and taking actions
to mitigate the most important and immediate threats to the financial system. Ensuring there is
no loss of market access for the payment and settlement of equities and exchange traded funds
(ETFs) for example.
Finally, we have been dealing with the authorisation of firms. Of which there were well over 100
applications for either new licenses or extensions to existing ones. These applications vary from
large banks to small investment firms or payment institutions.
Overall, in terms of our wide work on Brexit, we have tried to be as transparent as possible.  For
example, we have published our quarterly reports prepared for the Commission of the Central
5
Bank (our Board), albeit in redacted format on our website .
A  no-deal  Brexit  would  likely  bring  considerable  volatility  to  financial  markets,  with  heightened
6
stress and a potentially large depreciation of sterling .
Following the financial crisis, we have been building resilience in the financial system for the last
decade.  Through  our  preparations  over  the  last  three  years  we  have  more  specifically
strengthened resilience to Brexit.
Today,  the  main  outstanding  source  of  risk  to  financial  stability  stems  from  a  worse  than
expected macroeconomic shock. A particularly sharp increase in uncertainty or fall in confidence
could lead to greater macroeconomic disruption.
The  significant  uncertainty  around  a  hard  Brexit  makes  the  macroeconomic  outcome  hard  to
predict.Our estimates indicate severe and immediate disruptive effects of a no deal Brexit with
Irish economic output estimated to be 6 percentage points lower after two years than otherwise
7
expected .
Global risks: Trade tensions, global financial markets and political uncertainty
But Brexit is not the sole risk.
As I mentioned in my introduction, we are heavily exposed to the global environment, and the
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
current outlook is somewhat unfavourable.
Changes  in  world  demand  have  a  considerable  impact  on  Irish  exports,  unemployment  and
wages.
Thinking  beyond  Brexit,  structural  changes  in  the  global  economy  such  as  the  ongoing  trade
tensions between the US and China, and slowdown in investment, could indirectly dampen Irish
growth prospects.
8
In economic parlance, Ireland has a relatively high elasticity to global developments .
Another risk to financial stability comes from global financial markets. Against the background of
lacklustre economic outlook, markets are reassessing the global outlook for growth.
An abrupt repricing of risk premia could lead to a rapid tightening of global financing conditions.
One of the effects of this is it could be more expensive to borrow – for the State, for businesses
and, ultimately, for households.
That is the outlook for the international environment. The strong economic performance of the
domestic economy stands in stark contrast.
Domestic  overheating  –  low  unemployment,  wage  growth,  housing  market,  and  corporate  tax
receipts.
While Ireland helps to shape and influence policies at the European and wider international level,
it cannot dictate the response to international events.
One of the areas we have more control over as policymakers is domestic developments. Ireland
has had a remarkable recovery to the crisis and this has been broad-based across both export
and domestic orientated sectors.
Irish employment is approaching an all-time high . There are over four hundred thousand more
10
people in work than in the low of 2012. And wages are creeping upwards .
9
The  multinational  sector,  crucial  for  jobs,  is  also  contributing  significantly  to  the  exchequer,
paying over three quarters of corporate tax receipts in 2018. The corporate tax take has more
11
than doubled since 2014 .
Meanwhile, there are also pressure points in the housing market, with rents continuing to rise. 
These are the kind of factors generally associated with strong economic performance. However,
they also point to an increased risk of an overheating economy, which we must be wary of.
Resilience: ‘packing the right suitcase’
Having outlined some of the main risks, let me now turn to how we can try and protect against
them.
With the uncertain global environment, and with Brexit looming, we should be ready to respond to
any of these risks should they materialise.
As  a  central  bank,  our  mission  is  to  serve  the  public  interest  by  safeguarding  monetary  and
financial stability and by working to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests
of consumers and the wider economy. Reflecting our mandate, we are working to build resilience
to and understand the risks that we face.
As I mentioned earlier, we have undertaken substantial contingency planning for Brexit.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
While regulatory elements all play a critical role, today I will focus on the macro-prudential tools at
our disposal to build the resilience of the financial system, particularly for borrowers and lenders.
Starting  with  lenders,  a  necessary  part  of  promoting  such  resilience  is  the  completion  of  the
macroprudential framework for bank capital.
I noted the small and open nature of the Irish economy.
Whilst providing many positives, this openness increases the propensity – and sensitivity – of the
Irish economy to global shocks. These can be structural shocks – like Brexit or changes in global
trade or international taxation regimes. Or cyclical shocks – driven by the global economic cycle.
It  is  important  that  banks  hold  sufficient  buffers  to  guard  against  these  higher  levels  of
macroeconomic  risks  Ireland  faces.  To  guard  against  cyclical  risks,  we  have  implemented  a
counter cyclical buffer. And set this at 1 per cent. The buffer aims to promote the sustainable
provision of credit to the economy. It means banks have more capital when times are good, so
they can use that to absorb losses in tougher times.
Moving beyond the economic and financial cycle, we are also proactive in using our policies and
tools to build resilience to structural risks and shocks.
Following our request, we recently received confirmation from the Minister of Finance and Public
Expenditure and Reform that a legislative provision will be introduced to complete our macro-
prudential toolkit for bank capital. This gives the Central Bank the power to introduce a systemic
risk buffer (SyRB), which would help to counter structural shocks to the economy. This buffer
aims to build the resilience of the banks to big shocks or tail risks, by requiring banks to have
12
appropriate capital to absorb losses in case these risks were to crystallise .
A central policy to build resilience of lenders and borrowers, is the mortgage measures we have
had in place for a number of years.
This is particularly important given the inherent volatility of the Irish economy.
Neither the price level, nor the level of growth of house prices are the objective. Our measures
are  carefully  calibrated  to  strengthen  both  bank  and  borrower  resilience  and  to  reduce  the
likelihood of a credit-house price spiral emerging.
The mortgage measures are working as we designed them to. They are also flexible enough to
take into account specific circumstances. A system of allowances for example is in place that
allows banks to lend above the mortgage measure limits. To give an example, in 2018, one in
13
eight loans to first time buyers were above the loan to income (LTI) limit of 3.5 . Further, almost
50 per cent of these allowances were for loans issued with an LTI ratio above 4.
Looking at both first and subsequent borrowers last year, one fifth of the value of total mortgage
lending was issued with an allowance to the loan to income (LTI) or to value (LTV) limits. The
framework  therefore  is  sufficiently  flexible  and  the  allowances  enable  banks  to  take  individual
borrower circumstances into account.
We are all acutely aware of the current challenges in the Irish housing market and the supply
constraints. These challenges clearly impact on young couples and families. Be they buying a
new home or renting. But I have seen no evidence that more debt for these same young couples
and families is the answer.
More supply is.
We  have  a  pool  of  buyers  chasing  a  limited  number  of  properties.  And  the  legacy  of  non-
performing loans (NPLs) is a harsh reminder of what can happen when credit grows independent
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of incomes and fuels house prices. Our borrower-based measures aim to reduce the risks and
hardship to households during a possible downturn or a house price shock and make them more
resilient both now, and into the future.
As usual, we will review the effectiveness of the measures in meeting their objectives during the
Autumn.
Be prepared, but prepared to act
The variety of these macro-prudential tools provide flexibility that may be required in response to
many  shocks,  domestic  or  global.  Standing  alone,  a  disorderly  Brexit  would  argue  for
accommodative  policies,  for  example  allowing  the  automatic  stabilisers  to  work  and  targeted
fiscal measures for the most severely affected sectors.
If any of the more global risks were to crystallise and have a significant effect on the domestic
economy, they would likely pose different challenges. Whether it be dealing with the effects of
storms blowing in from abroad, or having protection from the sun on those warm Irish summer
days, the Central Bank stands ready to adjust the CCYB (buffer) in either direction as the risk
environment evolves, in order to support a sustainable supply of credit to the economy.
We  can’t  control  the  weather.  But  we  must  ensure  the  system  is  resilient,  and  continues  to
function into the future, come rain, hail or shine.
Finally, I hope you will allow me take the liberty of speaking at an event like MacGill to briefly look
beyond the Central Bank tool kit.
As policymakers, we serve the Irish public, the risks we face often overlap. And it is beneficial for
all when our policy responses are in tune.
While the domestic economy is doing well, we have the opportunity to boost our resilience to
future  shocks  and  risks.  Prudent  management  of  the  public  finances  are  needed.  Interest
payments  on  national  debt  are  lower  than  expected  and  corporate  tax  receipts  are  high,  but
neither  situation  should  be  regarded  as  permanent
.  These  funds  should  be  put  to  work  to
buffer against the next downturn or crisis and not to finance current expenditure or to boost an
economy which is close to capacity.
14
A clear strategy guiding the use of unanticipated revenue inflows should be promptly established.
Moreover, the reduction of public debt ought to remain a key priority given its very high level. To
somewhat labour the analogy, we must ‘fix the roof while the sun is shining’.
Final points
Finally, as I said at the beginning, the global environment is uncertain, and with Brexit looming,
we should be ready to respond if these risks materialise. But it is imperative that we are nimble
and ready to cool the warming economy if these risks dissipate.
We must not only be prepared, but prepared to act.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank Caroline Mehigan and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contribution to my remarks.
Donnery,  Sharon: Risks  and  Resilience  in  Uncertain  Times,  Address  to  the  Institute  of  International  and
European Affairs (8 March 2019).
Central Bank of Ireland: Financial Stability Review (2019:1).
Donnery,  Sharon: The  departure  of  the  UK  from  the  EU  –  implications  for  the  Irish  economy  and  financial
system. Internal dinner address to visiting staff from other central banks (5 March 2019).
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Central Bank of Ireland: Brexit Task Force Reports.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research: The Economic Effects of the Government’s Proposed Brexit
Deal (26 November 2018) Assume that sterling would depreciate against the euro by ten per cent while in a
worst case stress scenario published by the Bank of England it is assumed that sterling could fall by 30%
against the USD in a disorderly Brexit. Bank of England: Stress Testing the UK Banking System: Key elements
of the 2019 annual cyclical scenario (March 2019).
Conefrey, O’Reilly, Walsh: Box B: The Macroeconomic Implications of a Disorderly Brexit Central Bank of Ireland,
Quarterly Bulletin No.1 (2019).
Birmingham & Conefrey: The Irish Macroeconomic Response to an External Shock with an Application to Stress
Testing, Technical Research Paper, Central Bank of Ireland (2011).
Byrne, Stephen and Tara McIndoe-Calder: Quarterly Bulletin 2019 Q2, Central Bank of Ireland (2019).
Ibid.
The Revenue Commissioners: Corporation Tax 2018 Payments and 2017 Returns (May 2019).
Lane, Philip: Tail risks and The Irish Economy (2019).
Central Bank of Ireland: Financial Stability Review, 2019:1 (2019). 
Irish Fiscal Advisory Council: Fiscal Assessment Report (June 2019).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
