  16.09.2019 
 The EMU at 20: from divergence to resilience 
Welcome address. Third Annual Research Conference of the Banco de España 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  start  by  welcoming  you  to  the  Banco  de  España  for  the  Third  Annual  Research 
Conference. We began organising this conference three years ago, with the aim of bringing 
together leading scholars and policymakers to discuss frontier research on relevant topics. 
This year, the chosen topic is “The EMU at 20: current status and the way forward”, which 
I think ranks highly in the current policy debate. It would be hard to imagine a more eminent 
group of researchers to discuss this topic. I would like to thank all of you for your attendance 
here today. 
2019 marks the 20th anniversary of the creation of the euro. We reach this milestone in the 
context of a global macroeconomic deterioration, while still facing the legacy of the crisis, 
in  terms  of  high  unemployment  rates  and  persistent  levels  of  indebtedness.  Part  of  this 
worsening of economic conditions is linked to trade tensions, against a background in which 
the multilateral financial and trade system in place since the end of the Second World War 
is being put into question. At the same time we are confronted with global trends, such as 
digitalisation and climate change, which pose significant challenges, of a different nature, 
for the European economy.  
But I am optimistic about our common future. Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) remains 
the world’s foremost economic integration project of recent times. And after 20 years, there 
can  be  no  question  that  the  euro  is  perceived  by  the  public  as  a  success.  In  the  latest 
Eurobarometer surveys, euro area citizens have declared the highest level of support for the 
euro yet recorded.  
Europe has proved itself to be innovative and decisive, although sometimes the necessary 
steps have only been taken under the pressure of extreme circumstances, such as the ones 
we experienced during the last sovereign debt crisis. That said, some bold advances have 
been made towards the completion of EMU over the past decade. Let me highlight two of 
these.  
First, the two main pillars of the Banking Union that are now in place and operational: the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism. Second, the creation 
of the European Stability Mechanism, which played a significant role in the solution of the 
crisis, and the ongoing reform of which is expected to strengthen this institution’s capacity 
not  only to  combat  but  also  to  prevent  crises.  It  is  further  envisaged that  it  will  act  as a 
common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund (SRF),  filling a fundamental gap in the 
euro area’s institutional architecture.  
Despite  these,  and  other,  significant  achievements,  it  is  fair  to  acknowledge  that  the 
framework  still  lacks  some  fundamental  pieces.  In  particular,  as  regards  its  ability  to 
withstand  a  severe  crisis.  Let  me  flag  some  institutional  elements  that,  in  my  view,  rank 
highest among those needed. 
First, completing the banking union comes at the top of the list, in particular, by overcoming 
the current deadlock on the third main pillar of the Banking Union, the European Deposit 
Insurance Scheme (EDIS). The commitment to deploy such a scheme would have a strong 
impact on citizens’ trust and would contribute to increased risk-sharing in the euro area, 
insofar as it is designed as a fully-fledged mutualised EDIS. 
 3/8 
 In  addition,  it  would  help  align  financial  responsibility  with  the  pan-European  decision-
making that already exists in the areas of banking supervision and resolution. The current 
misalignment makes EMU governance more prone to institutional and political frailty. It also 
remains crucial to eliminate certain regulatory barriers and practices that are hindering the 
emergence of a truly European banking market. 
The second priority is linked to the need for well-developed and integrated capital markets 
within  EMU,  which  requires  further  deepening  of  the  Capital  Markets  Union.  This  is 
essential to enhance the capacity of the euro area to cushion macro-financial shocks. In 
particular, the development of a truly cross-border financial sector would allow economic 
agents to smooth asymmetric, national shocks through a strengthened credit channel. 
Moreover,  an  enhanced  Capital  Markets  Union  would  improve  the  channelling  of  the 
abundant aggregate savings – which currently exceed investment in the area by 3% of GDP 
– to satisfy investment needs in the areas of infrastructure, energy and innovation.  
Third, there is also an urgent need to improve the functioning of the current fiscal policy 
framework, so that it delivers an aggregate stance that is consistent with national constraints 
and  the  needs  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  On  the  one  hand,  the  current  fiscal  policy 
coordination device, the Stability and Growth Pact, has not stood the test of time very well. 
Our fiscal rules have proven to be hard to enforce in a timely manner, not least because of 
their  complexity,  and  have  also  been  unable  to  avoid  procyclical  fiscal  policies  at  the 
national level. On the other hand, and more importantly, the past decade has shown us that 
lacking a centralised fiscal tool to target an appropriate euro area macroeconomic policy 
stance is a serious limitation for the functioning of our monetary area. 
I  strongly  believe  that  a  central  fiscal  capacity  at  euro  area  level  could  contribute,  in 
particular,  not  only  to  tackling  asymmetric,  country  specific  shocks,  but  also  to 
macroeconomic  stabilisation.  In  this  respect,  monetary  policy  would  not  become 
overburdened, as it might be in the current economic juncture. 
Finally, let me advocate the need to explore the introduction of a common safe asset for 
the  euro  area.  In  my  view,  a  well-designed  safe  asset  would  contribute  significantly  to 
addressing  some  of  the  root  causes  of  the  euro  area’s  institutional  weaknesses.  In 
particular,  it  could  increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  improve  financial 
integration and complete the Banking and Capital Markets Union, by breaking the bank-
sovereign doom loop and facilitating diversification. Let me expand on these aspects. 
The normal operation of markets and financial intermediaries requires the availability of a 
broad spectrum of assets with sufficient liquidity and bounded counterparty risk, including 
so-called “safe assets”. This is even more the case in turbulent times, as investors tend to 
react to increases in uncertainty by turning to assets with a lower level of perceived risk. As 
Holmstrom  and  Tirole1  put  it,  a  safe  asset  is  an  instrument  that  allows  wealth  to  be 
transferred from one point in time to another without any nominal loss. If you allow me the 
metaphor, the supply of a broad enough set of assets is the infrastructure in an electricity 
grid.  A  large  enough  infrastructure  is  needed  to  ensure  the grid’s  smooth  functioning,  in 
                                                                                              
1  Holmstrom,  B.  and  J.  Tirole,  “Private and  Public  Supply  of  Liquidity”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  Vol.  106,  No 1 
(February 1998), pp. 1-40 (40 pages). 
4/8 
  particular, to allow it to withstand episodes of high demand. If not, the system is prone to 
disruptions and even blackouts. 
There is a wide consensus regarding the existence of a secular shortage of safe assets at 
global level. To put it simply, there is not much highly-rated paper available once holdings 
in monetary policy portfolios are discounted. This phenomenon has become more acute 
since  the  outbreak  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  given  that  some  euro-
denominated sovereigns have seen their ratings downgraded, in part due to the persistence 
of an incomplete EMU. 
As such, the total amount of European safe assets, defined as government bonds with a 
high credit rating (AA or higher) or privately-issued AAA products, is around $3 trillion, half 
of its peak in 2009.2 By comparison, privately-held safe debt in the United States totals more 
than $14 trillion. Thus, the scarcity of safe assets is particularly acute in the case of euro-
denominated safe assets, which limits  the diversification options of investors in  the euro 
area's  common  currency,  in  particular,  those  of  international  reserve  managers  with  a 
mandate to invest safely. 
The  latter  has  two  important  consequences  for  the  euro  area.  First,  it  precludes  a  more 
prominent international role for the euro, as investors need to take into account multiple 
sovereign risks and insolvency frameworks. Second, the demand for safe assets is entirely 
concentrated in a group of sovereigns. As a consequence, we face a form of “exorbitant 
divergence” in the euro area, as only some government bonds enjoy a high convenience 
yield stemming from their status as safe assets.3 A common safe asset  would  provide a 
single  benchmark  for  every  country  in  the  euro  area,  allowing  banks  and  companies  to 
diversify  their  portfolios  without  triggering  capital  flights  in  the  event  of  a  crisis,  and 
mitigating the “exorbitant divergence”. 
The introduction of a safe asset would also help to alleviate an unwarranted national 
bank - national sovereign nexus. I am referring here to the large domestic sovereign debt 
holdings of national commercial banks and the lack of incentives for them to act differently 
under  the  current  legal  framework.  Solving  this  problem  would  certainly  make  a  broad 
agreement  on  EDIS  more  likely  and  vice  versa.  To  create  adequate  incentives  for 
commercial banks to move away from domestic sovereigns, some proposals support the 
introduction  of  risk  weights  or  concentration  charges  on  banks’  holdings  of  domestic 
sovereign  debt.  In  my view,  this  is  an  issue that  has  many  facets  and  requires  thorough 
analysis. The literature has shown that, if implemented in isolation, such measures could 
have significant side effects. In particular, while pure diversification reduces exposure to the 
domestic  sovereign,  it  could  increase  aggregate  risk,  as  banks’  portfolios  become  more 
overlapped  and  interconnected.4,  5  In  addition,  risk  weights  may  have  unwarranted 
distributional effects, by giving the bonds of specific sovereigns a regulatory advantage.6 
                                                                                              
2  Aggarwal,  R.,  J.  Bai  and  L.  Laeven  (2016),  The  Role  of  the  Government  Bond  Lending  Market  in  Collateral 
Transformation. 
3 Estimated by the ECB as 110 basis points, as compared to 160 bp in the US. See: ECB (2019), The International role 
of the euro. 
4 Craig, B. R., M. Giuzio and S. Paterlini (2019), The Effect of Possible EU Diversification Requirements on the Risk of 
Banks’ Sovereign Bond Portfolios. 
5  Acemoglu,  Daron,  Asuman  Ozdaglar  and  Alireza  Tahbaz-Salehi  (2015),  “Systemic  Risk  and  Stability  in  Financial 
Networks”, American Economic Review, 105 (2): pp. 564-608. 
6 Alogoskoufis and Langfield (2018), “Regulating the doom loop”, ESBR Working Paper, No 74.   
 5/8 
 One  of  the  best  ways  of  increasing  the  degree  of  diversification  of  banks’  holdings  of 
sovereign debt, without relying on complex regulations with possible unintended effects, is 
through the creation of a pan-European safe asset. 
But as I will now argue, the relevance of a euro-denominated safe asset for strengthening 
our monetary union is not just linked to breaking the doom loop between sovereigns and 
banks, increasing diversification and strengthening the international role of the euro. It is 
also of paramount importance for the Capital Markets Union project. 
EU regulation has done a significant job in harmonising investment and savings products 
across the European Union. Nevertheless, the completion of the Capital Markets Union is 
hardly possible without a common benchmark for investors and firms at the euro area level. 
Under  the  current  framework,  even  highly  diversified  multinationals  are  linked  to  the 
sovereign  of  the  host  country.  For  example,  the  credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  of  the  most 
important Spanish non-financial multinationals (firms with revenues from all over the world) 
show a more than 90% correlation with the CDS of the Spanish government. Again, the 
benchmark for any firm is not a pan-European benchmark (or the Bund), but the national 
one. A single, risk-free asset would likely become a common benchmark, allowing the prices 
of  equities  and  bonds  across  the  euro  area  to  reflect  fundamental  risk  more  clearly. 
Naturally, a European safe asset would facilitate the development and integration of capital 
and financial markets in the euro area, as flight-to-quality movements would no longer 
imply flight-to-core-countries movements.  
The existence of a common euro-based safe asset would be particularly important in times 
of  stress,  as  it  could  mitigate  the  possibility  of  monetary  policy  transmission  being 
hampered  in  a  context  of  fragmented  bond  markets.  The  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy should be independent of the existence of country risk in the euro area. Similarly, a 
sufficient supply of safe assets would also facilitate the transmission of non-conventional 
monetary policy, by expanding the assets available in the event of a large asset purchase 
programme.  It  would  allow  monetary  policy  to  expand  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  without 
squeezing liquidity in national sovereign markets. 
More  generally,  the  literature  has  shown  that  a  shortage  of  safe  assets  leads  to  a  lower 
economic growth environment when monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower 
bound on interest rates. This is so because the scarcity of safe assets pushes the natural 
rate downwards. If central banks are constrained in their ability to lower nominal rates, a 
disequilibrium  emerges  in  asset  markets,  giving  rise  to  a  “safety  trap”.  In  this  case, 
households,  faced  with  deflationary  pressures  and  (relatively)  high  real  rates,  have  an 
incentive to save and postpone consumption, and firms, faced with low demand and high 
risk premia, to postpone investment. The result is a recession or a period of sluggish growth, 
which, in turn, reduces the wealth of savers and their demand for safe assets.7 
Do  we  have  alternative  ways  of  escaping  this  trap?  We  require,  following  my  earlier 
metaphor, an update to our electricity grid. On first thoughts, two ways to expand the set 
of safe euro-denominated assets spring to mind. On the one hand, euro area countries 
with a sovereign bond that is not considered sufficiently safe should focus on reducing their 
idiosyncratic  sovereign  risk,  in  particular  by  implementing  credible  medium-term  fiscal 
                                                                                              
7  Caballero,  Farhi  and Gourinchas  (2017),  “The  safe  asset shortage  conundrum”,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives, 
31(3). 
6/8 
  plans, in order to jump on the safety bandwagon. On the other hand, increases in the amount 
of current safe instruments could mitigate the safety trap. 
However, this strategy may not be enough to ensure a sufficiently stable and ample supply 
of  safe  assets.  First,  its  success  depends  on  the  capacity  of  the  less  safe  countries  to 
become safe. The sovereign debt crisis has shown that it is not sufficient to start from a low 
level of debt and a budget surplus, as was the case of Spain in 2007. Second, countries 
with  fiscal  space  might  face  restrictions  on  the  amount  of  debt  they  can  issue.  As  a 
consequence,  one  cannot  guarantee  that,  faced  with  another  negative  shock,  risk 
perceptions  will  not  differ  nor  fragmentation  increase.  In  addition,  this  strategy  will  not 
suffice to disentangle the financing of the economy from the status of its sovereign. For that, 
we need a pan-euro area safe asset. 
I  have  set  out  a  number  of  reasons  why  a  euro-based  safe  asset  is  desirable.  Several 
operational proposals have been suggested in the literature.8 Most of them, such as the one 
for  sovereign  bond  backed  securities  (SBBS),9  which  have  been  subject  to  a  thorough 
analysis  by  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  entail  the  creation  of  a  synthetic  bond 
backed by national sovereign bonds. This proposal emphasises that, through diversification, 
it  will  be  possible  to  provide  a  senior  tranche  with  lower  risk  than  German  debt.  An 
alternative option is E-bonds,10 which would be single tranche bonds issued by the ESM or 
any  euro  area  body  with  the  capacity  to  issue  bonds,  backed  by  loans  to  all  euro  area 
sovereigns. I think we need further reflection on the properties of these proposals and the 
constraints and incentives involved.  
Let  me  point  out  three  conditions  that  any  of  the  proposals  must  fulfil  in  order  to 
improve the current framework. 
First, they should have the potential to generate a sufficient amount of safe assets at the 
European level. They cannot simply involve a swap of one form of safety for another, as that 
would not solve the shortage of safe assets. 
Second, they should preserve liquidity in the markets for national sovereign securities. This 
would allow the market to price idiosyncratic risks correctly and help treasuries to meet own 
funding needs. 
Third, and connected with the previous condition, they should preserve the incentives to 
pursue  sound  fiscal  policies.  Ultimately,  sound  public  finances  are  indispensable  for  the 
provision of a truly safe asset. 
Lastly,  the  sizable  current  account  surplus  and  the  strong  overall  fiscal  position  of  the 
European Union, compared to those of other advanced economies, can be seen as a call 
for  greater  investment.  Among  the  main  areas  of  necessity,  we  should  prepare  our 
economies and citizens for challenges related to climate change, ageing and digitalisation. 
More  importantly,  the  EU  lags  behind  the  US  in  terms  of  productivity  growth.  These 
challenges are widespread and common to all our economies, and therefore a common and 
                                                                                              
8 Leandro and Zettelmeyer (2018), “The search for a Euro Area safe asset”, Peterson Institute for International Economics 
Working Paper, 18-3. 
9 Brunnermeier et al. (2017), ESBies: Safety in the tranches, and ESRB (2018). 
10 Zettelmeyer and Leandro (2019), “Beyond ESBies: safety without tranching”, in Risk sharing plus market discipline. A 
new paradigm for Euro Area  reform.  
 7/8 
 safe  source  of  financing  would  be  tailor-made  for  them.  It  could  also  provide  some 
stabilisation  for  the  economy,  as  investment  provides  a  safety  net  in  times  of  economic 
distress.  
In short, some sort of European investment agency, whether in the form of a new or an 
existing euro area body, with the capacity to issue bonds, might be able to target an optimal 
fiscal policy stance, while providing the economy with more safe assets, thus facilitating 
monetary policy transmission, increasing the international role of the euro and completing 
the Banking and Capital Markets Union. 
Twenty  years  ago,  the  euro  was  seen,  in  Christian  Noyer’s  words,  as  a  catalyst  for 
integration. This view is now as valid as it was then. In order to achieve price stability, the 
single currency generates the need to pursue sound economic policies. But it is clear now 
that  monetary  integration  does  not  immediately  lead  to  financial  integration.  This  is  an 
ongoing process, and the governance framework to guarantee the success of the European 
project is still developing. We must endeavour to achieve completion of the Capital Markets 
Union and the Banking Union. This will also require progress towards the Fiscal Union. A 
European safe asset lies at the heart of all of these initiatives. But, more often than not, the 
heart is the most difficult place to reach. 
I am sure that these two days will bring advanced research and a constructive exchange of 
views to bear on this and other important areas of the euro area architecture. 
Thank you for your attention.  
 8/8 
 