Norman T L Chan: Green finance - turning momentum into action
Opening remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the HKMA Green Finance Forum, Hong Kong, 7 May 2019.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  Thank you all for attending today’s Green Finance Forum organised by the HKMA.  Since the
Paris Agreement was reached in December 2015, international efforts in combating climate
change have gathered enormous momentum.  When I was in Washington DC last month to
attend the IMF Spring Meetings, the IMF Managing Director, Christine Lagarde, in presenting
the  Global  Policy  Agenda,  highlighted  the  importance  for  international  collaboration  to
confront  climate  risk  and  what  the  IMF  will  do  to  support  this  effort.    Earlier  the  Bank  of
England and Banque de France affirmed their commitment to support and promote green
banking.  These are welcomed developments because climate change, as we all know, is
one of the major risks threatening the well-being of mankind.  According to the IMF, in the
past  four  decades,  we  have  witnessed  the  warmest  years  on  record  and  the  number  of
natural disasters more than doubled.  So we gather today not to debate whether we need to
combat climate change but what we, as the key stakeholders in the financial system, can
and should do about it.
2.  We all appreciate that climate change must be tackled on a global basis and across different
sectors of the economy.  How the banking and financial system operates will clearly have an
impact on the way in which climate risk is managed or reduced.  The HKMA, in support of
the mission to reduce climate risk and to achieve sustainable finance, would like to launch
three sets of measures.
Green and Sustainable Banking
3.  In September 2017, I announced seven measures that the HKMA would undertake to bring
Hong Kong into the new era of Smart Banking. The main objective of the Smart Banking
Initiatives  is  to  promote  financial  innovation,  better  customer  experience  and  financial
inclusion.    What  I  am  going  to  propose  today  is  to  enlarge  the  ambit  of  this  exercise  to
“Smart and Sustainable Banking”.  We all appreciate the damages and economic losses
caused by increased frequency and ferocity of natural disasters arising from global warming
and  climate  change.    The  increased  risk  of  business  disruption  and  adverse  impact  on
collateral value of properties also pose real threat to the banking system. So it is now time
for the HKMA and the banking industry to take a more proactive approach to manage climate
risk by pursuing “Green and Sustainable Banking”.  The HKMA will soon issue guidance to
the banks in Hong Kong that a three-phased approach will be taken to promote Green and
Sustainable Banking:
___ (a)
Phase I – this will entail the development of a common framework to assess the existing
baseline  of  individual  banks  in  order  to  establish  how  “green”  they  are  currently.  The
baseline assessment would include the environmental risk of a bank’s lending and other
businesses. In this Phase, the HKMA will need to work with the industry to develop a
common framework, drawing on the latest international standards and best practices.
The HKMA will also, in collaboration with the relevant international bodies, such as the
International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC),  provide  capacity  building  and 
training
programmes to banks in Hong Kong for better understanding of the green principles and
methodology in undertaking the baseline assessment.
Phase II – once we have completed the baseline assessment of banks in Hong Kong in
Phase  I,  the  HKMA  will  engage  the  industry  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  in  a
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
  (b) consultation on the supervisory expectation or requirement on Green and Sustainable
Banking going forward. The key objective of this Phase is to set tangible deliverables for
Hong Kong’s banking industry to become “greener” and “more sustainable”.
(c)
Phase  III  –  once  the  deliverables  have  been  set,  the  next  Phase  is  Implementation,
Monitoring and Evaluation. The success of this Phase depends crucially on appropriate
measurement of the “greenness” of the banks and the timely disclosure of progress or
the lack of it.
4.  With the support of the banking industry, I expect Phase I could be completed within around
12 months’ time from now.
Responsible Investment
5.  In the past few years, there has been a significant shift in mind-set amongst asset owners
on Green and ESG investments.  There has been growing evidence that Green and ESG
investments may not lead to a sacrifice in returns.  On the contrary, some ESG investments
could  actually  enhance  long  term  sustainability  and  improve  risk-adjusted  returns  for
investors.  As the manager for the Exchange Fund, the HKMA takes a long term view and
sees Green and ESG investments as an important driver of value in the long term.  In this
connection, the guiding principle that the HKMA will adopt going forward is that priority can be
given to ESG investments if the long term return is comparable to other investments on a
risk-adjusted  basis.    More  specifically,  the  HKMA  has  taken  or  will  take  the  following
measures to support Responsible Investment:
___ (a) we have already incorporated ESG factors in our credit risk analysis of bonds;
     (b)
(c)
we have required our external managers of the Hong Kong equity portfolios to comply
with  the  Principles  of  Responsible  Ownership  promulgated  by  the  Securities  and
Futures Commission in 2016;
we have invested two tranches of US$1 billion each in the Managed Co-lending Portfolio
Programme  (MCPP)  run  by  the  IFC.  A  substantial  part  of  the  MCPP  will  target
sustainable investments across emerging markets;
green bond funds;
our real estate portfolio.
managers in passive or active mandates targeting ESG benchmark indices; and
(d) we will further grow our green bond portfolio, through direct investment or investment in
(e) we  will  participate  in  ESG-themed  public  equities  investments  through  external
(f) we will accord green accreditation as a predominant factor in investment in buildings in
6.  Instead of setting a quantitative threshold or target for Green investments, we believe our
present approach is a more pragmatic and likely to be a more effective way of promoting
Green  and  ESG  investments.    We  will  continue  to  work  with  like-minded  investors  to
promote  focus  on  good  ESG  practices  in  managing  their  investments.    In  the  interest  of
transparency,  the  HKMA  will  also  consider  an  appropriate  framework  for  disclosing  the
Exchange Fund’s Green and ESG investment efforts without arousing market sensitivity in
the process.
Capacity Building in Green Finance: Centre for Green Finance (CGF)
7.  Hong Kong is already one of the major green finance hubs in the world.  Last year a total of
US$11 billion of green bonds were issued and arranged in Hong Kong.  Earlier this morning,
the  HKMA,  as  the  implementation  agent  of  the  HK$100  billion  Government  Green  Bond
Programme,  announced  that  a  roadshow  will  be  held  for  a  potential  green  bond  offering.
  Under  the  Outline  Development  Plan  for  the  Guangdong-Hong  Kong-Macao  Greater  Bay
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Area, Hong Kong is the designated green finance centre in the Area.  With the launch of the
Green and Sustainable Banking initiative and the rapid growth of the Green Bond market,
Hong Kong possesses enormous potential to become a leading Green Finance Hub in the
world.    However,  in  pursuing  our  aspirations,  there  is  a  pressing  need  to  upgrade  our
capacity and expertise in green finance in the financial industry. 
8.  With this in mind, the HKMA will set up shortly a new Centre for Green Finance (CGF) under
the Infrastructure Financing Facilitation Office (IFFO).  The CGF will serve as the focal point
for capacity building and experience sharing.  As most of you are aware, IFFO has already
become an active facilitator for capacity building in infrastructure investments and it would
be logical and timely for the new CGF to be set up to promote capacity and expertise in
Green Finance.  Only yesterday, IFFO co-organised a seminar with the Chinese Ministry of
Finance and IFC on ESG and Impact Investing.  So the CGF will provide a one-stop shop in
capacity building for Green Finance for the financial industry, especially banks, in the coming
months.  We are already in discussion with the IFC on how to leverage their expertise on
this.    Furthermore,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  the  CGF,  together  with  the  IFC,  will  co-
organise  the  next  Climate  Business  Forum  in  Hong  Kong  in  early  2020.    This  Climate
Business Forum is the IFC’s flagship event to discuss trends and business opportunities
relating to climate change and sustainability.  In addition to green finance, the Forum will also
cover topics such as green city, buildings, infrastructure, transportation and energy storage
etc.  So I look forward to your participation and support of the future activities of the CGF.
Conclusion
9.  Ladies and gentlemen, in today’s forum, we have arranged two panels, chaired by Eddie Yue
and Arthur  Yuen  respectively,  to  elaborate  on  and  discuss  the  initiatives  and  measures  I
have just mentioned.  It would be useful for us to receive your comments and feedback. 
These initiatives and measures require persistence, dedication, and collaborative efforts of
all  the  stakeholders:  regulators,  industry  practitioners,  international  bodies,  environmental
groups.  We must all work together.  Thank you very much.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
