Cleviston Haynes: Cash will remain a part of the mix
Speech by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, Bridgetown, 4 June
2019.
 Just over a decade ago the Bank hosted its first currency exhibition, as ensuring a steady supply
of money in circulation is a natural extension of one of our core functions.
Thirteen years later, much has changed. For some, the assertion that “cash is king” has been
replaced by the question “is cash dead?”
In many ways this is not surprising. Alternatives to cash are increasingly popular. Credit cards,
debit cards, mobile wallets, etc., appear to be displacing traditional payment instruments such as
cheques and cash. Globally, smartphone apps and other technological advances seem poised to
transform payment systems as we know them.
Now,  for  the  younger  persons  here  today,  the  idea  of  paying  for  something  using  your  phone
probably doesn’t seem extraordinary, but this is something I certainly did not imagine when we
were your age.
Nevertheless, the Bank understands the need to adapt in general. More specifically, we have to
adapt to the requirements of the new digital age. Being able to collect and make payments more
efficiently  is  a  key  part  of  the  digital  transformation  that  the  economy  will  undergo.  It  has  the
potential to enhance productivity and overall competitiveness. We are committed to working with
Government  to  improve  the  payments  infrastructure,  including  through  the  reduced  use  of
cheques and cash. This should contribute to speedier, secure settlement of transactions.
So why an exhibition celebrating cash?
While  we  aim  to  decrease  significantly  the  use  of  cash,  we  cannot  ignore  that  at  present  it
accounts  for  a  significant  percentage  of  the  transactions  made  in  Barbados.  Currency  in
circulation is about 7% of GDP. However, there is already increasing usage of credit and debit
cards the transactions through the Automated Clearing House.
While  cash  remains  relevant  now,  it  is  facing  increased  competition  as  an  instrument  for
payments.
But we believe that there will remain a place for cash. A wholesale shift to digital payments or
even debit and credit cards has implications for financial inclusion. For the traditionally unbanked,
access to cash allows participation in the economy. The same is true of many older persons and
other vulnerable members of society.
Cash also serves as a backup in the event that the networks that power other forms of payment
go down during and after a natural disaster or due to technological glitches or security breaches.
The importance of retaining some level of cash is widely acknowledged, even by countries like
Sweden, which is leading the world in the adoption of alternative forms of payment. Indeed, in his
presentation  at  our  Domestic  Financial  Institutions  Conference  earlier  this  year,  Sweden’s
Deputy Central Bank Governor,  Henry  Ohlsson,  discussed  the  merits  of  cash,  citing  both  the
need to protect the financially marginalised and the privacy that paying with cash affords.
Deputy Governor Ohlsson is not alone recognising the benefits of cash even while supporting the
development and adoption of electronic payments.
A 2019 study by the UK government found that despite debit cards replacing cash as the most
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
popular payment method in that country, there is still substantial support for retaining some level
of physical currency.
It is clear then, that there is a degree of consensus internationally on this issue.
In the decade or so since the Bank hosted its first currency exhibition, we’ve seen increased use
of credit and debit cards, a significant reduction in the use of cheques, and the introduction of
digital and cryptocurrencies.
So we acknowledge and encourage the changes to the payments landscape. But at the same
time,  it  would  be  premature  to  write  cash’s  obituary.  In  the  future,  as  we  seek  to  increase
efficiency through the use of electronic payments, cash may no longer be king, but it will remain
a part of the mix.
I thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
