Claudia  Buch:  Welcoming  remarks  -  Macroprudential  Conference
2019
Welcoming remarks by Prof Claudia Buch, Vice-President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
Macroprudential Conference 2019, Eltville, 21 June 2019.
 The Bundesbank is very proud to be hosting the Macroprudential Conference series for the first
time,  and  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  you  all  here  in  Eltville.  From  my
perspective, the tradition of these conferences, which were initiated by the Dutch National Bank
and the Swedish Riksbank, has two particularly important features:
The  first  is  close  interaction  between  policymakers  and  academics.  In  many  ways,
macroprudential policymaking has entered unchartered territory, and policy developments have
often  leapfrogged  analytical  work. A  close  dialogue  between  researchers  and  policymakers  is
thus essential in order to understand how our existing policy tools are working, to identify whether
we are missing any relevant channels, and to learn more about the functioning of the financial
system, particularly in times of stress.
The  second  feature  is  the  need  for  cooperation.  It  has  been  emphasised  repeatedly  that
macroprudential policy is a necessary complement to microprudential supervision with regard to
providing a system-wide perspective on the resilience of the financial system. This system does
not  end  at  national  borders.  International  cooperation  and  coordination  is  thus  crucial  when  it
comes to macroprudential policymaking.
Let me give you two examples which demonstrate that such policy coordination is in fact working
– and highlight the value of interaction with academia.
1 Coordination of Macroprudential Policy nationally and in Europe
Macroprudential  policy  is  a  core  element  of  the  post  crisis  reform  agenda,  and  it  plays  a
particularly important role in the European monetary union which lacks a single sovereign (Buch
and Weigert 2018). It is not enough to focus on the sustainability of public debt – mechanisms
are  needed  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Such  mechanisms  ensure  that
private  credit  is  sustainable  and  that  the  failure  to  service  debt  does  not  pose  a  threat  to  the
stability of the financial system. Macroprudential policy has exactly that objective: Preventing the
build-up of systemic risk, i.e. the risk of destabilising negative externalities in the financial system,
and  preventing  excessive  leverage  of  the  private  sector.  Macroprudential  policy  takes  a
macroeconomic  perspective  on  the  financial  sector’s  health  and  resilience.  It  complements
monetary policy and microprudential supervision.
In  Europe,  macroprudential  policy  is  a  national  task  –  involving  close  coordination  at  the
European level. Understanding the coordination of macroprudential policy –at both the national
and  supranational  level  –  is  important:  In  a  monetary  union  with  a  high  degree  of  financial
integration, risks can easily spill over across borders.
the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  raising 
Let me give you an example: The German Financial Stability Committee recently recommended
activating 
to  25  basis  points.   This
recommendation is based on the analytical work of the Bundesbank, as President Weidmann
explained  this  morning.    We  warn  against  over-optimism  after  a  long  period  of  good  growth
performance: credit risk might be underestimated, and market participants might overestimate
the value of collateral. Interest rate risks are, obviously, closely correlated with these risks.
it 
1
Responsibility for macroprudential policy in Germany is shared by the members of the Financial
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Stability Committee (FSC): the Bundesbank, the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin)
as the macroprudential authority, and the Ministry of Finance as the chair of the Committee. The
Committee  can  issue  warnings  and  recommendations  when  there  are  financial  stability
concerns. The institutional set-up for the implementation of macroprudential policy often includes
more  than  one  institution.  This  brings  more  expertise  and  different  views  to  the  table,  which
ensures sound decision making. But the decision-making process may also be lengthened. This
important issue has been highlighted in today’s presentation by Nellie Liang. In her paper with
Rochelle Edge, she finds that “countries with FSCs with stronger governance mechanisms are
more likely to use the CCyB”. As more evidence on policy decisions accumulates, and as more
instruments will be used, we will certainly learn more about the design of macroprudential policy
and governance structures.
An  insightful  example  of  the  coordination  and  the  political  economy  of  macroprudential  policy
decisions at the national level is a recommendation that was issued by the German FSC in 2015.
The  Committee  recommended  that  legislative  action  be  taken  with  regard  to  macroprudential
instruments  for  the  housing  market  and,  importantly,  that  a  legal  basis  be  created  for  the
collection of sufficiently granular data on housing loans. Two years later, the German parliament
passed  legislation  including  two  of  the  recommended  policy  instruments  –  loan-to-value-caps
and  amortisation  requirements  –  while  limits  to  debt-service  and  debt-to-income  ratios  were
dropped  from  the  proposal.  Thanks  to  the  close  collaboration  and  close  coordination  of
communication among FSC members we were able to convince lawmakers to include at least
two  of  the  recommended  instruments.  In  this  sense,  the  FSC  acts  as  an  important  hub  to
exchange views and coordinate action under the heading of financial stability. This is something
which would have been much harder to achieve without a sound legal mandate and a designated
committee. However, the arguments for the two remaining instruments are still valid and there
still remain data gaps to be closed.
Governing macroprudential policy decisions in Europe goes beyond coordination at the national
level. Domestic policy decisions play an important role also for the European financial system.
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  ECB  with  its  Financial  Stability  Committee
provide a cross-country view. The ESRB is the macroprudential oversight body for the EU. It can
issue confidential or public warnings when it identifies significant systemic risks. Furthermore,
the ESRB can issue recommendations for remedial action to address identified risks. The ECB
has the right to top-up certain national measures, such as the CCyB, thereby limiting spill-over
effects that might not be fully accounted for by national authorities.
This provides a laboratory for research on the effects of macroprudential policy coordination:
How do national policymakers react to domestic and European financial stability risks?
Which indicators should guide policymaking, and which surveillance tools should be used?
What is the role of communication? How to explain complex issues like financial stability,
systemic risks and macroprudential instruments, such as the CCyB? What can we learn
from each other?
The examples given here show that macroprudential policymaking in Europe is embedded in a
complex  set  of  institutional  arrangements,  ensuring  coordination  between  national  institutions
and  countries.  It  may  be  too  early  to  tell  whether  these  institutional  arrangements  help  to
overcome  the  inaction  bias  inherent  in  macroprudential  policy  and  whether  they  improve  the
surveillance of systemic risks. But as more evidence accumulates, we will certainly learn from
our experiences and improve existing frameworks, if necessary.
2 Coordinating Reform Evaluation Internationally
A second example is the coordination of the FSB’s currently ongoing ex post policy evaluations.
Post-crisis  financial  sector  reforms  were  agreed  at  a  global  level  in  order  to  make  sure  that
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
certain minimum standards apply in all jurisdictions. At the same time, many macroprudential
policies  that  were  implemented  after  the  global  financial  crisis  were  without  precedent.  This
meant that macroprudential policies had to be implemented and calibrated with great uncertainty
as to their actual effects. Now that many policies have been put in place and initial experiences
have been gained, we are in a position to evaluate and thus improve our understanding of their
effects.  Policy  evaluation  provides  information  on  whether  policies  achieve  their  objectives  or
whether unintended consequences materialise. Policy evaluation, however, is not a trivial task as
it needs to answer three key questions:
1.   Did the reform “cause” an outcome (attribution)?
2.  Did  the  reform  have  similar  effects  across  relevant  markets,  states  of  the  world,  or
jurisdictions and regions (heterogeneity)?
3.  Did the reform achieve its overall objective (aggregation/general equilibrium)?
These questions cannot be answered by taking a purely national perspective. Recent work at the
Financial Stability Board (FSB) is a good example of how internationally coordinated evaluation
has become part of the policy process: In 2017, during the German G20 presidency, the FSB
developed  a  framework  to  evaluate  the  effects  of  the  G20  post-crisis  reforms  of  financial
regulation (Financial Stability Board 2017). The FSB subsequently launched several evaluation
2
projects. Three projects have already been completed or are close to being finished:
The first project provided evidence that post-crisis reforms generated incentives to centrally
clear OTC derivatives.
The  second  project  showed  no  material  negative  effects  of  reforms  on  infrastructure
financing.
The third project analyses reform effects on the availability of funding for small and medium-
sized enterprises. The recently-published consultation report showed no persistent negative
effects of the G20 regulatory reforms on SME financing overall.
Ongoing evaluation work at the FSB deals with one of the G20’s core objective – reducing the
systemic and moral hazard risks associated with systemically important financial institutions.  A
first  evaluation  plan  has  been  published  on  the  FSB’s  website.   Workshops  will  be  held  with
stakeholders from academia, the financial sector, and representatives of civil society.
3
4
The Too-big-to-fail (TBTF) evaluation will address three main questions:
1.  Were the reforms effective in reducing the perceived probability of the impact of failure of
systemically important institutions? This question can be addressed by assessing changes
in  estimates  of  implicit  funding  subsidies  and  analysing  progress  in  the  resolvability  of
systemically important banks.
2.  Are reforms resulting in altered bank behaviour in terms of changes in funding structures,
asset allocation and risk-taking?
3.  What  are  the  broader  effects  of  the  reforms?  Such  effects  include  the  functioning  of  the
financial  system,  market  fragmentation,  cost  and  availability  of  financing  to  the  real
economy.
Focusing  on  the  experiences  of  individual  countries  will  not  be  sufficient  to  answer  these
questions.  Financial  systems  differ  with  regard  to  their  competitive  structure  and  the  types  of
institutions  involved.  Reform  effects  are  thus  likely  to  differ  across  countries.  Research
conducted by the International Banking Research Network, for instance, shows that prudential
instruments  sometimes  spill  over  across  borders  through  bank  lending,  and  that  international
spillovers  vary  across  prudential  instruments  and  are  heterogeneous  across  banks.   There
appears to be no one channel or indeed, a specific direction of transmission that predominates in
5
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the context of spillovers. Understanding this heterogeneity and its implications for resilience is
crucially important.
3 Summing Up
Macroprudential policy is a new policy field and offers lots of unchartered territory to be explored
by basic academic research and policy-oriented and applied research. With the FSB evaluation
framework  and  the  evaluations  initiated,  policy  makers  also  explicitly  acknowledged  the
importance of academia to support evidence-based policy making and improve accountability.
Therefore,  I  invite  the  academic  research  community  join  this  evaluation  process:  Either  by
directly contributing to the on-going and envisaged projects or by critically following the process
to ensure that analytical results and policy conclusions match.
References
Buch, C. M. and B. Weigert (2018), „Macroprudential Policy in a Currency Union”, Review of
World Economics, November 2018.
German  Financial  Stability  Committee  (2019),  „Recommendation  of  27  May  2019
concerning  the  increase  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer”,  May  2019,  available  at:
www.bundesbank.de/resource/blob/799224/0e100978a1a17cfcc164a0756c87aca6/mL/2019–
05–27-afs-anlage-empfehlung-data.pdf.
German  Financial  Stability  Committee  (2019a),  „FAQs  on  the  first  increase  of  the
countercyclical 
at:
www.bundesbank.de/resource/blob/798050/e16ab3892c8c8d10fcde9370e1f173a8/mL/2019–
05–27-afs-anlage-faq-data.pdf.
Financial  Stability  Board  (2011),  “Policy  Measures  to  Address  Systemically  Important
Financial Institutions”, November 2011, available at: www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Policy-
Measures-to-Address-Systemically-Important-Financial-Institutions.pdf.
Financial  Stability  Board  (2017),  “Framework  for  Post-Implementation  Evaluation  of  the
Effects  of 
the  G20  Financial  Regulatory  Reforms”,  July  2017,  available  at:
www.fsb.org/2017/07/framework-for-post-implementation-evaluation-of-the-effects-of-the-
g20-financial-regulatory-reforms/.
available 
buffer”, 
capital 
2019, 
May 
1
2
3
4
5
See German Financial Stability Committee (2019) and German Financial Stability Committee (2019a).
Consultative and final reports are available at: www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/implementation-monitoring/effects-
of-reforms/
See Financial Stability Board (2011). For details see the terms of reference (www.fsb.org/2019/05/evaluation-of-
too-big-to-fail-reforms-summary-terms-of-reference/). The final report is scheduled for the G20 Presidency in
2020.
www.fsb.org/2019/05/fsb-launches-evaluation-of-too-big-to-fail-reforms-and-invites-feedback-from-
stakeholders/
For details, see, voxeu.org/article/prudential-policies-crossing-borders
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
