Olli Rehn: Technological upheaval and labour markets
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Bank  of  Finland
Seminar on “Technological Upheaval and Labour Markets”, Helsinki, 2 September 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to welcome all of you to this seminar at the Bank of Finland. Today we are
addressing a very timely subject: technological upheaval and the labour markets.
Let me point out that this seminar has two parallel origins: popular demand and substantive
importance. By popular demand I am referring to our seminar last December with trade unions
and employers’ associations, when these issues were raised in many interventions, calling for
further research and dialogue on them – rightly so. So we are now responding to this well-
justified popular demand.
By substantive importance I am referring to the fact that these issues are indeed at the heart of
the ongoing transformation of work and the labor markets. They have a profound impact on the
everyday lives of our citizens – thus, what could more important than studying them?
Against this backdrop, let me outline a few questions I hope and trust that this seminar will be
analyzing and even providing some answers.
First of all, in recent years it seems that technological change has shifted gears. Many of our
daily activities have moved online, we are talking about the platform economy, while artificial
intelligence and robotics seem to be on the minds and agendas of companies and policymakers.
Digitalization and automation have been around for decades, and there have been many waves
of technological change that have caused disruptions in various industries and professions.
Nevertheless, it seems that there are some important differences between what has happened in
the past and what is happening today.
Most importantly, it would appear that information technology is having a more widespread effect
across all sectors of the economy. Also, the ongoing process of digitalization may be affecting a
larger share of jobs than the general purpose technologies of the past.
This has also raised ‘automation anxiety’, with predictions that machines will displace jobs and
cause mass unemployment. However, there is a long history of such predictions. Let me give
you a few examples.
Already 25 years ago, in 1995, American economic and social theorist Jeremy Rifkin warned
“Now for the first time, human labor is being systematically eliminated from the production
process. Intelligent machines are replacing human beings in countless tasks, forcing millions of
1
blue and white collar workers into unemployment, or worse still, breadlines.”
A few decades earlier, in 1962, President John F. Kennedy declared that “the major domestic
challenge of the sixties” was to “maintain full employment at a time when automation is replacing
men.”  President Lyndon B. Johnson followed in his footprints by appointing a national
commission to assess these issues in 1964.
2
Even before that, in 1930, John Maynard Keynes declared that the world was suffering from
“technological unemployment”, meaning “unemployment due to our discovery of means of
economizing the use of labor outrunning the pace at which we can find new uses for labor”.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Well… as history tells us, none of these predictions turned out to be accurate. Employment as a
share of population has remained remarkably stable in the long run. I think it is important to keep
this sober, perhaps ‘structurally optimistic’ fact in mind.
But it won’t happen automatically. Policy choices do matter, and in order to make right choices
from the public policy standpoint – I am thinking of high level of employment and sustained,
inclusive growth of real incomes – we need solid evidence-based analysis.
That is one main reason, why we are here today. In other words, we need research-based
answers to the question, should we expect – in the era of digitalization, robotics and artificial
intelligence – that machines will displace jobs on a massive scale?
In the academic literature on the effect of technological change on the  labour markets, the
3
hypothesis of skill-biased technological change dominated the scene for a long time.
In recent decades, however, employment growth has not been concentrated only on the highly
skilled, but also on the least skilled workers, while employment has declined among middle-
skilled workers. This phenomenon has been referred to as job polarization.
45
Job polarization arises from the development of information and communication technologies
and their ability to replace tasks formerly performed by human labour. The key issue is that all
tasks are not equally prone to computerization.
Computers have increasingly displaced workers in ‘routine’ tasks that are characteristic of many
middle-skilled activities, such as clerical and administrative work, and repetitive production tasks.
But as David Autor, one of the leading scholars in this field, importantly points out, the fact that a
task cannot be computerized does not imply that computerization has no effect on that task. On
the contrary: tasks that cannot be substituted by computerization are generally complemented by
it. This is evident in many highly skilled jobs where information technologies increase the
productivity of workers.
But this may also be the case in many manual jobs. David Autor uses the example of
contemporary construction workers, who by historical standards are akin to cyborgs. Augmented
by cranes, excavators, power tools and pneumatic nail guns, there has been a staggering
increase in the output of these workers. Many tasks of both high- and low skilled-workers have
been complemented by automation, which has resulted in strong employment growth for both
6
groups of workers.
There is also a close interaction between technological change, globalization and the polarized
job structure of developed countries.  Today, many mid-level tasks are most prone to relocation
(e.g. programming, accounting or payroll services). In contrast, many other jobs cannot be
8
offshored because they require personal contact (e.g. elderly care, security, public transport).
7
 With the reduction of middle-paid jobs, the second key question is what kind of jobs those
workers can move to and what kind of frictions are involved. The prerequisite for the growth of a
highly educated and knowledge-intensive economy, such as that of Finland, can be improved,
especially by supporting the creation of highly-skilled jobs.
At the same time, it is also important for the labour market institutions to support the creation of
low-productivity jobs, even if the aim is to keep up the share of high value-added jobs. This is
particularly important for young people entering the labour market for the first time. The
alternative would seem to be accepting a higher level of unemployment.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Wage formation is a key factor. Job polarization in itself is already widening the pay gap: the rise
in the share of low-paid and, above all, high-paid jobs inevitably increases the income gap.
However, the absence of wage polarization in Finland suggests that wages have hardly
responded to the declining demand for mid-wage labour. This may have further decreased the
number of middle-wage tasks. Job polarization will increase the demand for low-wage jobs, like
9
many services, but will only create jobs if they are not priced out of the market.
Last but not least, Nordic comprehensive social security is an important part of our growth
policies, since it makes structural change more socially acceptable. It is important to aim for
economic growth that is distributed fairly across society and create opportunities for all.
So that’s our agenda today. I look very much forward to listening to the presentations and your
views about technological upheaval and its impact on the working life and labour markets this
afternoon.
With these words, welcome to all of you to this seminar!
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me now introduce to you our first key-note speaker, Professor Laura Tyson.
Laura is an influential and well-known scholar of economics and public policy, specializing on
trade and competitiveness. Today, Laura Tyson is the Faculty Director of the Berkeley Haas
Institute for Business and Social Impact, which she launched in 2013. In addition, she has also
served as Dean of London Business School from 2002 until 2006.
As many of you certainly well remember, she has also served as a presidential adviser. She
served as Chair of President Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers from 1993 to 1995, and as
Director of the White House National Economic Council from 1995 to 1996.
Laura is the author of numerous publications on competitiveness, industrial policy, international
trade, and sustainable business practices.
She is also regular contributor to Project Syndicate, and is a frequent media commentator, for
instance, on issues of U.S. and global trade and economics, competition, and women’s
economic empowerment.
Much of Prof. Tyson’s recent research focuses on the effects of automation on the future of
work. I’m sure we are going to hear more of her thoughts on those issues today.
Without further ado, Prof. Tyson, Dear Laura, the floor is yours, please.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jeremy Rifkin (1996): The End of Work: Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-market Era.
Warner Books.
James Bessen (2015): Learning by Doing, The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages and Wealth. Yale
University Press.
E.g. Lawrence F. Katz & David Autor (1999) Changes in the wage structure and earnings inequality, Handbook of
Labor  Economics,  in:  O. Ashenfelter  &  D.  Card  (ed.),  Handbook  of  Labor  Economics,  edition  1,  volume  3,
chapter  26,  1463–1555  Elsevier.,  Daron Acemoglu  &  David Autor  (2011):  Skills,  Tasks  and  Technologies:
Implications for Employment and Earnings, Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier.
Maarten Goos & Alan Manning, 2007. “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in Britain,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 89(1), 118–133.
Maarten  Goos  & Alan  Manning  & Anna  Salomons,  2009.  “Job  Polarization  in  Europe,” American  Economic
Review, vol. 99(2), 58–63, May.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
David  H. Autor  (2015):  Polanyi’s  Paradox  and  the  Shape  of  Employment  Growth.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
Kansas City: Economic Policy Proceedings, Reevaluating Labor Market Dynamics. 2015. 129–177.
Maarten  Goos  &  Alan  Manning  &  Anna  Salomons,  2014.  “Explaining  Job  Polarization:  Routine-Biased
Technological Change and Offshoring,” American Economic Review, vol. 104(8), 2509–26.
Juuso  Vanhala  (2008): Miten  globalisaatio  näkyy  työmarkkinoilla?  BoF  Online  5/2008,  27  March  2008  (In
Finnish)
Meri Obstbaum & Juuso Vanhala (2016):Työmarkkinoiden polarisaatio Suomessa Euro & Talous 12/2016 (in
Finnish).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
