Denis Beau: Denis Beau: Monetary and financial challenges for the
Euro area - what are our options?
Speech  by  Mr  Denis  Beau,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Faculty  of
Economics and Management, Strasbourg, 28 February 2019.
 Ten years after the crisis, the ability of the global financial system, and especially the European
financial sector, to withstand shocks appears to have been significantly reinforced.
This reinforcement is the result of numerous changes which vary in nature:
Banks now have more capital and its quality has been improved. Their transformation activities
are better regulated and they have larger liquidity buffers.
In  Europe,  the  banking  sector  has  also  been  made  more  resilient  through  major  institutional
reforms, especially the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism under the aegis of the ECB
and the Single Resolution Mechanism.
Outside the banking industry, the reforms steered by the G20 have enhanced the functioning of
financial  markets  (particularly  derivatives  markets),  improved  the  oversight  and  regulation  of
developments  in  non-bank  financial  intermediation  (shadow  banking),  and  put  in  place  a
framework  for  monitoring  and  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole
through the implementation of macroprudential policy.
The crisis has also prompted changes in the way financial institutions operate. One of the most
visible ones is that risk and compliance functions have now become an essential part of their
organisations.  In  a  more  subtle  way,  there  have  also  been  changes  in  the  culture  of  these
institutions, with greater emphasis now being placed on good governance and on the “purpose”
of certain activities or the “service” provided to clients.
This  strengthening  of  the  financial  system’s  resilience  is  a  major  source  of  confidence  at  the
start  of  2019,  in  an  environment  marked  by  mounting  geopolitical  uncertainties  and  slowing
economic  growth.  But  it  is  not  time  for  complacency.  One  of  the  core  challenges  we  face,
particularly in the euro area, is preventing and limiting the impact of new potential shocks.
“Madame  la  Vice-Présidente”,  you  have  invited  me  here  today  to  share  a  central  banker  and
supervisor’s perspective on the different options open to private and public agents for meeting
these  challenges.  Rather  than  talking  about  options,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  two  “burning
obligations” that fall on all of us, namely:
for  financial  intermediaries,  micro  and  macroprudential  supervisors,  maintaining  a  strong
vigilance (I.); and
for regulators and the private (financial) sector promoting a deeper financial integration of the
euro area (II.).
I. Continued strong vigilance is needed to navigate through an increasingly uncertain
world
a. Persistent threats
Against  a  backdrop  of  intense  geopolitical  uncertainty  and  a  less  favourable  macroeconomic
environment than expected, the financial industry faces a combination of very “traditional” risks
and some relatively new ones.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since the summer, there has been a series of negative surprises: a resurgence of trade tensions
between  the  United  States  and  its  partners,  notably  China;  tensions  surrounding  the  Italian
budget;  the  British  parliament’s  rejection  of  the  Brexit  deal;  and,  closer  to  us,  the  scale  and
duration of the so called gilets jaunes movement.
This  climate  has  weighed  on  the  macroeconomic  environment,  which  is  now  unquestionably
less favourable than anticipated a few months ago. According to the IMF, global growth could
slow to 3.5% in 2019 from 3.7% in 2018. France’s economic growth is also slowing, albeit to a
lesser extent than in other European countries thanks to a rise in purchasing power and robust
domestic demand. In 2019, France should grow at a pace faster than in Germany, and close to
the average pace for the euro area.
This context of uncertainty exacerbates risks already faced by financial intermediaries.
Debt levels among economic agents remain high. This is particularly true for France where debt
has been rising consistently over the past fifteen years, and now stands at 75% and 60% of GDP
respectively  for  non-financial  corporations  and  households  –  in  stark  contrast  with  the  trends
observed in neighbouring European countries and other advanced economies. The downward
revision to growth forecasts raises even greater concerns over the sustainability of this debt and
the amplifying role it could play in the event of an upward shock to interest rates or a downward
shock to activity.
Similarly, it makes the (still necessary) process of balance sheet cleansing even harder for those
financial intermediaries that have been unable to finish it or have put it off since the last crisis,
and still bear the scars in the form of legacy non-performing loans.
The increased uncertainty in the macroeconomic and geopolitical environment is also weighing
on markets, where valuations still seem elevated in a medium-term perspective. This raises the
risk of abrupt and marked downward corrections in financial asset prices, particularly as market
liquidity seems more fragile since the last financial crisis.
From  a  more  forward-looking  perspective,  the  downward  revision  to  growth  forecasts  could
prolong  the  current  low  interest  environment  which,  despite  being  overall  consistent  with  the
macroeconomic situation, still has implications for (more) economic agents’ borrowing and for
the (weaker) profitability of financial intermediaries.
Added to these clearly identified cyclical risks are a number of new, structural risks – among
them those arising from the increasing digitalisation of the financial industry.
Digitalisation  in  finance  is  being  driven  by  a  combination  of  cutting-edge  technological
developments (big data, cloud computing, artificial intelligence or blockchain technology), which
are transforming the way financial products are designed, developed, distributed and managed.
Digital transformation offers the promise of better user experiences, more diversified sources of
financing for the economy, lower production costs and greater efficiency in the financial system.
But it also raises three types of risk.
First, it requires huge investment, the management of complex projects and greater agility on the
part  of  financial  institutions.  As  a  result,  although  necessary  and  desirable,  the  digital
transformation of financial intermediaries carries a significant execution risk. This is the first type
of risk to which we are exposed, and one that is highly idiosyncratic, but we need to recognise it.
Next, digitalisation is challenging existing business models and their profitability, which can have
destabilising effects in a banking industry such as Europe’s where there are overcapacity issues
and where profitability is rising but remains well below US levels.
The third type of risk is that digitalisation gives operational risk a more systemic footprint. In a
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
largely  dematerialised  world  where  financial  services  can  be  accessed  via  multiple  channels,
cyber-risk poses an increasingly significant threat. Similarly, the use by financial intermediaries
and  their  operational  reliance  on  a  small  handful  of  providers  of  “suites”  of  technological
solutions, and not just softwares, raises the risk that a service disruption might impact the entire
system and not just a single entity.
b. What are the priorities for microprudential supervisors?
In light of these complex and interconnected risks, and the fact that a significant portion of them
are  new,  financial  intermediaries  and  supervisors  need  to  exercise  vigilance  in  order  to
understand the exact nature and impacts of the threats, and take appropriate steps to contain
and manage them. For the SSM, this vigilance requirement has led to the establishment of three
supervisory priorities for 2019:
first priority is, given the continuing high level of outstanding non-performing loans, to monitor
the euro area banking industry’s credit risk by providing further strong incentives to lower
exposures – efforts which have already resulted in a substantial reduction;
second  priority  is  to  ensure  that  institutions  manage  their  risks  appropriately,  including
behavioural aspects such as customer protection and the prevention of money laundering,
the significance of which has become abundantly clear in recent years;
third priority is to manage multidimensional risks, the most pressing of which being Brexit.
The SSM’s priority in this respect is clearly to ensure that euro area banks operating in the
United Kingdom and vice versa have drawn up contingency plans to cope with the loss of
European passporting rights after Brexit.
c. What role can macroprudential policy play?
Macroprudential policy can play a complementary role alongside microprudential supervision by
following a more preventive approach that addresses the financial system as a whole.
Macroprudential policy can play a preventive role with regard to debt trends and to the financial
cycle:  the  current  phase  of  the  cycle  is  conducive  to  greater  risk-taking,  and  the  French
macroprudential  authority,  the Haut Conseil de stabilité financière, has taken steps to limit this
and/or prevent negative consequences in the event of a financial shock.
The HCSF therefore keeps a close eye on markets or activities where exuberance is more likely
to emerge. Over the past quarters, it has made public its concerns about developments in the
commercial real estate market (i.e. the market where real estate is an asset class for financial
investors), trends in debt levels among highly indebted corporations or, more recently, leveraged
finance  activities  (especiallythe  debt  incurred  by  companies  participating  in  LBOs,  which  is
frequently sold off by originators to other financial investors).
The HCSF has also formally intervened to curb risk-taking: at the end of 2017 it decided to cap
bank exposures to large and highly indebted corporations at 5% of their capital.
In addition, to limit the negative consequences for banks of increased risk-taking in the event of a
financial shock, the HCSF decided in June 2018 to raise the countercylical capital buffer to 0.25%
– in other words, to require banks to set aside more capital to cover their risk exposure toward
the French economy.
As  a  countercyclical  tool,  this  buffer  is  designed  to  be  put  in  place  preventively,  when  credit
constraints are low, i.e. when the economic “cost” of such an additional requirement is limited.
It forces banks to build up some room for manoeuvre that can then be used to prevent credit
rationing  if  they  incur  higher-than-expected  losses  after  a  shock  or  turnaround  in  the  financial
cycle.  Immediately  releasing  the  buffer  would  allow  banks  to  tap  into  this  capital  reserve  and
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
support  the  supply  of  credit,  especially  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  which  are  the
most reliant on bank financing.
Macroprudential policy is also concerned with the emerging structural risks described previously.
For example, the “platformisation” of financial activities driven by digitalisation is contributing to a
profound transformation of financial intermediation – a trend also amplified by other factors: the
search for yield in the current low interest rate environment; changes in financial intermediation
business models in response to the macrofinancial environment and regulatory developments;
the desire of firms to diversify their sources of financing to increase their resilience.
With  regard  to  financial  stability  and  systemic  risk,  these  developments  mean  that  non-bank
financial  intermediation  is  playing  an  increasing  role  in  financing  the  economy,  while
macroprudential policy has been designed with reference to a bank-centric financial system.
The  disruption  in  financial  intermediation  is  also  increasing  the  number  and  complexity  of  the
interconnections between financial sector participants (banks, investment funds, insurers).
In both cases, macroprudential authorities need to strengthen their analytical capabilities, in order
to better understand the consequences of these interconnections, eventually conducting stress
tests  across  the  entire  system  rather  than  just  in  individual  sectors,  and  adapt  their
macroprudential policy to the new challenges.
The HCSF is fully committed to this goal. Its powers were adjusted by legislators in 2016 to allow
it  to  intervene  outside  the  banking  industry.  It  has  also  begun  carrying  out  coordinated  stress
tests across all sectors, and has facilitated the pooling and cross examination of data held by
different  authorities  to  provide  a  more  holistic  understanding  of  the  system  and  its
interconnections.
Although national authorities must be at the frontline of macroprudential policy, it is important to
stress that these efforts cannot be conducted in isolation, particularly in the European Union and
the euro area where our economies and their financing are closely intertwined.
II. The euro area needs to continue strengthening its financial integration
Euro  area  countries  are  already  closely  integrated  on  an  economic  level,  and  their  financial
integration  should  not  be  left  half-finished.  However,  deeper  integration  will  not  happen
spontaneously  –  it  requires  strong  and  determined  political  action.  It  means  completing  the
Banking  Union,  supplementing  it  with  an  action  plan  to  develop  other  financing  channels,  and
creating deeper and more integrated European financial markets.
a. Why do we need to increase the euro area’s financial integration?
We  tend  to  talk  of  the  euro,  which  has  just  celebrated  its  20th  anniversary,  as  an  eminently
political project. Clearly, this is true: the single currency stands as a daily reminder of our shared
European identity. As with other “European successes” such as the free movement of people,
we often forget that its achievement was not a foregone conclusion.  
But the euro is also an economic necessity: it was born in part from the obvious difficulties that
emerged in the 1980s and 1990s in managing a single market with national currencies. Indeed
economic union called for monetary union.
Similarly, the 2007–2009 financial crisis, followed by the euro area sovereign debt crisis in 2011–
2012, shed a stark light on the disadvantages of having an economic and monetary union without
a banking and financial union.
As  the  crisis  unfurled,  the  gaps  in  our  financial  integration  led  to  a  fragmentation  of  financing
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
conditions across the euro area, which in turn exacerbated the negative effects of the shock.
Some  countries  experienced  an  abrupt  deterioration  in  both  government  solvency  and  bank
solvency, triggering a vicious circle linked to their domestic sovereign-bank nexus – that is the
overexposure of domestic banks to their own national government’s debt.
Today,  progress  has  been  made  in  resolving  the  institutional  failings  at  the  root  of  this
fragmentation,  with  increased  oversight  and  better  coordination  in  fiscal  policies  and  a  more
homogeneous system of financial supervision. However, financial integration remains a pressing
challenge for the euro area, and one on which the future prosperity of the European Union and its
citizens depends. Since the crisis, the allocation of savings and investment has remained firmly
biased towards domestic markets and vehicles.
It  is  vital  that  we  make  progress  in  this  area  if  we  are  to  channel  our  savings  surplus  more
effectively  towards  investment,  and  in  particular  towards  the  financing  of  European  firms,
especially the most innovative and dynamic ones whose development will determine our future
potential growth.
Financial  integration  is  also  key  to  ensuring  economic  and  financial  stability  in  the  European
Union as it will enable the private sector to better absorb economic shocks and spread its risk.
Even more importantly, achieving integration will allow us to reap the full and lasting benefits of
the drive towards union that began in 1957, and will ensure that the European community is more
than just the sum of its parts and that Europe has weight and influence in tomorrow’s world.
b. Improving the functioning of the Banking Union...
One  of  the  main  steps  towards  this  integration  has  been  the  Banking  Union.  However,  its
functioning needs to be adapted and improved.
The most visible aspect of Banking Union has been the implementation of a single supervisory
mechanism under the aegis of the ECB.
Constructed in record time to address the main weaknesses in our banking system – the doom
loop between government debt and bank debt, the disparity in national banking rights, the national
bias  in  supervision  –  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  now  a  tangible  reality  that  has
completely transformed the way the euro area banking industry is regulated.
After just over four years of existence, the SSM today constitutes a unique and efficient model,
based on the application of the EU Single Rulebook (under the direction of the European Banking
Authority – EBA), close cooperation between the ECB and national authorities on all levels (ECB
Supervisory Board, Joint Supervisory Teams, on-site inspections teams), and the principles of
subsidiarity and proportionality (the ECB directly supervises 119 of the largest banking groups
while all other institutions are supervised through national authorities).
The SSM represents a major institutional step forward and the initial results are real.
Banking  supervision  practices  have  been  harmonised  upwards  and  are  now  aligned  with  the
highest  international  standards  (for  example,  the  methodology  for  the  supervisory  review  and
evaluation process or SREP).
Europe’s banking industry is today significantly more robust than before the crisis: the biggest
banks’ CET1 ratio has increased by more than 3 percentage points since 2014 (from 11.3% to
14.6% at end-2017) and their balance sheets have largely been cleaned up (through a reduction
in the NPL ratio from 7.6% to 4.9% over the same period).
The industry’s resilience was confirmed in the stress tests organised by the ECB and EBA in
2018, which simulated the impact of financial shocks on the solvency of the largest banks: in an
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
adverse  scenario,  the  average  CET1  ratio  for  the  sample  would  come  out  at  9.9%  –  or
1 percentage point higher than in the previous exercise in 2016.
That  said,  we  still  have  not  reaped  the  full  benefits  of  more  harmonised  regulation  and  more
integrated supervision, and we need to make sure that we consolidate and build on the progress
already made.
From a regulatory perspective, aside from transposing the Basel Accords into EU law (the CRR
2-CRD 5 package introducing new prudential requirements such as the NSFR and the leverage
ratio), we need to advance further on the application of uniform regulations. We also need to pull
down  all  the  barriers  to  euro  area  banking  integration  by  removing  all  regulatory  obstacles  to
cross-border transactions – in terms of solvency, liquidity or large exposures – and by adjusting
the calculation of capital requirements for systemic institutions. In short, we need to recognise
that the euro area must be treated as a single jurisdiction where a single rulebook is enforced.
In terms of supervision, the priority now is to bring the largest investment firms within the scope
of the SSM. We also need to increase cooperation between national authorities for the oversight
of cross-border institutions (home-host relations), and for anti-money laundering and countering
the financing of terrorism – the importance of which is recurrently driven home by the news.
To complete the Banking Union, we also need to render its second pillar, the Single Resolution
Mechanism or SRM, fully operational.
The euro area has had a common resolution mechanism in place for banking crises since 2015.
Like the SSM, the SRM is based on a common regulatory framework (the BRRD Directive and
the  SRM  regulation),  and  is  structured  around  a  Single  Resolution  Board  and  joint  resolution
teams.
Although  the  SSM  and  the  SRM  have  both  been  successful  in  managing  the  first  bank
liquidations  or  resolutions  (i.e.  those  concerning  the  Veneto  banks  and  Banco  Popular),  the
second  pillar  still  has  to  be  finalised.  Achieving  this  goal  is  essential,  both  to  prevent  the
contagion of banking crises and to ensure the continuity of critical banking functions.
In this regard, France has worked hard for the creation of a common backstop, the main features
of which were decided just a few months ago. Three issues still need to be addressed however:
the duration of the credit lines provided by the backstop; the creation of a rapid decision-making
process in the event of an emergency; and the provision of liquidity to banks in resolution.
Once these matters have been resolved, we can hope, and at the Banque de France it is our
firm belief, that a pragmatic compromise can be found on the third pillar – the deposit guarantee
scheme.
c. … and building a Capital Markets Union to create a true Financing Union
Evidently, financial integration is not just about achieving banking union. Ensuring the balanced
and  sustainable  financing  of  the  economy  also  implies  deeper  integration  of  capital  markets,
which fosters greater geographical diversification in savings and meets corporate firms’ financing
needs – notably equity financing. It also means making better use of the savings entrusted to
insurers and pension funds, to ensure the long-term financing of the European economy. Which
is why France supports an ambitious review of the regulation in the sector. These overall goals
for  mobilising  savings  are  also  why  the  European  Commission’s  2015  project  for  a  Capital
Markets Union has garnered such a broad support.
The  Commission  has  already  implemented  a  significant  number  of  measures  (revision  of  the
Prospectus  Directive,  creation  of  European  long-term  venture  capital  funds  –  EuVECA  and
ELTIF),  and  discussions  are  well  underway  on  other  topics  (pan-European  personal  pension
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
product or PEPP, plan for sustainable finance, plan for fintechs).
It  is  clearly  vital  that  the  future  European  Commission,  European  Parliament  and  European
Council all follow through on this action plan and complete the regulatory work.
But financial integration also requires initiatives from economic and financial actors, who need to
assimilate  the  regulatory  framework  and  bring  it  to  life:  we  cannot  develop  markets  for  green
bonds,  private  debt  and  securitisation  without  the  issuers,  investors  and  arrangers  that  make
them thrive.
More importantly, a Capital Markets Union would be meaningless if, alongside the Banking Union
and  the  Juncker  Plan,  it  is  not  part  of  a  longer-term  project  to  create  a  Financing  Union  for
Investment and Innovation.
Financial  integration  is  therefore  essential  for  the  euro  area  and  must  form  a  core  part  of  all
projects relating to the financing of European economies. However, as these projects imply a
profound transformation, we can only make progress with a strong commitment of all actors:
legislators and regulators, European and national authorities, private and public agents.
 We are only a few weeks away from the next European elections.
Underlining the threats we face is also an opportunity to remind ourselves that, in a globalised
world where size is key, our strength lies in our ability to exercise shared sovereignty.
And  talking  about  the  “burning  obligation”  to  deepen  Europe’s  financial  integration  is  also  a
chance to underline the real but often forgotten successes in the construction of Europe, as well
as the costs and dangers of incomplete integration. It illustrates, once again, that Europe is not
only a project that can benefit everyone, but also one that cannot be achieved without the full-
hearted and determined commitment of each and everyone of us.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
