Address	by	Dr.	Chiranjibi	Nepal,	Governor,	Nepal	Rastra	Bank	for	
Kathmandu, February 1, 2019 
“Anti‐Money	Laundering	Conference	‐	4th	Annual	Summit	(Nepal)	2019”	
1. 
It gives me a great pleasure to deliver my address at the opening 
ceremony of this conference on Anti Money Laundering and Combating 
the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). I would like to congratulate the 
National Banking Institute as well as other concerned International 
Agencies for organizing such an important program on a topical issue. 
2.  As is well known, the impact of money laundering and terrorism financing 
to the financial institutions and financial system has serious implications 
to the overall financial system, which jeopardizes socio-economic 
development for the country. At the global level, the IMF estimated the 
extent of money laundering to be around 2% to 5% of global GDP. A 
country's rating on compliance with standards set by Financial Action 
Task Force (FATF) on AML/CFT, is often considered as a key measure of 
the country's AML/CFT regime. An unfavorable rating would mean that 
the businesses, including financial institutions, would face greater 
scrutiny, higher costs of doing business, delays and other time consuming 
including unnecessary barriers when doing business with overseas 
counterparts. 
3.  While Nepal had received satisfactory rating in our last mutual evaluation 
in 2014 by APG, after the various efforts and reforms in respective sectors 
since the second mutual evaluation 2010, we have to do a lot for upcoming 
evaluation in 2020 which will be based on a more holistic methodology 
where greater focus will be on the effectiveness of our implementation.  If 
we do not attain good rating, the consequences could be high and Nepal 
will be listed in the FATF Public Statement as a country with significant 
deficiency in AML/CFT.  
4.  Bank and Financial Institutions (BFIs), being the most important partner 
for financial transactions, can play an important role of deterring as well 
as detecting money laundering and activities related to terrorism 
financing. Compliance with AML/CFT law and regulations in these 
financial institutions require high commitments with non-compliances 
being seriously dealt with. At the international level, we have witnessed 
that banks have been penalized billions of dollars for failure to comply 
with AML/CFT directives.  In Nepal, Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB), the Central 
Bank of Nepal, has been taking strong actions upon NRB licensed BFIs that 
have failed to comply and implement such directives related to AML/CFT. 
(For instance, the financial penalty that normally applies for non-
compliance ranges from one to fifty million rupees.)  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
5.  Money laundering can take different forms, and is not limited to tax 
evasion, cybercrime, identity fraud, phishing, card fraud, skimming, 
advance fee scams, fund transfer schemes, fake prizes, international 
lottery fraud, wills and legacies and loan fraud and international transfers 
etc. The technologies adopted by BFIs are making them increasingly 
vulnerable to various risks in money laundering. Generally, vulnerability 
to money laundering is greater when there is inadequate internal control 
system,  poor  risk  management  practices,  weak  good  governance, 
inadequate board and senior management oversight, inadequate policy, 
procedure and monitoring the functional activities and breach of contract 
and trust etc.  Although the banking system is stringent in Know Your 
Customer (KYC), it is not sufficient as expected to identify the beneficial 
owner and to apply the risk based approach. NRB has observed that 
money laundering is largely the result of weak internal control and poor 
risk management and practices of the respective banks. This highlights the 
need of efficient internal audit, strong internal control system and better 
risk management practices within the BFIs in addition to compliance to 
regulation and supervision for prevention, control and detection of 
financial crime. 
6.  BFIs must adopt strategic approach and also comply with the KYC 
regulations  based  on  risk  based approach,  real  time  transaction 
monitoring and transaction analysis for prevention and timely detection of 
financial crimes. The Board and senior management of BFIs should be 
proactive in understanding the potential risks and also put in place a 
crime prevention, control and detection mechanism. They should have a 
deep understanding of the institution’s strengths and weaknesses and be 
able to move their respective BFI in right direction. The prevention and 
corrective measures should also be a key concern to minimize the impact 
of financial loss that impact our economy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
7.  Nepal has established legal and institutional foundation to comply with 
AML/CFT standards. The whole of the legal and organizational framework 
of AML/CFT revolves around FATF's 40 recommendations. In that regard, 
8. 
its 
NRB  has  been  extensively  working  to  strengthen 
legal  and 
organizational framework. In this regime BFIs can play a very important 
role, not just because launderers have been abusing the financial system 
but also because as victim of such crimes, they are always at various risks 
such as legal, regulatory, concentration and reputational. 
In the case of Nepal stakeholders including the NRB and FIU-Nepal, have 
been proactively working to implement the preventive measures of 
financial crime, so as to investigate and disseminate the cases of money 
laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF) to Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs). FIU-Nepal received  45,93,5817 TTRs' and  887	STR's in FY 
2017/18 and out of the total STRs' that has been received; almost  312	
were disseminated to the LEAs. I hope that FIU-Nepal and LEAs will 
continue to coordinate to further investigate the cases for prosecution and 
convictions. I understand that FIU-Nepal has already installed the goAML 
system for strengthening the receiving, reporting and dissemination 
mechanism of information and reports from commercial banks and is now 
reporting under the test environment.  I am confident banks will soon 
move to live environment of goAML in reporting of STR and TTR to FIU-
Nepal.  
9.  Hence, leadership of Government of Nepal and joint and coordinate efforts 
among the regulators, BFIs, LEAs, FIU, civil society and support agencies  
such as ISP, Telecommunication companies, vendors, etc. including with 
the public private partnership can play an important role to control the 
financial crime and help to maintain the financial stability in country.   
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
10. At last, but not least, I would convey my best wishes that the conference 
will  be  successful  and  reach  a  concrete  conclusion  about 
the 
implementation of robust mechanism of AML compliance. In addition to 
this, I believe that, this program will able to help improve your knowledge 
on the risks associated with of ML/TF. It will also help to further continue 
discussions on plan of action to help prepare for the upcoming mutual 
evaluation scheduled in 2020.  
11. With this note, let me close my remarks by congratulating and thank you 
all for your gracious presence and attention. 
Thank you. 
