BANK Of ZAMBIA 
   CYBER SECURITY IN THE FINANCIAL SERVICES 
SECTOR WORKSHOP 
 SPEECH BY  
 DR. DENNY H. KALYALYA 
GOVERNOR – BANK OF ZAMBIA 
       MONDAY, 6th MAY 2019 
INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL, LUSAKA, ZAMBIA  
CYBER SECURITY IN THE FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR WORKSHOP, SPEECH BY DR. DENNY H. 
KALYALYA, GOVERNOR – BANK OF ZAMBIA – 6 MAY 2019 
 
Chief Executives of Financial Institutions in Zambia, 
Representatives from MEFMI, 
Members of staff from Bank of Zambia and other Financial Institutions 
Distinguished Resource Persons, 
Dear Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 
I am honoured to welcome you all to this important workshop on “Cyber Security in 
the  Financial  Services  Sector”,  which  is  being  jointly  conducted  by  the 
Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and Southern Africa 
(MEFMI) and the Bank of Zambia.  This workshop aims to discuss financial sector 
vulnerabilities  arising  from  cyber  threats  and  risks  and  to  develop  the  necessary 
skills and tools to make the sector resilient.   
 Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  a  special  welcome  to  our  facilitator  Dr. 
Rukanda. I am sure the delegates will greatly benefit from your experience and vast 
knowledge on the subject. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  are  all  aware,  Information  and  Communication 
Technology  (ICT)  have  over  the  years  permeated  all  aspects  of  our  lives  and  in 
particular, have become the mainstay of the world’s financial sector infrastructure. 
While  these  ever emerging  technologies  such as Digital transformation, Artificial 
Intelligence, Internet of Things, Cloud Computing, Enterprise Mobility and Mobile 
Banking, have brought about efficiency and  increased innovations, they have also 
exposed  the  financial  services  sector  to  cybercrime.  Some  notable  incidents  of 
 1 | P a g e  
cybercrime  include,  the  attack  on  the  Central  Bank  of  Bangladesh,  Russian  retail 
bank and seven banks in the United Kingdom.   
 The financial services sector is a key target by criminals because it is the custodian 
of large amount of funds in the economy. For this same reason, the financial services 
sector has to also deal with other types of risks, which among others include, fraud, 
extortion, money laundering, illicit financial flows, market manipulation, data theft, 
and  currency  attacks.  With  statistics  showing  an  increase  of  cyber-attacks  in  the 
financial sector, the importance of ensuring that our institutions are cyber resilient 
cannot be over-emphasized. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  financial  services  sector  has  to  see  cybersecurity  for 
what  it  is,  a  large  scale  operational  risk  deserving  the  utmost  attention  and  thus 
develop the necessary systems and cultures throughout the sector to deal with this 
risk. Key to the development and operation of these systems and cultures is the need 
to  nurture  talent  capable  of  addressing  cyber  security  threats  through  prompt 
detection, investigation, reporting, prosecution and prevention.   
 Distinguished  participants,  let  me  also  emphasize  that  cyber  risks  should  be 
viewed  from  an  enterprise-wide  perspective.    ICT,  Security,  Operations,  Credit 
Control, Anti-Money Laundering and Fraud Investigation departments need to break 
down the various silos to facilitate faster detection and prevention of cyber financial 
crimes.  No single department or function can be an island in this battle. In the same 
vein,  no  bank  or  financial  institution  can  be  an  island.  One  financial  institution 
brought  down  by  a  cyber-attack  would  impact  other  banks  and  could  ultimately 
destabilize the entire financial sector. It is for this reason that I call upon all CEOs 
 2 | P a g e  
here present to ensure that Cyber Security is entrenched in our day-to-day operations 
and strategic plans.  
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  aware  that  other  countries  have  set  up  Computer 
Incident  Response  Teams  (CIRTs)  for  various  industries,  including  the  Financial 
Sector. It is high time that we seriously begin to consider setting up a financial sector 
CIRT in Zambia.  I believe that the CIRT would, not only assist in ensuring that all 
financial institutions are collaborating and working as one in mitigating cyber risks, 
but also enable information sharing. I am therefore calling upon Bankers Association 
of Zambia to work with Bank of Zambia to ensure that this is achieved. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  you  the  best  and  I  encourage  you  to  participate 
actively during the presentations and discussions.  Use every opportunity to tap into 
the vast experience of the resource persons and your peers during these few days.  
 With these remarks, I declare this workshop officially open.   
 Thank you and God bless you all. 
  3 | P a g e  
