Digitalization, Competition, and Financial Stability 
Opening remarks prepared for the Seminar "Statistics on Fintech – Bringing 
Together Demand and Supply to Measure its Impact" organized by the 
Irving Fisher Committee (IFC) and the Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) 
17.08.2019 | Kuala Lumpur | Claudia Buch 
 1 Digital innovations as a catalyst for structural change in the ﬁnancial system
 a) Drivers of market dynamics
 b) Implications for productivity
 c) Implications for ﬁnancial stability
 2 Regulatory responses
 3 Better statistics for improved surveillance
 4 Summing Up
 5 References
I would like to thank Fabian Bichlmeier, Manuel Buchholz, Ulf von Kalckreuth, Matthias 
Köhler, Stephan Müller, Jens Reich, Joerg Stephan, Benjamin Weigert, Matthias Weiß, 
and Grit Winkler for their most helpful contributions and comments on an earlier draft. 
All remaining errors and inconsistencies are my own.
Digital innovations and improvements in information technology have the potential to 
signiﬁcantly change the competitive structure of banking markets. They are 
transforming the way in which information is collected, processed, and analysed. 
FinTechs and BigTechs potentially have comparative advantages over banks in deploying 
big data techniques, artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, or social media data for 
credit scoring or risk assessments.
There are different channels through which digital innovations can impact banking 
markets, with different implications for competition and ﬁnancial stability. Banks can 
develop new technologies in-house, FinTechs can provide speciﬁc ﬁnancial services, or 
BigTechs can use their existing network structures to provide a large range of ﬁnancial 
services to customers (FSB 2019). New market entrants may provide services to 
incumbent ﬁnancial ﬁrms or cooperate with existing ﬁnancial ﬁrms such as banks in 
order to offer new or enhanced ﬁnancial products to customers. By providing services 
to incumbents, technology can be improved and costs can be reduced. But new market 
entrants may also target limited, high value added elements of the value chain of banks 
and ﬁnancial ﬁrms.
Central banks have many reasons to take an interest in these developments as the 
structure of the ﬁnancial system shapes the transmission of monetary policy. Central 
banks are providers of payment systems, and they contribute to banking and ﬁnancial 
market supervision. Technological innovation in the ﬁnancial sector thus affects central 
banks along many dimensions.
In this paper, I focus on another important mandate of central banks: ﬁnancial stability. 
After the global ﬁnancial crisis, central banks were assigned a crucial role in 
contributing to a stable ﬁnancial system. According to the German ﬁnancial stability 
legislation, for instance, the Bundesbank is a member of the national Financial Stability 
Committee and provides analytical inputs on the stability of the German ﬁnancial 
system. For this purpose, the Bundesbank deﬁnes “ﬁnancial stability” as a situation in 
which the ﬁnancial system performs its key functions for the real economy in terms of 
allocating savings, investments, and risks as well as providing the infrastructure for the 
payments system. A stable ﬁnancial system is not a source of shocks that destabilize the 
economy, nor does it excessively contribute to the ampliﬁcation of shocks to the 
system. Vulnerabilities for the ﬁnancial system can emerge through various channels: 
risks at large and systemically important ﬁnancial institutions, a high degree of 
interconnectedness in the ﬁnancial system, and common exposure to the same shocks. 
Enhancing the resilience of individual ﬁnancial institutions through higher equity capital 
– and thereby also enhancing the resilience of the ﬁnancial systems as such — has thus 
been a key objective of the post-crisis reform agenda.
Assessing the ﬁnancial stability implications of digital ﬁnancial services thus requires an 
understanding of how vulnerabilities emerge and how they change over time. This 
includes assessing the risks of individual institutions, connections with other institutions, 
and exposure to common shocks. In addition, to the extent that FinTechs and BigTechs 
change the value chains of ﬁnancial activities and cooperate with several ﬁnancial 
institutions, disruptions of these value chains might become systemic.
Obtaining reliable information on the activities of FinTechs and BigTechs from traditional 
statistics and reporting systems is diﬃcult though. Given this patchy knowledge base, it 
is vital to monitor the resilience of ﬁnancial institutions. Whether emerging 
vulnerabilities will ultimately endanger ﬁnancial stability crucially depends on the 
resilience. It is interesting to note that some new providers of digital ﬁnancial services, 
such as BigTechs, are not funded through deposits and are well capitalized. This may – 
a priori – mitigate ﬁnancial stability concerns. Yet, if these companies venture into the 
realm of “traditional” ﬁnancial services such as deposit-taking and lending business or 
innovatively bundle existing services and products to create a new product. In this case, 
FinTechs and BigTechs may assume the same or even higher risks as regulated ﬁnancial 
institutions. Hence, assessments of resilience and of the related risks may change, 
which requires ﬁrst and foremost adequate coverage of these institutions in oﬃcial 
statistics.
This note discusses how digital innovations can be a catalyst for structural change in the 
ﬁnancial system and affect the risk-stability trade off. It argues that better statistics are 
needed in order to improve surveillance. Better statistics help in addressing the “big 
data paradox” – while the beneﬁts and challenges arising from digital innovation and 
better processing of data have been discussed at length, existing statistical systems 
provide little information for a structured surveillance of these trends. Results of a 
survey recently conducted by the Irving Fisher Committee (IFC) shows that central banks 
are closing data gaps and gathering data from FinTech infrastructure (such as crypto-
assets exchanges) and service providers.
 International cooperation is a key aspect 
here, and more work needs to be done with regard to the statistical business 
classiﬁcation of FinTech ﬁrms.
 [2]
 [1]
1 Digital innovations as a catalyst for structural change in the financial 
system
a) Drivers of market dynamics
Historically, structural changes in the ﬁnancial system have been a consequence of the 
process of ﬁnancial innovation in terms of new products or services, new production 
processes, or new organizational forms (Frame, Wall and White 2018; Frame and White 
2014). Financial innovation has often had its roots in advances in the processing power 
of IT systems and lower costs for data storage (Beck, Chen, Lin and Song 2016). This 
has reduced transaction costs and information asymmetries, thus affecting a key 
function of banks in the ﬁnancial system (Mishkin and Strahan 1999; Leland and Pyle 
1977). Advances in IT infrastructure made it possible to manage large securities 
portfolios and led to the development of automated credit scoring models which inter 
alia facilitated the securitization of assets (Berger 2003).
In a similar vein, digitalization has the potential to change the competitive advantages 
of providers of ﬁnancial services. New market entrants may have superior technologies 
for the screening of borrowers and thus lower information asymmetries (Dell’Arricia 
1998; Dell’Arricia, Friedman and Marquez 1999). BigTech ﬁrms have access to a wide 
range of customer data, which may be used to improve risk assessments and the 
screening of borrowers (Frost, Gambacorta, Huang, Shin and Zbinden 2019). These 
advantages have been identiﬁed for FinTech lenders (Jagtiani and Lemieux 2018; Fuster, 
Plosser, Schnabl and Vickery 2018). Additionally, BigTech ﬁrms might be able to achieve 
economies of scale through network effects. As a result, business models of ﬁnancial 
institutions that are based on the cross-subsidization of different types of services may 
come under pressure.
Forecasting how these trends will affect market dynamics in the ﬁnancial services sector 
is diﬃcult. In the past, entry into banking systems of advanced market economies has 
been rather limited due to strong market positions of incumbents and saturated 
markets. Exit has been driven primarily by mergers and acquisitions of smaller banks.
Take the German banking sector as an example. The number of banks in Germany has 
been in continuous decline over the past few decades 
, reﬂecting pressure to 
rationalize and cutting costs. Despite this shrinking of the market in terms of the 
number of institutions, the size of the German banking system in terms of total assets 
to GDP increased steadily until the global ﬁnancial crisis 
ﬁnancial crisis, large German banks, and in particular the Landesbanken, have scaled 
back their interbank activities and their foreign operations (Deutsche Bundesbank 
2017).
. Following the 
 (Figure 2)
 (Figure 3)
 (Figure 4)
. In the past, there have been relatively few market entries, most of 
Adjustment along the extensive margin shows some interesting patterns of entry and 
exit 
them – with a share of 60% – through foreign banks. Mergers among smaller banks 
have been the main exit channel. Implications for capacities in the banking sector have 
been limited though because the merged banks typically carry on conducting the 
business of the absorbed entities. Other exit channels, with potentially larger effects on 
overall capacities, have been more limited.
. Recently, margins have come under pressure as it is diﬃcult for banks to pass 
These trends have also had an impact on pricing and interest margins. Interest margins 
in the German banking sector have been narrowing steadily over the past decades 
(Figure 1)
negative monetary policy rates on to customer deposits. However, low and declining 
proﬁtability is not a recent phenomenon. Low interest rates rather aggravate structural 
pressure on bank proﬁtability due to ﬁercer competition as a result of greater 
transparency, reduced switching costs, and the entry of new suppliers of ﬁnancial 
services.
 b) Implications for productivity
Increasing assets of ﬁnancial institutions and thus ﬁnancial deepening have been global 
phenomena, at least until the ﬁnancial crisis. However, while the size of the global 
ﬁnancial sector has grown signiﬁcantly, it has not been one of the sectors that have 
innovated a lot. Relative to GDP, assets of German banks, for example, have increased 
from around 50% to more than 200% since the 1950s 
. Trends are similar 
for other banking systems. However, data for the past 150 years show that ﬁnancial 
services in the US have been produced under constant returns to scale, with an annual 
average cost between 1.5% and 2% of outstanding assets (Philippon 2015). Bazot 
(2017) documents similar trends for European banks, albeit based on shorter time 
series. More recently, roughly since the global ﬁnancial crisis, the costs of ﬁnancial 
intermediation seem to have declined as a result of improved technology and increased 
competition (Philippon 2019).
 (Figure 2)
The potential of banks to realize economies of scale and scope has been a recurring 
theme in the empirical literature. Recent research challenges the view that there are 
relevant economies of scale in banking. Instead, the systemic risk externalities that large 
banks pose to ﬁnancial systems may outweigh cost advantages due to size. Funding 
cost advantages are a proxy for the implicit government subsidy accruing to systemic 
banks and thus the expected bailout that debt holders expect to receive (Siegert and 
Willison 2015). Banks’ expectation that they will be bailed out in case of distress may 
affect their behavior, and particularly increase their size and complexity beyond socially 
optimal levels. Estimates of economies of scale in banking ﬁnd that the potential cost 
advantages are smaller than the costs to the macro-economy due to systemic risk and 
distorted incentives (Boyd and Heitz 2016). Once controlled for too-big-to-fail (TBTF) 
status, banks no longer beneﬁt from economies of scale (Davies and Tracey 2014).
How digital innovations affect productivity in banking crucially depends on changes in 
the competitive structure of markets. As in other industries, the entry of new, more 
productive ﬁrms and the exit of incumbent, less productive ﬁrms, can be a channel for 
improvements in productivity.
This process of “creative destruction” is, however, constrained by the fact that ﬁnancial 
institutions which are being restructured or are eventually resolved may pose threats to 
ﬁnancial stability. Dynamics of entry and exit thus differ across banks and non-ﬁnancial 
institutions: in the event of insolvency, liabilities of non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms can be frozen, 
and the ﬁrm can be gradually restructured and, possibly, resolved. Applying standard 
insolvency procedures to banks is more diﬃcult because of their short-term liabilities 
and the risk of runs and contagion effects. One core objective of post-crisis ﬁnancial 
sector reforms has thus been to restore normal market functioning, inter alia, by 
introducing restructuring and resolution regimes for systemically important banks.
c) Implications for financial stability
Digital ﬁnancial innovation and the entry of new providers of ﬁnancial services may not 
only affect productivity and eﬃciency but may also have important consequences for 
ﬁnancial stability. In ﬁnancial services, unlike in other industries, increased competition 
may not be welfare enhancing (Corbae and Levine 2018). Instead, the link between 
competition and risk in banking is non-linear (Martinez-Miera and Repullo 2010): A low 
degree of competition generates monopoly rents which the bank manager wants to 
protect by investing in safe assets (Keeley 1990). Accordingly, risk would increase if 
competition becomes more intense. However, weaker competition also drives up 
interest rate costs, borrowers choose riskier projects, and banks become riskier (Boyd 
and De Nicoló 2005). If this mechanism dominates, increased competition would tend 
to lower risks of individual ﬁnancial institutions.
Reﬂecting the opposing theoretical mechanisms, empirical studies ﬁnd it diﬃcult to 
establish a clear relationship between competition and risk, and the link between risk 
and competition depends on the type of bank and the type of risk considered (Freixas 
and Ma 2014).
Changing patterns of competition in the banking industry can have implications for 
ﬁnancial stability that go beyond those for individual banks. Insuﬃcient exit can lead to 
overcapacity and excessive risk-taking by weakly capitalized banks, weaken aggregate 
proﬁtability, and limit banks’ ability to rebuild buffers following negative shocks. 
Generally, the link between competition and ﬁnancial stability depends on the nature of 
the shock, risk-taking incentives at the level of the individual ﬁrm, and the overall 
structure of the banking system. In a highly concentrated banking system, dominated 
by a few banks, an idiosyncratic shock hitting a large ﬁnancial institution can have 
repercussions for the entire system (granularity effects or “too big to fail”). But a 
decentralized and weakly competitive banking system populated by many small banks 
might also have destabilizing features. If many smaller banks are exposed to the same 
(macroeconomic) risks, this may create systemic instability as well (“too many to fail”).
How the entry of new ﬁrms and the use of new technologies in the provision of 
ﬁnancial services affects ﬁnancial stability is thus hard to predict. It depends on changes 
in the riskiness of individual institutions and on structural features of the ﬁnancial 
system such as the degree of concentration, interconnectedness, and commonality in 
the exposure to shocks. Assessing the costs and beneﬁts of new ﬁnancial technologies 
is, therefore, conceptually diﬃcult. Lack of data adds an additional layer of complexity: 
many new entrants and suppliers of ﬁnancial services are hardly covered by oﬃcial 
statistics on the ﬁnancial sector.
This moves resilience against shocks and against mismeasurement of vulnerabilities to 
center stage. It is interesting to note that many BigTechs ﬁrms are quite well capitalized 
compared to banks. For example, ratios of equity to total assets are in the range of 
30% for companies like Amazon or Apple or around 75% for Google or Facebook.

[3]
 For comparison: The aggregate unweighted Tier1 capital ratio of banks is in the 
range of about 9% for US banks and 6% for euro area banks (CGFS 2018). Obviously, 
BigTechs are not banks – hence the funding structures and business models are not 
comparable.
portfolios, maturity structures, exposures to common shocks, or funding structures. Key 
to a surveillance of the emerging market for ﬁnancial services and changing 
vulnerabilities is thus suﬃciently detailed and granular information on all relevant 
actors.
Risk assessments must take into account the structure of asset 
 [4] 
2 Regulatory responses
Digitalization and increased competition through new market entrants is only one of 
the key trends affecting market structure. In addition, post-crisis ﬁnancial sector reforms 
affect the competitive structure of banking markets: More stringent capital 
requirements, as a core reform element, aim at shifting activities towards better-
capitalized banks. Policies reducing implicit subsidies for systemically important ﬁnancial 
institutions (“ending too-big-to-fail”) affect the market power of banks that beneﬁted 
from such subsidies. For reforms strengthening bank capital to be effective, they need 
to be accompanied by reforms of resolution frameworks which enable weak ﬁnancial 
institutions to exit the market without adverse effects on ﬁnancial stability.
At the same time, many regulatory discussions related to FinTech and BigTech center 
around entry regulations: Should the new suppliers of ﬁnancial services face the same 
regulations and licensing requirements as incumbents? Or should regulators lower entry 
barriers to stimulate competition? Are regulatory “sandboxes” the solution?
Answering these questions requires, ﬁrst and foremost, an assessment of the business 
models of new market entrants. If the characteristics of these ﬁrms resemble those of 
regulated ﬁnancial institutions in terms of risk characteristics that justify regulation, 
regulation should adequately address those risks.
In addition, attention should focus not only on entry regulation and prudential 
requirements but also on exit regulation. If digital innovations catalyze structural 
change, the implications for market dynamics, productivity, and ﬁnancial stability 
depend on the effectiveness of resolution regimes. The ongoing ex post evaluation of 
TBTF reforms by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) can be expected to provide useful 
insights as it assesses – inter alia – the effects of new resolution regimes.
evaluation focuses on the implementation of reforms, their credibility and effectiveness 
in terms of coping with the failure of systemic banks.
 The 
 [5]
Potential regulatory implications go beyond the prudential regulation of banks. How 
BigTechs will be able to enter the market for traditional banking activities will crucially 
depend on their ability to utilize customer data across different services. Close 
cooperation is thus needed between prudential regulators, competition authorities as 
well as data and consumer protection agencies. The use of new information 
technologies may increase the risks of cyber attacks, making necessary improved cyber-
mapping, reporting, and – potentially – regulation.
 Also, violation of privacy rules 
could be a concern if BigTech and FinTech ﬁrms provide banking services. Of course, 
appropriate privacy regulation are also required if traditional banks start providing 
services beyond traditional banking services.
 [6]
 [7]
 At the same time, its objective is to 
Policy trade-offs may require coordination across different authorities. The new rules for 
the recovery and resolution of banks in Europe can serve as an example, as they 
explicitly address such trade-offs. The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) is, 
in principle, distinct from competition law.
allow banks to be liquidated, and eventually resolved, without recourse to taxpayers’ 
money. If, however, ﬁnancial stability is at risk, the BRRD allows for public support. Such 
permission is subject to stringent conditions that have to take into account the rules of 
EU competition policy.
 Different authorities – resolution and competition authorities 
– therefore interact, each operating within their clearly deﬁned mandates. Balancing the 
different objectives may, at times, seem cumbersome and bureaucratic. Well-designed 
regulatory measures can thus ensure that increased competition need not come at the 
expense of ﬁnancial stability.
 [8]
 [9]
From a macroprudential perspective, assessing the need for regulatory responses 
requires an understanding of markets and market structures. Ideally, decisions on 
regulations should be taken as part of a structured policy process (Buch, Vogel and 
Weigert 2018). Such a policy process involves four steps: deﬁning policy objectives for 
macroprudential policies, choosing intermediate objectives and appropriate indicators, 
linking instruments to these indicators through ex-ante evaluation studies, and 
analyzing the effects of these policies through ex-post evaluation studies.
Having suﬃcient and reliable data early on is a key ingredient for such a policy process. 
Without good data, monitoring key indicators and assessing vulnerabilities is diﬃcult, 
and there will be an insuﬃcient basis for ex ante policy evaluation.
3 Better statistics for improved surveillance
Reliable statistics are the ﬁrst ingredient in any discussion on regulatory responses to 
ﬁnancial innovation from a macroprudential perspective. This presents a ”chicken-and-
egg” problem: Decisions on (macroprudential) regulation – including the decision 
whether or not to regulate – require good and reliable data as an input into surveillance 
work. At the same time, data on ﬁnancial institutions are traditionally collected within 
the context of (micro)prudential regulation and for monetary policy purposes. Hence, 
data would be collected after taking the decision to regulate.
One key policy response to digital innovations and new providers of ﬁnancial services is 
thus to address what one may call the “big data paradox”: On the one hand, new 
technologies promise a better, faster, and safer provision of ﬁnancial services and a 
more eﬃcient use of data. On the other hand, ﬁnancial regulators are struggling to 
understand the implications of digital innovations because there is hardly any consistent 
statistical information on how those innovations change market structures.
Following the ﬁnancial crisis, new statistical projects have thus been launched that 
decouple monitoring from regulation and that satisfy the data needs of a wide range of 
policy ﬁelds. Within the European System of Central Banks, for example, AnaCredit 
(analytical credit datasets) and the Securities Holdings Statistics provide granular 
information that provides inputs for a large range of central banking tasks.There have 
also been several national and international initiatives aimed at closing data gaps 
regarding non-bank ﬁnancial intermediation. The goal of these initiatives is to enhance 
the monitoring of risks by improving primary statistics on non-bank ﬁnancial 
intermediation in ﬁnancial accounts (ESRB 2019). Especially with regard to FinTech and 
BigTech, this requires both, deﬁning the institutions that enter the industry and provide 
ﬁnancial services as well as the deﬁnition of the services provided.
Currently, many statistics on the ﬁnancial sector do not capture FinTechs as most are 
recorded as providers of non-ﬁnancial services. Therefore, activities of these ﬁrms are 
not recorded systematically, and information on the riskiness of BigTechs and FinTechs is 
patchy. Currently, it is even diﬃcult to obtain accurate ﬁgures on the total number of 
ﬁrms on the market or their market shares. Therefore, initiatives are needed to improve 
the statistical reporting on new ﬁnancial activities, including information on activities, 
risks, and capitalization. Such initiatives also need to be coordinated globally.
The evolution of service provision by FinTechs and BigTechs is a particularly important 
issue for central banks. Essentially, all business areas are affected, including ﬁnancial 
stability, prudential supervision, payments, markets, and monetary analysis. But data 
requirements go beyond immediate central banking tasks. Data on these ﬁrms is also 
needed in areas such as cyber security or competition policy. Hence, there is a need to 
monitor new trends, and this requires harmonized statistical deﬁnitions.
In order to close these gaps, a Working Group on FinTech Data Issues was set up by the 
IFC to take stock of existing data sources, identify data gaps, provide guidance on 
FinTech classiﬁcation issues, and develop a way forward. In addition, the IFC has 
conducted a membership survey in 2019, which informs about approaches that central 
banks pursue with regard to FinTech data. The survey covers the current statistical 
infrastructure, “FinTech gaps” in statistics, FinTech data demands from a user 
perspective, ongoing initiatives to measure FinTech, and the role of international 
coordination. One of the main issues is that there is no clear deﬁnition of what 
“FinTech” and “BigTech” actually mean. The Financial Stability Board deﬁnes FinTech as 
a technologically-enabled ﬁnancial innovation that could result in new business models, 
applications, processes or products with an associated material effect on the provision 
of ﬁnancial services. This deﬁnition does not match easily with existing statistical 
concepts, and oﬃcial data are often lacking.
A review of statistical classiﬁcation systems such as the Central Product Classiﬁcation 
(CPC) for products and the International Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation of All 
Economic Activities (ISIC) shows that deﬁning FinTech ﬁrms from a statistical point of 
view is challenging. FinTechs are currently in a state of "limbo" with regard to 
classiﬁcation as they do not (yet) have a position in statistical classiﬁcation systems. The 
IFC membership survey’s preliminary results suggest that this is one of the most 
important issues. For all deﬁnitions currently in use, including the FSB deﬁnition cited 
above, the two descriptors "innovative" and "technology" are essential. These concepts 
are not time-invariant. Thus, a ﬁrm that is labeled “FinTech” today may not be a “
FinTech” ﬁrm ten years from now even if it continues to provide the same services, 
mainly because the technology will not be “new” anymore. One may be able to 
distinguish between FinTechs and other providers of ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial services, 
given the current state of ﬁnancial technology, but these distinctions will not lead to 
partitions that are stable over time, in the way they need to for statistical classiﬁcation 
purposes.
FinTech activities combine both, IT-driven business services as well as ﬁnancial service. 
Strikingly, in a sample of 180 German FinTech ﬁrms,
 von Kalckreuth and Wilson 
(2019) ﬁnd that only 20% of these FinTech ﬁrms were classiﬁed as ﬁnancial 
corporations in the Business Register of the Federal Statistical Oﬃce (Destatis). The 
other 80% are classiﬁed as non-ﬁnancial companies of various sorts, mostly IT service 
providers. Though the quantitative size of German FinTechs is (still) small, that means 
that our statistical picture may be missing out the most dynamic elements of the 
 [10]
ﬁnancial sector landscape. This could potentially lead to statistical biases when 
measuring the size and growth of the ﬁnancial sector as well as its value chains and 
thus its connectedness. Currently, dynamics in the FinTech sector are not being 
adequately captured by the ﬁnancial sector statistics.
 [11]
Better coverage of FinTech requires close cooperation of national statistical institutes 
and central banks in coordinated data collection efforts. This is one of the key results of 
the IFC membership survey. There is a large variety of data collected by central banks, 
but the collection process is not harmonized at the international level. Therefore, a 
systematic exchange of experience and data is needed to make further progress in 
statistical recording of FinTech activity and providers of digital ﬁnancial services more 
generally.
But there are also good news. The NACE classiﬁcation is about to be revised. It is 
important that this revision, and possibly also a revision of the underlying ISIC, will 
adequately reﬂect the development of the ﬁnancial sector by classifying FinTechs as 
ﬁnancial enterprises.
ﬁrms offering a mix of products and ﬁnancial services.
 This may require a discussion on how to adequately capture 
 [12]
In order to enable statistics to register and map ﬁnancial activity in the economy, two 
ingredients are needed. First, identiﬁcation of the key processes necessary to produce 
ﬁnancial services. Second, a classiﬁcation of activities and products as "ﬁnancial”, no 
matter whether they are provided by a traditional ﬁnancial institution or IT companies 
specialized in elements of the ﬁnancial value chain. This will make statistical 
measurement immune to outsourcing and specialization within the ﬁnancial industry 
and ensure ﬂexibility with regard to future technological progress. Capturing ﬁnancial 
services provided by BigTechs also requires that statistical reporting on the provision of 
ﬁnancial services should not depend on the industry classiﬁcation of a ﬁrm.
Monitoring FinTech services also requires new techniques for observing activities of 
ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial enterprises. A combination of traditional survey techniques 
and automated web scraping was recently used for the 2018 report on alternative 
ﬁnance platforms in Europe by the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance.
 [13]
remains to be seen how well digitalized data collection techniques can be ﬁtted into the 
infrastructure of oﬃcial statistics.
 It 
4 Summing Up
Undoubtedly, technological innovation can bring important improvements in 
productivity and convenience to the ﬁnancial services industry. It serves as a catalyst for 
structural change and thus requires careful monitoring of market dynamics and 
implications for risk.
Going forward, I see four main priorities for regulators and supervisors:
First, improving the statistics database on providers of digital ﬁnancial services is key. 
We need better data to assess risks, vulnerabilities, and resilience. Entry into the 
provision of ﬁnancial services should be conditional upon the provision of suﬃcient data 
and information that allows regulators to make the necessary assessments of risks. A 
recent survey by the Irving Fisher Committee shows that the statistical infrastructure is 
not yet geared to this new phenomenon. There is a lack of shared concepts and data. 
Strong cooperation on the national and the international level will thus be needed, 
which is one of the priorities of future work in the IFC.
Second, activities should be regulated irrespective of the institution offering it. This 
should eliminate possibilities for regulatory arbitrage so that risks are not shifted from 
regulated sectors toward new market participants for which these rules do not apply. 
Hence, regulation of new market participants should follow the principle of “same risk, 
same rules”.
Third, speeding up structural change might be perceived as being excessively disruptive 
at the current juncture. It may be argued that testing the new resolution regimes too 
early could undermine the credibility of reforms. Yet, simply preserving the current 
market structures entails risks as well. Protecting the market shares of (large) incumbent 
ﬁnancial institutions might counteract the reforms’ objectives to address the too-big-to-
fail issue. The potential for harnessing eﬃciency gains may be squandered.
Fourth, close cooperation between regulators is needed. This includes international 
cooperation in case innovations can have cross-border implications. But cooperation is 
also needed between regulators such as competition authorities and ﬁnancial regulators 
that have to assess and deal with relevant aspects of the same market.
5 References
Bazot, G. (2017). Financial Consumption and the Cost of Finance: Measuring Financial 
Eﬃciency in Europe (1950–2007). Journal of the European Economic Association 16(1): 
123–160.
Beck, T., T. Chen, C. Lin, and F. Song (2016). Financial innovation: The bright and the 
dark sides. Journal of Banking & Finance 72: 28-51.
Berg, T., and J. Gider (2016). What Explains the Difference in Leverage between Banks 
and Non-Banks?. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52: 2677-2702.
Berger, A. (2003). The Economic Effects of Technological Progress: Evidence from the 
Banking Industry. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35(2): 141-176.
Boyd, J. H., and G. De Nicoló (2005). The Theory of Bank Risk Taking and Competition 
Revisited. The Journal of Finance 60(3): 1329-1343.
Boyd, J. H., and A. Heitz (2016). The Social Costs and Beneﬁts of Too-big-to-fail Banks. 
A “Bounding” Exercise. Journal of Banking and Finance 68: 251–265.
Buch, C. M., E. Vogel, and B. Weigert (2018). Evaluating Macroprudential Policies. ESRB
Working Paper No 76. Frankfurt a.M..
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017). Financial Stability Review. November 2017. Frankfurt 
a.M..
Carletti, E., and A. Smolenska (2017). 10 Years On from the Financial Crisis: Co-
Operation Between Competition Agencies and Regulators in the Financial Sector. OECD
Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs. Competition Committee. Working Party 
No. (Number) 2 on Competition and Regulation. DAF/COMP/WP2(2017)8. Paris.
Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) (2018). Structural Changes in Banking 
after the Crisis. CGFS Papers No 60. Basel.
Corbae, D., and R. Levine (2018). Competition, Stability, and Eﬃciency in Financial 
Markets. In: 2018 Jackson Hole Symposium: Changing market Structure and 
Implications for Monetary Policy. forthcoming.
Davies, R., and B. Tracey (2014). Too Big to Be Eﬃcient? The Impact of Implicit Subsidies 
on Estimates of Scale Economies for Banks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46 
(s1): 219–253
Dell’Ariccia, G. (1998). Asymmetric Information and the Market Structure of the 
Banking Industry. IMF Working Paper No. (Number) 98/92. Washington DC.
Dell’Ariccia, G., E. Friedman, and R. Marquez (1999). Adverse Selection as a Barrier to 
Entry in the Banking Industry. The RAND Journal of Economics 30(3): 515-534.
Dorﬂeitner, G., L. Hornuf, M. Schmitt, and M. Weber (2017). FinTech in Germany. 
Springer, Heidelberg, New York, London.
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) (2019). EU Non-bank Financial Intermediation Risk 
Monitor 2019. Frankfurt a.M..
Financial Stability Board (FSB) (2019). FinTech and market structure in ﬁnancial services: 
Market developments and potential ﬁnancial stability implications. Basel.
Frame, S. (Seite), L. Wall, and L. White (2018). Technological Change and Financial 
Innovation in Banking: Some Implications for Fintech. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Working Paper 2018-11. Atlanta.
Frame, S. (Seite), and L. White (2014). Technological Change, Financial Innovation, and 
Diffusion in Banking. The Oxford Handbook of Banking 2nd edn. Oxford.
Freixas, X., and K. Ma (2014). Banking Competition and Stability: The Role of Leverage. 
Tilburg University Discussion Paper 2014-009. Tilburg.
Frost, J., L. Gambacorta, Y. Huang, H. S. (Seite) Shin, and P. Zbinden (2019). BigTech and 
the changing structure of ﬁnancial intermediation. BIS Working paper. Basel.
Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, and J. Vickery (2018). The Role of Technology in 
Mortgage Lending. FED New York. Staff Report No. (Number) 836. New York.
von Kalckreuth, U., and N. Wilson (2019). Towards integrating Fintech into statistical 
classiﬁcation systems – a process oriented approach. Irving Fisher Committee Working 
Group on FinTech Data. Mimeo. Frankfurt a.M..
Keeley, M. C. (1990). Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking. American 
Economic Review 80(5): 1183-1200.
Leland, H. E., and D. H. Pyle (1977). Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure and 
Fi-nancial Intermediation. Journal of Finance 32(2): 371-387.
Martinez-Miera, D., and R. Repullo (2010). Does Competition Reduce the Risk of Bank 
Failure?. The Review of Financial Studies 23(10): 3638-3664.
Mishkin, F., and P. Strahan. (1999). What will technology do to ﬁnancial structure?. 
NBER Working Paper 6892. Cambridge MA.
Philippon, T. (2015). Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Eﬃcient? On the Theory 
and Measurement of Financial Intermediation. American Economic Review 105(4): 
1408–1438.
Philippon, T. (2019). On Fintech and Financial Inclusion. Mimeo. New York.
Siegert, C., and M. Willison (2015). Estimating the Extent of the ‘Too big to fail’ 
Problem – a Review of Existing Approaches. Bank of England Financial Stability Paper 
32. London.
Figures
Figure 1: Interest margins in the German banking sector
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics and Statistics of the Banks’ 
Profit and Loss Accounts 
The graph depicts the size-weighted ratio of the net interest margin to total assets for 
different groups of banks. The net interest margin is deﬁned as the difference between 
interest income and interest expenses. For the denominator the yearly average of total 
assets is used. Interest margins in the German banking sector have been narrowing 
steadily over the past decades. Recently, margins have come under pressure as it is 
diﬃcult for banks to pass negative monetary policy rates on to customer deposits.
Figure 2: Number of Banks in Germany 1950-2018
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics 
The process of consolidation, which had been evident for some time, gained traction in 
the 1990s. This holds especially true for the cooperative bank sector with its very large 
branch network, as credit institutions set out to streamline costs. Momentum waned 
after the turn of the millennium, however. The aggregate number of institutions across 
all categories of banks shrank by more than half between 1990 and 2015. Advancing 
digitalisation has further eroded the importance of branches as a sales channel, while 
the pressure to reduce the cost base through economies of scale has fostered the 
spread of direct banking. The surge in 1985 can be ascribed to a one-off effect resulting 
from the expansion of data collection for credit cooperatives from a partial to a 
complete survey.
Figure 3: Assets of German Banks (1950-2018)
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics 
Deregulation in the 1990s enabled large banks, in particular, to expand. The upturn in 
capital market ﬁnancing was chieﬂy driven by four sets of ﬁnancial market promotion 
legislation in Germany. The third legislation, dating from 1998, had the greatest impact 
on the volume of bank debt issuance. The ﬁnancial crisis brought to a halt a trend of 
ﬁnancial market liberalisation, which had been unfolding since the 1990s. The spread of 
the subprime crisis to the money market in summer 2007 and the Lehman Brothers 
failure in September 2008 made it more diﬃcult and more expensive for German banks 
to obtain ﬁnance on the interbank and capital markets. In particular, the Landesbanken 
and mortgage banks – categories of banks which had been hit hard by restructuring 
and resolution – saw their total assets contract. This contributed signiﬁcantly to the 
decline in the aggregated total assets of the German banking system. Implementation 
of the German Act to Modernise Accounting Law (Bilanzrechtsmodernisierungsgesetz), 
which introduced accounting of derivatives in the trading portfolio, is driving the 
notable increase in the aggregated total assets of the German banking system in 2010. 
This caused a large rise in total assets, especially for the big banks and the 
Landesbanken.
Figure 4: Entries and exits in the German banking sector
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistics of Bank Offices and Supervisory Data 
In the past, there have been relatively few market entries, most of them through 
foreign banks. Mergers among smaller banks have been the main exit channel. 
Implications for capacities in the banking sector have been limited though because the 
merged banks typically carry on conducting the business of the absorbed entities. Other 
exit channels, with potentially larger effects on overall capacities, have been more 
limited.
Footnotes:
1. The IFC is a forum of central bank economists and statisticians that operates under 
the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
2. The results of the IFC-survey on Fintech data will be summarized in a report and 
made publicly available on the BIS website (https://www.bis.org/ifc/publications.htm?
m=3%7C46%7C94).
3. These numbers are taken from Bloomberg and refer to the ﬁrst quarter of 2019.
4. See Berg and Gider (2016) for a discussion on the leverage ratios of banks and non-
ﬁnancial ﬁrms.
5. Updated information on the evaluation, including consultative and ﬁnal reports, will 
be available at: https://www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/implementation-
monitoring/effects-of-reforms/
6. The G7 (Gruppe der Sieben) has, for instance, agreed on common principles for 
addressing cyber risks: https://www.bundesbank.de/en/tasks/topics/g7-countries-
adopt-reports-on-cybersecurity-764644
7. See item 7 of the European Commission’s Banking Communication 2013: “Financial 
stability remains of central importance in the Commission's assessment of state aid to 
the ﬁnancial sector under this Communication.” Art. (Artikel) 107(3)b.
8. BRRD, Art. (Artikel) 32(4)d: [an institution shall be deemed failing or likely to fail if] 
“extraordinary public ﬁnancial support is required except when, in order to remedy a 
serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State and preserve ﬁnancial stability 
[…].”[…] “In each of the cases mentioned […], the guarantee or equivalent measures 
referred to therein shall be conﬁned to solvent institutions and shall be conditional on 
ﬁnal approval under the Union State aid framework.”
9. In a similar vein, Carletti and Smolenska (2017) argue that viewing ﬁnancial 
regulations through the lens of competition theory and enhancing cooperation 
between different authorities can be beneﬁcial.
10. Using a list of FinTech ﬁrms taken from Dorﬂeitner, Hornuf, Schmitt and Weber 
(2017), von Kalckreuth and Wilson (2019) could match 180 of the 433 ﬁrms on that 
list to entries in the Destatis Business Register.
11. Data on the “use side” of FinTech by households and ﬁrms is also extremely scarce. In 
this regard, an ongoing household survey on credit platforms and robo-advice run by 
the Bundesbank may serve as a valuable prototype. First results are expected to be 
published at the beginning of 2020.
12. Issues related to the classiﬁcation of FinTech are discussed in von Kalckreuth and 
Wilson (2019).
13. See Ziegler, Shneor, Gravey, Wenzlaff, Yerolemou, Rui and Zhang (2018: p. 19) on 
methodology.
