Juyeol Lee: Inaugural address
Inaugural address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, Seoul, 2 April 2018.
 (The  following  is  an  unofficial  English  translation  of  the  inaugural  address  of  Juyeol  Lee,  the
Governor of the Bank of Korea.)
My dear fellow Bank of Korea staff!
Today I begin my second term as Bank of Korea governor. This is not only a great honor for me
personally, but from the standpoint of our organization as well I think it has a very deep meaning
in serving to honor the Bank of Korea’s neutrality and the autonomy of its monetary policy. At first
I  considered  beginning  my  new  term  without  holding  any  event  at  all,  but  for  the  purpose  of
reflecting together with you all on this meaning, and newly resolving ourselves for the work ahead
of us, we are having this inaugural ceremony, even if it is only a simple one.
First, let me express my heartfelt appreciation to our Monetary Policy Board members, who have
given  their  all  in  our  establishment  and  operation  of  monetary  policy  even  under  the  harsh
conditions that we have faced over the past four years, and to our executives and staff, who have
faithfully carried out the duties assigned to them under these conditions as well.
My fellow Bank of Korea staff!
Recently our domestic economy, as well as economies overseas, have been growing solidly,
and  it  is  forecast  that  these  trends  will  persist  going  forward  as  well.  But  I  think  that  the
uncertainties surrounding our economy now are greater than at any other time before. 
Already this year financial markets worldwide have been shaken to considerable extents, in line
with  the  monetary  policy  normalizations  in  major  countries  and  the  movements  toward
strengthened trade protectionism. In Korea structural problems have also built up, owing to our
low  birthrate  and  population  aging,  income  imbalances,  dual  labor  market  structure  and
accumulated household debt. All of these are factors that can undermine the stability of our real
economy and financial system.
In  severe  conditions  like  these,  we  will  need  to  equip  ourselves  with  strong  senses  of
responsibility  and  mission,  and  ponder  deeply  the  directions  appropriate  to  our  future  policy
operations. And as I begin my second term here today, I would like to talk from now on about the
tasks that I plan to focus on pushing ahead with.
First, while working to sustain the momentum of the economic recovery, we will also have to
operate our monetary policy so as to ensure that financial system stability can be maintained. As
we continue our monetary policy accommodation to support our economy’s trend of growth, and
closely examine changes in real economic and financial stability conditions, we will need to judge
carefully the necessity of any adjustment in the degree of accommodation. In this process we will
have  to  devote  special  care  to  making  sure  that  potential  financial  system  risks,  such  as  the
buildup of household debt and the possibility of capital outflows, do not materialize. In order to
operate our monetary policy effectively, accurate assessment and forecasting of financial and
economic conditions are essential. And on the basis of this we will have to maintain consistency
in our policy-making, while formulating the directions for our monetary policy operations from a
medium-term perspective and communicating on them with the market.
While  devoting  efforts  to  the  efficient  operation  of  our  monetary  policy,  we  will  not  hesitate  to
provide  advice  on  pending  economic  issues  overall.  Short-term  policy  responses  to  the  risks
facing  us  mentioned  earlier  are  of  course  important,  but  when  looked  at  from  a  long-term
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
perspective I believe that the work of resolving the structural vulnerabilities in our economy is a
task  that  cannot  be  delayed  any  longer.  Through  in-depth  research  we  will  have  to  precisely
diagnose  the  urgent  economic  issues  before  us,  seek  viable  responses  to  them,  and
consistently propose these to the policy authorities.
To enhance our monetary policy’s effectiveness we will need to reconsider our policy framework
and instruments. Taking into account the changes in the relationship between growth and prices,
as well as the importance of the central bank’s role in financial stability, we will have to deliberate
deeply on measures to facilitate efficient operation of our inflation targeting system. Since there is
a possibility that, together with the drop in our potential growth rate, the scope for our Base Rate
operations will become narrower than previously, it will be necessary from a medium- to long-
term perspective to also devise measures for securing our policy capacity. 
We  will  have  to  respond  actively  to  the  changes  in  our  financial  environment  due  to  the
developments  of  fintech  and  new  technologies  such  as  Blockchain.  Technological  innovation
these  days  is  so  rapid  and  complex  that  it  is  difficult  to  compare  it  with  past  cases.  These
changes  do  bring  to  us  new  opportunities  and  convenience,  but  they  can  also  lead  to
unanticipated risks and also threaten our financial system’s stability. We will have to strengthen
our research on the impacts that digital innovation is having on the real and financial economies,
while at the same time also participating actively in the international discussions in this regard.
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea!
In starting my first term four years ago I immediately launched the ｢Management Improvement
T/F｣, which promoted the heightening of our work efficiency. Since then we have continued our
efforts  to  raise  our  staff’s  sense  of  accomplishment  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  our
organization  as  a  whole,  but  it  is  true  that  there  are  still  inadequacies  in  our  management
practices  that  will  have  to  be  improved  upon  going  forward.  If  we  say  that  in  operating  our
organization over the past four years we have put ‘stability‘ first, then during the next four years
we  will  place  our  focus  on  ‘change  and  innovation.‘  To  this  end  we  will  reassess,  from  the
present day’s perspective, the various systems and practices related to internal management at
our Bank, and build upon the parts of our heritage that are worth preserving while proactively
seeking to change practices that are either obsolete or in need of improvement. 
To speak a little more concretely here, we will have to aggressively clear away any inefficiencies
in our work process, and heighten our productivity. Precious time and resources should not be
wasted  in  unnecessary  processes  or  practices.  Through  the  delegating  of  authority  to  lower
levels of staff, the simplification of our reporting process, and the minimization of task overlaps
across departments, we will strive to enhance the efficiency of our work process and decision-
making system. I think that this is also important in order that staff be able to strike a ‘balance
between work and life.’
And if we want these efforts to bear the intended fruit, then smooth communication between high
and  low  level  staff  members,  between  colleagues,  and  between  departments  is  essential.
Together  with  this,  through  personnel  management  based  on  objective  criteria  for  assessing
performance and ability, we will ensure the reinvigoration of our organization.
My fellow Bank of Korea staff!
In circumstances where domestic and overseas economic conditions are severe like this, I think
that the public expectations for the central bank are higher than at any other time. And in order for
the  Bank  of  Korea  to  be  able  to  satisfy  these  public  expectations,  all  staff  will  need  to  gather
themselves,  with  new  determination,  and  strive  to  fulfill  their  individual  responsibilities.  In
connection  with  this,  I  think  that  at  this  point  in  time  it  is  crucial  to  have  an  open  attitude  of
willingness to listen to healthy criticisms or opinions from outside. I always stress that we must
be ever vigilant against the possibility of delays in our development as a result of homogeneous
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
thinking. And this is why we must carry out our duties with more adventurous attitudes, and also
why increasing the diversity of our organizational composition is appropriate.
In order to become a central bank trusted by the public, as is our vision, we must live up to the
public’s high expectations not only in our policy operations but also from the perspective of our
morality. Our individual staff  members  will  have  to  maintain  their  dignities  as  central  bankers.
Slackness  in  complying  with  our  principles  and  regulations  in  the  execution  of  our  duties  is
unacceptable.
Dear Bank of Korea executives and staff!
Let  us  all,  as  central  bank  employees,  be  resolute  in  our  purpose  of  contributing  to  the
development of our national economy, and while cooperating and communicating actively with
each other exert ourselves to the utmost in fulfilling the responsibilities that we are entrusted with.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
