Yannis Stournaras: Lessons from the Greek crisis - past, present,
future
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  87th  International
Atlantic Economic Conference "Lessons from the Greek Crisis: Past, present, future", Athens,
28 March 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It gives me great pleasure to be here today to share my thoughts on the lessons from the Greek
crisis. First, I would like to give you an overview of the Greek crisis and a recap of the progress
made  since  2010,  and  outline  the  challenges  that  Greece  still  faces.  I  will  then  discuss  the
prospects  of  the  Greek  economy  and  the  pre-conditions  that  need  to  be  met  to  achieve
sustainable  growth.  Finally,  I  will  put  forward  some  proposals  for  enhancing  the  EMU
architecture.
1. Brief overview and lessons from the Greek crisis
At the onset of the crisis, a deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, the downgrades of
sovereign  debt  and  rising  sovereign  spreads  on  account  of  large  macroeconomic  and  fiscal
imbalances cut off the Greek sovereign and Greek banks from international capital and money
markets. Extremely tight liquidity conditions ensued, and pressure on the banking sector grew,
amid substantial deposit withdrawals. An unprecedented fiscal consolidation was undertaken to
correct the fiscal imbalance.
The  crisis  has  taken  a  heavy  toll  on  output,  incomes  and  wealth.  Between  2008  and  2016,
Greece lost over one fourth of its GDP at constant prices, and the unemployment rate rose by
nearly 16 percentage points. Furthermore, GDP per capita at purchasing power parity declined to
67% of the EU average in 2017, down from 93% in 2008. Meanwhile, there was a large brain
drain, depriving Greece’s society and economy of a highly productive segment of its population,
with immeasurable demographic, economic and social consequences.
The deterioration in the macroeconomic environment and the slide of the GDP growth rate into
negative  territory  raised  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to  unsustainable  levels  despite  the  fiscal
consolidation and caused debt-servicing problems for households and businesses. As a result,
non-performing loans (NPLs) rose substantially, weakening the banks’ asset quality, thus making
it  difficult  for  banks  to  finance  the  real  economy.  Resolving  the  Greek  crisis  took  eight  years,
three  economic  adjustment  programmes,  one  major  debt  restructuring  and  three  rounds  of
banks recapitalisation.
Several factors can explain the length and depth of the Greek crisis:
First, the size and speed of fiscal consolidation were unprecedented. This primarily had to do
with  the  fact  that  the  initial  macroeconomic  imbalances  were  much  higher  in  Greece  than  in
other countries.
Second, the fiscal multipliers turned out to be higher than initially anticipated (see Blanchard and
Leigh, 2013, 2014). Furthermore, the focus of fiscal policy on higher taxes led to an increase in
the  informal  sector  of  the  economy,  a  loss  of  tax  revenue  due  to  tax  evasion  and  additional
measures in order to meet the fiscal targets (Dellas et al., 2017). As a result, the economy was
soon caught in a vicious circle of austerity and recession.
Third, there were certain flaws in the design of the economic adjustment programmes. Given
the  size  of  the  initial  fiscal  imbalances,  more  emphasis  was  placed  on  fiscal  consolidation,
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
streamlining budgetary procedures and increasing fiscal transparency, at the expense of growth-
enhancing reforms, tackling tax evasion and reorganising the public sector. (1)
Fourth, the idiosyncratic sequencing of structural reforms led to real wages declining more than
initially planned, deepening the recession. The reform effort focused more on the labour market
than on goods and services markets (see Berti and Meyerman, 2017, on the ‘sequencing’ and
‘packaging’ of reforms). Hence, nominal wages declined faster and more strongly than prices.
Households  experienced  a  massive  drop  in  purchasing  power,  which,  in  turn,  constrained
personal consumption and deepened the recession.
Fifth,  the  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  problem  proved  more  difficult  to  manage  than  initially
anticipated. Mainly the result of economic contraction, it was further exacerbated by legislative
changes  such  as  the  blanket  moratorium  on  primary  residence  auctions  and  the  abuse  of
foreclosure  protection  under  Law  3869/2010,  as  well  as  several  other  legal  and  judicial
impediments. A more dynamic response during the first years of the crisis, by implementing the
necessary  legislative  changes  much  earlier  and  introducing  a  centralised  asset  management
framework for NPLs as other Member States have done could have reduced the problem we
face today.
Sixth,  certain  reforms  fell  behind  the  agreed  time  schedule  due  to  several  factors,  including:
insufficient  ownership  of  the  necessary  reforms;  populist  rhetoric,  rivalry  and  failure  of  the
political  parties  to  reach  an  understanding;  and  the  resistance  of  various  –  small  and  large  –
vested interests to reform. The biggest manifestation of this political rivalry and polarisation was
the failure to elect a President of the Republic at the end of 2014, which led to early elections in
2015 and to the unfortunate negotiations of the first half of 2015. These, in turn, led to the signing
of the third adjustment programme, capital controls, another bank recapitalisation round and two
years of economic stagnation.
Seventh, political economy deliberations in the euro area also played their part in delaying the
recovery of the Greek economy. The Eurogroup decision of November 2012 to grant further debt
relief was put off for several years and was implemented only in June 2018. This undermined the
growth prospects of the Greek economy and prolonged the duration of the crisis.
Last,  but  not  least,  when  the  Greek  crisis  broke  out,  the  EMU  lacked  the  tools  to  avert  and
contain the crisis (see Katsimi and Moutos, 2010). The EU fiscal rules (Stability and Growth Pact
−  SGP)  failed  to  avert  the  soaring  public  debt,  and  there  was  no  monitoring  and  control  over
macroeconomic imbalances. Moreover, euro area crisis management and resolution tools were
practically non-existent due to moral hazard concerns. Instead, the ECB stepped in to contain
the spillover risk to the rest of the euro area.
2. Significant progress has been made since the beginning of the debt crisis
Despite the missteps and delays, significant progress has been made since the beginning of the
sovereign debt crisis in 2010. The implementation of a bold economic adjustment programme
has  eliminated  the  root  causes  of  the  Greek  crisis  (see  Stournaras,  2019a,  2018a,b  and
Malliaropulos, 2019). It is particularly worth noting that:
• The fiscal adjustment was unprecedented, turning a primary deficit of 10.1% of GDP in 2009
into a primary surplus of 3.9% of GDP in 2017.
• The current account deficit has been reduced by more than 12 percentage points of GDP since
the beginning of the crisis.
• Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored and price competitiveness has recorded
substantial gains since 2009.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
• A bold programme of structural reforms was implemented, covering various areas, such as the
pension and healthcare systems, goods and services markets, the business environment, the
tax system, the budgetary framework and public sector transparency.
Meanwhile, the role of the Bank of Greece was pivotal in the restructuring and the recapitalization
of the banking system as well as in the enhancement of its corporate governance. Today, banks’
capital adequacy ratios stand at satisfactory levels, and their loan-loss provisions are sufficient to
address potential credit risks.
However,  the  banking  system  still  faces  a  very  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs). A
number of important reforms have been implemented in this regard, aiming to provide banks with
an array of tools to tackle this challenge, including a strengthening of the supervisory framework
by setting operational targets for NPL reduction, the creation of a secondary NPL market and the
removal of various legal, judicial and administrative barriers to the management of NPLs (see
Bank of Greece, 2018).
These actions have started to bear fruit, as shown by the continued reduction of the NPL stock in
line  with  the  targets  set.  Non-performing  loans  amounted  to  EUR  81.8  billion  at  the  end  of
December 2018, down by EUR 25.4 billion from their peak in March 2016. However, the NPL
ratio remained high, at 45.4% in December 2018.
On  account  of  the  reforms  implemented  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  and  the  effort  of
enterprises to make up for declining domestic demand by exporting to new markets, openness
has improved substantially, and the economy has started to rebalance towards tradable, export-
oriented sectors.
• The share of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 37.7% in 2018. Exports of
goods and services, excluding the shipping sector, have increased in real terms by 53% since
their trough in 2009, outperforming euro area exports as a whole.
• The volume of tradable goods and services in the economy increased cumulatively between
2010 and 2017 by 14% relative to non-tradables in terms of gross value added. The rebalancing
of the economy towards the internationally tradable sectors was facilitated by increases in the
relative prices and net profit margins of tradable goods and services. It is worth underlining the
fact  that,  in  2017,  the  estimated  net  profit  margins  of  tradables  were  three  times  higher  than
those of non-tradables.
Thanks to improved economic conditions and to the reforms implemented, the unemployment
rate, though still high, fell to 18.7% in the fourth quarter of 2018, from 27.8% at the end of 2013.
3. The Greek economy continues to face major challenges
Despite the progress made so far, the Greek economy continues to face major challenges and
crisis-related legacies. The European Commission, in its report for the European Semester of
2019  (see  European  Commission,  2019),  points  out 
faces  excessive
macroeconomic imbalances. Particular mention is made of the following challenges:
that  Greece 
• the high public debt (whose sustainability has improved significantly in the medium term with
the measures adopted by the Eurogroup in June 2018);
•  the  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs),  which  impairs  banks’  lending  capacity  and
delays the recovery of investment and economic activity (see Abiad et al., 2011);
•  Greece’s  negative  net  international  investment  position  and  still  negative  current  account
balance;
• high unemployment, which generates inequalities that threaten social cohesion and increases
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the risk of depreciation of human capital (see Blanchard and Summers, 1986, and Moller, 1990);
and
• the low potential growth rate, due to the loss of human and physical capital during the crisis
(see Bhagwati and Hamada, 1974, on the effect of brain drain), coupled with population ageing
and a very low investment rate.
Without ignoring the effect of still relatively weak domestic demand and the funding constraints
hampering  new  investment,  the  business  environment  can  still  not  be  considered  investment
friendly and discourages investment with high tax rates, extensive bureaucracy, limited access to
bank financing and delays in court proceedings and rulings. In this context, it should be noted that
non-price or structural competitiveness is not only low compared with our European peers but it
has in fact receded over the past two years, according to the Doing Business report of the World
Bank (2018) and the Global Competitiveness Index of the World Economic Forum (2018).
On top of all this, maintaining large primary surpluses over a prolonged period (e.g. 3.5% of GDP
until 2022) impacts negatively on GDP growth. The restrictive effect of large primary surpluses is
even more pronounced when accompanied by very high taxation which increases the informal
sector of the economy (see Dellas et al., 2017).
4. The pre-conditions for sustainable growth
To address the challenges facing the Greek economy, speed up the recovery and strengthen
investor confidence in Greece’s long-term economic prospects, the following ten policy actions
should be considered:
1st  Reducing  the  high  stock  of  NPLs  with  the  timely  implementation  of  the  two  systemic
solutions proposed by the Bank of Greece and the Ministry of Finance, which will supplement the
banks’ own efforts.
2nd Reducing the primary surplus target for the period up to 2022 to 2.0% of GDP compared with
the current target of 3.5%.
3rd  Changing  the  fiscal  policy  mix,  with  an  emphasis  on  lower  tax  rates  and  higher  public
investment, so as to boost the growth impact of fiscal policy.
4 r d Implementing  more  structural  reforms  (including  those  agreed  as  part  of  the
enhanced post-programme surveillance) to safeguard the fiscal achievements made so far
and to enhance policy credibility. This would have a positive impact on Greece’s attempt to return
to international financial markets on a sustainable basis.
5th Broadening the scope for public-private cooperation, in line with best international practices,
for  example,  by  strengthening  public-private  partnerships  in  investment,  social  security  and
healthcare.
6th Improving the quality and safeguarding the independence of public institutions. Independent
and  properly  functioning  institutions  enhance  long-term  economic  growth  (see Acemoglu  and
Robinson, 2012). In this context, a speedier delivery of justice, legal certainty and a clear and
stable legal framework are essential conditions for strengthening the public sense of fairness and
justice, for improving the investment climate and for accelerating economic growth.
7th  Implementing  a  more  focused  policy for  attracting  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI), by
reducing  the  tax  burden,  improving  public  administration  efficiency  and  removing  major
disincentives,  such  as  bureaucracy,  legislative  and  regulatory  ambiguity,  especially  land  use,
delays in litigation, and remaining restrictions on capital movements. FDI is crucial as domestic
savings  are  insufficient  to  cover  the  investment  needs  of  the  Greek  economy.  In  addition  to
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
helping  to  reduce  the  investment  gap,  FDI  promotes  closer  trade  links  with  countries  and
companies with state-of-the-art technologies and facilitates participation in global value chains.
This would increase extroversion and improve both the quantity and quality of Greek exports (see
Kinoshita, 2011). This, in turn, would accelerate a reallocation of production resources towards
exports and increase Greece’s long-term potential output (see Olosfdotter, 1998, and Reisen and
Soto, 2001).
8th Maintaining labour market flexibility and supporting the long-term unemployed, so as to avoid
losing the gains in competitiveness and employment growth from the painstaking reform effort of
the period 2010–2017.
9th Enhancing the so-called ‘knowledge triangle’, i.e. education, research and innovation, and
the  digitalisation  of  the  economy  by  adopting  policies  and  reforms  that  support  research,
technology  diffusion,  entrepreneurship  and  foster  closer  ties  between  businesses,  research
centres and universities. This would contribute to further increasing R&D spending and the ICT
sector’s share in GDP.(2)
However, exploitation of ICT calls for continuous development and training in new technologies,
the adoption of innovative products and the enhancement of start-up entrepreneurship. Overall,
serious efforts are required to foster innovation and R&D spending in order to boost Greece’s
digital transformation.
10th Targeting policy efforts on providing incentives for cluster development, so as to help SMEs
overcome their small size and exploit economies of scale, given the very significant role of SMEs
in  the  Greek  economy.  Incentives  should  also  be  provided  to  improve  the  technology  and
knowledge content of their output, while emphasis should be placed on facilitating their access to
foreign  markets  through  export  promotion  strategies  and  the  establishment  of  common
distribution channels. It is well documented that financial development boosts the growth of small
firms more than it does large firms and hence fosters aggregate economic growth (see Beck et
al., 2004). Furthermore, policy action is needed to provide funding via the banking sector, the
capital markets as well as through various EU funds, while financial technology (FinTech) could
offer alternative finance options to SMEs.
The Bank of Greece has an active interest in FinTech and has, in fact, recently set up a FinTech
Innovation Hub (see Bank of Greece, 2019) aiming to offer support and information to firms and
individuals  who  are  introducing  or  considering  the  adoption  of  innovative,  technology-driven
financial products, services or business models.
5. The EMU dimension
A  lot  has  been  done  in  recent  years  to  improve  the  functioning  of  EMU.  Nonetheless,  the
architecture of EMU is still incomplete in many respects, and euro area policy makers cannot rely
solely  on  ECB  interventions  (see  European  Commission,  2018d;  Stournaras,  2019b).  The
following improvements are considered necessary:
First, it is essential to ensure that the economic rebalancing mechanism (i.e. the Macroeconomic
Imbalance Procedure) operates more symmetrically, i.e. both for Member States with external
deficits and for those with external surpluses. Up to now, the burden of adjustment has fallen, to
a very large degree, on Member States with current account deficits. Member States with high
current account surpluses could have responded more appropriately.
Second,  it  is  a  priority  to  complete  the  Banking  Union  with  a  European  Deposit  Insurance
Scheme and the Capital Markets Union in order to restore intra-European financial flows, improve
stability in the banking sector and promote private risk-sharing in the EU.
Third, the ESM could be transformed into a European Monetary Fund to act as a lender of last
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
resort for Member States, when they cannot access financial markets on sustainable terms.
Fourth, the EMU should also enhance public sector risk-sharing by creating a centralised fiscal
stabilisation tool (based on investment and/or unemployment insurance) and by allowing for the
issuance of European “safe” bonds.
Fifth,  it  is  crucial  to  improve  the  accountability  of  European  institutions  to  the  European
Parliament, for European citizens to have their say (through their European MPs) on euro area
developments as a way of combatting populist and anti-European voices.
6. Conclusions
Despite some missteps and delays and political resistance to the implementation of the required
reforms,  Greece  has  made  notable  progress  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  in  2010.  The
implementation  of  a  bold  economic  adjustment  programme  has  eliminated  several
macroeconomic  imbalances.  Moreover,  the  economy  is  now  recovering  and  has  started  to
rebalance towards the tradable, export-oriented sectors. Nevertheless, significant challenges and
crisis-related legacies remain (e.g. a high public debt ratio, a high NPL ratio, and high long-term
unemployment),  while  the  brain  drain  and  underinvestment  weigh  on  the  long-term  growth
potential.  To  address  these  challenges,  emphasis  must  now  be  placed  on  implementing  the
reforms  described  above.  These  reforms  would  facilitate  the  sustainable  return  of  the  Greek
State to the international government bond markets and the rebalancing of the economy towards
a knowledge-based and export-led growth model.
Finally,  it  is  high  time  to  take  bold  steps  towards  the  completion  of  EMU,  promoting  greater
political solidarity and fostering private and public risk-sharing. The next crisis should not find us
unprepared and we should not rely solely on the ECB’s monetary policy to deal with it.
(1) For example, according to Alesina (2015a,b), revenue-based consolidations are more harmful
for output dynamics than expenditure-based consolidations. The more benign effect of the latter
type of consolidations works through their positive impact on business confidence and private
investment.  Moreover,  Kasselaki  and  Tagkalakis  (2016),  using  Greek  data,  have  found  that  a
government  spending-based  fiscal  consolidation  improves  financial  markets  and  boosts
economic sentiment. This, in turn, mitigates the direct negative impact of fiscal consolidation on
private investment and output, leading to a more rapid recovery.
(2)  R&D  spending  in  2017  rose  to  1.14%  of  GDP  from  0.67%  of  GDP  in  2011,  but  still  lags
behind the euro area average of 2.13% in 2016. The ICT share in GDP in Greece was 3.1% in
2015 and lags behind the EU average of slightly above 4%. Indicatively, Ireland recorded an ICT
sector share in GDP of 11.6% in 2014 (see European Commission, 2018a).
References
D Abiad, A., J. Dell’ Ariccia and G.B Li (2011), “Creditless recoveries”, IMF Working Paper 11/58.
Acemoglu, D. and J. Robinson (2012), Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty, Publisher: Crown Business.
Alesina, A., O. Barbiero, C. Favero, F. Giavazzi, and M.  Paradisi, M. (2015a), Austerity in 2009–
13, Economic Policy, 30(83): 383–437.
Alesina, A., C. Favero and F. Giavazzi (2015b), “The output effects of fiscal consolidation plans”,
Journal of International Economics, 96 (Supplement1), pp. 19–42.
Bank 
Policy, 
www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/Inter_NomPol2018.pdf
(2018).  Monetary 
of  Greece 
Interim 
Report, 
December.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
of 
Hub.
Bank 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/InnovationHub/FinTechHub.aspxBeck, Th., A.  Dermirguc-
Kunt, L. Laeven,  and R. Levine  (2004),  “Finance,  Firm  Size,  and  Growth”, Journal  of  Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 40, No. 7, pp. 1379–1405.
Innovation 
FinTech 
Greece 
(2019), 
Berti, K. and E. Meyermans (2017), “Maximising the impact of labour and product market reforms
in  the  euro  area  –  sequencing  and  packaging”, Quarterly  Report  on  the  Euro Area  (QREA),
Directorate  General  Economic  and  Financial Affairs  (DG  ECFIN),  European  Commission,  vol.
16(2), pp. 7-19, October.
Bhagwati,  J.  and  K.  Hamada  (1974),  “The  brain  drain,  international  integration  of  markets  for
professionals and unemployment: a theoretical analysis”,  Journal of Development Economics
1(1-2): 19–42.
Blanchard,  O.  and  D.  Leigh  (2013),  “Growth  forecast  errors  and  fiscal  multipliers”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 103(3), pp. 117–120.
Blanchard,  O.  and  D.  Leigh  (2014),  “Learning  about  fiscal  multipliers  from  growth  forecast
errors”, IMF Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 2.
Blanchard,  O.J.,  and  L.H.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  unemployment
problem”, in: S. Fischer (ed.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual (MIT Press, Cambridge): pp. 15–
78
Dellas, H., D. Malliaropulos, D. Papageorgiou and E. Vourvachaki (2017), “Fiscal policy with an
informal sector”, Bank of Greece Working Paper, No. 235.
European  Commission  (2018a), Digital Economy and Society Index Report 2018 The  EU  ICT
sector 
performance.
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/research-development-scoreboard
R&D 
and 
its 
European Commission (2018b), The Digital Transformation Scoreboard 2018, EU business go
digital: 
uptake.
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/dem/monitor/sites/default/files/Digital%20Transformation
opportunities, 
outcomes, 
and 
European Commission (2018c), The Digital Economy and Society Index 2018, Country Report:
Greece, ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/scoreboard/greece
European  Commission 
“Deepening  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary
Union”, Commission Note ahead of the European Council and the Euro Summit of 28–29 June
2018. ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/euco-emu-booklet-june2018_en.pdf
(2018d), 
European  Commission  (2019),  2019  European  Semester, Country  Report:  Greece  2019
Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances,
Brus s els , ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/2019-european-semester-country-report-
greece_en.pdf
Kasselaki,  M.  and  A.  Tagkalakis  (2016),  “ Fiscal  policy  and  private  investment  in  Greece”,
International Economics, vol.146, pp53–106.
Kinoshita,  Y.  (2011),  “ Sectoral  Composition  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  External
Vulnerability in Eastern Europe”, IMF Working Paper 11/123.
Katsimi,  M.  and  Th.  Moutos  (2010),  “EMU  and  the  Greek  Crisis:  Are  There  Lessons  to  Be
Learnt?”, European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 26, No. 4, p. 568.
Malliaropulos, D. (2019), “The Greek economy in 2019 – Outlook, risks and major challenges”,
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Presentation 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/Default.aspx?
Item_ID=578&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
the 
at 
FitchRatings 
Seminar,
Möller,  J.  (1990),  “Unemployment  and  deterioration  of  human  capital”, Empirical  Economics,
vol.15, pp. 199–215.
National Documentation Centre (2018), Basic Indices for Research and Development in Greece
in 2017.
Olofsdotter, K. (1998), “Foreign  direct  investment,  country  capabilities  and  economic  growth”,
Review of World Economics 134 (3): 534-47.
Reisen, H.,  and  M. Soto  (2001),  “Which  types  of  capital  inflows  foster  developing  country
growth?”, International Finance 4 (1): 1-14.
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019a),  “International  economic  developments  and  prospects  of  the  Greek
economy”, Speech at an event of the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki,
15 March.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=582&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2019b), Article published in the 100th edition of  The Bulletin (OMFIF): Addressing
reversal of ﬁnancial integration.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=560&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019c),  New  Year  Speech  to  the  Bank  of  Greece  staff,  Athens,  January  9.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=559&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2018a),  “Investment  Opportunities  in  Greece  −Investment  opportunities  in
Greece”,  speech  at 
the  “Repositioning  Greece”  event  of  Ekali  Club,  17  December.
https://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=556&List_ID
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2018b), “What lies in store for the eurozone? An assessment of the Greek bailout
programmes:  Has  the  EU  become  wiser?”,  speech  at  the  Economist’s  event:  Southeast
Europe–Germany Business and Investment Summit: Reassessing Europe’s priorities, Berlin, 3
D e c e m b e r
. www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=553&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
World  Bank  (2018), Doing  Business  2019: A  Year  of  Record  Reforms,  Rising  Influence ,  31
October. www.worldbank.org/en/news/immersive-story/2018/10/31/doing-business-2019-a-year-
of-record-reforms-rising-influence
Economic 
World 
http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-
2018/?doing_wp_cron=1553010986.3554461002349853515625
Forum 
(2018), The  Global  Competitiveness  Report 
2018.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
