Olli Rehn: European economic and monetary policy outlook
Dinner speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the symposium organized by
the  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  the  US  National Association  of  Business  Economics  (NABE)  on
"Global Economics at the Crossroads: Growing Together While Growing Apart", Stockholm, 2
May 2019.
Mina damer och herrar, bästa vänner,
 Ett  stort  tack  för  inbjudan  till  Stefan  Ingves  och  Riksbanken.  Det  är  alltid  jättefint  att  besöka
Stockholm, särskilt för en gammal nordist som mig.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good evening to everybody. Many thanks to Riksbanken and NABE for the invitation to give a
dinner talk at your symposium. I have been asked to focus my remarks on the European side of
things by looking at the economic outlook and monetary policy in Europe. I will do so, and it is a
great honour and pleasure to discuss these matters with you today.
Let  me  begin  by  highlighting  our  joint  Nordic  and  American  societal  heritage,  which  is
fundamentally linked to economic liberalism and the market economy. This is the basis for us
‘growing together’, as the conference title starts, which I, frankly, much prefer to ‘growing apart’.
Our  joint  legacy  can  be  illustrated  by  a  person  who  is  relatively  unknown  outside  the  Nordic
countries,  but  who  played  an  important  role  in  paving  the  way  for  economic  and  also  social
liberalism.  I  am  referring  to  a  chaplain  from  western  Finland,  Anders  Chydenius,  who  was
politically active during the second half of the 18  century. He lived at the time when Finland was
an organic part of Sweden. He still holds an important place in our common Swedish-Finnish
history. Chydenius spent a short period of his long life as a Member of Parliament (or ‘Diet’) here
in Stockholm.
th
The  parliamentary  work  and  writings  of  Chydenius  during  the  years  1765  and  1766  left  a
permanent imprint on society in Sweden and Finland. Among other things, he wrote about the
importance of the stable value of money, an issue very dear to us central bankers, and warned
about  the  deflationary  consequences  of  a  forced  massive  revaluation  of  the  then  Swedish
currency, on which he was right, but for which he was in fact expelled from the Diet – there were
limits to the freedom of speech then!
Chydenius also wrote about ‘the wealth of the people’ a decade before Adam Smith published his
milestone ‘The Wealth of Nations’ . Making productive activity and the stock of labour the basis of
a nation’s wealth, Chydenius took a distance from the mercantilists and instead emphasized the
gains of commerce and free trade. This was immensely important for the catching-up process in
the  19   century,  first  by  Sweden  and  later  byFinland,  and  their  subsequent  growth  and
prosperity.
th
1
As  an  example,  at  that  time  Finland  had  only  three  towns  with  staple  rights  that  allowed  the
townspeople to export produce on their own ships directly to foreign ports. This ‘Bothnian Trade
Prohibition’  meant  that  Finnish  west-coast  merchants  and  those  of  Swedish  Norrland  were
forced to transport and sell their produce in Stockholm before shipping abroad. The decades-
long struggle ended in 1765, as staple rights were granted to four towns in Ostrobothnia and two
in Norrland, largely thanks to the work of Chydenius. This was essential for the rapid growth of
those regions. And it is no wonder that free trade became a core part of the Nordic DNA.
A more recent example of the Nordic path of development relates to labour rights, an issue driven
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
also by Chydenius. We have major achievements in the free movement of labour, which today is
one of the freedoms guaranteed by the European Union. The Common Nordic Labour Market
was  formed  already  in  1954  by  Denmark,  Norway,  Finland  and  Sweden.  The  catalyst  for  the
arrangement was post-war reconstruction.
Today it is not only people who move across the borders, but also companies and businesses.
Almost all countries participate in the world economy. Isolation is not possible anymore without
great losses in citizens’ living standards. At the same time, perceived negative side-effects of
globalisation have stimulated a large-scale movement against it, and, in fact, against modernity.
Protectionism, however, is not an answer.
We in the Nordic countries tend to believe that the benefits of globalization can be realized in full
only with a sustainable and inclusive growth agenda at the national level. The Nordic model is
based on the combination of entrepreneurial dynamism and free trade with strong safety nets,
universal health care and free education. We like it – and we don’t call it socialism, but welfare
society, or the social market economy.
While an inclusive national agenda is necessary, many critical challenges are global, and hence
our pressing economic and political challenges can be properly addressed only through effective
international cooperation.
This  symposium  explores  both  common  and  diverse  trends  shaping  the  United  States’  and
European economies. It is worth underlining that the impact of Euro-Atlantic cooperation since
the  Second  World  War  has  been  enormous  and  positive  in  all  walks  of  life.  Current
developments,  described  by  the  organizers  as  ‘growing together  while  growing apart',  could
have equally far reaching consequences for US and European businesses and citizens, but to
the reverse direction. It is essential to maintain our current global institutions, but at the same
time  to  reform  them  to  face  new  challenges.  While  the  IMF  has  been  able  to  adapt  itself
successfully in the post-crisis era, it is the World Trade Organisation that is in the greatest need
of reform today. As has been rightly said by EU Commissioner Cecilia Malmström, we should
make the WTO reform a cornerstone of the next transatlantic project. I very much endorse this.
International  cooperation,  and  policy  coordination,  also  played  a  critical  role  in  firefighting  the
global financial crisis. From the start of the crisis, an intensive co-operation emerged between
central  banks  to  safeguard  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial  system  after  the  collapse  of
Lehman.
As global markets started to collapse, the demand for liquidity by the banks increased, not only in
domestic currency, but also in foreign currency, most of all in US dollars. Suddenly, the demand
for dollars exceeded the supply on the wholesale market. Subsequently, the swaps between the
Fed and the ECB began in December 2007. The ECB borrowed dollars from the Fed, which took
euros  in  exchange.  By  October  2008,  the  Fed  had  decided  on  swaps  with  the  ECB,  Bank  of
England and the Swiss and Japanese central banks to provide as many dollars as needed, thus
fulfilling  its  role  as  the  lender  of  last  resort  in  dollars.  Importantly,  the  central  banks  had  the
necessary insight and determination to back words with deeds.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
After tough times and difficult decisions, Europe was able to overcome the rock-bottom of the
debt crisis by the end of 2012. During the euro area recovery since 2013, over 10 million net new
jobs have been created. Unemployment has fallen from its peak of over 12 per cent to below 8
per  cent.  The  banking  sector  is  now  more  resilient:  capital  buffers  have  been  doubled,  non-
performing loans reduced considerably, and lending to households and enterprises increased.
The ECB’s accommodative monetary policy has been very important in supporting the recovery.
During the first months of 2019, global economic activity slowed down, which has been felt also
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in  the  euro  area.  Prevailing  uncertainty,  which  stems  from  the  US-China  trade  tensions,
slowdown of growth in China and Europe’s internal problems, has weakened the outlook for the
economy.
Growth forecasts for this year have globally been revised downwards. Incoming data, however, is
moving sideways. Some very recent indicators hint at stabilization – I am referring to last week’s
growth figures for the United States that were rather strong, and to this week’s Eurostat flash
estimate  that  the  Eurozone  GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  accelerated  to  0.4
percent, up from 0.2 in the last quarter of 2018.
This is good news, of course. But in my view we should not jump the gun after the first green
shoots and change the course. In policy-making, it is often better to be safe than sorry. This goes
certainly for monetary policy.
As a consequence of the slowdown, (almost) all major central banks needed to put monetary
policy normalisation on hold and instead maintain an accommodative policy stance. This holds
true for the ECB as well.
The  ECB  Governing  Council  is  maintaining  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  accommodation
through our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates, reinvestments of a sizable stock of
acquired assets, and the new series of targeted long-term refinancing operations.
Moreover, as President Mario Draghi has said, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all
of its instruments, as appropriate, so that inflation converges with our aim of below but close to
2% in a sustained manner. It is worth noting that our inflation aim does not imply a ceiling at 2%,
since inflation can deviate from our target in both directions.
Before concluding, let me say a word on the longer term. The ECB – much like other central
banks – operates in an environment where long run trends, such as population aging and lower
long-term  interest  rates,  as  well  as  concerns  about  inequality  and  climate  change  can  have
important  societal  effects.  The  central  banking  community  needs  to  understand  better  the
implications of these structural changes for growth, employment and inflation dynamics, so as to
deliver more effectively on their mandate.
That’s why it is important to assess systematically how these transformations affect our longer-
term monetary policy strategy. Many central banks are reviewing their monetary policy strategy
and  some  do  it  regularly.  For  instance,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Riksbanken  have  done  so
recently, and the Federal Reserve System has just launched one.
The Fed review was announced to be wide-ranging, without prejudging where it will lead. The
Federal Reserve Board has outlined questions for the review that focus on the symmetry of its
inflation objective, the adequacy of its policy tools and the enhancement of communication.  If I
have understood it correctly, the strategy review is best seen as an important research program,
but also as an inclusive dialogue with the academia and the civil society, important for legitimacy.
2
Every central bank must operate under its own mandate. The mandate defines the scope of the
strategy  review.  I  have  also  been  advocating  for  a  review  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s
monetary policy strategy. The last time Eurosystem has done a comprehensive strategy review
was  15  years  ago  in  2003.  That  was  before  the  financial  crises  and  low  inflation,  before  our
forward guidance and the large-scale asset purchases.
My motivation for a review stems from the previously mentioned structural changes, which seem
to have lowered the long term real natural rate of interest. The natural rate of interest is one of the
key  concepts  for  understanding  monetary  policy.  Its  modern  usage  in  fact  dates  back  to  the
Swedish economist Knut Wicksell, who in 1898 defined it as the interest rate that is compatible
with a stable price level – a still valid definition.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Why is a low natural rate of interest a problem? Because it increases the risk of monetary policy
hitting the zero lower bound, making monetary policy ineffective. This in turn would prevent the
necessary easing of monetary policy stance, as well as eventually lead into permanently too low
inflation expectations compared to our definition of price stability.
I wish that the outcome of a strategy review, if and when launched, will lead to more effective and
timely monetary policy that fulfills our primary objective of price stability – and, “without prejudice
to the objective of price stability”, supports “the general economic policies in the Union, with a
view of contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Union”, which include, inter alia,
“full employment” and “balanced economic growth”.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
On a final note, let me come back to our common heritage of liberty and Anders Chydenius. His
era  was  still  characterized  by  mercantilism  and  clericalism,  yet,  Chydenius  wrote  about  and
fought for the freedom of speech and the press, for the freedom of religion and labour, and for the
freedom of trade and industry. Democracy, equality and respect for human rights were, for him,
the only way towards progress and the pursuit of happiness for the entire society. That was ten
years before Patrick Henry and the Declaration of Independence of the Thirteen Colonies.
Those  Enlightenment  values,  which  still  underpin  our  economic  and  political  models  on  both
sides  of  the Atlantic,  are  now  being  challenged  both  politically  and  socially,  from  inside  and
outside. Politically, a populist and nationalist agenda appears tempting to many people. Socially,
the values of tolerance, liberalism and inclusion are increasingly under threat.
To my mind, it is a common challenge for both of us, as Americans and Europeans, to defend
the values of liberty and democracy, and the rule of law and rules-based world order. On this
side of the pond, we realize the urgency of this effort, especially now as the role of Europe as the
standard-bearer for liberal democracy has become even more crucial.
As  the  international  system  is  built  not  only  on  rules  and  institutions,  but  also  on  trust  and
confidence, current policy uncertainty and the erosion of international cooperation are damaging
to  everyone.  We  need  bolder  joint  efforts  to  steer  the  global  economy  towards  a  more
sustainable future.
In Europe we want to keep the flame of global multilateralism alive. I hope our American friends
will rejoin us and stay on board.
Many thanks for your attention, and enjoy the evening and Stockholm.
1
2
 Anticipating the Wealth of Nations: The selected works of Anders Chydenius (1729–1803): Edited by Maren
Jonasson  and  Pertti  Hyttinen  with  an  Introduction  by  Lars  Magnusson,  Routledge  Studies  in  the  History  of
Economics, 2012.
 The Federal Reserve Board has coined three questions: 1. “Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory
objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past
misses of the inflation objective?"; 2. “Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain
maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded?, and 3. “How can the FOMC’s
communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?".
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
