Carlos da Silva Costa: Farewell speech in honor of President Mario
Draghi
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the ECB Governing
Council Dinner in honor of President Mario Draghi, Frankfurt am Main, 23 October 2019.
As prepared for delivery
Dear Mario, dear friends,
 As the longest serving Governor of a national central bank in the Governing Council, I have been
awarded the privilege and honour to say a few words at Mario’s farewell dinner. 
When Mario took office as President of the ECB eight years ago, Europe was diving deep into the
sovereign debt crisis. Financial markets questioned the ability of highly indebted euro area
countries to pay back their debts. A break up of the euro was a real possibility and
redenomination risk premia appeared. 
Eight years have passed, the euro is here to stay, and rests on much stronger foundations. 
Mario´s contribution to this outcome cannot be overemphasised. His leadership as President of
the ECB has shown a remarkable ability:
To evaluate the context;
To separate what is essential from what is secondary; 
To  build  consensus  within  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  to  pursue  the  required
unconventional policies;
And  last,  but  not  least,  to  convince  European  leaders  of  the  need  to  strengthen  the
foundations of the EMU. Mario provided impetus to the creation of the Banking Union, and
took upon the ECB the task of setting up the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Mario has had the courage to search for solutions that tested the limits of our common mandate,
while being open and flexible on how to achieve it. In doing so, he had to cope with a lack of
understanding by important sectors of public opinion.
With its balanced and determined decisions to define the Outright Monetary Transactions
mechanism and to provide conditional financing to the Greek banking system, the ECB
effectively saved the euro. 
With its bold unconventional policies, the ECB effectively prevented the euro area from sliding
into deflation. It also allowed the time for political agents to adjust their fiscal policies, to adopt
structural measures and to agree on institutional improvements needed for a sustainable
Economic and Monetary Union.
Mario has proven to be intellectually curious and open, looking at facts and questioning theories.
He has instilled mental discipline among all of us working with him, and throughout the ECB.
Without annulling differences in opinion, Mario was able to make us converge to a common
course of action.
Mario, dear President, 
You understood the problems we were confronted with like few others; 
You had the courage and the sense of urgency that the situation required; 
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
You showed the authority, the expertise and the resolve to act decisively;
You  were  able  to  think  –  and  act  –  out  of  the  box,  exploring  the  room  for  manoeuvre
provided by the EU Treaty and our Statute;
In brief, you were always ahead of the curve. What better definition could we have of a true
leader?
So, Mario:
Thank you for your vision and your genius intuition; 
Thank you for your bold and skilful leadership of the European Central Bank;
Thank you for leaving us a credible, mature and independent ECB, fully committed to its
price stability and bank supervision mandates;
And,  coming  from  a  country  that  underwent  such  a  profound  crisis,  thank  you  for  the
support you – and the ECB under your leadership – extended to us. It made a difference, it
still does.
On a more personal note, and I finish here, I cannot thank you enough for the trust and solidarity
you showed me two years ago. Portugal was being ravaged by wildfires, and many advised you
to cancel that year’s ECB forum in Sintra. Following my assurances, you decided to go ahead
with the forum. A different decision would have been an enormous blow not only for Portugal, but
also to the ECB forum. Once again, you were proven right. 
Thank You, Mario!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
