Joint session  
of the V Committee (Budget, Treasury and Planning)  
and the XIV Committee (European Union Policies)  
of the Chamber of Deputies
Testimony on the functioning  
of the European Stability Mechanism  
and the prospects for its reform
Given by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy
Rome, 4 December 2019
Presidents, Honourable Members of Parliament, I am grateful to the Fifth and 
Fourteenth Committees of the Chamber of Deputies for this invitation to debate 
the proposed reform of the Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM). The proposal is the result of a provisional agreement reached last June, 
based on the Euro Summit understanding of December 2018. As with the Treaty 
currently in force, it will only take effect once it has been signed and ratified by all 
Member States.
The  ESM  was  introduced  in  2012  to  bridge  one  of  the  gaps  in  European 
economic  governance:  its  core  function  is  to  grant  conditional  assistance  to 
euro-area  countries  that  are  experiencing  temporary  difficulties  in  raising  funds 
on  the  market,  despite  having  sustainable  public  debts.  Alongside  this  function 
the proposed reform introduces a backstop to the Single Resolution Fund (SRF), 
within the bank crisis management framework. 
In the talks leading to the agreement and in the accompanying debate, in-depth 
discussions were also held on the rules on financial aid to Member States and, in 
particular, the related risks. In this respect, the reform addresses the prerequisites 
for granting financial assistance and the tasks carried out by the ESM; overall, the 
proposed changes are limited in scope. The reform makes no provision for, nor 
does it foresee in the future, any sovereign debt restructuring mechanism. As with 
the Treaty in force today, there is no quid pro quo between financial assistance 
and debt restructuring. An assessment of debt sustainability before the granting 
of aid is already envisaged under the Treaty in force. This is a clause designed to 
safeguard the ESM’s resources, to which Italy is the third biggest contributor.
1.  The origins of the European Stability Mechanism
The  ESM  is  the  response  to  part  of  Europe’s  ‘incomplete’  economic 
governance. Up until the sovereign debt crisis, the European fiscal framework was 
based on crisis prevention through compliance with fiscal rules that were designed 
to keep deficits and public debts within the limits considered prudent. It did not 
provide for a toolkit capable of managing the sovereign debt crises; indeed, the ‘no 
bail-out clause’ of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, at least 
in its most restrictive interpretation, seemed to prohibit any measures in support of 
countries in difficulty.1
The tensions that emerged on the European sovereign debt markets starting 
in 2010, as a result of the global financial crisis and the considerable imbalances 
in  Greece’s  public  accounts,  strongly  affirmed  the  need  for  adequate  European 
economic  governance.  Specifically,  the  absence  of  mechanisms  for  managing 
a  severe  financial  crisis  of  a  euro-area  Member  State  generated  uncertainty, 
lengthening the timeframes involved in providing support, increasing its cost and 
feeding the risk of contagion.
The first response to the sovereign debt crisis was necessarily of an urgent 
nature. In spring 2010, financial support to Greece was provided through bilateral 
loans on the part of euro-area countries (Greek Loan Facility). Shortly thereafter, as 
the crisis extended to other countries, two common mechanisms were established 
for  the  disbursement  of  financial  support:  the  European  Financial  Stabilisation 
Mechanism (EFSM), which is limited in size (€60 billion) and is financed by the 
European  Union,  and  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF),  which 
has greater lending capacity (initially equal to €250 billion, then €440 billion), is 
temporary in nature, and is guaranteed by the euro-area Member States.
The  intervention  strategy  changed  abruptly  at  the  end  of  2010  with  the 
agreement between France and Germany and with the Council of the European 
Union’s decision in the summer of 2011 on private sector involvement (PSI) in 
restructuring Greece’s debt. Following this decision, in the autumn of 2011 the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  published  a  recommendation  asking  the 
main banks to create ‘exceptional’ and ‘temporary’ capital buffers to address their 
exposure to sovereign debt.
The  Council’s  decision  and  the  EBA’s  recommendation  came  before  the 
establishment,  in  2012,  of  the  ESM  and  the  specification  that  private  sector 
involvement  would  be  limited  to  exceptional  circumstances  and  would  not  be 
triggered automatically. Outright monetary transactions (OMT) by the European 
Central Bank were also introduced in 2012. These were conditional on the presence 
of  an  ESM  assistance  programme.  It  is  likely  that,  had  the  sequence  of  events 
been different (introducing the ESM and OMT before the PSI announcement and 
EBA recommendation), the effect on the financial markets would have been more 
contained.
1 
The  establishment  of  the  ESM  was  accompanied  by  a  special  amendment  to  the  Treaty  on  the 
Functioning of the European Union (art. 136(3)).
4
The ESM’s subscribed capital amounts to €704.8 billion, of which €80.5 has 
been  paid  in;  its  lending  capacity  stands  at  €500  billion.  In  addition  to  having 
provided bilateral financial support and having participated in EFSF programmes 
(committing a total of almost €44 billion), Italy’s subscribed capital in the ESM 
amounts to about €125 billion and its paid-in capital is more than €14 billion.
Each  member’s  share  of  the  ESM’s  capital  is  based  on  the  ECB’s  capital  keys,  which  reflect  the 
country’s share in the total population and gross domestic product of the euro area. The portion of the 
ESM’s  capital  that  is  subscribed  but  not  paid  in  is  ‘callable’  at  any  time  if  needed,  meaning  that  ESM 
members are asked to provide the corresponding funding with little advance notice.
2.  ESM governance and functions 
The  ESM  was  established  by  an  intergovernmental  agreement,  outside  the 
judicial framework of the European Union. It is headed by the Board of Governors, 
which consists of the 19 Ministers of Finance in the euro area. Unanimous approval 
is required for all important decisions (including those relating to disbursements 
of financial assistance and the approval of memoranda of understanding with the 
countries that receive it). 
The  Board  of  Governors  chooses  whether  it  is  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  Eurogroup  (as  is 
currently the case) or by a President elected from within the Board itself; terms last two years and may 
be renewed. For the purposes of ensuring the efficacy of the ESM’s decision-making system, the ESM may 
operate with a qualified majority of 85 per cent of capital if, in the event of a threat to the economic and 
financial stability of the euro area, the European Commission and the ECB ask it to make urgent decisions 
concerning financial assistance. The voting rights of Board members correspond to the number of shares 
assigned to the respective countries. Germany, France and Italy have shares that exceed 15 per cent and, 
therefore, may also veto urgent decisions. 
The  ESM’s  executive  body  is  the  Board  of  Directors,  consisting  of  19  members  each  of  whom  is 
appointed  by  a  Governor  and  has  extensive  experience  in  economics  and  finance.  It  is  headed  by  the 
Managing Director who also serves as the ESM’s legal representative.
As I mentioned, the fundamental purpose of the ESM is to provide financial 
assistance,  subject  to  conditions,  to  member  countries  experiencing  temporary 
difficulties in accessing the markets, despite having a sustainable public debt. It is 
not a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism but instead tries to avoid it; as stated 
in the current version of the Treaty and as reiterated in the proposed amendments 
thereto, restructuring may only be considered in exceptional circumstances.
The Treaty contains a single reference to debt restructuring in recital number 12, which states that ‘in 
accordance with IMF practice, in exceptional cases an adequate and proportionate form of private sector 
involvement shall be considered in cases where stability support is provided accompanied by conditionality 
in the form of a macro-economic adjustment programme’. 
5
The Treaty provides for the possibility of the ESM working in conjunction 
with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  The  ESM  may  open  credit  lines, 
disburse  loans  or  purchase  government  securities  issued  by  the  state  receiving 
assistance. Its intervention is never in the form of non-repayable transfers.
Support is provided subject to rigorous conditionality and an analysis of the 
sustainability of the public debt which, according to the rules set out in the current 
version of the Treaty, is carried out by the European Commission in liaison with 
the ECB (where possible, also with the IMF). The level of conditionality varies 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  instrument  used:  for  loans,  it  is  in  the  form  of  a 
macro-economic adjustment programme, described in a dedicated memorandum; 
it is less stringent with precautionary credit lines to countries with fundamentally 
solid economic and financial conditions that are suffering the effects of an adverse 
shock.
There are two types of precautionary measures, accompanied by a Memorandum of Understanding 
that sets out the conditions: the precautionary conditioned credit line (PCCL), for countries meeting the 
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact that do not have excessive macroeconomic imbalances or 
financial stability problems, and the enhanced conditions credit line (ECCL), for countries that do not fully 
meet the above prerequisites and that are therefore asked to take corrective measures. It should be borne in 
mind that the ESM may also purchase government securities in the primary and secondary markets.
The ESM currently finances itself by issuing debt instruments on the market 
with maturities that range from one month to 45 years. The ESM has the highest 
credit rating (AAA) awarded by Fitch and by DBRS, and just below the top rating 
awarded by Moody’s (AA1, with a ‘positive outlook’). ESM loans benefit from 
a credit status that is second only to that of the IMF. These conditions make it 
possible for the ESM to take on debt under highly advantageous conditions. 
Since 2010, the total amount of financial assistance that has been disbursed through the various tools 
to euro-area countries in difficulty is equal to more than €480 billion, of which more than €80 billion were 
provided by the IMF (Table 1). There have been five beneficiary countries: Greece was the main recipient 
accounting for almost 60 per cent (just under €290 billion), followed by Portugal (more than €75 billion), 
Ireland (more than €65 billion), Spain (more than €40 billion) and Cyprus (about €7 billion). Spain is the 
only one of the five countries to have benefited from financial support that was exclusively dedicated to 
shoring up its banking system.
The ESM has granted loans to three countries, totalling about €110 billion (€61.9 billion to Greece, 
€41.3 billion to Spain and €6.3 billion to Cyprus; Table 2), with fairly long average maturities and relatively 
low interest rates (a maximum of 1.2 per cent for Spain and Cyprus and 1.6 per cent for Greece). 
All the support programmes have come to a close: the beneficiary countries are once again able to 
access the markets for financing. The support disbursed by the EFSF, the ESM and the IMF has already 
been partly repaid. More than €170 billion are yet to be repaid to the EFSF, approximately €90 billion to 
the ESM, and less than €10 billion to the IMF. Figure 1 illustrates the repayment plan for the loans issued 
by the ESM, whose residual lending capacity is currently just over €410 billion (Figure 2).
6
3.  Financial assistance in the proposed reform of the Treaty2
The reform proposal before us covers three main areas: the ESM’s governance 
and tasks regarding financial assistance to member countries, the conditionality 
for granting such assistance and the ESM’s function as a backstop for the Single 
Resolution Fund (I will focus on this last point later on). The proposal also provides 
for an amendment to the collective action clauses (CACs) included in government 
securities.
The ESM’s governance and tasks regarding financial assistance to member 
countries.  –  The  reform  proposal  establishes  the  independence  of  the  ESM’s 
Managing  Director  and  staff  (Article  7.4  and  recital  16)  and  at  the  same  time 
strengthens  the  provisions  requiring  the  ESM’s  activities  to  be  compliant  with 
European Union legislation; it also entrusts the European Commission with the 
related control tasks. Voting rights and procedures remain unchanged. 
At  the  end  of  2017,  the  European  Commission  had  put  forward  a  proposal  to  integrate  the  ESM 
into European Union legislation; a solution of this kind would greatly simplify the management of ESM 
activities and the coordination with the Commission. 
The ESM is to play an active role in crisis management and in the process for 
disbursing financial assistance, as well as in the subsequent monitoring thereof; in 
line with this, the Managing Director is given greater responsibilities, and becomes 
the reference point for the ESM in all activities connected with granting financial 
support. This is a new role for the ESM and means that it will flank the European 
Commission. How the two institutions cooperate will be set out in an agreement to 
be signed when the amendments to the Treaty come into force (Article 13.8). The 
terms of the provisional agreement reached between the two institutions in 2018 
are echoed in the text of the reform proposals,3 which contains safeguards designed 
to avoid any duplication of tasks between the ESM and the European Commission.
The  agreement  reaffirms  the  Commission’s  exclusive  responsibility  for  the 
overall  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  of  countries  and  of  their  position 
vis-à-vis  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the  Macroeconomic 
Imbalance Procedure. The reform establishes that the ESM may follow and assess 
their macroeconomic and financial situations – including the sustainability of their 
2 
3 
The reform is analysed in detail in C. Dias and A. Zoppè (2019), ‘The 2019 proposed amendments to 
the Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism’, In-Depth Analysis, 11-10-2019, European 
Parliament. Information and links to the official documents are available on the ESM’s website.
The text of the agreement is available on the ESM website.
7
public debt– so that it can intervene promptly as needed (Article 3.1). Therefore, ‘the 
ESM should not serve the purpose of economic policies coordination among ESM 
members  for  which  European  Union  law  provides  the  necessary  arrangements’ 
(recital 15A). Lastly, it is confirmed that ‘the post-programme surveillance will 
be carried out by the European Commission in liaison with the ECB, and by the 
Council of the European Union within the framework laid down pursuant to Articles 
121 and 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union’ (recital 18).
In the event of a request for assistance, the reform provides that the ESM’s 
Managing Director, together with the European Commission (and in liaison with 
the ECB), assess the sustainability of a country’s public debt and, to better protect 
the member countries in their role as ESM financers, the capacity of a country to 
repay the loan. In the event no agreement can be reached on these assessments, the 
Commission will have the last word on the sustainability of the debt, and the ESM 
on the capacity to repay the loan (see recital 12A).
In addition, the ESM’s Managing Director, again together with the Commission 
(and in liaison with the ECB), will take part in the negotiation with the requesting 
country on the conditionality attached to the financial assistance programme, and 
in the assessment of compliance with these conditions over time (Articles 5.6.g 
and 13.7). 
The  conditions  for  granting  financial  assistance.  –  The  reform  more  clearly 
describes some of the principles for the disbursement of funding that are already laid 
down in the current text of the Treaty and in the guidelines adopted by the ESM.
For the purposes of granting any form of ESM assistance, the current Treaty 
already provides for a prior assessment of debt sustainability (Article 13.1.b). The 
reform reiterates this provision and, as previously mentioned, introduces alongside 
it the criterion of the requesting country’s loan repayment capacity (recital 12A 
and Article 13.1.b of the reform proposal), so far only used in post-programme 
surveillance. At the same time, the reform clarifies that these preliminary checks 
are  in  no  way  automatic:  despite  being  based  on  ‘transparent  and  predictable’ 
criteria,  the  authorities  that  carry  out  such  checks  have  a  ‘sufficient  margin  of 
discretion’ to do so (recital 12A and Article 13.1.b of the reform proposal). 
The reform to the Treaty also reviews the criteria and procedures for obtaining 
precautionary credit lines. 
In  the  case  of  the  PCCL,  signing  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  would  no  longer  be 
required; this credit line would be granted to countries not subject to a procedure for deficit or excessive 
8
macroeconomic imbalances, provided there is a letter of intent in which the requesting country commits 
to respecting the criteria, which are specified in quantitative terms in Annex III of the new version of the 
Treaty (Article 14). Those countries which, despite having sound economic fundamentals, do not meet all 
the criteria set out in Annex III, will be able to have recourse to the ECCL, which would continue to require 
the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding.
Collective  action  clauses.  –  The  reform  to  the  Treaty  envisages  introducing  
−  from  2022  −  an  amendment  to  the  current  collective  action  clauses  that,  if  a 
country decides to proceed with a debt restructuring, a single vote by government 
security holders would be sufficient to amend the terms and conditions of all the 
bonds (‘single limb’ CACs), instead of dual votes (one for each issuance and one for 
the bonds as a whole; see recital 11 and Article 12.4). This amendment is designed 
to make any debt restructuring more orderly, thereby reducing the costs linked to the 
uncertainty over how it will be done and how long it will take. As already happened 
following the introduction of the current CACs in 2013, this amendment − which 
does not increase the likelihood of a default but reduces the uncertainty surrounding 
its outcome − could lead to a fall in sovereign debt risk premiums.4 
There is no amendment to the reference in the current Treaty to private sector 
involvement, which remains strictly limited to exceptional cases and is in no way 
a precondition for obtaining financial assistance from the ESM (recital 12B of the 
reform proposal). It is in light of the PSI being confirmed as an exceptional case 
that we should interpret both the amendments to the collective action clauses and 
the possibility that the reform gives to the ESM to facilitate dialogue between a 
country  and  private  investors,  only  if  the  country  so  requests,  ‘on  a  voluntary, 
informal, non-binding, temporary and confidential basis’ (recital 12). 
To conclude this discussion of the amendments that the reform intends to make 
to financial assistance procedures, I would like to point out that a country with high 
public debt, especially a country with great economic weight in the euro area, must 
first of all create a situation in which there is no need to turn to the ESM; how to 
obtain funding is not irrelevant but should not be the focal point. The way forward 
is to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio by maintaining an adequate primary surplus, 
increasing economic growth, and keeping confidence high and the average cost of 
debt low. The existence of the ESM makes this last task easier because it limits 
contagion risks, thereby helping to preserve orderly market conditions.
4 
G.  Tabellini  (2017),  ‘Reforming  the  Eurozone:  Structuring  versus  restructuring  sovereign  debts’, 
VoxEU.org; A. Bardozzetti and D. Dottori (2014), ‘Collective action clauses: How do they affect 
sovereign bond yields?’, Journal of International Economics, vol. 92, issue 2, 286-303. 
9
4.  The backstop for the Single Resolution Fund 
The ESM Treaty is also being revised to address the need for a backstop to the 
Single Resolution Fund (SRF), namely the option of supporting the SRF should its 
resources prove insufficient to finance the measures it must take. 
Under  the  current  European  bank  crisis  management  framework,  the  main 
function of the SRF, managed by the Single Resolution Board (SRB), is to finance 
the application of resolution tools while minimizing the use of public resources.5 
In addition, if needed to avoid contagion risk, the SRF will also be able to absorb 
the losses directly and help recapitalize the bank under resolution, for a maximum 
amount equal to 5 per cent of the bank’s liabilities and only after a bail-in equal to 
at least 8 per cent of the same liabilities. 
The SRF is funded by annual contributions from all euro-area banks (not just 
those classified as ‘significant’ for supervisory purposes). The contributions are 
paid in and gradually mutualized according to a schedule that will see the scheme 
fully in place by the end of 2023, when the SRF will have reached its target level 
(at least 1 per cent of the total amount of covered deposits in the euro area, a share 
that the SRB estimates to be around €60 billion).
The private financial resources available to the SRF could prove insufficient 
in the event of a systemic crisis. The importance of a public backstop was already 
acknowledged  in  the  late  2013  ECOFIN  Council’s  conclusions  on  the  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM).  Its  establishment  was  also  deemed  a  priority  in 
the  2015  Five  Presidents’  Report  on  Completing  the  European  Economic  and 
Monetary Union.6 Since the very outset of the negotiations on the SRM, Italy has 
been  one  of  the  most  active  supporters  of  the  need  for  a  backstop  to  the  SRF, 
especially one involving the ESM. 
The  reform  of  the  ESM  now  being  discussed  introduces  such  a  backstop, 
whose size is aligned with the actual level of the SRF (as indicated in the Terms 
of Reference agreed in December 20187 and referred to in Recitals 5A and 15B, 
as well as in Annex IV of the proposed reform); it therefore goes in the direction 
5 
6 
7 
‘Changes in the way banking crises are managed’, FAQ published in the ‘In detail’ section of the 
Bank of Italy’s website, 8 July 2015.
‘Council  agrees  general  approach  on  Single  Resolution  Mechanism’,  18  December  2013,  press 
release; Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (2015), Report by Jean-Claude Juncker 
in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz.
‘Terms  of  reference  of  the  common  backstop  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund’,  4  December  2018, 
available on the European Council’s website.
10
of bolstering the credibility of the SRF and its effective ability to intervene and, in 
doing so, reduces the risk of a disorderly management of a crisis at a large bank, 
which could impact overall financial stability. 
The reform envisages the introduction of the backstop no later than the end 
of 2023. The possibility of introducing it earlier is made conditional on further 
progress in reducing banking risks, something that will be assessed next year. Such 
progress, however, refers only to building up sufficient buffers to meet the minimum 
requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL; that is, the minimum 
amount of liabilities that can be used for loss absorption or recapitalization of a 
bank under resolution) and to reducing the NPL ratio (against benchmark ratios 
of 5 per cent gross of write-downs already booked and 2.5 per cent net of them). 
However, no mention is made of other types of assets that are risky because they 
are illiquid or lack transparency regarding their valuation (such as so-called Level 
2 and Level 3 financial instruments).
Introducing the backstop to the SRF is not the only change that we believe is 
necessary to complete the current European crisis management framework. As I 
have emphasized many times, including very recently, mechanisms are also needed 
to facilitate the orderly exit from the market of small- and medium-sized banks 
that cannot access the resolution procedure and therefore cannot receive support 
from  the  SRF  even  though  they  contribute  to  it.  To  this  end,  we  should  take  a 
close look at the experience of the US’s Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), which during the global financial crisis effectively managed the crises of 
hundreds  of  small-  and  medium-sized  banks  without  adverse  effects  on  overall 
stability. In fact, the German Finance Minister referred to the example of the FDIC 
in his recent proposals on completing the banking union.8  Experts at the Bank of 
Italy  have  proposed  measures  that  could  help  to  address  the  current  problems.9 
We stand ready to provide technical support to the Government in the discussions 
under way at EU level on this issue. 
 8 
9 
‘Position paper on the goals of the banking union’, German Finance Minister, November 2019.
A. De Aldisio, G. Aloia, A. Bentivegna, A. Gagliano, E. Giorgiantonio, C. Lanfranchi and M. Maltese 
(2019),  ‘Towards  a  framework  for  orderly  liquidation  of  banks  in  the  EU’,  Notes  on  Financial 
Stability and Supervision, No. 15, August. Among the measures proposed are: eliminating the super-
priority for deposit guarantee schemes, raising the deposit coverage limit, changing the method for 
assessing the fulfilment of the least cost criterion, so as to include not just ‘direct’ but also ‘indirect’ 
costs (arising, for example, from possible contagion effects).
11
The creation of the ESM has strengthened the economic governance of the 
monetary union and – all other things being equal – has reduced the risks of financial 
instability for each country and for the area as a whole. It was part of a comprehensive 
reform  whose  salient  points  were  already  set  out  in  the  first  report  of  the  four 
Presidents released in June 2012.10 Made gradually less ambitious in successive 
official documents, today this original plan remains uncompleted. 
The proposal to reform the ESM marks a step in the right direction, especially 
because  it  introduces  a  backstop  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund.  On  the  issue 
of  assistance  to  countries  in  crisis,  it  does  not  alter  the  substance  of  the  Treaty 
currently in force. It confirms the absence of any automatism in decisions on the 
sustainability  of  public  debts  and  rules  out  any  debt  restructuring  mechanism. 
As I recently underlined, this confirmation is important because ‘The small and 
uncertain benefits of a debt restructuring mechanism must be weighed against the 
huge risk that the mere announcement of its introduction may trigger a perverse 
spiral of expectations of default, which may prove to be self-fulfilling’.11 I made 
similar observations on the risks of sovereign crises in my Concluding Remarks 
delivered in May 2019 and even prior to that on a number of occasions, when the 
idea of introducing an automatic debt restructuring mechanism for the Member 
States of the euro area had not yet been fully discarded.12
The proposed changes in financial assistance to Member States reassert principles 
of common sense that are already inscribed in the Treaty. For the ESM, as for any 
other lender, it would be nonsensical to grant credit to those whose debt is not deemed 
sustainable, given that this would constitute a non-refundable transfer. The safeguards 
in  terms  of  ex  ante  conditionality  and  ex  post  monitoring  that  flank  the  financing 
mechanisms  of  the  ESM  have  always  been,  and  still  are,  duly  rigorous.  They  are 
safeguards that protect the resources that euro-area countries ‘invested’ at the time of 
the ESM’s establishment and, as I recalled earlier, Italy is the third largest contributor.
The proposed reform is, of course, the result of a compromise – between the 
fears  of  those  who  have  always  rejected  any  further  mutualization  of  risks  and 
the opposing fears of an unjustified postponement of progress towards ‘genuine 
economic  and  monetary  union’.  The  best  way  to  convince  everybody  of  the 
10 
11 
12 
Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union (2012), Report by Herman Van Rompuy in close 
collaboration with Mario Draghi, José Manuel Barroso and Jean-Claude Juncker.
I. Visco, ‘The Economic and Monetary Union: Time to Break the Deadlock’, keynote address at the 
OMFIF-Banca d’Italia Seminar ‘Future of the Euro area’, Rome, 15 November 2019.
See, for example, F. Balassone and I. Visco (2018), ‘The Economic and Monetary Union: Time to 
Break the Deadlock’, The European Union Review, Vol. 23– 1-2-3, March-November 2018, 9-22.
12
usefulness of the reform is to see it as a starting point for the purposeful resumption 
of the path to European integration. A first step could be to announce the intention to 
incorporate the ESM in European legislation in the medium term.  What continues 
to be lacking is a comprehensive plan for the completion of monetary union, one 
that introduces a centralized fiscal capacity and a safe asset in the euro area, as well 
as the completion of banking union.
The possibility of introducing a common fiscal capacity capable of flanking 
monetary policy in the task of stabilizing the euro area must be examined anew; 
this  would  enable  us  to  deal  with  sometimes  pronounced  cyclical  fluctuations, 
without thwarting the efforts made up to that point in each country to reduce its 
debt-to-GDP ratio.
The process towards completion of the capital markets union must be speeded 
up  including  −  I  would  even  say  primarily  −  by  introducing  euro  area  sovereign 
bonds, which could replace a portion of national securities in circulation and play 
the role of safe asset assigned to sovereign bonds in all the other major economies. 
This result can also be achieved with the simultaneous introduction of some form of 
European-wide public debt insurance, for example through the creation of a European 
debt redemption fund (ERF), financed by dedicated resources of the participating 
countries determined in a way that prevents systematic intra-country transfers.13
Banking  union  must  be  completed  with  a  more  effective  mechanism  for 
managing crises at any intermediary, including small- and medium-sized ones, and 
with a proper European deposit insurance scheme that guarantees equal protection 
for depositors, irrespective of where their bank operates. This is where measures to 
curtail risks such as the ones often proposed by, on the one hand, those who wish 
to revise the prudential treatment of banks’ sovereign exposures and, on the other, 
those who stress how important it is not to take a selective approach to banking 
risks (with the sole focus on non-performing loans), could be usefully inserted. 
Looking ahead, some thought could  also be given to the possibility of introducing 
limits  on  the  concentration  of  sovereign  bonds  in  bank  portfolios,  without 
distinguishing among sovereign debtors and in any event with a sufficiently high 
13 
See M. Cioffi, P. Rizza, M. Romanelli and P. Tommasino (2019), ‘Un fondo di ammortamento del 
debito dell’area dell’euro: cos’è, perché costruirlo, come progettarlo’, Rivista di Politica Economica 
(forthcoming). For a discussion of similar proposals, see M. Cioffi, P. Rizza, M. Romanelli and P. 
Tommasino (2019), ‘Outline of a redistribution-free debt redemption fund for the euro area’, Banca 
d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 479, 2019; in particular, among the 
earliest contributions, see V. Visco, ‘Innovative Financing at a Global and European Level’, Hearing 
before the European Parliament, 10 January 2011 and German Council of Economic Advisors (2011), 
‘Assume responsibility for Europe’, Annual Report 2011/12. 
13
initial ‘exemption’, but only if the euro area simultaneously decides to introduce 
a common safe asset. Failing this, among other things, the diversification of bank 
portfolios of sovereign bonds could not take place in an orderly fashion. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  it  is  imperative  that  the  consolidation  of  the 
public  finances  of  highly  indebted  countries  remains  a  credible  process,  one  in 
which every opportunity provided by the current low interest rate environment is 
seized without hesitation. If everyone plays their part, it will become apparent that 
all the Member States hold dear the success of monetary union and, above all, the 
prosperity and well-being of all European citizens.
14
TABLES AND FIGURES
Financial assistance disbursed to countries in difficulty
(billions of euros)
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Total 
Table 1
Greece
ESM
EFSF
Bilateral loans
IMF
Total for Greece
Ireland
EFSF
EFSM
Bilateral loans
IMF
Total for Ireland
Portugal
EFSF
EFSM
IMF
Total for Portugal
Spain
ESM
Total for Spain
Cyprus
ESM
IMF
Total for Cyprus
21.4
10.3
8.5
21.7
108.2
25.3
8.3
21.0
10.5
31.9
9.6
1.7
6.7
3.4
7.6
13.9
0.5
12.8
4.4
7.8
2.5
6.4
6.9
14.1
13.0
11.3
8.0
8.2
5.7
1.9
3.3
6.6
3.4
0.8
1.2
2.2
1.8
39.5
1.9
4.6
0.3
1.1
0.2
0.6
0.4
0.1
61.9
141.8
52.9
31.9
288.5
17.7
22.5
4.8
22.6
67.6
26.0
24.3
26.3
76.6
41.3
41.3
6.3
1.0
7.3
Total assistance:
31.5
110.2
of which ESM:
197.9
39.5
59.7
6.5
18.9
1.1
22.4
22.0
10.4
10.3
8.5
8.5
21.7
21.7
481.2
109.6
Sources: For the bilateral loans to Ireland, National Treasury Management Agency and Macro-Financial Assistance to EU 
Member States, State of Play – November 2019, European Parliament; for the assistance provided by the EFSF, ESM 
and EFSM, their respective websites, from the pages on the beneficiary countries; for the support programme for Greece, 
European Commission, The second economic adjustment programme for Greece, March 2012 and, for IMF loans dis-
bursed to Greece between 2012 and 2014, IMF press releases published at the time of each loan.
16
Financial assistance disbursed by the ESM and related repayments
(billions of euros)
Table 2
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Total 
Net 
Total
Greece
disbursements
repayments
21.4
10.3
0.0
8.5
2.0
21.7
61.9
59.9
disbursements
39.5
1.9
repayments
1.6
4.0
1.0
3.0
8.0
2.1
41.3
17.6
23.7
Spain
Cyprus
Total 
disbursements
Total 
repayments
disbursements
4.6
1.1
0.6
6.3
6.3
repayments
39.5
6.5
1.1
22.0
10.3
8.5
21.7
109.6
1.6
4.0
1.0
5.0
8.0
19.7
Source: Based on ESM data available at:  https://www.esm.europa.eu/assistance/programme-database/programme-overview.
17
Residual debt towards the ESM
(billions of euros)
Figure 1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Greece
Cyprus
Spain
Source: Based on ESM data available at: https://www.esm.europa.eu/assistance/programme-database/programme-overview.
18
Financial assistance (net of repayments) disbursed by the ESM  
by country and residual lending capacity
(billions of euros)
Figure 2
410.1
89.9
59.9
6.3
23.7
Residual lending capacity
Greece
Cyprus
Spain
Source: Based on ESM data available at: https://www.esm.europa.eu/assistance/programme-database/programme-overview.
19
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
