Mugur Isărescu: Transformation of Central and Eastern European
economies - lessons learned and the way forward
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
Bucharest Security Conference, Bucharest, 4 October 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I  am  honoured  to  speak  at  this  conference  about  a  highly  topical  issue  in  front  of  such  a
distinguished audience. I believe it is a good opportunity to look back at the macroeconomic and
financial  developments  in  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  and,  based  on  the  past
decades’  experience,  to  look  forward  into  the  future  of  these  economies,  also  from  the
perspective of euro adoption.
Generally speaking, the transition from a centrally-planned to a market economy proved to be a
much more difficult task than it was first believed. The transition model was designed based on
the concepts prevailing in the western countries in the early ’90s: free markets, globalisation and
ensuring security and development via NATO and EU membership. With the benefit of hindsight,
I can say now that not many knew exactly what the right thing to do was, relevant experience was
lacking, and every model – be it shock therapy or gradual reform strategy – proved to have its
limits, so it was rather learning by doing. It was a time of experiments and many reforms were
carried out in a sui generis manner. I dare say this as a veteran, serving also one year as a
Prime Minister in 2000.
In  time,  several  aspects  of  transition  differed  from  one  country  to  another:  smaller  countries,
such as the Baltic states or Slovenia and Slovakia, opted for a fast track towards Eurozone entry,
inter  alia  because  of  geopolitical  and  security  reasons,  while  states  with  larger  and  more
complex economies, such as Poland, Hungary, Czechia or Romania, focused their efforts more
on  internal  development.  For  instance,  in  Poland  there  is  talk  of  “Polish-ization”  and
“nationalisation” of development, the spotlight being on the requirement to increase the country’s
power resources: “if you cannot stand on your own feet, no one will listen to you”. In Romania,
we had a very difficult transition in the first post-communist decade, with half-hearted, gradual
reform, yet after 2000 our economy has evolved more coherently, having two important anchors:
the EU and NATO.
Events that were hard to foresee in the early ’90s took place as well. For instance, who would
have thought that Slovakia, the less developed part of Czechoslovakia, would join the euro area
and  Czechia  would  not?  Under  the  circumstances,  does  euro  adoption  testify  to  a  high
development level? Who would have thought that Balcerowicz, the initiator of shock therapy in
Poland, whose name will always be linked to its transition from a centrally-planned economy to a
market  economy,  considered  a  hero  of  reforms  in  the  ’90s  and  even  before  the  global  crisis,
would become now a sort of scapegoat for the less positive aspects of transition – the leader of
Law  and  Justice  Party  in  Poland,  Jaroslaw  Kaczynski,  committed  to  “  finally  reject  the
1
unfortunate concepts of the pest Balcerowicz”  .
I  don’t  have  now  the  time  to  discuss  in  detail  these  complex  processes  or  the  differences
between  countries.  I  am  sure  that  this  conference  will  lay  another  brick  to  the  better
understanding of these processes. My intervention aims at sharing with you a few lessons that I
am formulating from my present position as a central banker.
The first  lesson  I  would  like  to  mention  refers  precisely  to  real  convergence.  In  almost  two
decades, all CEE economies have made significant progress – at various paces – in terms of
real convergence, with the catching-up process benefiting substantially from their EU accession.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  Romania’s  case,  GDP  per  capita  as  a  percentage  of  euro  area  average  (based  on  PPS)
expanded almost threefold compared to the year 2000, reaching 61 percent in 2018. Poland and
Hungary stand at around 67 percent (both posting values of no more than 45 percent in 2000),
Czechia at 86 percent (from 61 percent in 2000) and Bulgaria at 47 percent (against 24 percent
in 2000).
As a matter of fact, Romania boasts the fastest growth rate in the group of peer countries with
similar trends. Can we, therefore, say that this is proof of a successful catching-up in real terms?
Furthermore, can we claim that having a flexible policy framework (including a managed floating
exchange rate) helped us in this respect? Allow me to assert that more time is needed in order
for these questions to be appropriately answered. However, a general remark can be made: the
EU and NATO anchors helped us all make progress as concerns real convergence.
The  second  lesson  derives  from  the  answer  to  the  following  question:  did  the  strategic
decisions on the exchange rate regime and monetary policy framework matter? It is known that
some countries in the region (Romania, Poland, Czechia, Hungary) opted for flexible exchange
rate arrangements and adopted inflation targeting, while others (Bulgaria and the Baltic states)
resorted to a fixed exchange rate regime under a currency board. At first sight, it seems that the
latter group of countries are better prepared in terms of euro adoption (the Baltic states have
already taken this step but they, being much smaller and more open economies, are a special
case),  given  the  fiscal  discipline  pursued  and  the  nominal  convergence  stage  in  those
economies. This has helped keep macroeconomic imbalances under control, yet the flipside of
the coin is that the pace of real convergence was slowed by these powerful constraints, at least
in the aforementioned case of Bulgaria.
Consequently, it can be said that both approaches have benefits and drawbacks and that
the story of these economies on their catching-up journey is still far from over. I would
point  out  that  there  are  resources  for  all  these  economies  to  continue  to  grow  relatively  fast.
While convergence will go on, it is unsure at what pace, how linear and how sustainable it will be,
and the surprises that the future has in store for us are difficult to foresee, just like the recent
past differed from what we could have forecasted two decades earlier, for instance.  
The third lesson concerns the manner in which the global economic and financial crisis was
weathered.  With  only  one  exception  (Poland,  which  has  not  seen  a  single  year  of  recession
precisely  because  it  managed  to  adequately  combine  exchange  rate  flexibility  and  fiscal
discipline), all CEE economies witnessed periods of economic decline – more or less severe,
shorter  or  longer  –  owing  to  the  crisis,  irrespective  of  their  exchange  rate  or  monetary  policy
regimes. The steepest decline was in Romania, which had to undergo the most painful fiscal
adjustment. This occurred because the fiscal policy during the pre-crisis boom had been strongly
procyclical, so that the economic advance of over 9 percent in 2008 was followed by sharp falls
in the next two years: –5.5 percent in 2009 and –3.9 percent in 2010. The lesson learned here
is  that  there  is  no  viable  alternative  to  a  predictable  and  coherent  mix  of  economic
policies and structural reforms. Let me stress that this mix should remain in place even when
facing the challenges of election years, and there are several election rounds in Romania in 2019
and 2020.
The fourth lesson could deal with the issue of whether joining the euro area ensures faster
growth  or  not.  I  attended  the  celebrations  marking  the  10th  anniversary  of  euro  adoption  in
Slovenia  and  Slovakia.  While  in  the  latter  country  euro  area  membership  is  considered  a
success story, in Slovenia it is viewed as a necessary, yet painful, step. During my conversation
with  a  Slovenian  expert,  I  argued  that  the  difficulties  faced  after  euro  adoption  were  the
consequence of not cleaning up banks’ balance sheets before euro area entry. He replied that
the people were not interested in these details, as what they cared about most was the standard
of living, which declined after the euro changeover.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
While this could be in itself regarded as a lesson, I will go further and add that the recent views
expressed  by  policymakers  in  Hungary  and  Poland  appear  to  favour  the  idea  that  euro  area
membership contains the room for growth.  
A number of public statements are relevant in this respect. The Hungarian Prime Minister, Viktor
Orbán, said in April 2013 that “Hungary cannot seriously consider joining the euro zone until the
country’s  average  economic  development  reaches  90  percent  of  the  level  of  euro  states”.
Poland’s former central bank  governor  Marek  Belka  stated  in  2015:  “You  shouldn’t  rush  when
there  is  still  smoke  coming  from  a  house  that  was  burning… As  long  as  the  eurozone  has
problems with some of its own members, don’t expect us to be enthusiastic about joining”. His
successor at the helm of the monetary authority in Poland, Adam Glapiński, said that – and I
quote  –  “We  will  not  give  up  on  the  zloty  (currency),  because  it  will  dramatically  limit  growth
opportunities for the Polish economy”.
Back  in  2001,  Leszek  Balcerowicz  noted  that  structural  reforms  are  those  that  harmonise
nominal  and  real  convergence,  as  there  are  also  unavoidable  tensions  between  the  two.  The
more comprehensive the structural reforms, the less costly the disinflation and the more robust
the economic growth over the long term.
Benoît Cœuré, a member of the ECB’s Executive Board, provided an overall view when pointing
out,  in  November  2018,  that  the  Central,  Eastern  and  South-Eastern  economies  were
characterised by an uneven level of convergence and that the smaller ones (from Slovenia to the
Baltic states) joined the euro area irrespective of their progress in this area. Larger economies
were  in  no  hurry  to  adopt  the  euro,  but  rather  focused  in  the  first  place  on  correcting  some
structural issues as long as the economic policy framework still enjoyed a certain flexibility.
Let me now tell you how we addressed these issues in my country. Romania chose rather to
take the middle way in approaching euro adoption, envisaging a real convergence level of at least
70–75 percent prior to entering the euro area, as a lower level would cause us to be severely
affected by asymmetric shocks and therefore be unable to synchronise our business cycle with
that of other euro area economies. As for the Maastricht criteria, from July 2015 to November
2017, Romania fulfilled all the convergence criteria in the Treaty (yet without participating in the
Exchange Rate Mechanism). The fact that, at this moment, the reference values for the long-
term interest rate and inflation are no longer complied with is a warning that efforts should be
undertaken to attain nominal convergence in a lasting manner, not accidentally or temporarily.
This is feasible only when the two types of convergence reinforce each other.
The inherent flexibility of a managed float regime such as the one pursued by the NBR does,
however, have its clear limitations, which should not be overlooked – this does not imply, by any
means, that the central bank acts in a discretionary manner, taking the exchange rate wherever it
wants. The abuse of flexibility can be as harmful to the proper functioning of the economy as the
abuse of rigidity. In fact, the inflation-targeting regime implemented by the NBR is a mix of rules
and discretion with the aim of formulating a coherent and effective monetary policy.
As  regards  the  current  differences  in  the  countries’  approaches  to  euro  adoption,  for  some  it
might seem odd that Bulgaria, which lags behind in terms of real convergence, is considering
joining the euro area sooner than Romania. It is only natural for our neighbour to contemplate
euro adoption as the only sound exit from the present currency board. By contrast, in Romania,
as well as in other countries pursuing a floating exchange rate regime, the approach is different,
since  euro  adoption  is  more  complex.  This  is  by  no  means  to  say  that  Romania  does  not
envisage joining the euro area, but merely that a comprehensive preparation is of the essence to
cope with the related challenges.
The  Latin  dictum festina lente is, in my opinion, quite suitable in the case of euro adoption as
well. With respect to real convergence, many have been asking themselves “How fast is fast
enough?”.  Unlike  others,  I  would  not  necessarily  look  for  a  certain  figure  (beyond  the  already
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
mentioned minimum level of roughly 70–75 percent); I would tackle this issue by approaching
real convergence not as a race where the fastest track is also the right one, but rather
as a complex process giving the steady runner (a marathoner rather than a sprinter) the
opportunity to reap most of the potential benefits, while avoiding excessive risks.
Speaking about risks, it is worth noting that relatively sizeable current account and fiscal deficits
may erode the very foundation of this edifice that is the national economy. It is therefore much
wiser to adjust them in a gradual manner than leave market forces to cause a sudden correction.
Fiscal  discipline,  consistent  economic  policies  and  an  ambitious,  yet  viable,  calendar  should
make  a  successful  euro  adoption  possible,  so  that  the  economy  adequately  withstand
competitive pressures within the euro area. Equally important is to reduce the still overly large
disparities across Romania’s development regions, as it takes the entire country to join the euro
area,  not  only  Bucharest  and  Ilfov  county. Economic  growth  is  not  enough,  it  should  be
accompanied by lasting economic development.
Before ending my speech, instead of my personal view about the future, let me quote a recent
column  in Financial  Times  by Tony  Barber   relevant  for  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  region:
“Nevertheless  all  is  not  well  in  the  region.  Why?  One  reason  lies  in  the  model  that  western
governments in the 1990s prescribed for the east’s transition to free-market democracy. As it
shed  its  communist  past,  the  east  was  told  to  embrace  not  just  liberal  democracy  but
globalisation, open borders and the lightly regulated financial capitalism that the west viewed as
the touchstone of its own economic success.
2
This  model’s  flaws  were  exposed  in  the  2008  financial  crisis  and  the  European  refugee  and
migrant emergency of 2015–16. […]
EU  membership,  too,  has  brought  more  pluses  than  minuses. Access  to  the  single  market,
regional  aid  and,  from  ordinary  people’s  viewpoint,  Europe-wide  freedom  of  movement  are
cherished gains. […]  
This  resentment  has  much  to  do  with  the  western  model  grafted  on  to  the  east.  In  1989,  as
during  Europe’s  1848  revolutions,  the  people  wanted  civic  freedoms  and,  in  many  cases,
liberation  from  foreign  overlords  and  their  first  independent  states  of  modern  times.  But  after
1989 the adoption of the western model — complete with EU membership, global capitalism and
a liberal political philosophy — created tensions between liberalism allied to internationalism and
the assertion of a newly acquired national sovereignty. […]
Now central and eastern Europe is experiencing its own contest between populist nationalism
and liberal democracy. It would be brave to forecast a winner when some western societies are
caught up in much the same struggle.”
This being said, let me thank you for your attention and wish you insightful discussions.
1
2
“Poland’s wild ride out of communism remains election faultline”, James Shotter, Financial Times, 2 October
2019.
“The legacy of 1989 has been complacency”, Tony Barber, Financial Times, 2 October 2019.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
