Shaktikanta Das: Indian banking at crossroads - some reflections
Speech  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  First  Annual
Economics  Conference,  Amrut  Mody  School  of  Management,  Ahmedabad  University,
Ahmedabad, 16 November 2019.
 I am very happy to be amongst you today to address the first Annual Economics Conference
being organised by the Amrut Mody School of Management, Ahmedabad University. The theme
of the conference – “50 years of Bank Nationalisation: Indian Banking at Crossroads” - provides
the  perfect  backdrop  for  a  discussion  on  the  evolution  of  Public  Sector  Banks(PSBs),  their
journey over the last 50 years and a vision for their future.  The banking system has played a
critical  role  in  the  upliftment  of  our  country,  especially  in  the  recent  decades  which  saw
unprecedented  economic  growth.  However,  the  banking  system,  especially  the  public  sector
banks, has experienced a large churn after the Global Financial Crisis(GFC) as it tries to grapple
with  multiple  challenges,  including  high  non-performing  loans  (NPLs),  global  and  domestic
economic  downturns,  adaptation  of  technology  and  competition  from  new  age  fintech
companies. In my address today, I shall attempt to discuss the challenges that lay ahead for the
broader banking sector and what we expect of them going forward. I shall also briefly touch upon
our  approach  to  tackling  the  issues  in  the  non-banking  finance  companies  and  urban  co-
operative banks, which are important segments of the financial sector.
2. Many a time, to see through to the future, looking back at the past provides insights that are of
much  help.  With  that  limited  objective,  I  shall  wade  back  a  little  to  the  past  for  the  sake  of
contextualising our discussion. In 1967, credit to agriculture constituted only 2.2 per cent of the
total  advances  of  the  Scheduled  Commercial  Banks  in  sharp  contrast  to  industry  which
constituted 64.3 per cent. Five cities in the country, viz., Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and
Chennai  accounted  for  around  44  per  cent  of  the  bank  deposits  and  60  per  cent  of  the
outstanding  bank  credit  in1969.  This  led  to  the  widespread  political  perception  that,  left  to
themselves, the private sector banks were not sufficiently aware of their larger responsibilities
towards society. The solutions that the policy makers thought of at that time included exerting
various degrees of control over the banking system, which ultimately culminated in the decision
to nationalise 14 private sector banks in 1969, followed by the nationalisation of six more private
sector  banks  in  1980.  The  impact  of  the  decision  to  nationalise  banks  has  been  succinctly
summarised in the History of RBI, Volume III: “….at the time of nationalisation as many as 617
towns out of 2,700 in the country were not covered by commercial banks. And, even worse, out
of about 600,000 villages, hardly 5,000 had banks. The spread, too, was uneven…...”
Current Challenges and the Role of Exogenous Factors
3. Against this historical detour, let me come to the challenges faced by the banks today, many of
which are a result of how various exogenous factors have played out over the years. Everyone
concerned should realise that banks are in the business of taking bonafide risks. This means that
out of a host of exposures which a bank chooses to take, a few may go bad. The PSBs, which
have  been  used  as  vehicles  to  further  the  development  agenda  of  the  Government,  had  to
achieve and maximise multiple objectives. The high growth phase prior to the GFC (2008) was
aided by bank credit to a large extent, mostly by PSBs, leading to risk build ups in the balance
sheet  of  the  lenders.  In  particular,  bank  credit  to  infrastructure  sector  increased  at  an
unprecedented rate.  This exposed the  PSBs to the travails of the infrastructure sector, which
materialised significantly in the post-crisis years.
4. Further, the tail end of the above high growth period in advances to infrastructure coincided
with a period of slowdown in economic growth and tightening of environmental clearances. Also,
the  transformation  of  major  term  lending  institutions  into  universal  banks/NBFCs  led  to
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
commercial  banks  becoming  the  primary  source  of  long-term  debt  financing  to  projects  in
infrastructure and core industries. An immediate consequence of these circumstances was that
it led to a spurt in the level of ‘restructured standard assets’, i.e., assets which were restructured
without  being  downgraded  as  non-performing  assets  (NPAs).  Eventually,  most  of  the
restructured  assets  which  were  allowed  to  be  classified  as  ‘standard’  became  NPAs  as  the
restructuring  packages  proved  to  be  unviable.  Inadequate  credit  assessment  by  banks  and
governance issues also played their due part in the risk build-up.
5. As documented, the increase in NPAs was significantly higher in PSBs as compared to their
private and foreign counterparts.  PSBs, probably to fulfil the additional social objective of their
mandate,  had  taken  higher  exposure  in  some  of  the  critical  sectors  of  the  economy  such  as
mining,  iron  and  steel,  and  infrastructure.  NPA  levels  in  these  sectors  shot  up  as  all  these
sectors suffered external shocks leading to the respective stress – mining and energy was hit by
the cancellation of allocation of coal blocks; iron and steel sector faced cost pressures due to
dumping of cheaper steel from China; telecommunications sector underwent a disruption in the
form  of  cancellation  of  2G  spectrum  allotment;  and  the  construction  sector  was  marred  by
delays in obtaining necessary government approvals, in particular environmental clearances.
6. To add to these issues, shocks in the form of debt waivers/moratoriums and payment issues
of DISCOMs also meant significant costs to the fisc and also affected the health of the banking
sector  as  well  as  the  credit  culture.  Interestingly,  data  put  together  by  the  Indian  Banks
Association shows that of the 10 states that announced debt waiver schemes since 2017, only
three states have reimbursed almost completely as promised. Thus, it is imperative that write-off
amounts  are  reimbursed  to  the  banks  and  DISCOM  payments  are  made  in  a  time  bound
manner, so as to improve the health of banks and their capacity to lend in subsequent years.
Corporate Governance – The Elephant in the Room
7. This brings me to some of the internal challenges faced by the PSBs, and their governance
could easily be identified as a central concern. In fact, many of the problems that currently seem
to affect the PSBs such as the elevated levels of NPA, capital shortfalls, frauds and inadequate
risk  management  can  mostly  be  attributed  to  the  manifestation  of  underlying  corporate
governance  issues.  The  role  of  independent  Boards  in  fostering  a  compliance  culture  by
establishing  the  proper  systems  of  control,  audit  and  distinct  reporting  of  business  and  risk
management  has  been  found  wanting  in  some  PSBs  leading  to  build-up  of  NPAs. Also,  the
understanding  of  risks  from  a  business  perspective  by  the  Boards  in  some  banks  has  been
inadequate due to skill gap and, competency issues. The fact remains that a strong corporate
governance culture, with a focus on transparency and accountability, has to percolate from a
strong Board which sets the example by leading.
8.  Let me also touch upon governance issues in private sector banks (PVBs) which originate
from altogether different set of concerns. The issues here mainly relate to incentive structure of
their  managements,  quality  of  audits  and  compliance  and  also  functioning  of Audit  and  Risk
Management Committees. The Reserve Bank has recently issued guidelines for compensation
in  private  sector  banks  which  include  specification  of  minimum  variable  pay  component  and
clawback arrangements, among others.
Resolution of Stressed Assets
9. Apart from governance, one of the biggest challenges faced by the PSBs, and the banking
system  in  general,  is  the  resolution  of  stressed  assets.  For  a  long  time,  India  did  not  have  a
bankruptcy  law  in  place,  and  hence  the  Reserve  Bank  introduced  various  restructuring
frameworks which were designed to emulate the desirable attributes of a bankruptcy law. The
enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC) has been a game changer in this
regard. Despite the impression that IBC has been marred with numerous litigations leading to
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
delays in resolution, I am optimistic that these are teething problems in a new law. Majority of the
companies that went through insolvency proceedings under IBC and ended in liquidation so far
were already stressed entities for a long time whose value had been eroded significantly and
were  pending  before  the  Board  for  Industrial  and  Financial  Reconstruction  (BIFR).  The  real
impact of the IBC is to be seen in the fresh cases where I expect the law to provide an efficient
avenue to effect a resolution.
10. To complement these efforts, the Reserve Bank has put in place a framework for resolution
of  stressed  assets  through  a circular  dated  June  7,  2019  which  envisages  a  time  bound
implementation of a resolution plan, failing which disincentives in the form of additional provisions
will kick in.
11.  While  these  provisions  are  available  for  real  sector  firms,  the  situation  is  entirely  different
when it comes to resolution of financial firms. In this regard, the Government, on November 15,
2019 has notified the rules containing a framework for resolution of financial services providers
(FSPs)  under  the  IBC.  The  applicability  of  these  rules  would  be  limited  to  certain  financial
services providers to be separately notified by the Government in consultation with regulators.
12.  Our  resolute  efforts  towards  recognition,  repair  and  resolution  have  resulted  in  non-
performing assets (NPAs) of the banking system declining for the first time in March 2019 after a
gap of 7 years. Fresh slippages declined and the system-level provision coverage ratio jumped to
60.5 per cent from 48.3 per cent a year ago. The capital adequacy ratio of the banking system
has increased to 14.3 per cent, much higher than the Basel norms. This has benefited from the
recapitalisation of PSBs in the order of ₹ 2.9 lakh crore by the Government in the recent period.
Mergers of Public Sector Banks
13. The government, with an objective to create strong and competitive banks, has announced
an  amalgamation  of  PSBs  in  order  to  create  stronger  banks  with  global  presence.  This
consolidation is in the direction of the recommendations of the first report of the Narasimham
Committee in 1991, where the requirement for fewer but stronger banks for Indian economy had
been highlighted. The idea was to enable such banks to compete at the national and international
level. A well-executed merger generates synergies of workforce and capital, helps in streamlining
of operations and leads to significant improvements in efficiency. It can also entail diffusion of
best practices across the board between banks. The bigger and agile banks, in principle, could
reposition themselves with better branding exercises.  I must, however, hasten to add that the
merger process has to be executed without creating any disruption in the normal functioning of
these banks.
Non-Bank Financial Companies (NBFC) Sector
14.  It  is  well  recognised  that  NBFCs  play  a  prominent  role  in  the  Indian  financial  system  by
catering  to  financial  needs  of  a  wide  variety  of  customers  and  niche  sectors,  providing
complementarity and competition to banks.  The  NBFC sector largely depends on market and
bank borrowings, thereby creating a web of inter-linkages with banks and financial markets. As
Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) now fall under the regulatory purview of the Reserve Bank,
we are undertaking a review of extant regulations and are in the process of harmonising these
regulations for HFCs with applicable regulations for NBFCs.
15.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  IL&FS  crisis  and  subsequent  defaults  by  a  few  companies,  asset
quality  concerns  have  emerged,  which  imposes  liquidity  constraints  on  NBFCs.  The  Reserve
Bank has been proactive in taking several measures to address these concerns and strengthen
the regulatory and supervisory architecture of the NBFC sector, thereby ensuring that the sector
remains stable and robust. We have attached considerable importance to make them resilient
through harmonization of regulations and a robust liquidity framework. RBI on November 4, 2019
has come out with guidelines on liquidity risk management framework for NBFCs. Our objective
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
is to ensure proper governance and risk management structures in NBFCs.
Urban Co-operative Banks
1
16. Let me now turn to co-operative banks. They contribute significantly in credit delivery and in
bringing other financial services to the people. The performance of some of these institutions,
however, has been hampered due to operational and governance issues. The recent unearthing
of fraud in one of the urban co-operative banks (UCBs) has brought up issues relating to their
governance, prudent internal control mechanisms, and adequacy of checks and balances to the
forefront.
17. Turning back to history, the Urban Co-operative Banks were brought under the ambit of the
Banking Regulation (BR) Act, 1949 with effect from March 1, 1966. Certain provisions of the BR
Act, however, were not made applicable to them, limiting the scope of regulation and supervision
over them . Broadly speaking, banking-related functions of cooperative banks are regulated by
the  Reserve  Bank and management-related functions are controlled by the concerned  State /
Central Government. The Reserve Bank’s regulatory control over UCBs is affected due to this
duality of control. RBI has made concerted efforts in the past to mitigate the adverse impact of
dual regulation in the form of MoUs with State/ Central Governments and setting up of a State-
level Task Force for Co-operative Urban Banks (TAFCUB). However, challenges still persist. At
present,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  working  with  the  Government  to  amend  the Act  governing  co-
operative banks. We have suggested several legislative changes to the Central Government for
better regulation and supervision of UCBs. On our part, we are reviewing the existing architecture
of regulation and supervision of UCBs and shall carry out necessary changes in sync with the
evolving requirements.
18. Going forward, UCBs are likely to increasingly face competition from players such as Small
Finance  banks  (SFBs),  Payments  Banks,  NBFCs  and  Micro-Finance  Institutions  (MFIs).  It  is,
therefore,  necessary  for  them  to  adopt  robust  technology  to  enable  them  to  provide  banking
services  at  lower  costs  and  with  adequate  safeguards.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  taking
proactive  steps  to  assist  these  institutions  to  adopt  a  robust  IT  infrastructure.  The  proposed
national level Umbrella Organisation (UO) is expected to provide liquidity and capital support to
member  co-operative  banks,  and  will  therefore  contribute  to  the  strength  and  vibrancy  of  the
sector.
New Frontiers of Banking
3
2
19. The emergence of new banking models, in the form of Payments Banks and Small Finance
Banks, have widened the horizons of banking in India. The Government and the Reserve Bank
have taken several initiatives to encourage greater use of electronic payments  to achieve a ‘less
cash’ society. These measures have led to digital payments  to GDP ratio rising to 8.6 per cent
at end-March 2019 from 6.7 per cent at end-March 2016. During the same period, the number of
per  capita  digital  transactions  rose  from  4.6  to  17.6.  Similarly,  Fin-Tech  is  offering  alternative
models of lending and capital raising. In this regard, crowd-funding, peer-to-peer lending, invoice
financing (Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDs)) and digital lending have made their
presence felt. They have helped in improving the efficiency of intermediation by bringing down the
costs, sachetisation of products and services and in expanding the reach of financial services to
a greater number of people.
20. More recently, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) and Big Data are becoming
central  to  financial  services  innovation. Analysis  of  vast  amount  of  data,  both  structured  and
unstructured, has been made possible using these techniques. Increasing levels of expectations
of compliance to regulations and a greater focus on data and reporting has brought RegTech and
SupTech into limelight.  They are being applied in areas such as risk management, regulatory
reporting, data management, compliance, e-KYC / anti-money laundering (AML)/ Combating the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financing of Terrorism (CFT), and fraud prevention.
21.  In  light  of  these  developments,  conventional  banking  is  making  way  for  next-generation
banking with focus on digitisation and modernisation. The need for brick and mortar branches is
being reviewed continuously as digitisation has brought banking to the fingertips of the people,
obviating the need to physically visit a bank branch. The transformation of the financial services
landscape caused by technological innovations can blur the difference between a bank and a
technology  company,  as  technological  giants  are  making  rapid  strides  into  areas  such  as
payments, traditionally the domain of banks. This will present testing grounds for the regulators to
delicately  balance  promotion  of  innovation  and  applying  uniform  supervisory  and  regulatory
framework.
Concluding Observations
22. Let me conclude by saying that banks have a critical role in the economy. The privilege of
raising unsecured liabilities from the society and generating revenue by deploying them in various
avenues  and  ventures  necessitates  prudent  risk  assessment  of  such  deployment.  In  this
process,  the  banks  do  have  a  responsibility  to  shoulder  when  it  comes  to  contributing  to  the
growth of productive sectors of the economy including infrastructure.
23. As we move forward, we at the RBI are focusing on governance, risk management, internal
audit  and  compliance  functions  in  banks  more  closely.  In  a  bid  to  strengthen  oversight  of
commercial  banks,  co-operative  banks  and  NBFCs,  we  have  created  a  unified  department  of
supervision (DoS) and a unified department of regulation (DoR) with effect from  November 1,
2019. This move will enhance the efficacy of supervision and regulation as these entities operate
in an increasingly integrated environment with overlapping business domains. It is our endeavour
to update the knowledge and skill levels of supervisors on a continuous basis. We are adopting a
multi-pronged  approach  in  this  aspect.  We  are  in  the  process  of  setting  up  a  College  of
Supervisors to augment and reinforce supervisory skills among regulatory and supervisory staff.
In addition, an internal supervisory research and analysis wing is being created to supplement
and support regulatory and supervisory activities. As indicated earlier, technology would continue
to play a vital role in enhancing the efficacy of regulation and supervision in a continual manner.
24. We are also addressing some of the long persisting issues in our regulatory and supervisory
framework in a systematic and time bound manner towards building a more efficient and robust
financial system.
25. I hope the participants of the conference would deliberate on some of the issues highlighted
in  my  remarks  today  in  greater  detail  in  the  sessions  that  follow.  I  wish  the  conference  all
success.
1
2
3
Co-operative banks are regulated under Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949 subject to certain modifications. As Co-
operative banks are exempted from certain provisions of the Act, the regulatory authority of the Reserve Bank
over UCBs is limited.
Such as  Immediate  Payments  Service (IMPS),  Unified  Payments  Interface (UPI),  Bharat  Interface for  Money
(BHIM), Bharat Bill Pay System (BBPS), Aadhaar-enabled Payment System (AePS), Bharat QR code and mobile
wallets.
Digital payments include RTGS (customer transactions and inter-bank transactions), retail electronic payments
and card payments (credit and debit card transactions at point of sale (PoS) terminals, and payments made
through pre-paid payment instruments).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
