Caroline Abel: Closing remarks - Fintech Seychelles Workshop
Closing remarks by Ms Caroline Abel, Governor of Central Bank of Seychelles, at the Fintech
Seychelles Workshop, Mahe, 10 May 2019.
 Secretary of State,
Deputy Executive Director, Alliance for Financial Inclusion,
Programme Leader, World Bank Group,
Representatives of Central Banks,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentleman,
Good Morning.
The  past  two-and-a-half  days  have  been  an  insightful  journey  for  us  all,  especially  the  local
stakeholders, as it has provided us with the necessary interactions to help demystify the concept
of Fintech.
If there is one thing that has become clear from the discussions, it is this: it is important for us to
be on the same page if we are to embrace the opportunities and efficiently mitigate the risks that
technological advances bring to the financial sector and indeed, the economy as a whole.
We are now better equipped with much-needed information for the work to begin on drawing up
our National Fintech Strategy; one that clearly outlines what can and what needs to be done, by
whom, and in what timeframe. The challenge that we now face – and it is not an unsurmountable
one – is to educate and empower our local population, so that they embrace the move towards
more digitalisation with less suspicion, and eventually see the benefits that Fintech can bring to
their daily lives.
The fact that Seychelles is small, means that we can do things more efficiently and roll out new
initiatives faster, with the support and participation of all relevant stakeholders and partners.
At  this  juncture,  I  take  the  opportunity  to  express  our  sincere  appreciation  to  our  international
partners, notably the World Bank and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, without whom this event
would not have had the same high-level of engagement and interaction. We are also grateful for
the  learning  experiences  and  innovative  ideas  shared  by  all  our  moderators,  panellists  and
delegates – your active participation is much appreciated and has contributed to the success of
this workshop.
My final word of thanks is extended to the local financial sector regulators and financial industry
players who have shown a keen interest in moving the Fintech agenda forward. The end of this
workshop today signals the beginning of much work that cannot be done in silos, if we are to
move the financial sector into the digital and technological era. I therefore urge all partners to
keep this momentum going and stay on course with our target of delivering a National Fintech
Strategy by the end of 2019.
On this note, I would like to thank you for your attention and active participation over the last few
days and look forward to working with all of you on building a Fintech platform for Seychelles.
Thank you.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
