Statement at the presentation of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank’s 2019 Financial Stability Review 
Speech delivered at the press conference to unveil the Financial Stability 
Review 
21.11.2019 | Frankfurt am Main | Claudia Buch 
 1 Underestimation of credit risk
 2 Overvaluation of assets and loan collateral
 3 Interest rate risk
 4 Countercyclical capital buffer
 5 Need for action to ensure a stable financial system
This time last year, the economic outlook was slightly more positive than it is at present. 
Although economic warning signs were already apparent, interest rates were still expected 
to rise gradually. Unfortunately, this has not come to pass; downside risks to the economy 
have since emerged worldwide. Germany’s export-oriented industry has borne the brunt of 
this. Robust domestic demand – bolstered by favourable financing conditions and an 
upbeat labour market situation – has prevented an even greater economic downturn thus 
far.
Unlike in the previous year, market participants are now expecting risk-free interest rates to 
remain low in the years to come. A scenario in which interest rates are low for an extended 
period has therefore become more likely.
From the perspective of financial stability, this means that cyclical risks are continuing to 
accumulate within the German financial system. These risks are not directly visible as low 
interest rates are keeping valuations high in some cases, the markets are liquid, and asset 
prices and loans are still experiencing dynamic growth. At the same time, the vulnerabilities 
of the German financial system to unexpected macroeconomic developments are growing 
further.
We have described these vulnerabilities in past years:
   After ten years of positive economic development, future credit risks are potentially 
being underestimated.
Meanwhile, the recoverability of loan collateral such as real estate is potentially being 
overestimated.
The situation is further compounded by interest rate risk: both an abrupt rise in interest 
rates and persistently low interest rates would put pressure on the financial system.
Two developments, in particular, could expose these vulnerabilities.
  An unexpected economic downturn could hit Germany’s financial system hard. One 
potential trigger could be bad news concerning the global economy. Furthermore, 
external weaknesses may have a greater impact on domestic demand. Credit defaults 
would then increase and assets would lose value.
An abrupt rise in interest rates triggered, say, by the materialisation of downside risks 
and a sudden increase in risk premia in the markets, could also jeopardise financial 
stability.
A stable financial system should be able to cushion such shocks as much as possible rather 
than amplifying them. This year, the German Financial Stability Committee (FSC) thus 
recommended raising the countercyclical capital buffer to 0.25% on account of increased 
cyclical systemic risks.
Allow me to explain in more detail how we assess these risks and what action needs to be 
taken.
1 Underestimation of credit risk
Overall, the credit scores of German enterprises have been exceedingly good and 
insolvencies correspondingly low over the past few years. Hence, it follows that the 
number of non-performing loans has declined.
However, there are mounting signs that future credit risks are being underestimated:
 Banks’ risk provisioning remains exceptionally low, reflecting the low number of 
insolvencies.
  Economic downturns coupled with steeply increasing credit risks are likely to be 
underrepresented in many banks’ risk assessments. This is indicated, for instance, by the 
low risk weights of banks which use internal ratings-based models.
In addition to this, at around 5% over the past year, lending to the private sector 
reached a 15-year high. Large, systemically important financial institutions have recently 
expanded their lending in this area to a greater degree than small and medium-sized 
institutions.
Allocation risks may thus emerge for the entire loan portfolio that appear paradoxical at 
first glance: even if the creditworthiness of all enterprises has improved following a long 
upswing, making each individual loan appear sound, the structure of the loan portfolio 
may shift to enterprises that are riskier in relative terms.
Allocation risks, then, are not themselves a new risk, but rather a further indication that 
credit risks are being underestimated.
   Creditworthiness varies between enterprises. Most enterprises have a fair credit score, 
although there are some which are rated particularly highly, and others which are 
weaker.
This distribution is broadly reflected in banks’ portfolios, too, although some enterprises 
also obtain funding via the capital market, whilst others draw on equity capital.
Now, what happens during a cyclical upswing? In such an event, all enterprises see an 
improvement in their creditworthiness. Strong enterprises increasingly turn to retained 
earnings or the capital market as sources of funding. Even relatively riskier enterprises are 
able to take out more loans from banks on the strength of an overall improvement in 
creditworthiness.
These are merely initial theoretical considerations which serve to illustrate the mechanism. 
But what concrete developments are we seeing in banks’ portfolios?
Here, enterprises’ creditworthiness has in fact seen an improvement. Compared with the 
beginning of the new millennium, enterprises’ interest coverage ratio – in other words, 
earnings relative to interest expenditure – has undergone continuous enhancement. 
Unsurprisingly, other indicators of creditworthiness present a very similar picture.
At the same time, comparatively risky enterprises have received more loans on account of 
their improved creditworthiness. The composition of loan portfolios has shifted. This is a 
statistical finding, first and foremost. It tells us nothing about the drivers behind this trend, 
such as higher risk-taking propensity among banks or a change in the demand for loans. 
Viewed in the context of banks’ creditworthiness assessments or from a supervisory 
perspective, this shift is not necessarily a problem.
However, banks are now increasingly financing the very enterprises that would be the first 
to encounter problems in the event of an unexpected economic deterioration.
What could happen in the event of an unexpected economic downturn?
  Enterprises’ creditworthiness would deteriorate and more loan defaults would occur.
Loan losses and write-downs would increase more sharply than they would if credit risk 
were distributed more evenly.
Banks’ portfolios would then include a greater number of borrowers with lower credit 
ratings.
Such allocation risks are evidence of the fact that credit risk may potentially be 
underestimated following a long period of favourable economic developments. They have 
increased in recent years and are feeding into cyclical vulnerabilities throughout the whole 
banking system.
2 Overvaluation of assets and loan collateral
As market participants see it, interest rates are likely to remain low for longer than 
previously anticipated. Low interest rates bolster valuations in the global bond and equity 
markets. This is one reason why the weaker economic activity has barely made itself felt in 
the financial markets as yet.
At the same time, the banking system as a whole has become more vulnerable to an 
abrupt increase in risk premia. Should global political risks emerge or economic activity 
deteriorate unexpectedly, valuations would likely decline, meaning that losses would then 
have to be absorbed.
And in a low-interest-rate setting, asset prices react more strongly to minor changes in risk 
premia. Unexpected changes in market interest rates could thus be accompanied by a 
higher degree of volatility. This could potentially result in increased capital requirements for 
market risk.
Valuations in the real estate market are particularly significant for the German financial 
system. This is because more than half of all loans to households are loans for house 
purchase.
 At 80%, real estate makes up the lion’s share of fixed assets in Germany.
 [1]
Our assessment of the real estate market situation is similar to that of last year: cyclical 
risks, to which the real estate market is making a significant contribution, are continuing to 
mount. However, we see no need to activate borrower-based instruments intended to 
stabilise lending standards – in other words, a loan-to-value ratio and an amortisation 
requirement.
How have we reached this assessment?
House prices are an important indicator and have continued to grow sharply, rising by 
around 8% over the past year. Property prices in German cities are likely to stand around 
15% to 30% above the value that would correspond to the fundamentals.
 [2]
At present, however, we do not see any clear indications of mounting speculation being 
driven by credit. Whether there is a self-reinforcing “narrative” – to use the words of Nobel 
Prize winner Robert Shiller – cannot be clearly assessed.
however.
 There are indications of this, 
 [3]
   First of all, the competition in granting residential real estate loans is highly intense. With 
growth of 5%, loans for residential property recently grew at a slightly above-average 
rate. Segments of the market have shifted to the savings banks and credit cooperatives.
Prudential  surveys  amongst  institutions  show  that  there  are  certain  signs  of  lending 
standards being relaxed – but only slightly and not across all institutions.
Households and banks expect residential property prices to rise further. It is difficult to 
say  whether  they  are  being  overly  optimistic  here.  At  the  very  least,  households  are 
expecting  less  pronounced  price  rises  in  rural  areas  than  in  big  cities  and  they  expect 
smaller increases in prices per year over a period of five years than over one year.
All in all, it would therefore be premature to issue the all-clear for the real estate market. 
There is a need for action in two areas.
In a warning to Germany, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) has just recently 
highlighted the need to close existing gaps in the data. We still know too little about one 
particular central indicator for estimating risk: the quality of lending standards.
Surveys of institutions, like those we have conducted once again over the past year, 
provide us with vital information. Ultimately, however, they are costly for all involved and 
do not offer a robust statistical footing for forward-looking policy. Over the past year, we 
have therefore continued to work on creating the preconditions for a legal basis regarding 
the collection of the necessary data. High-quality data are also urgently required in many 
other areas of public policy that concern the real estate market. However, it is policymakers 
who must ultimately reach a decision on the data collection recommended by the German 
FSC in 2015.
Furthermore, two additional income-based instruments should be created. Both 
instruments are oriented around indicators that banks use to assess creditworthiness in 
order to prevent borrowers from taking on excessive debt.
feature in the recommendations proposed by the ESRB and the German FSC for the 
German residential real estate market.
 Both instruments likewise 
 [4]
3 Interest rate risk
The German financial system remains vulnerable to an abrupt rise in interest rates. Many 
institutions have increased the interest rate fixation periods of their assets, not least to 
stabilise their interest income. For instance, the share of new loans for house purchase with 
an interest rate lock-in period of more than ten years has risen from 26% in 2010 to its 
current level of 50%.
Although this initially protects the borrower from rising interest rates, the risks do not 
disappear but are instead borne by the banks. A rise in interest rates would therefore 
impact many institutions at the same time. Funding costs would rise immediately, but 
interest income would only rise gradually. Savings banks and credit cooperatives would be 
affected to a considerably greater extent than larger banks.
4 Countercyclical capital buffer
These cyclical risks can emerge together and reinforce each other. An unexpected 
economic downturn could be amplified if banks restrict their lending. In order to prevent 
dangers to financial stability, banks must maintain capital buffers designed to absorb 
losses.
Macroprudential capital requirements serve precisely this buffer function. Under certain 
circumstances, banks can undershoot macroprudential buffers without measures such as 
the withdrawal of their banking licence being immediately imposed. Instead, bonus 
payments and profit distribution would be restricted. Macroprudential policy therefore 
complements supervisory measures that aim to ensure robust capitalisation and good risk 
management amongst banks.
The countercyclical capital buffer increases the resilience of the banking system and 
stabilises lending during periods of stress. Should cyclical systemic risks materialise, the 
buffer can be lowered straight away
In May 2019, the German FSC recommended that the Federal Financial Supervisory 
Authority (BaFin) activate the countercyclical capital buffer. Germany is thereby following in 
the footsteps of other European countries that have activated or increased the 
countercyclical capital buffer. BaFin followed this recommendation and raised the buffer to 
0.25% of risk-weighted domestic exposures in the third quarter of 2019. Banks have 12 
months to build up the buffer, and, for the most part, they may use their surplus capital to 
meet the requirement.
The recommendation makes allowances for uncertainty about economic developments. 
Future adjustments to the countercyclical capital buffer will depend on whether and to 
what extent cyclical risks continue to build up in the financial system. The financial cycle, 
and not the economic cycle, is the relevant factor here.
5 Need for action to ensure a stable financial system
Digitalisation, climate change, demographic change, and globalisation are megatrends that 
are impacting all areas of the economy and society. The financial sector mirrors these 
developments and, at the same time, is a key catalyst for the necessary structural change.
For the first time, this year’s Financial Stability Review features a chapter on the impact of 
climate-related risks on the financial system. In this context, our goal is not to evaluate 
climate-policy decisions. Instead, we aim to analyse the impact of climate change as well as 
the political, social and economic responses. To this end, more than 45 central banks and 
supervisors worldwide have joined forces in the Network for Greening the Financial System 
(NGFS), pooling their methodological capabilities and building up a robust information 
base. At the international level, the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) Task Force on Climate-
Related Financial Disclosures undertook important preliminary work for CO  risks to be 
better disclosed in enterprises’ balance sheets.
 [5]
2
In order to tackle climate change effectively, it is necessary to implement a policy regime 
that adjusts the relative prices between carbon-intensive and low-carbon economic 
activities. This, in turn, necessitates significant structural change. A functioning financial 
system is key to ensuring that structural change can succeed without hampering innovation 
or jeopardising stability. 
However, structural change has also not stopped short of the financial sector itself. Banks – 
just like firms in other economic sectors – must therefore be allowed to withdraw from the 
market or to shrink if their business strategies are no longer sustainable. An effective 
resolution and restructuring regime can help market mechanisms to function properly. With 
the banking package recently passed by the EU, key regulations on creditors participating 

in losses – known as a bail-in – have been brought into line with international standards.
[6]
 Also at the international level, the FSB is currently evaluating the impact of too-big-to-
fail reforms.
 A corresponding consultative report will be published in June 2020.
 [7]
Footnotes:
1. This figure refers to lending to domestic households and enterprises.
2. The Bundesbank estimates that house prices in German towns and cities were 
overvalued by between 15% and 30% in 2018. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), 
Monthly Report, February 2019. The fundamentals include per capita real estate 
holdings, per capita income, population density, and the age structure of the population.
3. See Robert J. Shiller (2019), Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major 
Economic Events. Princeton University Press. Oxford and Princeton.
4. Relevant indicators include, amongst others, aggregate debt as a percentage of 
household income as well as the percentage of household income needed to make 
interest and redemption payments.
5. See Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (2017), Final Report, Financial 
Stability Board.
6. In this context, the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) 
7.
was revised.
 https://www.fsb.org/2019/05/fsb-launches-evaluation-of-too-big-to-fail-reforms-and-
invites-feedback-from-stakeholders/
