 23.10.2019 
 The Banking Union: a key building block of the EU project 
Opening remarks at roundtable “Banking Union – Five years in the making” 
Banco de España 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
    Dear  chairs  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  European  Banking  Authority, 
president of the European Banking Federation, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
Let me start by welcoming you to Banco de España for this roundtable. Over the next couple 
of hours we intend to discuss both the achievements and pending elements of the Banking 
Union  (BU)  on  its  fifth  anniversary.  We  are  honoured  to  be  accompanied  by  such 
distinguished panelists, so thank you for accepting our invitation and for being here today. 
But  before  getting  down  to  the  discussion,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  a  few  general 
thoughts on the European Union project and the role the Banking Union (BU) plays as part 
of this collective endeavour.  
In my remarks today I will point out what the BU has meant in terms of greater integration 
for the euro area banking sector, and I will also refer briefly to those developments that, in 
my view, may still be missing if we are to achieve a truly integrated and cross-border banking 
sector. 
The  EU  project  has  certainly  improved  the  life  of  millions  of  people  in  Europe  since  its 
creation, not only in economic terms, but also regarding rights and living standards across 
the whole Union.  
The  success  of  the  EU  project  cannot  be  assessed  solely  on  the  basis  of  its  economic 
performance; we must also look at its other original objectives, namely, to increase the level 
of political and economic integration in the region.  
Throughout its history, the EU integration process has not been linear, and not even gradual. 
Actually,  over  nearly  seven  decades,  the  European  project  has  experienced  long,  quiet 
periods  –where  little  or  nothing  remarkable  happened–  punctuated  by,  so  to  speak, 
‘transformative periods’, that have contributed decisively to its development and to shaping 
its current form. 
Normally, these deep transformations have been introduced in an orderly and negotiated 
fashion. For example, the launching of the Single Market in 1993 was the result of lengthy 
negotiations,  which  started  when  it  was  apparent  that  the  European  economy  needed  a 
qualitative boost to adapt to the new international landscape.  
The Euro itself was also the result of lengthy debates, negotiations and preparatory phases, 
that  were  not  always  fully  successful.  Take,  for  instance,  the  crisis  of  the  European 
Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992.  
Yet, despite all the difficulties, the Euro was successfully launched in 1999 and, after the 
introduction of the Euro notes and coins 2002, has been a tangible reality for all citizens. 
Indeed, its popularity in the 19 Eurozone countries is higher than ever. All in all, the Euro 
represents the most ambitious economic integration process the world has witnessed since 
the end of the Second World War. 
Of course, the Banking Union is now an integral part of the Euro project. In fact, like pillars 
in a building, the BU provides resilience and stability to the whole Euro project. As such, the 
BU is in its own right one of those transformative developments that have contributed to 
deepening our level of integration.  
2/5 
 However, unlike the single market or the adoption of the euro, the BU was not the result of 
a  joint  vision  by  EU  leaders  on  the  need  to  enhance  banking  supervision  and  resolution 
across the Eurozone. Instead, it was the outcome of bold and swift defensive reactions to 
preserve the single currency in the wake of the European financial and sovereign debt crisis.  
Indeed, it was the crisis that led to the conviction that a common and enhanced framework 
for banking supervision and resolution was needed to help break the link between banks 
and  sovereigns.  This  conviction  gave  rise  to  the  Single  Supervisory  and  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanisms, which, so far, are the key components of the BU.  
Another important development related to the Single Resolution Mechanism came to fruition 
last  December,  when  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  was  recognised  as  a  common 
backstop to the Single Resolution Fund for both solvency and liquidity support. 
Today the rationale behind the creation of the SSM and the SRB seems obvious. But, to be 
fair,  before  the  European  sovereign  crisis  erupted,  there  had  been  only  a  few  warnings 
against  the  risks  that  a  fragmented  banking  supervision  landscape  within  the  Euro  area 
involved.  
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa and Romano Prodi were among those who, in the early 2000s, 
highlighted the inefficiencies and potential issues that the introduction of a monetary union 
without common supervision could entail. Despite their prescient analysis, their original calls 
for greater coordination among national authorities fell short of the kind of arrangement that 
was needed to address this structural flaw.  
As the crisis later demonstrated, the much greater degree of integration brought about by 
the BU proved to be the most effective response to the crisis, as well as to the preservation 
of the euro.  
Ultimately, as many viewed it when it was launched 20 years ago, the Euro project has been 
the catalyst for further reform and integration. As far as the banking sector is concerned, 
the BU has contributed to loosening the bank-sovereign nexus and it should give rise to a 
more integrated banking system. 
However,  so  far,  the  greater  level  of  institutional  integration  of  the  BU  has  not  been 
accompanied by greater cross-border activity in the banking sector. The absence of cross-
border mergers is seen by many as evidence that we still have a long way to go in terms of 
market integration and diversification. 
In my view, the lack of cross-border mergers can be partially explained by the over-capacity 
of the financial sector in Europe. Indeed, the benefits from synergies, potential cost-cutting 
and efficiency gains are mainly observed in mergers between same-country institutions, due 
to  the  greater  redundancies  in  branches  and  central  services.  For  most  cross-border 
mergers,  the  business  case  is  more  difficult  to  anticipate  in  the  current  competitive 
landscape. 
Admittedly, too, there are certain cultural, institutional and regulatory obstacles that hinder 
the  emergence  of  a  truly  European  banking  market.  The  resistance  to  removing  these 
obstacles largely imply preserving ring-fencing structures at national level, limiting or even 
impeding the free flow of capital or liquidity across borders.  
 3/5 
 In my view, after achieving a significant reduction of risks in the financial sector as well as a 
complete  pan-European decision-making  process,  it  would  be  time  to  call  for  an  end  to 
these  national  ring-fencing  supervisory  practices,  which  are  detrimental  to  financial 
integration and, thus, limit the ambition of the BU as a single jurisdiction. 
The implementation of the SSM and SRB may be seen as a remarkable achievement. But 
we  must  acknowledge  that  the  BU  still  lacks  one  of  its  three  main  pillars,  the  European 
Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). At a minimum, a building needs three pillars to ensure its 
structural soundness; likewise, I believe that the EDIS would contribute to making the BU 
more stable, particularly in times of stress, which is in fact when the resilience of structures 
are tested.  
Certainly, a fully-fledged mutualised EDIS would have a strong impact on citizens’ trust; but, 
in  addition,  a  greater  degree  of  risk-sharing  within  the  euro  area  would  also  help  align 
financial responsibility with the pan-European decision-making process, already in place in 
the areas of banking supervision and resolution. 
Mervin King noted in the aftermath of the global financial crisis that international banks were 
global  in  life  but  national  in  death.  I  believe  that,  in  a  real  EU  banking  union,  financial 
institutions should be an EU matter, both in life and in death. 
Apart from completing the BU, other elements are necessary to continue making progress 
towards  a  more  complete  financial  union.  From  a  regulatory  perspective,  the  lack  of  a 
sufficiently  homogeneous  legal  basis  across  the  Eurozone  is  evident.  While  full 
harmonisation may not be possible in the foreseeable future, there are some critical areas, 
such  as  anti-money-laundering,  fit  and  proper  standards  and  insolvency  rules  at  credit 
institutions, where a common set of rules across the Eurozone would foster the integration 
of the market, improving also the efficiency of supervision and resolution. 
As regards the institutional side, and looking beyond the BU, I want to highlight a second 
priority which, in my view, is essential to enhance the capacity of the euro area to cushion 
macro-financial shocks. This capacity is linked to the development of deep and integrated 
capital markets.  
The completion of the Capital Markets Union (CMU) would complement the BU and would 
foster  a  truly  cross-border  financial  sector,  allowing  economic  agents  to  smooth 
asymmetric, national shocks. 
Last, but possibly not least, it may also be time to tackle the absence of a pan-European 
safe asset. While controversial, the implementation of a single EU risk-free asset would likely 
become a common benchmark, allowing the prices of equities and bonds across the euro 
area to reflect fundamental risk more clearly, enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy 
and fostering the attractiveness of European capital markets.  
A safe asset would also help mitigate the bank-sovereign nexus, reduce cross-border safe-
haven flows in the event of crisis and, ultimately, improve financial integration. Of course, 
we should be cautious to design it in such a way as not to water down the incentives for 
sound national fiscal policies, which are the essence of achieving safety. 
4/5 
 Let  me  conclude.  Throughout  its  history,  the  EU  has  followed  a  path  towards  greater 
economic and political integration, which has brought clear benefits in terms of economic 
growth and citizens’ rights.  
The BU is an important step in this direction and has been key to addressing the euro crisis. 
Still, the implementation of certain regulatory and institutional elements are needed to reap 
the economic benefits of an increase in cross-border banking activities. 
When assessing our capacity to deal with future financial crises, we should not forget that 
the  institutional  setting  remains  incomplete  and  policy  space  has  been  reduced.  As 
memories of the crisis fade, we should strive to avoid complacency.  
It is often said that in life you should expect the best but be prepared for the worst. Likewise, 
as supervisors we should strive to avoid financial crises, by applying supervisory tools to 
mitigate risk accumulations as well as reinforcing banks’ management capabilities; but, at 
the same time, we should work with a longer-term perspective to complete the institutional 
framework, in case a crisis still occurs. 
Thank you.  
 5/5 
