What the future holds – Benefits and limitations of 
forward guidance 
Speech at the European Banking Congress 
22.11.2019 | Frankfurt am Main | Jens Weidmann 
 1 Introduction
 2 Clarifying the reaction function
 3 Lower for longer 
 4 Achieving price stability in the euro area
 5 Conclusion
1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
More than 200 years ago, French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace proposed that the universe 
was essentially deterministic and, hence, predictable. Some being – later called a demon – 
with sufficient information and calculating power would be able to know all the states of 
the universe: past, present and future.
 [1]
In today’s financial markets, Laplace’s demon could easily earn a fortune. But despite all 
the progress in computing, it has never come into existence. Still, some people may dream 
of its possibility. Brazilian author Paulo Coelho once quipped that everything was possible: 
“from angels to demons to economists to politicians”.
 [2]
Financial market participants are no demons: they carefully monitor every word uttered by 
central bankers, because failing to anticipate the central bank’s next move could be costly.
For a long time, central bankers were reluctant to provide hints on their expected future 
course of action or communicate openly. A good example is former Fed Chair, Alan 
Greenspan, who once told Congress: “If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have 
misunderstood what I said”.
“presented as an esoteric art”.
 And according to Otmar Issing, central banking was 
 [4]
 [3]
 [5]
Over time, monetary policy has clearly become more of a science and less of an art.
Economists have formulated reaction functions, which are supposed to summarise how 
central banks respond to economic conditions. Often, relatively simple rules such as a 
common Taylor rule are considered. Of course, monetary policymaking is much more 
complex than that. But just for the sake of argument, I would ask you to think of such a 
standard rule when it comes to the reaction function.  
Central banks have also increased transparency and extended communication in order to 
enhance their accountability to the public and make monetary policy more effective. In the 
wake of the financial crisis, as policy rates approached zero, more and more central banks 
switched from dipped beam to full beam: using forward guidance, they began to shed light 
on their reaction function.
By indicating that they would withdraw the monetary policy stimuli later than the public 
expected at the time, central banks attempted to further reduce longer-term interest rates 
when policy rates had already reached low levels.
distinguish two approaches to forward guidance:
 In this context, I would like to 
 [6]
First, the central bank can clarify its reaction function if there is a misperception or 
uncertainty about it among the public due to imperfect information.
And second, the central bank could communicate that it intends to deviate from previous 
behaviour in the future.
However, just as in the case of any other policy tool, the public may face the problem of 
disentangling information regarding the central bank’s policy from information on the state 
of the economy. In times of considerable uncertainty, observers could – falsely – interpret 
an unexpected expansionary policy move as a signal that the central bank deems 
aggregate demand to be weaker than they had anticipated. By dampening inflation 
expectations, the surprise could have an unintended adverse effect on the economy 
temporarily.
 Therefore, monetary policy decisions need to be communicated very 
carefully and clearly.
 [7]
What is more, the lines between the two types of forward guidance I have laid out may be 
less clear-cut in economic reality. However, to keep it simple, I will squarely attribute the 
communication provided by the Eurosystem and many other central banks to forward 
guidance of the first type.
 [8]
Today, I would like to reflect on the experience we have made in the last few years, but I 
will also discuss possible pros and cons of the second, more daring type of forward 
guidance. I will close with some remarks on monetary policy in the euro area.
2 Clarifying the reaction function
In recent years, the Eurosystem’s forward guidance evolved and, at times, communicated 
the Governing Council’s expectations on both the lift-off of policy rates and the duration of 
asset purchases.
With the introduction of the Asset Purchase Programme (APP) in 2015, guidance was given 
along two dimensions by providing a timeframe and outlining the necessary progress of 
inflation towards our policy aim. The calendar-based component was easy to communicate 
and understand. And the state-contingent element acted like an automatic adjustment 
mechanism to economic news. If incoming data indicated a delay in the firming of inflation 
towards our policy aim, it implied continuation of net asset purchases beyond the calendar-
based component.
Later, the forward guidance on policy rates was linked to the duration of the Eurosystem’s 
net asset purchases. A prolongation of these purchases shifted the timing of the first rate 
hike further into the future. This connection was well-understood and worked accordingly. 
Indeed, Bundesbank research shows that rate forward guidance linked to the APP 
 [9]
contributed to the observed decline in longer-term interest rates to a significant extent.
In other words, part of the expansionary effect of the purchase programme was due to the 
management of expectations about interest rates in the more distant future.
 [10]
Last year, the Governing Council announced the end of APP net purchases after December 
2018 and decided to link the two elements of forward guidance directly to policy rates. 
This reformulated guidance succeeded in anchoring expectations about future short-term 
rates despite the end of net purchases and, therefore, contributed to keeping longer-term 
interest rates low.
More generally, by using rate forward guidance, central banks can do what they also do 
when employing asset purchases, namely to influence long-term rates and stimulate the 
economy when conventional policy is constrained.
Besides shaping expectations, asset purchases can work through other channels, such as 
portfolio rebalancing, as well. But they also entail different risks and possible side effects, 
all the more so in a monetary union with fiscally autonomous member states. In this 
particular set-up, government bond purchases involve the fundamental risk of mutualising 
sovereign liability risks through the central banks’ balance sheets, blurring the lines 
between fiscal and monetary policy.
Given its effectiveness, forward guidance could be a preferred policy tool near the lower 
bound of interest rates. Indeed, the reformulation of forward guidance introduced in 
September maintained the focus on policy rates.
3 Lower for longer 
At the effective lower bound, theory, at least, suggests that the central bank could do more 
if it switches to the second type of forward guidance. By committing to hold interest rates 
lower for longer than implied by the monetary policy rule, the central bank pledges to let 
inflation overshoot its target in the future. In this way, it could provide an additional 
stimulus to the economy via inflation expectations. If people expect future inflation to be 
temporarily higher than anticipated so far, real interest rates will decline even when 
nominal rates remain unchanged. This, in turn, will induce them to consume and invest 
more in the here and now.
But why have central banks so far shied away from using forward guidance in this manner?
 [11]
One important reason may be the problem of time inconsistency.
father wants to make sure his son studies up on his Latin vocabulary. It makes sense, then, 
to announce that he will quiz his son next Thursday evening. But when Thursday arrives 
and Arsenal takes on Eintracht Frankfurt, there is every reason for the father to cancel the 
test, since he has already made his son study. His optimal choices are time-inconsistent. 
And his son is not outsmarted so easily. He will call his father’s bluff, as he knows the 
Europa League schedule just as well as his father does.
 Let’s say that a 
Similarly, a one-off promise of “lower for longer” holds the allure of a monetary stimulus 
now, at the cost of higher inflation in the future. But when the time comes to make good 
on the promise, the benefits have already been reaped, and only the cost of higher 
inflation remains. At this point, policymakers have an incentive to renege on their promise 
as well.
But such an approach still raises further problems. In the case of the euro area, it should be 
kept in mind that, according to our existing strategy, the Governing Council defines price 
stability as a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area of below 2% and aims to 
maintain inflation rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term. Thus, intentionally 
higher inflation rates would not be consistent with this strategy and may pose a 
communication challenge and a credibility risk.
Moreover, for “lower for longer” to work as intended, inflation expectations of firms and 
households need to respond accordingly: short-term expectations have to adapt to the 
central bank’s guidance without de-anchoring long-term expectations from the inflation 
target. This is certainly no mean feat. A study on various advanced economies suggests 
that expectations of households and firms do not respond much to announcements on 
monetary policy in an environment of low inflation. The researchers refer to this as a “veil 
of inattention”.
 Central banks would need to pierce it by adjusting and intensifying 
their communication in order to use inflation expectations as a more active policy tool.
 [12]
Furthermore, after a long period of low interest rates, holding interest rates lower for even 
longer would aggravate the risks and side effects of a very expansionary monetary policy.
For example, the longer the period of negative rates persists, the more likely it is to place a 
burden on banks that primarily generate their income from traditional deposit-taking and 
lending operations. This is what we observe in the euro area. In this context, the relief 
which the new tiering system will provide to banks is likely to be perceptible, but modest. It 
is the indirect effects of negative interest rates and, for banks engaged in maturity 
transformation, also the flat yield curve that matter more.
Of course, safeguarding the profitability of banks is not a task of the Eurosystem. However, 
the pressure on bank profitability arising from negative interest rates could eventually cause 
banks to cut back on lending despite additional expansionary monetary policy measures, 
thereby impairing the transmission of monetary policy.
Beyond its impact on bank profitability, a prolonged period of low interest rates may also 
induce investors in search of yield to take on undue risks that could sow the seeds of 
financial imbalances. Eventually, this could undercut the central bank’s ability to maintain 
price stability.
Clearly, the first line of defence against financial imbalances should be macroprudential 
policy. But this policy approach is still in its infancy, and our knowledge about the effects 
and transmission channels is incomplete. Given this uncertainty, macroprudential policy 
may be prone to an inaction bias – that is to say, the inclination to act too tentatively and 
 [13]
thus too late, or not at all.
 Hence, we should not be over-confident about the role 
macroprudential policy can play in addressing systemic risks. Monetary policy cannot be 
complacent if its policy stance raises long-term risks to price stability through the build-up 
of financial imbalances.
4 Achieving price stability in the euro area
As Luis de Guindos said on Monday, we are aware that the expansionary stance of 
monetary policy in the euro area comes with side effects, and that the side effects are 
increasing.
 And I keep on making this point for quite some time now.
 [14]
At the same time, price pressures in the euro area remain subdued. Therefore, monetary 
policy accommodation is still warranted.
At least, financial market expectations of considerable further policy rate cuts have receded 
in recent weeks and months. Among other positive news, the German economy did not 
slip into a technical recession, and first tentative signs emerged that the downturn in its 
export-oriented industry could level off.
Moreover, wage pressures in the euro area point in the right direction. In the second 
quarter of 2019, hourly wages went up by 2½% year-on-year, and the total wage sum 
increased by almost 4%.
True, a recent Bundesbank study finds that the cyclical impact of wages on prices in 
Germany has become weaker since the 1970s. In recent years, however, the pass-through 
 Our economists estimate that a 1% rise in 
has remained roughly stable and intact.
wage costs in Germany increases consumer prices by around 0.3%. But the analysis also 
shows that the transmission can take several years. With that in mind, the slow 
strengthening of inflation shouldn’t really come as a surprise to us.
 [15]
An ECB study suggests that this is also the case for other major euro area economies.
In a low inflation setting, the transmission could even take longer than under normal 
circumstances.
 [16]
The Governing Council has deliberately geared its policy aim towards the medium term 
without further specification. This allows us to take lags into account, such as the pass-
through from wages to prices. Our strategy also gives us the leeway not to respond to 
every slight revision in the inflation outlook mechanistically or even with full force, as long 
as the overall trajectory is still intact and the relevant inflation expectations remain 
anchored.
But it is also true that near the effective lower bound of interest rates, fiscal policy is less at 
risk of crowding out private demand. Under current conditions, this makes it a potentially 
powerful instrument if economic developments were to take a marked turn for the worse – 
which, just to be clear, is not what is generally expected.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Dennis Gabor, the British physicist who invented holography and won the Nobel Prize in 
1971, noted that the future cannot be predicted, but it can be created.
 [17]
It is worth investigating which monetary policy approaches allow the Eurosystem to 
respond vigorously in an economic downturn. But these policies have to be evaluated 
carefully in light of both potential benefits and costs. In my short remarks today, I have only 
been able to highlight a few issues on forward guidance.
I fully agree with Christine Lagarde. The monetary policy strategy should always evolve in a 
way that best serves our mandate.
 Since our strategy has been in place since 2003, it 
may be worth collecting lessons from the financial crisis and the more recent past at the 
appropriate time.
 [18]
In my view, this should include, among other things, the question how to handle long-term 
risks to price stability arising from financial imbalances.
As Claudio Borio once warned us, economic lessons “are learnt, forgotten, re-learnt and 
forgotten again”.
 [19]
Laplace’s demon would know better.
Thank you for your attention. 
Footnotes:
1. 
Laplace, P.-S. (1814). Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Mme. Ve. Courcier.
2. 
Coelho, P. in an interview by The Guardian, 19 March 2009.
3. 
Greenspan, A. in a testimony to Congress in 1987, according to Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, What steps has the Federal Reserve taken to improve transparency?, 
September 2006.
4. 
Issing, O. (2014). Forward Guidance: A New Challenge for Central Banks, Goethe 
University, SAFE White Paper, No 16.
5. 
Mishkin, F.S. (2007). Will Monetary Policy become more of a Science?, Prepared for the 
Deutsche Bundesbank conference “Monetary Policy Over Fifty Years”, held in Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany, 21 September, 2007.
6. 
Campbell, J., Fisher, J., Justiniano, A. and Melosi, L. (2016). Forward Guidance and 
Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31 
(2016), pp. 283-357; Charbonneau, K.B. and Rennison, L. (2015). Forward Guidance at 
the Effective Lower Bound: International Experience, Bank of Canada Discussion Papers, 
No
7. 
Falck, L., Hoffmann, M. and Hürtgen, P. (2019). Disagreement about Inflation 
Expectations and Monetary Policy Transmission, Journal of Monetary Economics, 
forthcoming.
8. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2013). Forward guidance – an indication of monetary policy 
stance in the future, Monthly Report, August 2013.
9. 
Geiger, F. and Schupp, F. (2018). With a little help from my friends: Survey-based 
derivation of euro area short rate expectations at the effective lower bound, Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Discussion Papers 27/2018.
10. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). The macroeconomic impact of quantitative easing in the 
euro area, Monthly Report, June 2016.
11. 
Kydland, F.E. and Prescott E.C. (1977). Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of 
Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No 3, pp. 473-492.
12. 
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kumar, S. and Pedemonte, M. (2018). Inflation 
expectations as a policy tool?, NBER Working Paper 24788.
13. 
Buch, C. M., Vogel, E. and Weigert, B. (2018). Evaluating macroprudential policies, 
European Systemic Risk Board, Working Paper, No 76.
14. 
Reuters (2019). EZB-Vize – Nebenwirkungen der ultralockeren Geldpolitik nehmen zu.  
https://de.reuters.com/article/ezb-de-guindos-idDEKBN1XS168, 18 November 2019.
15. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019). The impact of wages on prices in Germany: results of 
selected empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019.
16. 
Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I. (2019), The link between labor cost and 
price inflation in the euro area, ECB Working Paper Series No 2235.
17. 
Gabor, D. (1963). Inventing the Future, Secker & Warburg.
18. 
European Parliament (2019). Draft report on the Council recommendation on the 
appointment of the President of the European Central Bank, Committee on Economic 
and Monetary Affairs, 29 August 2019.
19. 
Borio, C. (2012). The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt? BIS 
Working Paper, No. 395.
