Behavioural insights for conduct supervision
Introductory Remarks by Luigi Federico Signorini 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Banca d’Italia/FinCoNet International Seminar 
on Financial Consumer Protection
Rome, 15 November 2019
It is my great pleasure to open the International Seminar on Financial Consumer 
Protection, jointly organized by Finconet and the Bank of Italy.
The theme of this seminar is the subject of much discussion and a driving force in 
the evolution of business  conduct regulation and supervision. Behavioural  economics 
has provided important insights. We would be well advised to take them into account 
when framing regulations and performing supervisory tasks in the financial sector. 
Understanding  how  people  make  economic  choices  is  central  to  economics. 
Economic  models,  however,  will  never  be  able  to  do  justice  to  the  full  range  of 
motivations,  reasoning  and  impulses  behind  human  behaviour.  Economics  needs  to 
simplify and select. At the same time, it needs to remain open-minded enough to see 
the pitfalls of simplifying assumptions. Economic models have always been challenged 
over time, with new approaches subverting the conventional wisdom of the day; as in all 
sound science, progress in economics has been driven by people challenging received 
wisdom,  pointing  out  its  flaws,  and  proposing  corrections.  Yet  it  has  always  retained 
the basic concept that agents will respond to incentives and that in most circumstances 
the collective wisdom resulting from innumerable fallible individual choices is superior 
to comprehensive top-down planning, enlightened as the latter may be. Adam Smith 
did not have to invoke utility maximisation to conceive of the invisible hand, nor did 
Ricardo to discover comparative advantage: two of the most counterintuitive, and most 
enduring, cornerstones of economics. Ronald Coase famously  stated that “there is no 
reason to suppose that most human beings are engaged in maximising anything unless 
it be unhappiness, and even this with incomplete success”; yet this (half tongue-in-cheek) 
assertion did not prevent him from formulating a theorem about the superiority of private 
contracts even with externalities, provided property rights are carefully laid down.1 
¹  Actually, as is well known, Coase did not formulate a “Coase theorem”, but he did lay down the theoretical 
foundations to what is known by that name. 
Contemporary mainstream economics makes abundant use of formal models that 
specify what precise quantity is being maximised, and assume that agents make efficient 
use of whatever information is available. While such assumptions are extremely useful 
for  developing  insights  into  how  the  world  actually  functions,  nobody  believes  them 
literally. “Utility” for instance, (sane) economists will accept, has no well-defined physical 
counterpart.  This  means  that,  while  recognising  the  usefulness  of  this  or  that  formal 
model in many cases, one should remain alert to its limits. 
Consumer  behaviour  is  a  case  in  point.  Utility  maximisation  by  consumers  has 
proved to be a fantastic tool for developing compact, elegant models to describe many 
interesting and crucial features of the real economy. Yet it cannot provide all the answers, 
especially when you look at consumers’ choices in a concrete environment and reflect 
upon  the  best  ways  to  regulate  market  conduct  in  legal  detail.  Converting  a  useful 
simplifying modelling device into an article of faith about how the human mind works 
would be nonsense. One does not need to throw away a century of economic thought to 
recognise that human behaviour is much subtler and more elusive than that; one needs 
only some reasonable human heuristics, as it were, and the ability to adapt one’s tools 
to the task at hand. 
Nevertheless, it took a while for economists to recognise in full that actual consumer 
decision-making  is  rather  different  from  what  is  expected  from  a  rational  agent  who 
single-mindedly maximises a utility function – a major exception being the studies on 
bounded rationality.2 By contrast, marketing experts developed an understanding early 
on of how buyers actually make decisions, and found ways to profit from it. Regulators 
that fail to recognise this asymmetry, and act upon it, would not do a good job.
This  is  not  a  theoretical  point,  and  the  audience  today  will  need  no  convincing. 
There  is  even  a  plausible  claim  that  the  delay  in  tackling  certain  financial  consumer 
protection  issues  contributed  to  the  financial  crisis  ten  years  ago.3  Be  that  as  it  may, 
the  day-to-day  task  of  ensuring  the  fair  and  efficient  functioning  of  the  market  for 
consumer finance requires a richer model of consumer behaviour than one based on 
“utility”  maximisation  and  the  full  use  of  information.  Hence,  the  increasing  attention 
now devoted to behavioural economics by financial regulators and supervisors, with the 
aim of designing and implementing policies that help consumers take financial decisions 
they will not regret.
This seminar will benefit from contributions from the academy and from supervisors. 
The Bank of Italy strongly supports this interaction.
Before  leaving  the  floor  to  our  speakers,  let  me  briefly  recall  some  well-known 
insights  from  behavioural  economics  that  have  been  significant  in  the  evolution  of 
regulation in the field of financial consumer protection, and provide a quick overview of 
the approach to financial consumer protection adopted by the Bank of Italy. 
2 
Simon, H.A., “Models of Man, Social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behavior in 
a Social Setting”, New York: Wiley & Sons, 1957.
3  G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection, October 2011 (www.oecd.org).
2
Behavioural economics relies heavily on the seminal studies by Daniel Kahneman 
and Amos Tversky,4 two psychologists, one of whom (Kahneman) got a Nobel Prize in 
economics for it (Tversky, sadly, did not live to get the share he deserved). This is, by the 
way, not an isolated case; it bears witness to the fact that the economics profession, in its 
best moments, is open to contributions from other disciplines to refine its understanding 
of human behaviour and interactions. 
Behavioural economics has provided evidence that, when taking decisions, people 
regularly deviate from certain accepted canons of rationality, as intuition often prevails 
over reasoning.5 Such deviations are not random. Laboratory experiments, though mostly 
confined to simulated environments, do provide rather convincing evidence that biases 
affect the decisions of consumers in a systematic way. 
For financial services providers, knowledge of this can make competing on quality 
and prices less attractive relative to leveraging on these biases in their marketing activity 
using opportunistic business practices.
The list of biases is an evolving one; here, I will only mention a few of those that are 
most relevant from a financial consumer protection perspective and represent a common 
background for business conduct supervisors. They include: 
I)  mental shortcuts used to generate approximate answers to questions (heuristics); 
II) 
III) 
the influence of the way information is presented on the way decisions are taken 
(framing effect)
the  fact  that  outcomes  are  usually  assessed  against  a  reference  point  (reference 
dependence/anchoring  effect),  implying  that  different  reference  points  affect  the 
perception of gains and losses; 
IV)  a preference for immediate gratification, resulting in decisions that do not maximise 
long-term net effects (present bias) – e.g. people overestimate their ability to repay 
loans, resulting in over-indebtedness; 
V) 
the fact that people often demand much more to give up an object than they would 
be willing to pay for it (endowment effect); this helps explain, e.g., why switching 
rates among products from different financial services providers are low even when 
there are no legal obstacles to or monetary costs in doing so.
While biases are deeply embedded in the human mind, they have not prevented 
humans from becoming (for better or for worse) the dominant species on Earth. In fact, 
in many circumstances, biases and mental shortcuts will “do the trick” and help us to 
4  D. Kahneman and A. Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.” Econometrica, vol. 
47, no. 2, 1979, pp. 263–291.
Kahneman,  D.,  “Thinking,  Fast  and  Slow”,  New  York:  Farrar,  Straus,  and  Giroux,  2011;  Kahneman,  D. 
“Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics.” The American Economic Review, 
vol. 93, no. 5, 2003, pp. 1449–1475.
5 
3
take decisions instantly and without effort that we would not later regret, by and large.6 
However, the jungle of finance is in many ways different from the environment where 
humans have evolved over hundreds of thousands of years. When it comes to financial 
decisions, mental shortcuts that were efficient for escaping lions or capturing gazelles 
may prove inadequate to make (say) choices on long-term financial retirement plans. 
They may prompt consumers to take decisions that they would not have taken based on 
a more thorough assessment.
The evidence from behavioural economics should be enough to convince regulators 
and  supervisors  that  it  is  crucial  to  complement  the  traditional  regulatory  approach 
–  based  on  pre-contractual  disclosure  to  overcome  information  asymmetries  –  with 
behavioural insights. Policy makers have started testing new instruments, examples of 
which include:
I)  
standardising  pre-contractual  documents,  so  that  they  selectively  provide  (or 
highlight) only those pieces of information that are most relevant to the consumer; 
II)   prescribing the use of the most effective channels for interacting with customers: 
for  instance,  evidence  exists  that  text  alerts  and  mobile  banking  apps  are  much 
more effective than periodic reports for attracting the attention of consumers that 
are incurring overdraft charges;7
III) 
focusing on the overall fairness of contractual relationships, e.g. in order to limit any 
over-indebtedness induced by present bias;
IV)   establishing cooling-off periods, i.e. the possibility for consumers to withdraw from 
contracts,  especially  in  the  event  of  cross-selling  practices  and  distance  selling 
(thus neutralising possible temporary emotional effects), to allow for legitimate and 
sufficiently timely regret.
All these tools are mainly intended to remove information and cognitive asymmetries, 
and  their  undesired  consequences  for  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  consumer 
markets. In this sense, one could say that they do not depart from the traditional paradigm, 
whereby the individual’s choices should not ultimately be replaced or unduly influenced 
by those of the regulator. The aim is to supply consumers with the necessary tools to 
make informed judgments, rather than to supplant their ability to decide for themselves.
Some go further. Proponents of libertarian paternalism maintain that regulators, 
while still refraining from direct coercion, should endeavour to influence the choices of 
6 
7 
In a sense, it has been argued that sentiments and intuition, rather than reasoning, have provided the 
most enduring tool for decision-making in the history of humankind; see Harari, Y.N. “Homo Deus: A 
Brief History of Tomorrow”, London: Harvill Secker, 2016.
FCA,  Occasional  Paper  No.  10,  “Message  received?  The  impact  of  annual  summaries,  text  alerts  and 
mobile apps on consumer banking behaviour”, available on the FCA website (www.fca.org.uk).
4
affected parties in a way that is expected to make them better off8 – an approach also 
commonly referred to as nudging.9 
This view also provides a strong argument (not the only possible one) for regulators 
to exploit the alternative between the “opt-in” and “opt-out” approaches for financial 
schemes;  when  the  regulator  considers  one  alternative  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of 
consumers, it can “nudge” them in that direction by making it the default (or “inertial”) 
choice. The opt-out approach has proved to be quite effective in promoting participation 
in pension schemes, for example, where it is seen as an effective tool against “present 
bias”.
How  far  one  would  go  along  this  road  will  ultimately  depend  on  one’s  view  of 
society. Some would balk at the idea of treating citizens as perennial minors, to be gently 
prodded, or “nudged”, by a benevolent regulator, to do whatever the regulator considers 
to be in the consumer’s own best interest. Yet even if one thinks that the individual must 
remain  ultimately  responsible  for  his  or  her  own  choices,  the  insights  of  behavioural 
economics remain central for framing those choices in a way that is consistent with known 
cognitive bias, so as to empower the consumer to make such choices in full awareness. 
Whatever  your  approach,  the  landscape  is  evolving  rapidly.  A  growing  body  of 
experimental research is developing on the effectiveness of regulatory initiatives based on 
behavioural insights. At the frontier, a series of studies is flourishing on the physiological 
reaction of financial consumers to external stimulus (neurofinance). What will come out 
of that, and what one is to do with whatever the results might be, must be the subject of 
future reflection. 
For  the  framework  of  consumer  protection  to  be  effective,  it  needs  more  than 
regulation alone. It must be complemented with supervision, enforcement, and financial 
education. Let me elaborate briefly on the approach of the Bank of Italy.
Based on the understanding that too much information is as potentially harmful 
as too little information, and that such “information overload” can lead consumers to 
take financial decisions that they will consider inappropriate in retrospect, the traditional 
regulatory approach based on a full disclosure regime has evolved. Reflecting changes in 
the EU legal framework too, regulation of the most common products now provides for 
standardised pre-contractual information that makes key information adequately salient. 
The  regulator  plays  a  delicate  role  in  selecting  the  most  relevant  information,  based 
for instance on the size of the revenues from certain fees and tariffs, and finding ways 
to increase its visibility. One application of this concept is to require banks to disclose 
standardised  cost  indicators  for  the  simplest  forms  of  bank  accounts  and  the  most 
common types of consumer loans.
8 
9 
Thaler, R.H. and Sunstein, C.R., “Libertarian Paternalism.” The American Economic Review, vol. 93, 2003, 
pp. 175-179.
Thaler, R.H. and Sunstein, C.R., “Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth and Happiness.” New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2008.
5
Again  on  the  regulatory  side,  recognising  that  biases  are  always  in  action,  and 
that financial services providers – including banks – may actively seek to exploit them, 
has  led  us  to  introduce  –  in  compliance  with  the  applicable  EU  legislation  –  certain 
business conduct requirements, aimed at increasing the overall fairness of contractual 
relationships. We abstain, however, from interfering directly with individual decisions of 
consumers or firms. A few examples of such requirements are:
I) 
provisions  concerning  the  assessment  of  creditworthiness,  to  address  over-
indebtedness;
II)   product  governance  requirements,  concerning  the  design  of  new  products, 
consumer-testing activities, as well as distribution; 
III)   sound remuneration policies for sales staff, to mitigate the risk of perverse incentives 
for misleading the consumer.
As regards supervision, since the establishment of a dedicated Directorate in 2014, 
the Bank of Italy has been moving steadily from the assumption that more information is 
always better to a focus on salience as opposed to sheer quantity; from mere disclosure 
to a broader range of issues (including governance and strategy); and from a box-ticking 
approach to an approach that includes cooperation and guidance. 
We have thus complemented our supervisory action by issuing Guidelines to clarify 
supervisory expectations. This approach has proved to be fruitful in addressing issues that 
are highly significant for consumer protection, such as the remuneration of overdrafts 
and overrunning, the unilateral variation of contracts, the handling of complaints, and 
the conditions for consumer credit.
For enforcement, we start from the assumption that customers harmed by unfair 
business  conduct  and  non-compliance  with  regulatory  requirements  should  be  in 
a  position  to  seek  redress  in  a  way  that  is  simple,  fast,  and  inexpensive.  To  this  end, 
in 2009, the Bank of Italy established an alternative dispute resolution mechanism for 
the  banking  sector  (the  Arbitro  Bancario  Finanziario  or  ABF),  which  has  proved  to  be 
effective, has become increasingly popular with customers, and has somehow become 
a  benchmark  for  other  regulated  sectors.  While  the  ABF’s  decisions  are  not  binding, 
“naming  and  shaming”  is  applicable  in  the  event  of  non-compliance  and  has  proven 
an effective deterrent. Furthermore, as financial services providers are required to take 
the ABF’s decisions into account when dealing with complaints from their customers, 
this  enforcement  system  contributes  to  increasing  the  overall  fairness  of  contractual 
relationships in the banking sector.
Finally,  a  few  remarks  on  financial  education.  While  regulation  and  supervision 
may help to address indirectly some of the major flaws in consumers’ choices, there is 
broad consensus that the empowerment of consumers also requires strategies aimed at 
increasing their basic financial knowledge. 
Nowadays  people  are  probably  facing  increasingly  complex  financial  decisions 
more often than at any other point in humankind’s history. Ageing and the evolution 
6
of welfare imply an enhanced role for life insurance and private pension schemes. The 
increased range of financial investment choices provides better potential opportunities, 
but  may  appear  baffling  to  non-experts.  Technological  development  in  payments 
are  transforming,  beyond  recognition,  the  way  we  conduct  even  the  most  common 
transactions. Individuals need to take financial decisions throughout their life, including 
decisions inherently involving long-term outcomes that are very difficult to predict and 
assess (e.g., investing early for one’s retirement), which are exactly those where the usual 
mental shortcuts are most likely to fail.
Neither  pre-contractual  information,  nor  business  conduct  requirements  will 
provide  the  desired  policy  outcomes  if  people  are  not  able  to  grasp  at  least  the 
fundamentals  of  finance. International evidence shows that this ability, while perhaps 
generally unsatisfactory, is even less developed in Italy than in many other countries. This 
is why the Bank of Italy has devoted a great deal of effort to designing and implementing 
financial literacy programs. These strive to take into account behavioural biases and to 
make consumers aware of how they influence their decisions. 
The Bank also supported the establishment of a National Committee in charge of 
steering and coordinating financial education initiatives, where we cooperate with many 
other public and private institutions providing financial education schemes. 
 Effective  business  conduct  supervision  is  challenging.  Insights  from  behavioural 
economics contribute to its theoretical foundations, and provide useful suggestions for 
improving the regulatory and supervisory framework. The lessons we are going to learn 
today will be of great help in shaping our financial control architecture to make it more 
effective  and  to  contribute  to  a  financial system  that  is  fairer,  sounder,  and  safer  for 
consumers.
I wish you all a fruitful discussion and a pleasant stay in Rome. Thank you!
7
