    
 
Enhancing resilience in payments 
 
Speech given by 
Victoria Cleland, Executive Director; Banking, Payments & Innovation 
 PayExpo, London 
8 October 2019 
  With thanks to Samantha Leighton and James Sanders for their assistance in preparing this speech.  
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
1 
   It is a pleasure to be speaking at PayExpo at the Business Design Centre in Islington today, in an agenda 
packed with innovation and technological advance.  I lived in Islington when I first moved to London, which 
had the great benefit of enabling me to walk to work.  I now live further afield, but I am able to make the 
journey in similar time benefitting from advancements in new(er) technology – a bicycle!   
 It is also a pleasure to be speaking at a second major payments event in London in a month, following hot on 
the heels of SIBOS in late September. This demonstrates the importance of London, and the UK, as a hub 
for payment innovation and fintech more widely. In the second quarter of 2019 funding for fintech companies 
topped $8.3bn, growing 24% quarter-on-quarter1 – just one sign of a thriving industry.  The number of 
payments made in the UK continues to increase too and reached a record 39 billion in 2018, with a value of 
more than £90 trillion.2 We are also experiencing a period of rapid change in the way payments are being 
made (one can even hire an electric bike using an app) by consumers and businesses, and in the companies 
and technologies behind them.  
 At SIBOS I spoke3 about the Bank of England’s engagement with innovation and future trends in payments, 
both through our response to the Future of Finance Report4 and our work to renew the UK’s Real-Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS) service. This is an ambitious programme which will be delivered over the next few 
years. Our vision for RTGS is defined by: increased resilience; greater access; wider interoperability; 
improved user functionality; and strengthened end to end risk management. Today I will focus on the steps 
we are taking right now on the fifth of these to enhance the resilience in payments. 
 Operational risk and resilience are in the spotlight like never before, with the FCA reporting a 187% increase 
in technology outages from 2017 to 2018.5 The joint Discussion Paper the Bank, PRA and FCA published 
last year6 started a dialogue on the operational resilience of the financial system, and the individual firms and 
Financial Market Infrastructures within it.  I will discuss resilience through a payments lens.   
 The UK’s payment systems (including retail payment systems such as Faster Payments and Bacs, and the 
high value system – CHAPS) connect payment service providers (PSPs) together, as a means of moving 
money between them. It is therefore vital that the organisations that manage the payment systems dedicate 
a lot of time to enhancing operational resilience and cyber security. And innovations, including instant 
payments, will also benefit from a resilient foundation.  
 The Bank’s operation of RTGS, and more recently CHAPS, makes a vital contribution to our overarching 
mission of maintaining monetary and financial stability. CHAPS is the UK’s high value payment system and 
settles an average of £330 billion each working day, representing 93% of non-cash payments in the UK by 
                                                      
1 https://www.assetnews.com/fintech/europe-trumps-asia-fintech-funding-q2-2019  
2 https://www.ukfinance.org.uk/sites/default/files/uploads/pdf/UK-Finance-UK-Payment-Markets-Report-2019-SUMMARY.pdf  
3 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/payments-a-platform-for-innovation-speech-by-victoria-
cleland.pdf?la=en&hash=5841227A82F5C75B75FFE32027EEF5EDA61D2C70 
4 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2019/future-of-finance 
5 https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/research/technology-cyber-resilience-questionnaire-cross-sector-report.pdf  
6 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/discussion-paper/2018/dp118.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  value. RTGS is the infrastructure where the key UK payments systems – including CHAPS – ultimately 
settle, supporting stability across the broader financial system. 
 The area of the Bank that I lead (Banking, Payments and Innovation) has provided real-time settlement 
through our RTGS infrastructure since 1996. In 2017, as part of our vision to enhance stability, we took the 
step of bringing the management and operation of CHAPS into the Bank (until then the CHAPS payment 
scheme was operated by a private sector company – CHAPS Co). The Bank understood and mitigated the 
risks within RTGS, and CHAPS Co looked at risks in its participants. But it was hard to join the two views 
together. Bringing CHAPS into the Bank meant a single organisation could take a holistic approach to 
managing risk across the end-to-end CHAPS system.  
 It also meant we could draw on a wide range of skills within the Bank – from supervision to cyber. This 
change enabled the teams responsible for operation of CHAPS to work closely with colleagues in the PRA, 
who are responsible for supervising most of our participants, and to access a range of information and tools 
to effectively challenge risk management practices in our users. Another area of the Bank, responsible to a 
different Deputy Governor, continues to supervise CHAPS to the same standards as other systemically 
important FMIs. 
 As a single unified operator for CHAPS, as well as RTGS, the Bank is taking important steps as a standard 
setter and a thought leader to drive increased resilience and improved recovery capability in payments. 
 Minimising risk 
 Standards 
 As the operator of CHAPS, the Bank is well placed to drive greater resilience in members of CHAPS through 
the setting of standards.  This is complemented by the Bank’s role as prudential regulator of many of these 
firms. 
 In order to manage risk, a payment system has rules to govern who can join, how participants should 
behave, and what operational and technical requirements they must meet. The CHAPS Reference Manual 
(CRM)7 contains the rules and requirements that CHAPS Direct Participants must comply with. The bulk of 
the requirements effectively describe controls that each Direct Participant must have in place – and these 
controls collectively are designed to mitigate the key risks to the end-to-end CHAPS system and support 
financial and operational resilience.  
Importantly, this includes risks the participants pose to each other. For example, the ‘Throughput’ rules 
require direct participants to process a certain proportion of payments by value by fixed times in the day. By 
                                                      
7 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/chaps/chaps-reference-manual  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  smoothing the flow of payments across the operating day rather being concentrated at stress points such as 
the end of day, this approach contributes to both financial and operational resilience.   
 We require participants to attest to meeting the CRM requirements and we also undertake verification. But 
risks to the payment system are constantly changing and we need to ensure that the CRM adapts 
accordingly.  Outages of CHAPS may disrupt the smooth flow of critical and time-sensitive payments that are 
core to the smooth operation of the financial system and real economy. Such outages would hurt end users 
and, if frequent and prolonged, potentially undermine monetary and financial stability. We are currently 
working on three sets of requirements to further mitigate these risks:  cyber, incident management and 
Cloud.  
 First, we plan next year to enhance the Security Requirements in the CRM to align to the globally recognised 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework.8 The new requirements 
would align with NIST’s principles of Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond and Recover, and will be more 
outcome focused, balanced with prescriptive requirements when necessary. This will increasingly enable 
Direct Participants with different resources and business models to apply their own methodology to comply, 
thus supporting our strategy to allow a diverse range of financial institutions to use CHAPS. 
 Second, the CHAPS rulebook clearly defines the Bank’s expectations around Direct Participants’ incident 
management approaches and reporting obligations. As I mentioned earlier, the FCA has observed a 
significant increase in technology-related outages across the financial industry. And for the first eight months 
of 2019, there were around half a dozen CHAPS Direct Participant incidents a month. The CHAPS rulebook 
provides an effective and timely means to manage risks through a focused root cause analysis, assignment 
of appropriate remediation plans and trend analysis to inform our assessment of the risks to the end-to-end 
CHAPS system. In line with the FCA’s analysis of incident reports,9 we have found that weaknesses in how 
changes are managed is a key driver behind nearly half of all CHAPS participant incidents. We are therefore 
revising the controls that Direct Participants should have in place in order to target areas that have 
contributed to incidents, for example, single-input of static data.  
 Third, in a payments industry that is experiencing a period of rapid change in technology, Cloud technologies 
are growing in importance. The Bank is taking steps to facilitate its adoption, including issuing a supervisory 
statement later this year. The use of a Cloud model is an evolution of, and a key element in, the supply chain 
for many financial institutions – including those who access CHAPS. We believe the use of Cloud 
technologies has the potential, if used appropriately, to minimise end-to-end risk and improve operational 
resiliency of the CHAPS system, taken as a whole. As the operator of CHAPS we want to enable our current 
and potential Direct Participant to realise these benefits in a safe and controlled way, without compromising 
the resilience of the CHAPS ecosystem. We are assessing the risks that the use of Cloud technology 
                                                      
8 https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework  
9 https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/research/technology-cyber-resilience-questionnaire-cross-sector-report.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  presents to the CHAPS system, and the nature of mitigating controls that we require. In due course, we 
expect to propose new controls for Cloud usage as it relates to CHAPS.  
 Policy Development 
 Development and implementation of requirements must be supported by strong and innovative policy 
thinking. The Bank works collaboratively on policy with other FMIs and central banks internationally. Some 
work-streams focus on resilience, others support greater innovation: and increasingly we look to combine the 
two.  
 CHAPS has historically had a small number of Direct Participants and a much larger number of indirect 
participants which access the system through a sponsor bank.  This arrangement (known as ‘tiering’) 
introduces credit, liquidity and operational risks, which were brought into sharp focus by developments 
including the financial crisis.  With heavy tiering, if a large direct participant was to encounter financial or 
operational issues, this would also impact the ability of the indirect participants that rely on it to make 
payments – causing issues to spread further across the financial system. These risks are best addressed by 
increasing direct access to the CHAPS system to reduce concentration in a small number of large sponsor 
banks.   
 As a result, the Bank has worked for several years, initially with CHAPS Co and more recently as the 
operator of CHAPS, to implement a strategy to mitigate the risks arising from tiering in CHAPS.  This 
includes engagement with large indirect participants, as well as new CHAPS rules that presume 
organisations responsible for more than 2% of CHAPS value will join directly. The last decade has seen a 
significant reduction in financial risks associated with tiering, with the addition of a further 19 Direct 
Participants including two further FMIs. Despite this, CHAPS remains highly tiered relative to other high 
value payment systems such as Fedwire Funds and TARGET2. The renewed RTGS service will help to 
change this. It will be able to support several hundred direct participants and make it easier, quicker and 
cheaper to join CHAPS. In time, we will consider the case for reducing the 2% threshold to further enhance 
financial stability.  
 Payments fraud and economic crime are becoming increasingly sophisticated, and the Bank as operator of 
CHAPS is engaging in initiatives to tackle these threats. The Committee on Payments and Market 
Infrastructures (CPMI) has developed guidance on reducing the risk of wholesale payments fraud related to 
endpoint security.10 The Bank is currently undertaking a number of initiatives to strengthen our position and 
support our CHAPS Direct Participants in line with CPMI strategy, which includes adjusting our CHAPS 
rulebook to focus on detection, prevention and response to security issues as I described earlier. 
                                                       
10 https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d178.htm 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  At the level where fraud is most likely to touch on end-users, Vocalink piloted an anti-money laundering tool 
known as Mule Insights Tactical Solution (MITS)11 for a number of Faster Payments participants. MITS can 
retrospectively track fraudulent payments as they move between customer accounts, thereby helping to 
quickly identify and highlight to Payment Service Providers any suspected ‘mule accounts’. They can then 
take action to block funds and close these accounts, making it more difficult for fraudsters to undertake 
scams. We are currently in the exploratory phase of a pilot to use MITS on a subset of CHAPS data. The 
additional insights generated should help participating Direct Participants to better tackle further fraud 
activity.   
 We are also focused on how as operator of CHAPS the Bank can support UK-wide efforts to tackle economic 
crime.  The recently published UK Economic Crime Plan12 noted the role that the Bank can play in this 
regard, including by enabling enhanced payment data through the development of interoperable message 
standards and by promoting wider adoption of Legal Entity Identifiers.  These initiatives will help to promote 
greater transparency in ownership of legal entities and support detection of financial crime. 
 Minimising impact of incidents 
 Resilience is key to payments, and we need to be ready to respond to the unexpected. That is why we have 
not stopped at prevention. We are also proactively thinking about how to respond when incidents occur; how 
to reduce the impact and any spill-overs to the wider ecosystem; and of course how we can recover quickly 
(for FMIs this means within two hours under most scenarios as set out in CPMI guidance). Furthermore, like 
other systemically important systems, we are preparing to meet the Bank’s forthcoming operational resilience 
policy that will apply equally to the Bank as the operator of CHAPS as it does to payment systems 
recognised for statutory supervision.  
 Our mandate for promoting the stability of the UK’s financial system means we are not only interested in the 
resilience of CHAPS, but also the settlement of all payments critical to the economy. In an increasingly fast-
moving financial system, being able to guarantee that critical payments settle on the same day is crucial. The 
Bank’s Financial Policy Committee set out a pilot impact tolerance in March 201913, stating that it would be 
prudent to expect the financial system to complete all critical payments by the end of the day, but recognising 
that firms would not be able to meet this in the most extreme circumstances. The Committee, which is 
responsible for monitoring and reducing systemic risks for the UK’s financial system, also agreed a pilot 
stress test based on the temporary unavailability of payments infrastructure.14 As the operator of CHAPS, we 
are participating in the pilot, any lessons learned from which will further enhance our understanding of the 
end-to-end resilience of the CHAPS system.  
                                                       
11 https://connect.vocalink.com/2018/december/mits/  
12https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/816215/2019-
22_Economic_Crime_Plan.pdf   
13 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/financial-policy-summary-and-record/2019/march-2019.pdf  
14 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/financial-policy-summary-and-record/2019/march-2019.pdf 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  We are also working through an enhanced programme of regular testing for our tertiary solution – MIRS, the 
Market Infrastructure Resiliency Service which is a geographically-remote and technologically diverse 
solution provided by SWIFT. MIRS is designed to, within a small number of hours, pick up CHAPS payment 
processing and other RTGS settlements in the event of a major issue with our own RTGS infrastructure. This 
should means that all critical CHAPS payments are completed by the end of the value date in line with the 
FPC’s pilot impact tolerance. The testing programme is not just technical but ensures sufficient familiarity 
across staff within the CHAPS participants of the tertiary service.  
 We actively support the design of, and participate in, a number of market wide exercises to explore 
coordination in the unlikely event of a major outage to the retail systems, or participants’ connections to the 
retail systems. SIMEX16 focused on a multi-day outage to RTGS and SIMEX18 focused on a protracted 
operational outage of a Global Systemically Important Bank; a summary report of SIMEX18 was published 
last month.15 Next month, we will participate in a desktop exercise to explore the impact of large scale re-
routing of payments between CHAPS and Faster Payments. These exercises are sponsored by a Cross 
Market Operational Resilience Group which is co-chaired by UK Finance and the PRA. 
 The Bank and Pay.UK are also exploring a potential solution for allowing batches of critical retail payments to 
settle directly over the renewed RTGS infrastructure, whilst ensuring critical wholesale payments are not 
impacted. This solution could help the FPC’s pilot impact tolerance be met for retail payments in the unlikely 
event of a major outage to the retail systems. Providing additional channels for retail payments to settle in a 
contingency situation increases the resiliency of the whole financial system, making it even less likely that 
users will experience a delay to their salaries, pensions, or other time sensitive payments.  
 The Bank is planning to introduce ISO 20022, an international standard for financial messaging, for CHAPS. 
Pay.UK also plan to introduce ISO 20022 in their New Payments Architecture: together we are developing 
what is known as a Common Credit Message. For the first time, the UK’s primary payment systems – 
CHAPS, Faster Payments and Bacs – will be using the same messaging standard. This will be a major step 
towards interoperability of the UK payment systems and should facilitate improved contingency 
arrangements for critical and time sensitive payments as described above. And ISO20022 messages will 
contain richer data in payments, ensuring that PSPs can easily identify and prioritise the most critical 
payments for processing during contingency scenarios. 
 In the last few days we have received the industry feedback on our like-for-like schemas for CHAPS, the final 
version of which will be published in December alongside more information on our transition approach. The 
schema for the enhanced messages will be published towards the end of 2020, aiming to cut over to the ISO 
messages in the first half of 2022. 
 Conclusion 
                                                      
15 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2019/sector-simulation-exercise-simex-2018-report  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   There is a significant amount of work underway to ensure the continued resilience of the UK’s payments 
infrastructure. And this work must continue, both practical activities such as testing, and also the 
development and promotion of standards.  
 Given the network nature of payments, this is not something the Bank of England can undertake in isolation.  
It is a journey we are on with many of you here today – the financial institutions that use CHAPS and RTGS 
to provide critical payment services to customers.  And we continue to work closely with other FMIs such as 
SWIFT, Pay.UK and payment system operators in other countries to develop consistent approaches and 
solutions.  
 To ensure resilience is maintained end-to-end, payment system participants, operators and suppliers will 
need to continue to evolve their resiliency arrangements and cyber security protocols. While some changes 
can be delivered by organisations in isolation, many require the industry to work together to improve the 
overall level of resilience, and ultimately stability. 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
8 
 
8 
 