François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Central  bank  digital  currency  and
innovative payments
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the
Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR), at the ACPR, Paris, 4 December 2019.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
One of the great things about the conferences organised by the ACPR is their sense of timing:
they always come in the middle of heated debates. Today is no exception with the issue of the
challenges faced by life insurance in a low interest rate environment. By way of introduction, let
me  agree  with  and  sum  up  Bernard  Delas’s  message  of  this  morning:  French  insurers  are
resilient and thus have the capacity to make the necessary dual adaptation. First, the rates paid
on life insurance policies need to be lowered this year from last year’s average of 1.8%. Next,
insurers must actively restructure and diversify their offering for savers, while at the same time
paying very close attention to the quality of advice they offer. If, as a complement – and only as a
complement – regulatory adjustments are needed to facilitate this change in life insurance, then
we are ready to support them.
I would like to turn now to the topic for this afternoon which is dedicated to innovation. Allow me
to both restrict and extend the scope of the subject: restrict it to the field of payments which has
seen  a  proliferation  of  innovations  over  recent  years. And  extend  it  beyond  the  scope  of  the
ACPR and the supervisory authority: I shall also speak as a central banker, and of a central bank
digital currency (CBDC). Driven by new market entrants, the digital revolution has brought with it
a wealth of advancements that we profit from every day: but it also raises major questions about
bank intermediation, and even about our monetary sovereignty. I would like to propose today that
we take a stark look at these questions (I), and that we answer them by reiterating the two main
pillars of our strategy: safeguarding confidence and supporting innovation (II).
I/ The advances and challenges associated with the proliferation of private initiatives in
the payment industry
Let us first recall the main trends that currently characterise the European payments market.
The  increasing  digitalisation  of  cashless  payments  –  which  is  leading  to  a  sharp  fall  in  cash
usage in certain countries, from  Sweden to  China – has been driven by the rise of non-bank
players. There is no denying that, today, the “centre of gravity” for payments is shifting towards
these  new  players,  especially  the  BigTechs.  This  displacement  poses  a  challenge  for  banks’
economic  model,  but  could  also  be  a  threat  to  European  sovereignty  insofar  that  the
infrastructures,  knowledge  and  technologies  underlying  it  are  largely  owned  by  non-European
corporations.
The emergence, in parallel, of a new generation of crypto-assets is amplifying this disruption.
The first wave of speculative crypto-assets such as bitcoin – which are very volatile, with no real
underlying  economic  basis  and  perhaps  no  real  future  –  has  been  succeeded  by  a  second
generation of assets – stablecoins – based on the same promising blockchain technology, but
now backed by mechanisms designed to stabilise their value. Thanks to network effects, these
stablecoins  could  offer  a  concrete  solution  for  cross-border  payments  which  are  still  –
undeniably  –  far  too  costly  and  slow.  But  –  and  this  is  the  downside  –  these  crypto-asset
projects, which are global in reach, also generate considerable compliance, financial and political
risks. I’m thinking notably of money-laundering and terrorism, for which they could provide new
channels of financing, and of the more systemic risks to financial stability.
II/ Our response: Step up the pace on payment solutions and consider the possibility of a
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
CBDC
Of  course,  as  central  bankers  and  supervisors,  there  is  no  question  of  us standing  by and
letting this change happen unchecked. We have to remain fully committed to our dual objective –
safeguarding  confidence/supporting  innovation  –  which  is  written  into  the  very  DNA  of  our
institution.
We are determined, first and foremost, to safeguard confidence – at the global level – through
strong and coordinated action. Under France’s presidency, the G7 reacted swiftly and strongly
last June: alongside Bruno Le Maire, we entrusted Benoît Cœuré with a mandate immediately
after the announcement of the Libra project. Cœuré’s report – compiled over four months and
published  in  October  –  provides  a  full  assessment  of  the  risks  posed  by  stablecoins  from  a
microeconomic viewpoint, in terms of anti-money laundering and consumer protection, but also
from a macroeconomic one, in terms of financial stability. Within the framework of the Financial
Stability  Board  (FSB),  we  are  now  preparing  a  coordinated  regulatory  response  to  these
challenges, due to be published by next summer.
I  shall  turn  now  to  the  second  pillar  of  our  response: supporting innovation  to  enhance  our
payment  systems  and  meet  the  growing  expectations  of  consumers.  We  first  have  to  take
advantage  of  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  digital  revolution  to  develop  a genuine  pan-
European  payment  solution.  As  Steve  Jobs  said,  “innovation  is  saying  no  to  a  thousand
things”. This observation sheds light on the challenge that European banks are about to face with
the PEPS-I project (Pan European Payment Solution Initiative). I have every hope that they will be
able  to  forces  –  and  go  beyond  “national”  practices  –  and  rapidly  propose  a single,  pan-
European  payment  solution,  thus  avoiding  market  fragmentation  and  the  dominance  of  non-
European solutions. The Eurosystem will be ready to provide support as and when needed, in
line with what we are doing to promote the use of TIPS (Target Instant Payment Settlement). As
a market infrastructure capable of processing pan-European instant payments, TIPS could be
used for the interbank settlement of transactions initiated via PEPS-I. This pan-European solution
would be a major step forward that would help European banks withstand the challenges posed
by the BigTechs.
There is also another important area where we need to make headway: reducing the cost and
speeding  up  the  execution  of cross-border  payments  by  identifying  concrete  and  useful
solutions. Our aim should notably be to harmonise the technical standards used for transfers of
funds, and to enhance the interoperability of payment systems and solutions. Between now and
the  autumn,  the  FSB,  under  the  aegis  of  the  G20,  will  propose  concrete  measures  to  make
cross-border, extra-European payments significantly cheaper and faster.
I shall turn now to a topic that is a major challenge for the future of the international monetary and
financial  system: the  possible  creation  of  a  central  bank  digital  currency  (CBDC).  The
creation  of  a  new  form  of  currency  by  central  banks  goes  beyond  the  challenges  I  have  just
mentioned: it is neither a precondition for nor a guarantee of more efficient payments. However,
we as central banks must and want to take up this call for innovation at a time when private
initiatives – especially payments between financial players – and technologies are accelerating,
and public and political demand is increasing. Other countries have paved the way; it is now up
to us to play our part, both ambitiously and methodically.
To  this  end, the  Banque  de  France  is  to  be  reorganised.  The  current Direction  de  la
surveillance des paiements et des infrastructures de marché (DSPM – Payments and Market
Infrastructures  Oversight  Directorate)  will  become 
the Direction  des  infrastructures,  de
l’innovation et des paiements (DIIP – Infrastructure, Innovation and Payments Directorate), and
its  scope  will  be  extended  to  cover  all  payment  innovations,  infrastructures  and  central  bank
digital currency. Additional skills will be recruited to strengthen its expertise, and, with the help of
our  Lab,  the  DIIP  will  work  with  industry  innovators  from  the  private  sector:  we  want  to  start
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
running experiments rapidly and will launch a call for projects before the end of the first quarter of
2020. We are particularly keen to take part in experiments to integrate a “wholesale” CBDC into
innovative procedures for exchanging and settling tokenised financial assets. Nathalie Aufauvre,
Director General of Financial Stability and Operations, will coordinate the Banque de France’s
acceleration process. Our actions will naturally contribute to the work of the Eurosystem, which
should make looking into the possibility of an “e-euro” one of its next focuses: Christine Lagarde
referred to it on Monday in front of the European Parliament. Beyond this, we intend to take part in
the work of the “innovation hub” recently created by the BIS.
On a substantive level, I would like to share with you some first thoughts – which are still open to
discussion, of course – on three aspects: the objectives, externalities and possible modalities of
a central bank digital currency.
1/  At  this  stage,  I  can  see three  different  –  but  not  mutually  exclusive  –  objectives for
digitalising central bank currency. The first relates to the desire, in countries such as Sweden
where cash use is declining rapidly, to guarantee all citizens access to central bank money. A
CBDC would help to preserve the trust in the financial system that stems in part from being able
to  exchange  assets  for  legal  tender.  The  second  argument  relates  to  the  efficiency  gains,
reduced intermediation costs and resilience that would potentially result from the “tokenisation” of
a central bank currency, especially in settlement and post-trade activities (which is also one of
the  objectives  of  JP  Morgan’s  JPM  Coin  project).  The  third  and  final  reason  –  and  the  most
important one for political authorities, including in France and Europe – is that creating a CBDC
would give us a powerful lever with which to assert our sovereignty in the face of private-sector
initiatives such as Libra. This is also one of the concerns highlighted by the People’s Bank of
China with its Digital Currency Electronic Payment (DCEP) project.
In  this  context, what  form  should  our  CBDC  take?  Public  expectations  on  this  differ
significantly from those of financial institutions. As a result, in the long term, two different uses of
the CBDC could exist side by side: one for payments between financial sector players (a so-
called “wholesale” currency) that uses blockchain technology and all its possibilities, notably
smart contracts; and another for the general public (a so-called “retail” currency) that is simpler
and  better  suited  to  retail  transactions.  In  this  respect,  financial  institutions  are  much  more
digitally mature than private individuals as they already access central bank currency digitally via
the bank accounts they hold with the central bank. In addition, following on from the questions
raised  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mark  Carney,  on  the  idea  of  creating  an
international digital currency in response to the dominance of the US dollar, I think there would be
some advantage in moving rapidly to issue at least a wholesale CBDC, as we would be the first
such issuer in the world and would thus reap the benefits of having a benchmark CBDC.
2/ The issuance of a CBDC can generate significant positive externalities by increasing the
productivity of the financial sector and by extension the economy, and by shoring up confidence
in  the  currency  and  in  the  financial  system.  But,  in  parallel,  it  is  vital  that  we  examine  the
potentially  negative  externalities that  a  CBDC  could  generate  for  liquidity,  profitability  and
bank intermediation. In particular, we need to look very closely at the risks linked to large-scale
and/or sudden conversions of bank deposits into central bank money.
3/ The third aspect is the modalities that could be used to circulate the CBDC, especially the
“retail” version, about which we need to be particularly vigilant. I’m thinking about the issue of its
legal tender status – which is not indispensable but probable; the conditions under which it can
be held – in the form of accounts rather than tokens; and last, whether non-residents will have
access to it, which would certainly help to raise its international status. Moreover, thanks to their
proven  expertise  in  payment  instruments,  know-your  customer  requirements  and  transaction
monitoring,  financial  intermediaries  will  be  able  to  play  a  front-line  surveillance  role  in  the
distribution  of  the  CBDC.  In  parallel,  we  will  also  need  to  launch  a  reflection  to  define  the
conditions under which the CBDC could circulate anonymously “from person to person”. Limits
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
could be set for the size of anonymous transactions, such as those already applicable in France
for e-money and cash payments.
Today,  probably  more  than  at  any  other  time  in  our  history,  innovation  has  the  potential  to
profoundly alter banking activities. It is no longer just about transforming our payment systems, it
is  our  very  currency  that  is  at  stake.  The  Banque  de  France  fully  intends  to  guide  these
developments,  as  it  has  done  for  more  than  two  hundred  years,  and  will  adapt  the  way  it
operates to this change in paradigm. But in doing so it will also make sure that confidence, the
cornerstone  of  innovation,  is  maintained  on  two  levels.  Confidence  first  and  foremost  in  the
currency:  everyone  will  be  free  to  use  the  payment  instrument  of  their  choice,  and  that  still
includes  cash.  Confidence,  as  well,  in  the ability  of  financial  institutions  to  finance  the
economy. And the ACPR will continue and step up its efforts – notably through its  FINTECH
Innovation unit – to monitor all innovations that impact these methods of financing. Thank you for
your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
