 "The Changing World" - Keynote Speech 
by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing 
Director, Monetary Authority of 
Singapore, at The World Federation of 
Exchanges General Assembly and Annual 
Meeting on 9 October 2019
Mr. Loh Boon Chye, Chief Executive O(cid:119)icer, Singapore Exchange (SGX),
Dr. Urs Ruegsegger, Chairman, The World Federation of Exchanges,
Ms. Nandini Sukumar, Chief Executive O(cid:119)icer, The World Federation of 
Exchanges,
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Introduction
1 (cid:272) (cid:272) Let me begin by welcoming you to Singapore for the World Federation of 
Exchanges 59th General Assembly and Annual Meeting. 
2 (cid:272) (cid:272) Exchanges have a long and illustrious history, dating back to the 
establishment of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange from as early as 1602. Four 
centuries on, exchanges continue to play a crucial role in facilitating trade and 
disseminating information, enabling companies to raise capital, and providing 
investors with a fair, orderly, and transparent marketplace to trade financial 
assets and carry out risk management activities.(cid:272) 
3 (cid:272) (cid:272) The World Federation of Exchanges (“WFE”) has played a critical role in 
promoting the development of organised and regulated markets to meet the 
world’s capital raising needs. As the leading global industry group for 
exchanges and clearing houses, the WFE has actively pushed for greater 
industry collaboration and international regulatory coherence to make public 
markets more vibrant and robust. 
4 (cid:272) (cid:272) The agenda of this year’s WFE General Assembly and Annual Meeting will 
further the WFE’s objectives and work as it covers a wide spectrum of issues that 
are forward-looking and relevant to how WFE members can navigate the 
changing world.(cid:272) These include the future of capital raising and the adoption of 
distributed ledger technology.(cid:272) In the same vein, I will speak about three trends 
that continue to shape the financial markets of tomorrow - sustainable 
finance, technology and innovation, and the evolving dynamics of our 
public and private markets. 
5 (cid:272) (cid:272) Before I outline these trends, let me first start by setting out the 
macroeconomic picture, as this is the backdrop against which we must view 
these developments. 
Global Economy – Heightened Uncertainty
6 (cid:272) (cid:272) There is no doubt that these are challenging times. Global growth is expected 
to slow going forward.(cid:272) IMF’s World Economic Outlook forecast for April 2019 
sees global growth moderating to 3.3% this year, from 3.6% in 2018
Indications are that the October World Economic Outlook to be released next 
week will likely paint a cautious assessment of global growth prospects and 
include downward revisions to growth forecasts.(cid:272) Slowing global growth is 
chiefly due to an elevated level of policy and geopolitical uncertainty, with 
ongoing trade tensions that continue to dent business sentiment and 
investment. These ongoing developments have important implications for the 
financial industry and we need to be vigilant and flexible to adapt and respond. 
[1]
.(cid:272) 
Regional Developments: ASEAN – Grounds for Optimism
7 (cid:272) (cid:272) Within ASEAN, the picture is rosier. According to the IMF, the major ASEAN 
economies are expected to continue outperforming emerging markets and 
developing economies as a whole, with projected GDP growth of about 5.0% 
annually for 2019-2020
in the world in the last few decades, and is home to eight of the world’s best 
performing developing economies
. Looking ahead to 2050, it is projected 
that ASEAN – with a population of close to 800 million people by then - could 
[4]
.(cid:272) 
become the fourth largest single market, behind China, India, and the US
. ASEAN has become one of the fast-growing regions 
[2]
[3]
• In the next few years, growth in ASEAN will continue to be driven by intra and 
extra-regional trade as well as strong investment flows, even as domestic 
demand will play a more important role.(cid:272) 
• ASEAN also has demographics on its side: we are for the most part a young 
region, with a rapidly growing middle class who is increasingly consuming 
higher value-added goods and services.
• Asian wealth accumulation is also growing quickly. Assets under 
management in the Asia Pacific is expected to increase faster than any other 
region globally, almost doubling from 2017 to about US$30 trillion in 2025. 
This will result in increased demand for investment opportunities across a 
wide range of products like equities, fixed-income, and risk management 
tools.
8 (cid:272) (cid:272) These factors underpin the promising economic prospects in ASEAN, with 
the corresponding need for regional enterprises to raise capital to support their 
growth.
9 (cid:272) (cid:272) Looking ahead, these are opportunities to be harnessed both within ASEAN 
and globally, and exchanges as well as clearing houses need to innovate and 
remain relevant to all stakeholders.(cid:272) I will now speak about three key trends, the 
opportunities they present, and what MAS is doing to support the Singapore 
financial services industry in these areas. 
Trend 1: Catalysing Sustainable Finance for Growth
10 (cid:272) (cid:272) The first trend is growth in sustainable finance. This is increasingly an area 
of both concern as well as interest to financial players, especially millennial 
investors. 
11 (cid:272) (cid:272) The estimated financing needs to support the greening of Asian economies 
are high. China has estimated that it will require US$450-600 billion of 
investments annually to achieve its green policy goals under its 13th Five Year 
Plan while ASEAN will need an estimated US$200 billion in green investments 
annually through 2030
[5]
 12 (cid:272) (cid:272) Sustainable finance is still at a nascent stage but we are seeing increasing 
focus from financial institutions to develop new environmental, social and 
governance (“ESG”)-related products. Similarly, with increased investor demand 
and awareness for sustainable financial products, exchanges like yourselves can 
look to expand and support product o(cid:119)erings that will meet the needs of socially 
and environmentally conscious enterprises and investors.(cid:272) 
13 (cid:272) (cid:272) One such area of growth is in green bonds. Global green bond issuance 
volume reached US$168 billion in 2018, a four-fold increase from US$42 billion in 
2015. The Asia-Pacific region accounted for almost US$50 billion of issuance, or 
almost 30% of global volumes, of which US$31 billion was from China. 
Exchanges can support the listings of green, social, and sustainability bonds, as 
countries and corporates transition towards a low-carbon and climate resilient 
model. 
• To foster sustainable growth in ASEAN, the ASEAN Capital Markets Forum 
(ACMF) has developed the ASEAN Green Bonds Standards, in collaboration 
with the International Capital Market Association (ICMA).(cid:272) The standards, 
based on ICMA’s globally recognised Green Bond Principles, seek to facilitate 
ASEAN capital markets in tapping green finance to support sustainable 
regional growth and meet investor demand for green investments. As of 
October 2019, 80 such bonds from Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, and the 
Philippines have been issued for renewable energy, green buildings and low 
carbon transportation
[6]
 14 (cid:272) (cid:272) Exchanges can also play an active role in supporting sustainable growth 
through sustainability reporting and integrating sustainability 
considerations in products that you launch. In particular, sustainability 
reporting is a key tool in encouraging enterprises to integrate ESG considerations 
in their performance and value proposition to both internal and external 
stakeholders.(cid:272) 
• Sustainable reporting has become more important with growing concerns 
from consumers and investors that financial returns are achieved with 
integrity, backed by ESG considerations. 
• In recognition of such trends, the Singapore Exchange (“SGX”) has introduced 
a “comply or explain” regime for sustainability reporting in 2017, where listed 
companies are required to disclose and explain their sustainability practices.
• ASEAN governments have also imposed regulatory drivers, to assist 
companies with identifying gaps and areas for improvements in their 
sustainability e(cid:119)orts
. For example, in the mining and minerals sectors, 
companies are subject to commonly-agreed-upon regional guidelines for 
assessing and reporting on the a(cid:119)ected environment.
[7]
15 (cid:272) (cid:272) We are heartened that the WFE has taken the lead in advancing the 
sustainability agenda in two particular areas:
• First, the integration of sustainability with commodity derivatives. The WFE 
has published a white paper that explores how commodity derivatives 
exchanges could create new mitigation or investment tools that respond to 
environmental challenges, and incorporate sustainability elements into 
existing contracts; (cid:272) 
• Second, the adoption of sustainable practices and principles. The WFE has 
partnered the United Nations Sustainable Stock Exchanges to set out a 
blueprint to support exchanges in embedding sustainability in their 
operations. 
16 (cid:272) (cid:272) Overall, these e(cid:119)orts will drive wider discussions on sustainability as well as 
provide guidelines on how WFE members could adopt relevant sustainable 
practices and principles in their strategies for growth and operations.
Trend 2: Leveraging Technology Developments and Innovations
17 (cid:272) (cid:272) The second trend relates to technology.(cid:272) Technology is widely viewed as 
having the potential to be a significant disrupter to financial markets globally, 
whilst o(cid:119)ering tremendous opportunities, including changing traditional ways of 
doing business, lowering operating costs and enhancing productivity.
18 (cid:272) (cid:272) In its current form, securities trading and clearing involve many 
stakeholders from exchanges, clearing houses, broker-dealers, and agent banks, 
which adds to frictional costs and lowers the e(cid:119)iciency of trading and clearing. 
Exchanges have shown growing interest in technologies like distributed 
ledger technology (“DLT”) to develop solutions that could simplify and 
speed up some of these processes. 
• Many of you have made significant headway in deploying technology in 
multiple ways.(cid:272) A 2018 report commissioned by Nasdaq
found that 70% of 
stock exchange operators surveyed were working on pilot projects to deploy 
DLT. This includes exchanges from the US, Europe, Australia, and Singapore. 
[8]
• In Singapore, SGX and MAS successfully developed Delivery vs Payment (DvP) 
capabilities for the settlement of tokenised assets across di(cid:119)erent blockchain 
platforms last year. This can simplify post-trade processes and shorten the 
settlement cycle. Australia’s stock exchange, the ASX, is also using blockchain 
to replace its post-trade clearing and settlement platform. 
19 (cid:272) (cid:272) To support technological adoption and innovation in the financial sector, 
MAS introduced the FinTech Regulatory Sandbox.(cid:272) The sandbox is also a 
regulatory innovation for MAS, where we support financial institutions and 
fintech players to experiment with innovative financial products or services in a 
live environment, within well-defined boundaries.(cid:272) Upon successful 
experimentation and exit of the sandbox, entities will then have to comply fully 
with the relevant regulatory requirements. 
20 (cid:272) (cid:272) The sandbox has been well received.(cid:272) Since its launch three years ago, MAS 
has provided guidance to more than 250 firms, and received more than 60 
applications to experiment in the sandbox. iSTOX, a private market platform 
leveraging on DLT and o(cid:119)ering the trading of tokenised private securities, is the 
first market operator to enter MAS’ sandbox.
21 (cid:272) (cid:272) The approach that we have adopted requires an extensive review of each 
application. This is necessary as each sandbox is customised to facilitate 
meaningful experiments, with appropriate safeguards to contain the 
consequences of failure. We have learnt along the way that for certain types of 
activities regulated by MAS, risks can be well managed within certain specific 
boundaries. Hence, we launched an enhanced version of the regulatory 
sandbox, Sandbox Express, to complement the current sandbox approach, in 
August this year. For a start, we have o(cid:119)ered three activities under Sandbox 
Express, including the activity of establishing or operating an organised market, 
which may be of interest to WFE members. This provides firms with a faster 
avenue to test innovative financial products and services in the market.(cid:272)(cid:272) 
Trend 3: Remaining Nimble to Developments in Public and Private Markets
22 (cid:272) (cid:272) Lastly, of crucial relevance to Singapore and the WFE, is the changing 
dynamics of public and private markets. Globally, capital raising by 
enterprises has been shi(cid:120)ing from public to private markets
driven by a combination of factors, including secular factors, such as the 
increased importance of intangible assets, as well as cyclical factors, such as the 
abundance of private capital, higher expected valuations in private markets, and 
low interest rates globally
. This shi(cid:120) is 
[10]
[9]
 23 (cid:272) (cid:272) New firms are also taking longer than before to tap on public funding via an 
IPO listing, with the average firm age of technology companies going public 
increasing from four years in 1999 to 12 years in 2018.
24 (cid:272) (cid:272) Most exchanges over the world are also seeing a trend of de-listings, as 
public companies go private or are acquired. In the US, the number of listed 
companies in 2018 stands at just over 4,000, half of that in 1996
. Similar 
trends have been observed in the United Kingdom and parts of Western Europe
[12]
. On the flipside, we are seeing significant growth in the number of private-
equity (“PE”) backed companies, with the number of such companies in the 
[13]
.
United States doubling from about 4,000 in 2006 to about 8,000 in 2017
[11]
25 (cid:272) (cid:272) Reforms in the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II (MiFID II) have 
also a(cid:119)ected the global investment research climate, with potential spill-on 
e(cid:119)ects on the liquidity and vibrancy of public markets. Research budgets are 
shrinking and small to mid-cap stocks are increasingly seeing a reduction in 
research coverage
. These factors could impact the liquidity of public 
markets, especially for thinly-traded smaller firms which may not receive 
su(cid:119)icient investor attention despite having strong fundamentals.
[14]
26 (cid:272) (cid:272) Amidst these trends, there is a need to respond to changing funding needs 
and be flexible to accommodate these evolving business models. 
27 (cid:272) (cid:272) In Singapore, we seek to support corporates’ financing capabilities and 
needs across the corporate lifecycle – from early stage financing to mature 
companies looking to tap on financing from public markets. As part of 
Singapore’s Financial Services Industry Transformation Map (ITM) to transform 
Singapore into a leading global financial centre that connects global markets 
and supports Asia’s development, MAS has introduced a number of initiatives to 
support enterprise financing in both private and public markets.
• Venture capital and private equity managers are an essential element in the 
financing lifecycle, by providing smart capital and operational and business 
expertise to portfolio companies. 
• To facilitate activities of venture capitalists to support small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), we have simplified and shortened the 
authorisation process for venture capital managers. 
[15]
• We have also set up a deal making platform called MATCH, or Meet 
ASEAN’s Talents and Champions)
, to connect global capital and the 
ASEAN enterprise community in 2018. This will help to grow the pipeline 
of companies that will eventually require listing in our public markets.
• Singapore also organises the annual Singapore FinTech Festival (SFF) 
and this will be combined with the Singapore Week of Innovation and 
Technology (SWITCH) that is coming up on the 11-15th November, to 
provide a platform for industry players to gain greater understanding of 
fintech applications and developments as well as support innovative 
solutions to find commercialisation opportunities.
• SGX is also working with licensed private market platforms to facilitate the 
listing process for portfolio companies. Such platforms provide PE/VC 
managers with opportunities to invest or exit, and provide a pipeline of 
companies that could list on SGX. Such private-public markets partnerships 
can serve as an engine of growth for our public markets and provide support 
for enterprises throughout their corporate lifecycle.
28 (cid:272) (cid:272) In keeping up with changes in our public markets, such as the rise of new-
economy start-ups and technology firms, exchanges have continued to 
innovate to provide product o(cid:119)erings that support the varying needs of these 
companies.
• For example, SGX has joined global exchanges in Canada, Europe, and the 
US, in introducing the Dual Class Share (DCS) structure to support firms 
which have shares with di(cid:119)erent voting rights to raise funds. DCS listings will 
broaden the range of investment options for investors and add vibrancy to 
Singapore’s capital markets and capital markets globally.
29 (cid:272) (cid:272) With the recognition that public markets play an important and key role 
in our entrepreneurial ecosystem by providing public financing for growing 
companies, MAS will continue to support growth in public equity markets.
• MAS has committed S$75 million over three years to help companies list and 
raise equity capital on SGX and support initiatives that broaden and deepen 
our research ecosystem. This will help to mitigate the growing and global 
phenomena of shrinking research coverage and build up our capabilities in 
covering public markets.
Conclusion
30 (cid:272) (cid:272) In conclusion, as we move into a changing world with a less certain global 
order, rapidly advancing technology, and increasing threats and opportunities, it 
will be even more important for exchanges and clearing houses to keep pace 
with global trends and be ready to adapt. This will ensure that you are well- 
placed to navigate challenges and remain relevant to the evolving needs of our 
financial markets.
31 (cid:272) (cid:272) The WFE, in continuing to advance a collective voice for the improvement of 
our public markets, will be an important contributor to global discussions with 
regulators on how our public markets are shaped for the future. The WFE’s 
ongoing e(cid:119)orts in advancing the sustainability agenda for exchanges and 
clearing houses, is testament to the leadership and contributions it has 
presented since its founding in 1961.
32 (cid:272) (cid:272) I wish you a fruitful general assembly and annual meeting in Singapore. 
Thank you.
The IMF’s 2019 global growth forecast was lowered to 3.2%, as cited in the World 
[1]
Economic Outlook, July 2019.
[2]
IMF World Economic Outlook, July 2019
The world’s best performing developing economies are defined as those that have 
[3]
averaged at least 3.5% annual per capita GDP growth over 50 years or 5% annual growth 
over 20 years, as cited in the McKinsey Global Institute Study on Outperformers 
Maintaining ASEAN Countries’ Exceptional Growth Report in 2018.
Population projections from the UN. The relative market size of ASEAN is cited by the 
[4]
US-ASEAN Business Council in its growth projections for ASEAN in 2050.
[5]
[6]
[7]
DBS Bank and the UN Environment, Green Finance Opportunities in ASEAN 2017
ASEAN Green / Social / Sustainability Bonds / Sukuk for October 2019
GCIO Sustainability Reporting in ASEAN Research Report 2018
Nasdaq and Celent July 2018, Global C-Suite Study on Capital Markets Infrastructure 
[8]
Technology
Global private equity valuations has grown more than 700% since 2002 in 2017, 
[9]
outpacing public equity market valuations, McKinsey Global Private Markets Review 2019, 
Private markets come of age.
CFA Institute Nov 2018, Capital Formation: The Evolving Role of Public and Private 
[10]
Markets
Wall Street Journal Jan 2018, Fewer Listed Companies: Is That Good or Bad for Stock 
[11]
Markets?
[12]
[13]
Duncan Lamont, Apr 2018, Market views - What is the point of equity market
McKinsey Global Private Markets Review 2019, Private markets come of age
CFA Institute Mar 2019, MIFID II Research Unbundling: A Survey Yielding Mixed 
[14]
Results
[15]
This year, MATCH has been enhanced with a new “Deal Fridays” format, reflecting a 
joint partnership with Enterprise Singapore to connect a carefully curated list of growth-
stage ASEAN companies with investors through weekly investor-company match-making 
events. Since the launch of “Deal Fridays” in June 2019, over 400 companies and 400 
investors have participated in Deal Fridays.
