  Economy day 2019 Volksbanken Raiffeisenbanken – Frankfurt, 14 November 
2019 
The future of the European Economic and Monetary Union 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
         Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr; 06 88 56 54 03).
Page 1 sur 7 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to be here with you and wish to thank you for your invitation. 
It’s almost like a home from home for me here: I visit Frankfurt at least twice a 
month for ECB Governing Council meetings! I should add that I myself worked 
as a retail banker for 12 years. Today I am also speaking to you as a committed 
European  and  a  friend  of  Germany.  I  am  French  but  my  family  roots  are  in 
Saarland.  My family  has lived there  since the end  of the 18th century and its 
ceramics company, Villeroy & Boch, is part of the German “Mittelstand”. I love 
Germany, its language and its culture.  
The impressive number of participants in today’s event is testament to the vitality 
of  the  Volksbanken  Raiffeisenbanken.  Through  their  ideas,  Friedrich  Wilhelm 
Raiffeisen  and  Hermann  Schulze-Delitzsch  [founder  of  the  Volksbanken] 
influenced many cooperative banking initiatives in Europe and throughout the 
world.  The  cooperative  model  has  proved  its  resilience,  first  and  foremost 
because  it  inspires  confidence  over  the  long  term.  These  two  core  values  of 
confidence and stability are also what characterise our single currency, the euro. 
This  year  it  celebrated  its  20th  birthday.  However,  to  optimise  its  benefits 
objectively, we need to overcome four clichés. I shall then turn to your banking 
industry and its three key challenges for tomorrow.  
 I. Overcoming four clichés in order to optimise the euro area.  
I am fully aware of the criticisms and debates that exist here in Germany about 
the functioning of the euro area. Not everything is perfect; but Germany can be 
proud of having helped to create an internationally recognised currency inspired 
by its own core values: independence, respect for Treaties, price stability and a 
long-term  approach.  The  ECB  and  the  euro  are  the  true  descendants  of  the 
Bundesbank and Deutsche Mark. But today, if we want to move forward with a 
serene debate, we need to get rid of four clichés.  
Page 2 sur 7 
 
The first one that needs to be overcome, including by some in my own country, 
is the somewhat lazy idea that economic union is a substitute for national 
reforms.  I  want  to  make  this  clear  from  the  start:  on  the  contrary,  national 
reforms are a prerequisite for reinforcing the economic union. I am saying this 
as a completely independent central banker; the current French government is 
taking  reforms  very  seriously.  France  has  already  reaped  the  first  rewards: 
strong  job  creation  –  1  million  new  jobs  in  the  past  four  years  –  is  lowering 
unemployment; growth – forecast at 1.3% this year – is proving more resilient 
than  in  the  rest  of  the  euro  area.  And  France  has  become  a  very  attractive 
country for foreign investors.i We need only look around us: in this regrettably 
turbulent world, there is no more reliable partner for Germany than France, and 
for France than Germany.  
This is why – and this is the second cliché – we need to stop reducing the debate 
to an old opposition between “German rules” and “French spending”. In the 
face of German fears, which I understand, I want to make a clear pledge: there 
is no question in my eyes of creating a “transfer union” that would only benefit 
certain  countries,  or  of  creating  eurobonds  that  would  equate  to  a  pooling  of 
debt. Need I remind you that France is also a net contributor to the European 
budget and that its public deficit is well below the 3% ceiling? But in light of the 
current  deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook,  those  countries  with  the  fiscal 
space  should  “act  in  an  effective  and  timely  manner”,  according  to  the  ECB 
Governing Council which was unanimous on this point in September. Economic 
studies show that public spending has a bigger impact on the economy when 
three conditions are met: (i) when spending is focused more on productive public 
investment,  such  as  infrastructure  and  R&D,  than  on  current  expenditure;  (ii) 
second, when monetary policy is close to the interest rate lower bound, as there 
is less crowding out of private investment; (iii) and last, when countries have low 
levels  of  public  debt.  These  conditions  are  currently  met  in  a  number  of  euro 
area countries, especially Germany.  
Page 3 sur 7 
 
Allow me to add a paradox that is not sufficiently well known: to get out of the 
current low rate environment, we should not turn instinctively solely to monetary 
policy – as many do. In advanced economies, the natural rate of interest – the 
level  that  equates  savings  with  investment  over  the  long  run  –  has  fallen  by 
around 2 percentage points in the last 20 years, and monetary policy has a very 
limited impact on this rate. Instead, what we need is to change the underlying 
economic factors driving the decline in the natural interest rate. Changing these 
factors means spending on investment and on the future, including on training 
and education, the energy transition and of course new technologies, with the 
aim of lifting long-term economic growth. If we want higher interest rates in the 
future, we must not be afraid to rapidly put in place targeted fiscal and structural 
policies.  
This brings us to the third cliché: other countries have gained more from the 
euro than we have. Unfortunately, this cliché is repeated everywhere, including 
in Germany.ii It is also paradoxical given that support for the single currency is 
currently at an all-time high in the euro area – 76% of European citizens support 
the  euro,  and  the  figure  is  even  81%  for  Germany.  In  reality,  the  euro  has 
benefited all countries, including – and especially – Germany. German inflation 
has been lower under the aegis of the ECB in the past 20 years than in the two 
preceding decades: 2.9% on average from 1979 to 1998 compared with 1.4% 
since 1999. The permanent stability of exchange rates between our economies 
is  an  undeniable  advantage  for  German  exporters:  in  2018,  36%  of  German 
exports were to euro area countries. The low level of interest rates is itself partly 
a  reflection  of  Germany’s  large  savings  surplus.  And  Switzerland,  another 
country that is in surplus but that is not part of the euro area, has to apply interest 
rates that are even more negative! Let us be in no doubt: the euro is an asset 
and not a burden for Germany.  
This  brings  me  finally  to  the  fourth  cliché:  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has 
betrayed its mandate. This idea was propagated in a recent “memorandum” 
by a number of former central bankers. I have every respect for them as people, 
Page 4 sur 7 
 
but  I  disagree  with  their  argument.  They  unfortunately  chose  to  ignore  the 
positive results of non-standard monetary policies. Jean-Claude Trichet himself, 
who can hardly be accused of laxity, underlined these benefits, and I would just 
like to remind you of them: estimates of the effectiveness of the ECB’s policies 
put  the  impact  on  growth  at  around  2.5  percentage  points  and  the  impact  on 
inflation at between 1 and 1.5 percentage point for the period 2014-18. What is 
more, since 2013 the euro area has created 11 million jobs. You may not like 
low rates; indeed the markets anticipate, reasonably in my view, that short-term 
rates are close to bottoming out. But there can be no doubt about two very real 
facts that unite us on the Governing Council. Our decisions are guided solely by 
our mandate of price stability, in the face of inflation that is currently too low at 
less  than  1%.  Given  the  recent  slowdown  in  economic  activity  –  starting  with 
Germany – these low short-term rates must and will remain in place: it would 
undeniably be a mistake to raise ECB rates now. We are all realists here, so we 
should focus on two issues:  
-  The first is clarifying the definition of the ECB’s inflation target, and above all 
sharing it better with economic agents – businesses and households. This is 
crucial  to  allow  them  to  better  adjust  their  inflation  expectations;  that  is 
precisely the aim of the strategic focus we are going to launch with Christine 
Lagarde.  
-  The  second  issue  is  limiting  the  negative  effects  of  low  rates  on  financial 
stability, and in particular on banks and insurers. We do not lack the tools to 
do 
this  –  you  with  your  strategic  adaptation,  and  us  with  our 
“macroprudential” policies. But this brings me to my second part.  
 II. Meeting three major challenges to strengthen euro area banks.  
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  a  strong  belief:  Europe  needs  strong  banks.  A 
dynamic economy requires a strong banking industry; it's true in France, and it's 
also true in Germany. Undeniably, euro area banks are stronger than they were 
ten years ago. As a result of regulations and of their streamlining efforts, they 
Page 5 sur 7 
 
were  able  to  significantly  shore  up  their  balance  sheets.  In  particular,  their 
solvency  and liquidity have improved,  while the  weight of NPL has drastically 
declined: their Common Equity Tier 1 ratios (CET1) rose from 9% at end-2009 
to 14.6% in June 2019. In addition, the major German banks themselves have 
seen their NPL amount fall more than twofold over the past five years, sliding 
from EUR 81  billion  at end-2014iii to EUR 33 billion at end-March 2019. Euro 
area  banks  are  nevertheless  experiencing  a  serious  problem  of  profitability, 
which is a cause for concern, both for you and us. I would like to outline three 
challenges that are often mentioned in this regard: low interest rates, the digital 
challenge, and consolidation. 
Let's start with the subject that is perhaps the most obvious to you: low interest 
rates. Negative rates are not an end in themselves, and we, as central bankers, 
are aware of the difficulties this represents for banks. However, I would like to 
qualify this statement. First, the effect of monetary policy on banks is not limited 
to  exerting  pressure  on  the  net  interest  margin.  It  is  broader  and  also  has 
positive  aspects  that  are  too  often  overlooked:  lower  financing  costs;  a  lower 
cost of risk due to borrowers’ improved solvency.  Furthermore, in September, 
we  decided  –  and  I  had  advocated  this  –  to  set  up  a  mitigation  mechanism, 
known  as  tiering,  which  exempts  some  of  your  excess  reserves  from  the 
negative rate. Germany is the euro area country whose banks have the largest 
liquidity  surplus:  tiering  will  therefore  first  benefit  German  banks,  for  several 
hundred million euros. This is good news; it hasn’t been much talked about and 
this is why I am particularly keen to welcome it with you. I also note that a number 
of countries – such as Denmark, Sweden and even the Netherlands in the euro 
area – display negative interest rates, but significantly higher bank profitability 
ratios than those of euro area banks – an RoE of 9-11%, compared to 6% in the 
euro area. Negative rates are not the only problem. More structural problems 
must also be solved. 
This brings me to the  digital  challenge. The digital transition is an important 
strategy for reducing costs. Financial institutions can unleash productivity gains 
Page 6 sur 7 
 
by exploring even further the possibilities of automation and artificial intelligence. 
However, in the short term, IT investment costs are significant, while potential 
profitability  gains  can  only  be  generated  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  This 
challenge is even more complex for medium-sized banks, and those that do not 
have sufficient financial capacity. The costs of digitalisation  – in investment  – 
are mostly fixed; its gains increase in proportion to size. 
This  brings  me  to  the  third  challenge,  that  of  the  consolidation  of  banking 
institutions in the euro area. Because of a still incomplete Banking Union, the 
European banking sector remains too fragmented compared to the US market: 
the market share of the five main European banks stands at 20% against more 
than 40% in the United States. In this regard, I would like to applaud the open 
approach of the Federal Minister of Finance Olaf Scholz. Beyond the debate on 
deposit guarantees, which in my opinion calls for a pragmatic compromise rather 
than a political confrontation, his merits are threefold: first, advocating European 
financial sovereignty after Brexit; this requires adding a stronger Banking Union 
and  a  Capital  Markets  Union.  Second,  proposing  a  common  bank  liquidation 
procedure,  in  order  to  deal  more  rapidly  and  effectively  with  failing  banks. 
Finally, overcoming the blockages of “host countries” of subsidiaries, in order to 
facilitate  the  constitution  of  European  cross-border  banking  groups,  including 
when the parent company is German. Of course, many things still need to be 
negotiated, notably the necessary reduction of risks. But the Scholz proposals 
are putting back in motion this key issue for the solidity of the euro area and the 
smooth financing of investment. 
Of course, there exists a diverse range of consolidation models across Europe, 
and  in  this  movement,  small  banks  must  not  relinquish  their  values.  In  this 
respect,  your central body DZ  Bank  seems to me to be  a good example of  a 
grouping  which  ensures  a  geographical  and  functional  complementarity  of 
activities.  I  welcome  the  current  debates  on  how  to  consolidate  networks  of 
cooperative and mutual banks in Europe; the German sector has the means of 
significantly contributing to these debates. 
Page 7 sur 7 
  Thanks  to  you,  I  have  discovered  Raiffeisen’s  beautiful  phrase:  "Several 
persons  have  the  ability  to  do  what  is  impossible  for  one  individual.”iv  This 
phrase perfectly describes the ambition of mutual banks. But it is also, I believe, 
a  model  of  thought  for  Europe.  In  this  uncertain  world,  shaken  by  the  rivalry 
between the United States and China, Germany and France must, more than 
ever,  overcome  their  differences.  The  entry  into  office  of  the  new  European 
Commission,  around  Ursula  von  der  Leyen,  must  be  an  opportunity  to  move 
forward together. It's now, or never. Europeans expect no less. Thank you for 
your attention. 
                                                            
References: 
i “Shock Resistant”, France’s Attractiveness Survey, EY, June 2019.  
ii Laurent Abraham, Jean-Baptiste Gossé, “The euro: is the grass always greener on the other side?”, Banque de 
France blog, May 2019. 
 
iii EBA source and sample. 
 
iv "Was dem Einzelnen nicht möglich ist, das vermögen viele." 
