Jens Weidmann: Climate change and central banks
Welcome  address  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Deutsche
Bundesbank’s second financial market conference, Frankfurt am Main, 29 October 2019.
 1 Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to bid you a warm welcome to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s second financial market
conference, on my own behalf and that of Sabine Mauderer, here at the Gesellschaftshaus in
Frankfurt’s green haven, the Palmengarten.
Frankfurt’s most charming park, the Palmengarten was created 150 years ago, and a series of
events have been scheduled this week to commemorate this anniversary. When Adolphe, Duke
of Nassau, was forced to disband his collection of exotic plants housed in Schloss Biebrich in
1866, Heinrich Siesmayer, a Frankfurt garden designer, came up with a clever idea – he set up a
stock corporation to buy the plants and build a botanical garden in Frankfurt. City folk snapped up
the shares in this company, allowing Siesmayer to buy Duke Adolphe’s green treasures for a
price of 60,000 Gulden.  I suppose you could say that the foundation of Frankfurt’s Palmengarten
was an early example of “green finance”, given that it was a privately funded green investment.
1
But there is more to green finance than that, of course. It is a term that also includes accounting
for  climate  risks  in  the  financial  sector,  or  the  transition  to  a  greener  financial  system.  If
environmental  concerns  are  joined  by  economic  and  social  sustainability  considerations,  it  is
common to use the term “sustainable finance”.  And that is what today’s conference is all about:
sustainable finance. Judging by the huge turnout, I dare say we’ve really got our finger on the
pulse.
2
We want this conference to be a forum for dialogue among representatives from the financial
industry,  academia  and  the  public  sector.  Government  is  hugely  interested  in  growing  a
sustainable financial sector, as you can see from the fact that not one, not two, but three finance
ministers  are  in  attendance. And  incidentally,  the  Palmengarten  was  more  than  just  a  private
initiative – the city of Frankfurt provided the land needed to build it.
2 Climate risks and central banks
2.1 Financial stability
Ladies and gentlemen,
The need to transition to a low-carbon economy has become a very important topic, not just from
financial market perspective, but also from the vantage point of central banks. And that is what I
would like to discuss in a little more detail over the next few minutes.
When  my  colleague  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  delivered  his  widely-
regarded Lloyd’s of London speech just four years ago, climate risk was still languishing as a
marginal  issue  for  most  central  banks.   Climate  awareness  has  changed  dramatically  since
then: central banks, supervisory and regulatory authorities have come to recognise that climate
risks also impact on their core tasks.
3
Mark  Carney  built  his  speech  around  the  implications  of  climate  change  for  financial  stability,
4
giving it the title “Breaking the tragedy of the horizon” in a reference to tragedy of the commons.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
If a field or any other common (that is, shared) resource is used without constraint, individual
users’  rational  desire  to  maximise  their  yield  can  end  up  destroying  that  resource  through
overuse. Economists call these situations “externalities” – that is, impacts on others which the
agents had failed to account for – and thus explain the tragedy of why humanity finds it so hard to
give the environment, as a common resource, the effective protection it needs.
When the market fails in this way, it is up to government to take corrective action. The English
economist Arthur Pigou suggested imposing a tax. The alternative idea of emission trading was
inspired  by  his  compatriot  Ronald  Coase.  What  both  theories  have  in  common  is  the  idea  of
putting a price tag on the external costs of our behaviour and creating incentives to change how
we act.
Up  until  now,  not  enough  attention  has  been  given  to  the  costs  of  environmentally  harmful
behaviour – as a result, the implications and risks associated with climate change and climate
policy have not been fully priced into financial assets.
Mark Carney stressed recently that the global financial system is currently funding a 4°C rise in
the temperature of the planet – double the pledge to limit increases to well below 2°C contained
in the Paris Agreement.  To stand a good chance of meeting the 2°C target agreed in Paris,
annual  emissions  can  be  no  more  than  1,100  gigatonnes  of  CO2. And  to  achieve  the  more
6
ambitious 1.5°C target, that figure would be less than 400 gigatonnes.
5
That would mean never using a large share of fossil fuel reserves, because that would deplete
the remaining carbon budget many times over. And that, in turn, will result in carbon-intensive
investments  losing  value.  The  massive  and  abrupt  materialisation  of  such  losses  might  have
7
implications for financial stability.
The  role  of  financial  supervisors  is  to  gauge  the  significance  of  climate-related  risks  for  the
financial system – and not just the risks caused by transitioning to a low-carbon economy, but
also  the  ones  triggered  by  climate  change  itself  –  such  as  the  damage  caused  by  an
accumulation of extreme weather events.
That  is  why  it  is  so  important  for  climate  risks  to  be  disclosed  and  anchored  in  supervisory
practice. Supervisors are hard at work at the methodically challenging task of carrying out any
climate stress tests that may be required.
Banks are required to also take climate risks into account. Our latest survey among small and
medium-sized  banks  found  that  it  is  still  early  days  for  institutions  looking  to  manage  climate
risks in practice: one-third of them said that climate risks feature, at least to a certain degree, in
8
their risk management, while two-thirds said that they have not (yet) begun to do so.
Modelling climate risks accurately is crucial for proper risk management at banks. It could also
have the side effect of making it less attractive to fund environmentally harmful investment. That
said, it would be wrong to want to use banking regulations to set climate policy incentives, for
example by granting risk weighting “discounts” for “green” assets.  Capital requirements should
always  be  geared  to  risk.  Creating  incentives  to  protect  the  climate,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a
matter for politicians.
2.2 Monetary policy
9
The importance of climate change and climate policy for central banks is not confined to our role
as financial supervisors and guardians of financial stability, though. There can be all manner of
monetary policy implications, too.
 Both climate change and climate policy can have a bearing
on macroeconomic indicators such as output and inflation. Central banks need to learn how the
transmission channels work. We are still at the beginning of this particular journey.
10
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Climate change is particularly apparent over the course of the economic cycle when it takes the
form of supply shocks – just take the price increases due to crop failures or low water levels.
Monetary policymakers normally look through such temporary disruptions. But climate change
could well make these shocks stronger and more frequent in the future.
 This can make growth
rates, inflation figures or financial market prices more volatile.
11
What is more, climate change might be accompanied by long-term structural shifts – such as
changes in potential growth or the natural rate of interest – and could well be of relevance to
monetary policymakers. The same can be said for climate policy tools such as a carbon tax or
emissions  trading  which,  depending  on  their  configuration,  will  probably  impact  noticeably  on
economic and price developments.
In a nutshell, gauging the prospects and risks for price stability could become even more of a
challenge  going  forward.  On  top  of  this,  there  are  some  who  are  calling  for  monetary
policymakers  to  take  specific  action  to  combat  climate  change.
  However,  I  am  very  critical
when people say that monetary policymakers need to “go green” by launching “green QE”, say,
or granting specific privileges to green assets within the collateral framework.
12
How hard should government, business and society push back against climate change? What
measures need to be taken, and what behaviour should be encouraged or punished? These are
political questions for elected governments and parliaments to answer. They are decisions which
are not for central banks to take, because they lack the requisite democratic legitimacy.
Our mandate is to preserve price stability, and policy implementation needs to be in line with
principle of market neutrality. Skewing asset purchases to green bonds, say, would run counter
to this principle, which is anchored in Article 127 of the EU Treaty.
And a trade-off could arise once monetary policy considerations call for applying the brakes and
scaling back the bond purchases. In this situation, I dare say there would be calls to press ahead
with the green asset purchase programme. After all, it is not immediately apparent why efforts to
combat climate change should only be made when price pressures are weak.
However,  asset  purchases  need  to  be  reserved  for  exceptional  situations  under  the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework and under no circumstances be deployed indefinitely.
That would also render a further question redundant – the matter of whether the asset purchase
programme  in  its  existing  form  favours  carbon-intensive  enterprises  and  thus  cements  the
existing structures.
13
A  monetary  policy  which  pursues  explicitly  environmental  policy  objectives  is  at  risk  of  being
overburdened. And in the long run, the central bank’s independence might be called into question.
What matters to me is that we do not generally promote sustainability using instruments which
serve other purposes. I think a decisive and effective climate policy is the right course of action –
but  it  needs  to  be  implemented  using  the  right  instruments  and  by  agents  which  have  the
democratic legitimacy needed for that purpose.
2.3 NGFS and portfolio management
That  certainly  does  not  mean  that  we  at  the  Bundesbank  do  not  also  have  scope,  within  the
constraints of our mandate, to help green the financial system.
We are an active player in national and global bodies dedicated to forging a more sustainable
financial system. Sabine Mauderer will use her speech later today to discuss our involvement in
the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS).
Furthermore, as a fiscal agent, we manage a host of public sector pension portfolios and have
already helped multiple clients gear their investment policy to sustainability criteria.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Central banks will play a part in transitioning to a low-carbon economy. We can help make the
financial system more sustainable yet must never lose sight of our core mandate.
Green finance can augment effective and smart climate policy, but it cannot replace it. It is, and
always will be, a matter for democratically elected politicians to make the necessary transition a
reality and to break the tragedy of the horizon.
In closing, ladies and gentlemen, may I wish you a day rich with insightful and rewarding dialogue
here at the Palmengarten, Frankfurt’s green haven.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
B. Taudte-Repp (2012), Der Palmengarten – ein Führer durch Frankfurts grüne Oase.
Deutsche Bundesbank, The market for sustainable financial investments: a stocktake, Monthly Report, October
2019.
Carney, M., Breaking the tragedy of the horizon – climate change and financial stability, speech at Lloyd’s of
London, 29 September 2015.
Harding, G. (1968), The Tragedy of the Commons, in Science, New Series, Vol. 162, No 3859, pp. 1243–1248.
www.theguardian.com/business/2019/oct/15/bank-of-england-boss-warns-global-finance-it-is-funding-climate-
crisis
Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate Change, So schnell tickt die CO
European Systemic Risk Board (2016), Too late, too sudden: Transition to a low-carbon economy and systemic
risk, Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee, No 6.
Deutsche Bundesbank/Federal Financial Supervisory Authority, 2019 LSI stress test results, slide 10.
EU High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable Finance (2018), Financing a sustainable European economy.
Cœuré, B., Monetary policy and climate change, speech delivered at the Scaling up Green Finance: The Role of
Central Banks conference, 8 November 2018.
Rudebusch,  G.  D.,  Climate  Change  and  the  Federal  Reserve,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,
Economic Letter 2019–09.
to  Step  Up  on  Global  Warming,  Foreign  Policy,
foreignpolicy.com/2019/07/20/why-central-banks-need-to-step-up-on-global-warming/;  Schoenmaker,  D.
Tooze,  A.  (2019),  Why  Central  Banks  Need 
 
(2019), Greening Monetary Policy, Bruegel Working Paper, issue 2.
Matikainen, S., E. Campiglio and D. Zenghelis (2017), The climate impact of quantitative easing, Policy Paper,
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
