Benjamin E Diokno: Financial health for Filipinos through financial
education
Speech by  Mr  Benjamin  E  Diokno,  Governor of  Bangko  Sentral ng  Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  BSP  Financial  Education  Stakeholders  Expo,  Pasay  City,  25
November 2019.
 National  Economic  Development  Authority  (NEDA)  Undersecretary  Rosemarie  Edillon;
Department of Education (DepEd) Undersecretary Ann Sevilla; Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE)
Chief  Operating  Officer  Atty.  Roel  Refran;  educators;  fellow  public  servants;  development
partners; leaders from the financial services industry and non-government sectors; friends from
the media; honored guests; good morning.
The  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP)  welcomes  you  to  the  2nd  Financial  Education
Stakeholders Expo. Thank you for joining this annual event for financial education.
In 2018, about 1,000 financial education experts, practitioners and advocates gathered here in
SMX for the first ever Expo. We envisioned it to bridge different players in the financial education
space.  We  sought  to  know  of  their  ongoing  initiatives,  understand  challenges,  and  find
opportunities  for  collaboration  and  partnerships.  We  wanted  to  determine  ways  forward  to
achieve shared financial education objectives.
In a year, the seeds of collaboration planted in 2018 have started to take root. Today we convene
again to showcase the progress we have made, and what more we can do together.
Allow me to share what we can expect from the 2019 Expo. The plenary sessions will present
how financial education contributes to green and sustainable development. Top financial advisors
will  impart  lessons  on  responsible  financial  planning,  making  our  money  grow  and  becoming
good financial role models. Similar lessons will be highlighted in a theater production after the
lunch break – this is quite interesting so stay tuned.
Tomorrow  is  just  as  exciting.  We  will  go  into  breakout  sessions,  delve  deeper  into  financial
education challenges and solutions, and learn more about stock market investing. We will have
entertaining sessions like a financial education board game, a financial literacy game show, an
awards program, and a raffle draw for all Expo participants.
There will be special performances from actor (Mr. Xian Lim) and a percussion group (Batangas
Drumbeaters). So you better be here tomorrow to enjoy the fun!
We  also  have  76  exhibit  booths  (60  Exhibitor  Institutions/Entities)  in  the  other  room  (Function
Room 5). Our Expo partners are showcasing their wares, ranging from financial products and
services  to  handicrafts  by  microentrepreneurs.  The  two-day  Exhibit  is  open  for  all  Expo
participants and the general public – so you may invite your friends to visit the booths.
The 2019 Expo activities are anchored on our objective of bringing the BSP closer to Filipinos.
Our three strategic advocacies – financial education, financial inclusion and consumer protection
– are all means towards this end.
Through financial education, we equip Filipinos with the ability to understand, select and prudently
use financial services. Through financial inclusion, we enable Filipinos to conveniently, safely and
digitally access affordable and fit-for-purpose financial services. With consumer protection, we
beget greater trust by Filipinos to transact with formal financial institutions observing customer-
centric and ethical business practices.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We implement these advocacies not only because they embody the BSP mandate to “promote
broad and convenient access to high quality financial services and consider the interest of the
general public” (Republic Act No. 11211).
We focus on financial education not only because two laws, the Youth Entrepreneurship Act (RA
No.  10679)  and  the  Economic  and  Financial  Literacy  Act  (RA  No.  10922),  urge  government
institutions to do so.
Rather, we pursue these advocacies because we want every Filipino to be financially healthy.
Financial Education Towards Financial Health
Financial  health  happens  when  an  individual  makes  financial  plans  and  priorities;  balances
income and expenses; builds and maintains financial reserves; manages existing debt and has
access  to  potential  resources;  manages  and  recovers  from  financial  shocks;  and  uses  an
effective range of financial tools.  Center for Financial Services Innovation, 2017, Financial Health
Indicators  for  a  Developing  World,  Beyond  Financial  Inclusion:  Financial  Health  as  a  Global
Framework.
The BSP vision is a financially healthy citizenry making wise financial decisions and contributing
productively  to  the  Philippine  economy.  This  is  consistent  with Ambisyon  Natin  2040  goal  of
having Filipinos “enjoy a stable and comfortable lifestyle, secure in the knowledge that we have
enough for our daily needs and unexpected expenses, that we can plan and prepare for our own
and our children’s future.”
You are part of this Expo because we know that you share this vision. We are confident that you
and your institutions can play significant roles in making this vision a reality.
The challenge is great, given the low level of financial literacy of  Filipinos.  Survey shows  that
Filipinos  have  marginal  understanding  of  compounding  interest;  the  effect  of  inflation  on  the
purchasing power of households; and investment risks, returns and diversification.
But there is good news – we’re not starting from scratch.  The BSP began the groundwork when
we implemented the Economic and Financial Learning Program from 2010 to 2017. 
We intensified building the foundations in 2018 as we shifted to a partnerships approach. With
this approach, we are deepening industry relationships and widening the scope and reach of our
financial education programs. We are now leveraging on partners’ competencies and resources,
and moving towards scalable, sustainable and measureable financial education programs.
Updates on Financial Education Partnerships
To  date,  the  BSP  has  institutionalized  financial  education  partnerships  with  key  government
agencies.
Department of Education
We  support  DepEd  in  integrating  financial  education  in  the  K  to  12  curriculum  to  address
learners’ needs; and incorporating personal finance management (PFM) sessions within regular
training programs for teachers. We expect to reach 29 million learners and more than 800,000
teaching and non-teaching personnel. Imagine how the country will benefit when every learner
who goes through the basic education system imbibes correct money values, and grows up to
become financially-savvy citizens, innovators, business owners and political leaders.
Under  this  partnership,  we  have  so  far  co-developed  10  videos  and  24  lesson  exemplars  as
classroom learning tools. We have also developed a personal finance management module for
teachers,  and  capacitated  around  300  trainers  to  cascade  the  module  to  their  peers  and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
colleagues nationwide. We also support DepEd in finalizing the policy and roadmap for financial
education integration.
We will learn more about DepEd’s milestones from Undersecretary Sevilla (last speaker of the
opening ceremony), and during the DepEd breakout session tomorrow morning.
Overseas Workers Welfare Administration
The  BSP  supports  Overseas  Workers  Welfare  Administration  (OWWA)  to  implement  the
Pinansyal na Talino at Kaalaman (PiTaKa) campaign. Under this campaign, we are developing
standard financial education modules fit for OFWs. The modules will be embedded in mandatory
orientations that OFWs and their families are required to undertake.
To date, we have completed a financial education module for use in Pre-Departure Orientation
Seminars (PDOS) and presented it to more than 600 trainers from OWWA-accredited PDOS
providers. In turn, they will cascade the module to reach over 2.3 million land-based and sea-
based OFWs. 
Standard modules are also being developed for Post Arrival Orientation Seminars (PAOS) and
General  Orientations  for  OFW  Families.  Full  roll-out  of  the  PiTaKa  campaign  would  mean  an
outreach of around 10 million Filipinos living and working abroad. Note that this figure does not
yet account for their families in the Philippines.
The BSP works with the Civil Service Commission (CSC), the Armed Forces of the Philippines
(AFP) and all its branches – the Philippine Army, Philippine Navy and Philippine Air Force.
We aim to embed financial education sessions in training programs required for completion by
civil servants and AFP personnel. This objective is in line with CSC’s thrust to enhance financial
literacy skills of the public sector workforce, and with the AFP Transformation Roadmap which
considers  financial  wellness  as  integral  pillar  of  personnel’s  holistic  development.  These
partnerships will cover an estimated 1.7 million civil servants and 140,000 AFP personnel.
We believe that financial education can be an instrument to achieve employees’ financial health
as well as enhance public sector productivity. Studies show that financially stressed employees
are more likely to miss work, or experience reduced productivity.
Aside from these ongoing partnerships, we will soon engage the police force and firefighters, by
signing  financial  education  agreements  with  the  Philippine  National  Police  and  Bureau  of  Fire
Protection in 2020.
We  are  also  targeting  financially  underserved  sectors  like  MSMEs,  beneficiaries  of  the
government’s cash transfer programs, persons with disabilities, and young professionals from
the  Business  Process  Outsourcing  (BPO)  industry.  For  this  purpose,  we  have  initiated
discussions with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), the Department of Social Welfare
and  Development  (DSWD),  the  National  Council  for  Disability Affairs  (NCDA),  and  the  IT  and
Business Process Association of the Philippines (IBPAP).
Private Sector Support
In  all  these  partnerships,  we  are  grateful  for  private  sector  support.  These  stakeholders  are
deeply  committed  to  carry-out  financial  education  programs  as  part  of  their  corporate  social
responsibility and devoid of commercial interests. These include –  in alphabetical order – the
BDO Foundation, BPI Foundation, Maybank Foundation and Visa Foundation.
We thank the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for assisting in the development of a Monitoring
and Evaluation (M&E) Framework for all our partnership programs. With an M&E Framework in
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
place, and an envisioned national financial capability survey in 2020, we hope to see evidence of
progress and determine opportunities for future work in financial education.
I shared the updates to give a sense of the breadth of the work that still needs to be done, the
areas where multi-sectoral support is needed, and the opportunities for partnerships. Consider
this my call to action.
Consider also the rags-to-riches life stories of “Tatang” Henry Sy, Sr. and “Big John” Gokongwei,
Jr. Both left legacies of multi-million business empires. But let us not overlook that both started
from  small  incomes,  used  their  money  well,  practiced  prudent  financial  and  business
management, and became the moguls we know them to be.
Every Filipino might not reach the same success, but we can try to help them, and ourselves, to
achieve comfortable levels of financial health.
Through complementary, coordinated and collaborative financial education programs, we must
aim to change the life of every Filipino towards a financially healthy future. In this Expo, we hope
to  generate  concrete  ideas  on  how  you  and  your  institutions  can  be  financial  education
champions and agents of change.
To end, former U.S. President Harry S. Truman once said, “Actions are the seed of fate. Deeds
grow into destiny.” As we act together, and gather critical mass, we can altogether achieve our
desired destiny – a financially healthy nation.
Good morning again and mabuhay
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
