 4.11.2019 
 Digitalisation and investment in intangible capital: the Spanish case within 
the EU 
Banco de España-European Investment Bank 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
    Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me start by welcoming you to Banco de España for the conference Digitalisation and 
Investment in Intangible Capital: The Spanish Case within the EU, jointly organised with the 
European Investment Bank. For the Banco de España it is a great pleasure to collaborate 
with  the  European  Investment  Bank  in  co-organising  a  conference  for  the  second  time. 
Before  going  any  further  with  my  intervention,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  you  for  your 
attendance here today.  
The  topic  of  this  conference  is  very  timely  and  appropriate.  Digitalisation  is  a  key 
development that is increasingly affecting all the sectors of the economy with the ability to 
significantly transform the functioning of companies and markets and the structure of the 
economy more generally. However, the final impact of digitalisation on various dimensions 
is highly uncertain. 
Digitalisation 
Digitalisation  refers  to  the  adoption  of  digital  technologies  such  as  big  data,  cloud 
computing,  E-commerce,  artificial  intelligence,  robotics,  the  Internet  of  Things  and  3D 
printing.  
The  impact  of  digitalisation  on  firms  and  the  general  economy  comes  through  various 
factors. First, digitalisation reduces search, transportation and verification costs1. Second, 
it  leads  to  increased  automation  of  routine  operations.  Third,  it  enables  new  ways  of 
organising  production.  Fourth,  it  may  change  the  structure  of  the  market,  potentially 
affecting competitive pressures in some sectors.  
There  is  an  overall  consensus  that  digitalisation  can  potentially  boost  firms’  productivity 
through  several  channels.  First,  technical  progress  in  the  production  of  digital  products 
leads  to  new,  better  and  cheaper  products  generating  productivity  gains  in  the  sectors 
producing  these  products.  Second,  other  sectors  may  benefit  from  cheaper  inputs 
encouraging  a  higher  use  of  those  inputs  as  investment  goods,  resulting  in  productivity 
gains for the firms in these sectors. Third, digital technologies enhance product and process 
innovations leading to new production and organisational processes, new business models 
and new or superior products. Finally, information and communication technologies (ICT) 
are seen as reducing the cost of sharing and acquiring knowledge, potentially increasing 
the diffusion of innovation and new knowledge.  
However,  digitalisation  may  also  entail  some  challenges.  First,  while  some  argue  that 
digitalisation leads to more intense competition, others fear increasing market concentration 
in some sectors on the back of digitalisation2. Second, some studies find evidence that ICT 
and automation are related to labour market polarisation3, where mid-skilled jobs either lose 
value or disappear, while there is an increase in demand for high-skilled job-profiles linked 
to digital technologies. This can lead to more income inequality or at least to big transition 
                                                                                              
1 Goldfard, Avi and Catherine Tucker (2019). “Digital Economics”, Journal of Economic Literature, vol 57(1), pages 3-43 
2 OECD (2018): “Maintaining competitive conditions in the era of digitalisation”. OECD report to G-20 Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors. 
3 Michaels, G., Natraj, A. and Van Reenen, J. (2014): “Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries 
over Twenty-Five Years”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), pp. 60-77 
2/6 
 costs for certain groups of  workers. Third, cybersecurity threats pose another challenge, 
given the vast amount of valuable information created and stored in the digital economy. 
Digitalisation may potentially lead to significant changes in the structure of most sectors of 
the economy. Among them, the possible impact on the financial sector is especially relevant 
for the Banco de España given our role as banking prudential and conduct supervisor and 
central  bank.  In  particular,  new  technologies  may  imply  efficiency  gains  and  may  also 
facilitate  the  entry  of  new  companies  offering  financial  services.  For  customers  this  may 
entail  benefits  in  terms  of  cost  savings  and  financial  inclusion.  For  the  incumbent  banks 
technological  change  involves  both  challenges  and  opportunities.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
entry of new competitors such as Fintech or Bigtech companies may threaten the market 
shares  of  incumbents.  But  on  the  other  hand,  innovation  may  lead  in  the  long  run  to 
efficiency gains in the provision of financial services for incumbent banks, although in the 
short  term  it  probably  implies  an  increase  in  costs  necessary  to  adapt  to  the  new 
technologies. 
Given our limited understanding of the impact of digitalisation on the economy, the use of 
surveys  to  firms  can  be  a  useful  tool  to  enhance  our  knowledge  of  specific  aspects  of 
digitalisation  such  as  adoption  rates,  barriers  and  impact  on  firm  performance.  In  this 
regard,  I  would  like  to  summarise  the  main  findings  of  two  recent  surveys  undertaken, 
respectively, by the EIB and the ECB.  
The EIB Investment Survey, which is run annually, included in 2018 some questions on firms’ 
demand for skills and digitalisation activities in the EU and the US. More specifically, 888 
firms in the EU and 800 firms in the US were surveyed4. This survey shows that EU firms lag 
their US peers in terms of adoption rates in the services sector whereas adoption rates in 
the manufacturing sector are similar on both sides of the Atlantic. It also shows that larger 
firms are more likely to adopt digital technologies than smaller ones.  
The  ECB  Digitalisation  Survey  is  an  ad-hoc  survey  which  interviewed  74  very  large  non-
financial companies from the euro area5. This survey shows that among large companies 
the take-up of digital technologies is very high, with big data and cloud computing being 
the most widely adopted. 
When  it  comes  to  the  impact  of  digitalisation  on  firm  performance,  the  results  of  both 
surveys  are  highly  consistent.  They  find  that  digitalisation  has  a  positive  impact  on  firm 
productivity, driven by the possibility of sharing knowledge more easily and more efficient 
production processes. It also has a positive effect on sales mainly due to better access to 
customers. Digital firms invest more, especially in intangible assets, and innovate more than 
non-digital firms. As regards perceived obstacles, digital firms report difficulties at recruiting 
and  retaining  highly  skilled  ICT  staff.  In  addition,  digitalisation  was  regarded  by  firms  as 
replacing low and medium-skilled jobs but not high-skilled jobs.  
                                                                                               
4  For  more  information,  see  European  Investment  Bank  (2019):  Investment  Report  2018/2019.  Retooling  Europe´s 
Economy. 
5 For more information, see ECB (2018): “Digitalisation and its impacto n the economy: insights from a survey of large 
companies”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2018 
 3/6 
 Intangible assets 
Today’s  conference  deals  not  only  with  digitalisation  but  also  with  intangible  assets. 
Intangible assets are non-monetary assets without physical substance encompassing ICT, 
research  and  development  (R&D),  innovation,  design,  creativity,  image  and  brand, 
organisation and human capital formation.  
The development of the digital economy has certainly contributed to a notable increase in 
investment in intangible assets, as digital firms tend to both invest and innovate more than 
non-digital firms. Also digital technologies have increased the demand for high-skill workers, 
increasing in this way the investment in intangibles. Partly as a result of digitalisation, the 
relative importance of intangible assets has been increasing in most economies6. 
But  measurement  of  intangible  assets  is  not  straightforward,  and  their  definition  in  the 
national accounts has gradually broadened. The current national accounts systems include 
as  intangible  assets  computerised  systems  (software  and  databases),  R&D,  mineral 
exploration  and  entertainment,  literary  or  artistic  originals.  Nevertheless,  some  authors7 
claim that a broader range of assets should be included in the definition of intangible assets. 
In this regard, it is worth mentioning that Cotec Foundation for Innovation and The Valencian 
Institute of Economic Research (IVIE, by its Spanish abbreviation8) provide estimates of the 
gross fixed capital formation in intangible assets in Spain for a broader range of assets than 
those included in the national accounts. Data are available since 1995 with a regional and 
sectorial breakdown. These data are very helpful to improve our understanding of the role 
played by intangible assets in the Spanish economy. 
Investment  in  innovation  is  widely  recognised  as  a  key  driver  of  firm  productivity.  But 
financing  intangible  assets  can  be  more  challenging  than  financing  tangible  assets.  In 
particular,  the  specific  nature  of  intangible  assets  makes  them  less  easy  to  be  used  as 
collateral. In addition, returns from innovation are generally riskier. All these elements made 
debt financing less suitable to finance innovation. Hence, innovative firms tend to rely more 
on  internal  sources  to  finance  investment,  as  well  as  equity  and,  in  particular,  venture 
capital9.  This  can  be  particularly  challenging  in  countries  such  as  those  of  the  European 
Union,  including  Spain,  in  which  these  markets  are  relatively  less  developed  than  in  the 
United States. 
The  public  sector often  plays  an  important  role  in  supporting  innovation  through  various 
ways such as directly investing, granting subsides or tax credit and financing projects. In 
this regard it is worth mentioning the activities of the Instituto de Crédito Oficial (ICO) in 
Spain as a key provider of venture capital, either directly or indirectly, through FOND-ICO 
Global, a “fund of funds” whose goal is to promote the creation of private venture capital 
funds that invest in Spanish companies. At the European level, the European Investment 
                                                                                              
6 For recent evidence in the euro aera, see ECB (2018): “Investment in intangible assets in the euro area”. ECB Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 7/2018 
7 C. Corrado, J. Haskel, C., Jona-Lasino and M. Iomni (2018), “Intangible investment in the EU and US before and since 
the  Great  Recession  and  its  contribution  to  productivity  growth”,  Journal  of  Infrastructure,  Policy  and  Development, 
Volume 2 Issue 1. 
8 Cotec Foundation for Innovation-Ivie (Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Económicas). Intangible assets: database 
for  Spain 
at: 
http://informecotec.es/activos-intangibles/. 
 
9 Brown, J. R., Fazzari, S. M. and B. C. Petersen (2009): “Financing Innovation and Growth: Cash Flow, External Equity, 
and the 1990x R&D Boom”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. LXIV, No. 1 
(1995-2014).  April 
2017.  Database 
communities 
autonomous 
available 
and 
its 
4/6 
 Bank  Group  also  supports  innovation  through  different  instruments  such  as  guarantees, 
SME loan securitisation and venture capital. 
The  public  sector  can  also  play  a  relevant  role  in  supporting  innovation  through  the 
education system since a key element of innovation is the supply of high-skilled workers. 
An improvement of the quality and functioning of the education system can therefore have 
a positive contribution to innovation. 
Spain’s global position in terms of innovation and digitalisation 
Now let me give you some figures on Spain’s relative position in terms of innovation and 
digitalisation. According to Eurostat10, R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP stood at 
2% in the EU in 2017, below the target of 3% of GDP set at “Europe 2020 strategy” and 
also below US levels (2.8%). Spain’s investment in R&D was lower than the EU average. It 
only accounted for 1.2% of its GDP in 2017 despite having been growing for the previous 
three years.  
According to COTEC11, Spanish companies fund the majority of their investment in R&D, 
around two thirds, with internally generated resources. Regarding external funding sources, 
venture capital and private equity are the most relevant ones.  
Another key element for innovation is the supply of human capital, i.e., the availability of 
high-skilled workers such as researchers. In this dimension, there is also an important gap 
between Spain and the EU average. In particular, according to Eurostat12, in 2017 Spain had 
0.27 researchers per 100 employees in the private sector, while the EU average was 0.45.  
Regarding digitalisation, Spain is gradually improving its global position. According to the 
Digital Economy and Society Index, published by the European Commission13, that tracks 
the evolution of EU member states in digital competitiveness, Spain ranks 11th among the 
28  countries  of  the  European  Union.  The  index  comprises  five  indicators:  connectivity, 
human capital, use of Internet services, integration of digital technology and digital public 
services.  Spain  ranks  above  EU  averages  in  4  out  of  5  of  these  indicators.  In  particular, 
Spain ranks 4th in the digital public services which focuses particularly on e-Government 
and e-Health services. In sharp contrast, Spain ranks in 17th position in the Human Capital 
dimension, which measures the skills needed to take advantage of the possibilities offered 
by digital technologies.  
All in all, these figures suggest that there is room to improve the global position of Spain in 
terms of both innovation activities and digitalisation, especially as regards human capital. 
This  is  especially  relevant  for  the  Spanish  economy,  which  show  low  levels  of  firm 
productivity in comparison with their European peers. 
Let me conclude by saying that I am sure that the presentations in this conference will be 
the basis of fruitful discussions on key aspects of digitalisation and investment in intangible 
assets in Spain, such as its evolution and drivers, the existence of barriers and the best way 
to support those activities. These discussions will be very useful to enrich the policy debate 
                                                                                              
10 Eurostat (2019): Statistics on research and development 
11 COTEC (2019): Informe COTEC. Innovación en España 
12 Eurostat (2019): Statistics on research and development 
13 European Commission (2019): The Digital Economy and Society Index 2019 
 5/6 
 around these highly relevant issues. With this expectation, I wish you a very pleasant and 
constructive conference. 
Thank you for your attention.  
6/6 
