Yannis Stournaras: Building public-private partnerships
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 30-year Anniversary
Conference, IMD World Competitiveness Center "30 years of competitiveness: The challenges
ahead", Lausanne, 4 October 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is my great pleasure to take part in this highly interesting discussion on the subject of building
public-private  partnerships  at  the  30-year  Anniversary  Conference  held  by  the  IMD  World
Competitiveness Center.
In my speech today, I will briefly talk about the importance of establishing effective partnerships
between the public and the private sector and how governments can create the conditions for
their success. But first let me highlight some of my own views on the key features of Greece’s
performance and its current state of play.
 As I will outline, the 2019 IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook makes for sobering reading as
far as Greece is concerned, given the indications that the country so far failed to make headway
in areas on which sustainable economic growth increasingly depends. Greece also has so far
shown signs of slippage in key dimensions against a group of advanced high-income economies
that have already managed to make a transition to a development that is based more on factors
related to efficiency and productivity. And all these, despite the impressive progress that Greece
has made since the beginning of the crisis in 2010 in the fiscal front, in the banking sector, in
social  security  reform,  in  unit  labour  cost  competitiveness,  and  in  labour  and  product  market
liberalization.
Looking at the 2019 Yearbook, my first observation is that little appears to have changed in the
last five years. In all five main pillars covered by the IMD Competitiveness index, Greece has
been trending downwards, falling by a cumulative 8 ranks in the overall index, from 50th place in
2015  to  58th  place  in  2019.  At  the  same  time,  the  country  continues  to  lose  ground  in  the
“knowledge”,  “technology”  and  “future  readiness”  dimensions,  as  reported  in  the  IMD  World
Competitiveness Digital Ranking 2018. These three factors are considered key to meeting long
term  objectives.  Still,  there  is  room  for  optimism,  given  (a)  the  strength  of  Greece’s  “skilled
workforce” and “high educational level”, as reported in the Executive Opinion Survey and in the
IMD World Talent Ranking 2018, and (b) the fact that a new government was elected last July
with a programme to invest in the so called “knowledge triangle” (education-research-innovation),
to  liberalise  further  product  and  services  markets,  to  promote  Public-Private  Partnerships
(PPPs), to attract foreign direct investment, to promote privatisations, to bring back to life large
investment projects that had been “frozen” for a number of years and to tackle the problem of
Non-Performing-Loans (NPLs), which is one of the most serious legacies of the crisis.
The  2019  Yearbook  and  other  similar  reports  show  that,  despite  the  progress  made  so  far,
Greece still needs to address major challenges and crisis-related legacies.
The  multi-year  recession  has  left  an  investment  gap  and  risks  permanently  impairing  the
productive capacity of the Greek economy through a hysteresis effect. Estimates by the Bank of
Greece  indicate  that  the  net  capital  stock  of  the  Greek  economy  (at  constant  2010  prices)
declined by €67.4 billion in the period 2010–2016, to €622.2 billion in 2016. In order to raise the
net  capital  stock  over  the  next  decade  to  pre-crisis  levels,  gross  fixed  capital  formation  at
constant  prices,  excluding  residential  investment,  needs  to  increase  by  about  5%  per  year.
Although this is a high growth rate, it is deemed achievable for the Greek economy based on
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
historical experience, so long as suitable investment and business-friendly policies are pursued.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is necessary, as domestic savings are insufficient to match the
investments needed for high growth rates. Up to now, the business environment had not been
considered investment-friendly, in fact it had discouraged investment. This was mainly the result
of high tax rates, weak public sector efficiency, red-tape and delays in court proceedings and
rulings. If Greece wants to attract more FDI, it must step up the pace of structural reforms and
privatisations.
Meanwhile, an important conclusion that can be drawn from the international rankings concerns
innovation, supported by investment in human capital. Factors related to human capital can be
divided  into  the  ability  to  attract  talent,  the  determination  to  maintain  and  enrich  it,  and  the
capacity to disseminate knowledge. So it is not hard to see where Greece’s main problems lie.
Greece has high-quality human resources and enclaves of excellence both in public research
institutes and in the private sector. However, Greece lags behind in its transition to a knowledge-
based economy. The high-quality research output does not translate into growth output, leading
to  a  paradox  of  non-commercialisation.  Strengthening  the  linkages  between  industry  and
universities  would  enhance  the  so-called  “knowledge  triangle”  and  lead  to  the  digital
transformation of the economy, an increase in the stock of knowledge and productive capital, the
development  of  outward-oriented  sectors  and,  more  generally,  to  a  knowledge  economy  and
society.
Public-Private Partnerships
 Four  decades  ago,  inequality  started  to  rise  in  the  OECD  member-states.  The  21st  century
ushered  in  new  challenges  like  the  prospects  of  powerful  new  technologies  that  gave  rise  to
higher  productive  capacity  but,  also,  concentration  of  economic  power  and  inequality  of
opportunities. The key role of governments was to create a well-functioning market economy,
which can be perceived as synonymous with a competitive economy. The top priority was, and
still remains, to restore economic dynamism through appropriate supply and demand policies as
well as to ensure equality of opportunity for all. In this vein, establishing partnerships with the
private sector is no longer a matter for theoretical discussion, it must become common practice. ​
Greece, in the past ten years has had a rather good track record in building PPPs. Across a
range  of  sectors,  PPPs  have  played  a  significant  role  in  facilitating  the  delivery  of  important
projects.  Currently,  Greece  is  involved  in  14  public-private  partnerships  of  various  types  and
sizes, which translate into an investment of €822 million over the years 2009 to 2019, of which
€318 million financed by EU grants and €504 million by private resources.
Let  me  elaborate  on  some  of  these  projects.  The  “Attica  Urban  Transportation  Telematics
System”  project,  signed  in  June  2014,  involved  1,000  smart  bus  and  trolley  stops,  providing
passengers with real-time information on the schedules and routes of 2,500 vehicles. The social
and  economic  benefits  of  the  project  were  significant:  (a)  upgrading  of  public  transport
infrastructure;  (b)  improvements  of  passenger  experience  and  quality  of  life;  (c)  reductions  in
traffic congestion, fuel consumption and, therefore, air pollution.
In December 2014, another partnership was signed to provide broadband infrastructure coverage
and affordable connectivity services to the residents of remote, disadvantaged and border areas
of Greece with no connection to the digital world and corresponding to roughly 45% of Greek
territory. This particular project was the winner of the European Broadband Awards 2017.
In  June  2015,  a  new  public-private  partnership  was  established  to  develop  the  first  integrated
waste  management  system  in  Greece.  This  new  waste  treatment  unit  encompasses  the
previously  existing  waste  management  system  of  Western  Macedonia,  and  creates  a  waste
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
management model in full conformity with the environmental strategy of the EU.
All 14 public-private partnerships adhere to high standards, as regards both financial reporting
standards and technical features, and have received wide recognition, not to mention a number
of international awards. Importantly, they have been evaluated by Eurostat and classified as ‘off-
balance sheet’ (meaning that they do not affect the government deficit and public debt) due to the
1
good risk-sharing between the entities.
An additional 12 public-private partnerships are presently in the pipeline and have already been
approved.  Their  emphasis  is  on  areas  of  high  social  priority  for  local  communities,  such  as
waste  management,  energy  saving  (for  example,  street  lighting  projects),  social  infrastructure
(for  example,  schools  and  hospitals)  and  ICT  (for  example,  the  “Ultrafast  Broadband”  project)
and on concession projects that do not burden the Public Investment Programme.
But  even  more  important  could  turn  out  to  be  in  the  future  PPPs  that  have  to  do  with  large
investment projects. The Greek state, for historical reasons, owns land to a much larger extent
than  other  OECD  or  European  member-states.  This  land  could  be  used  to  initiate  large
investment projects (and attract foreign direct investment) where the state leases the land for
long periods and private investors develop it. For example, the “Hellinikon” project, an 8 bl euros
giga project, concerns the development of a large area (three times the size of Monaco) in the
southern suburbs of Athens by the sea, which used to be the national airport of Greece. The
ambition is to create there a new “Riviera” with large multiplier effects through the construction of
luxury residencies, hotels and a casino.
The benefits of PPPs.
First, public-private partnerships enable the public sector to leverage more financial resources.
And since there is no immediate disbursement of public funds, this in turn allows government
funds to be redirected to other important uses.
Second, in any public-private partnership scheme, the private sector assumes a significant part
of the risks involved. Thus, it has a keen interest in ensuring the project’s diligent and efficient
design and implementation. The use of private funds, complementary to public ones, can then
contribute to a faster completion of the project and provision of services.
Third,  the  private  entity  involved  is  responsible  for  the  proper  maintenance  of  the  work  or
service. Specific performance indices are used to monitor the projects and are linked with the
terms  and  conditions  of  payment  specified  in  the  contracts.  In  other  words,  if  certain
performance  targets  are  not  met  on  time,  the  penalty  typically  entails  payment  reductions,
retentions, or credit to the owner, thus ensuring a strong incentive for the long-term maintenance
of a sound technical project and high-quality services.
Fourth,  the  long-term  nature  of  contracts  has  the  indirect  effect  of  creating  financially  stable
firms.  The  objective  is  to  secure  not  only  additional  funding  but  also  to  leverage  on  private
sector’s  know-how,  human  resources,  innovative  approach  and  ability  to  efficiently  manage
complex projects for the public benefit.
Last  but  not  least,  public-private  partnerships  have  the  potential  to  play  a  fundamental  role  in
achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
According to the United Nations, a sustainable future hinges on the achievement of 17 goals by
2030,  including  global  prosperity  with  no  poverty  and  zero  hunger,  quality  education,  equality,
decent work, access to clean water, affordable energy, justice, strong institutions and climate
action. Achieving these goals will, however, require substantially more investment, both public
and private, and a reorientation of that investment. In particular, it is estimated that the financing
required to achieve the sustainable development goals by 2030 amounts to about $5-7 trillion per
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
year globally. Global infrastructure (water, road and rail transportation, airports and ports, energy)
2
could require up to $94 trillion of investment by 2040, which corresponds to 3.5% of global GDP.
Given  the  limited  government  resources,  a  considerable  amount  of  private  finance  will  be
required  to  fill  the  gap.  More  importantly,  to  meet  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals,
partnerships at every level will be required. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development calls
for a new partnership or a “revitalized global partnership for sustainable development” and, as
Goal 17 states, “effective public, public-private and civil society partnerships” will be required to
strengthen the means of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals.
I  would  like  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  stress  how  strongly  Greece  is  committed  to  the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Goals, while ensuring
that  “no  one  is  left  behind”  is  a  high  policy  priority.  In  2017,  Greece  endorsed  eight  National
Priorities  for  adapting  the  17  Sustainable  Development  Goals  to  national  needs  and
circumstances. The 8th priority was “enhancing open, participatory, democratic processes and
promoting partnerships”.
Given that on the path to sustainable development lies the environmental challenge, the Bank of
Greece has committed to invest significantly in Goal 13, i.e. climate action, a horizontal goal that
contributes to the achievement of all others. As addressing the challenge of climate change calls
for  coordinated  efforts,  the  Bank  of  Greece,  through  its  Climate  Change  Impacts  Study
Committee (CCISC), is currently involved in an eight-year programme with the Greek Ministry of
Environment  and  Energy  and  other  partners  for  the  implementation  of  the  national  adaptation
strategy  for  Greece.  The  Bank  of  Greece  is  also  building  a  stakeholders’  network  to  bring
together  academia,  the  public  and  the  financial  sectors  in  stepping  up  the  collective  effort  to
address issues of climate change and adaptation.
Let us now examine what makes a public-private partnership successful.
Public-private partnerships need to be commercially viable schemes in order to attract private
sector investment, and there is already good guidance on how public-private partnerships can
deliver the value-for-money approach when selecting projects.
Public-private partnerships are just one way to deliver public infrastructure and services. This
means that they should not be seen as a “deus ex machina”, only stepping in to make up for
limitations in public funds to cover investment needs, but also as a way to increase the quality
and  efficiency  of  public  services.  When  well  designed  and  implemented,  public-private
partnerships  increase  access  to  capital,  foster  innovation  and  produce  more  efficient  public
services. They also bring into the projects a business culture oriented towards efficiency, quality
and economic viability.
Public-private partnerships are gaining a solid foothold, but face quite a few impediments and
challenges. According to the United Nations, public-private partnerships serve as an instrument
for  financing  key  economic  infrastructure  projects  and  deliver  value  for  money,  but  only  if
countries have in place the institutional capacity to create, manage, evaluate and monitor them.
These four interrelated capacities ensure that public-private partnerships are undertaken for the
“right”  reason.   The  design  of  a  proper  legal  framework  and  of  contractual  arrangements  is
crucial to make public private partnerships live up to their potential.
3
This brings me to the next question: what actions can governments take?
Ultimately,  building  successful  partnerships  is  equivalent  to  building  trust  between  public  and
private entities. It is often said that successful partnerships require both parties to have “shared
goals”. However, since this is very hard to achieve when it comes to public-private partnerships,
the focus should rather be on “complementary goals”. Misalignment, which includes conflicting
goals  and  incentives,  is  identified  as  one  of  the  three  major  reasons  for  failure  of  strategic
4
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
partnerships.   This  is  where  governments  have  an  important  role  to  play.  Governments  must
create the enabling environment in which partnerships can emerge, and moreover, they must
develop sufficient regulatory and assessment capacity to ensure that projects actually provide a
public good. The more transparent the objectives, targets, and impacts of the projects are, the
more effective the partnership will be. In this context, policy actions should focus more than ever
on good governance, sound institutions, respect for property rights and legal predictability. It is
the responsibility of the public sector to establish a reliable and credible institutional framework.
All around us, we see the power of technology to challenge, disrupt and improve the status quo.
Today, the use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is expanding public-private
partnerships  beyond  all  previous  limitations  and  boundaries.  The  relationship  between  public-
private  partnerships  and  ICT  can  be  described  as  symbiotic.  The  deployment  of  ICT  has  the
power  to  improve  the  services  that  matter  most  to  people’s  lives:  education,  transportation,
public safety, healthcare and social services. In order to transform the way these public services
are delivered, governments can collaborate with private corporations to develop such initiatives
as e-government, remote healthcare, and intelligent transport.
A transformative innovation policy is essential to sustainable growth. Fostering linkages in the
national innovation system has in recent years become a major policy focus, and public-private
partnerships can become a major policy instrument. Providing education services and improving
learning  outcomes  is  just  one  area  where  the  public  and  private  sectors  can  join  forces  to
complement  each  other’s  strengths.  For  one,  making  high-quality  education  accessible  to  all,
calls for innovative programmes and initiatives, in addition to public resources and leadership. In
higher  education  in  particular,  partnerships  with  the  private  sector  can,  when  undertaken
properly, benefit all parties. For instance, the curriculum, which is at the core of higher education,
when  developed  by  education  experts  and  with  input  and  feedback  from  the  social  partners,
stands a better chance of leading to better career prospects.
As a final remark, I would like to stress that SMEs are the backbone of the European economy
and  that  the  2030  agenda  places  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  at  the
heart of the partnership debate. Not only do they employ the vast majority of people in most EU
countries,  but  also  their  role  as  incubators  of  innovation  and  inclusive  growth  is  increasingly
recognised. These SMEs need support to build their competitiveness.
 In closing, isolationism is not a viable option. The interdependence of economies, value chains,
production processes and the increased use of technology have made obsolete the notion of 
going it alone. Collaboration with the private sector will be critical to bringing additional capacity
and transformation on the ground. It can also play an important role as a source of innovative
technologies, management and organisational skills and enhanced capabilities.
Private  sector,  the  academia  and  institutions  are  all  needed  to  build  a  compact  of  active
partnerships. Smart partnerships can bring multiple wins for all involved in the medium and long
term, where efforts of today can create opportunities for tomorrow.
1
2
3
4
Eurostat (2019), “Manual on Government Deficit and Debt — Implementation of ESA 2010”.
Global Infrastructure Outlook, Oxford Economics.
United Nations (2016), “Public-Private Partnerships and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: Fit for
Purpose, DESA Working Paper No 148.
Henderson,  J.,  Dhanaraj,  C.,  Perrinjaquet,  M.  and  Avagyan,  K.  (2019). Strategic  Partnerships.  [online]  IMD
business school. Available at: www.imd.org/research-knowledge/articles/strategic-partnerships.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
