    11th International Insurance Conference   
Paris, 25 October 2019 
“Insuring in the long term in a short-term world” 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
Chairman of the ACPR 
        Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
 
Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Page 1 of 6 
I am delighted to participate in this 11th International Insurance Conference. 
This  will  be  my  fourth  time  at  this  unmissable  annual  event,  but  the  first  for 
you, Florence. Bernard Delas and I would like to offer you our warmest wishes 
for  success  at  the  head  of  the  Fédération  française  de  l’assurance  (FFA  – 
French insurance federation). For our part, changes are also underway and I 
would like to take the opportunity this evening to welcome the appointment of 
Dominique Laboureix  as  Secretary  General  of  the  ACPR,  with  First  Deputy 
Secretary General, Patrick Montagner, whom you know well, at his side.  
The subject of your 11th Conference – “Insuring in the long term in a short-
term world” – perfectly sums up the real challenge to the insurance profession. 
I would like to begin by thanking France’s 712 authorised insurers that never 
waver  in  playing  their  key  role  in  the  financing  of  our  economy,  with 
EUR 2,600 billion  of  investments.  In  2018,  France  became  the  leading 
European  insurance  market,  outpacing  the  United  Kingdom  and  Germany  in 
terms of total balance sheet value and non-life premiums earned. The French 
insurance market has also enjoyed strong growth, with revenue up by almost 
3% [2.7% and 3.1% in non-life and life insurance, respectively]. In response to 
the legitimate concerns that many of you have raised, I have chosen to focus 
on two main issues: the challenge of low interest rates (I) and our ambition for 
the Solvency II review (II). 
I. 
The challenge of low interest rates 
  A. The economic situation compels us to keep interest rates low 
I recently marked out the limits that I believe should be set for monetary policy. 
I thus feel all the more obliged to clarify why the low interest rates are needed, 
why they are going to continue, and how we have to adapt to them together. 
I hear your concerns with regard to low interest rates, and I fully understand 
them. However, it is important not to lose sight of the long-term perspective: 
low interest rates are not only driven by monetary policy – they are primarily 
the  consequence  of  long-term  structural  trends,  notably  resulting  from  the 
Page 2 of 6 
 
change in the balance between a high level of savings and a fall in investment 
linked  to  an  ageing  population  and  the  slowdown  in  productivity.  The  low 
interest rates thus reflect the historic low level of what economists refer to as 
the real natural rate of interest, R*, which has declined by around 2 percentage 
points over the last 15 years in both the euro area and the United States. 
Furthermore,  for  the  last  several  months,  we  have  been  experiencing  an 
economic  cooldown  whose  causes  largely  lie  outside  the  euro  area. 
According to the IMF, heightened trade tensions are expected to shave up to 
0.8%  off  global  GDP  in  2020,  primarily  due  to  mounting  political  uncertainty 
and a resulting decline in business confidence. At 3% in 2019, global growth is 
expected to be at its lowest level since 2008/09. The euro area as a whole has 
been badly affected, principally due to the weight of Germany, whose growth 
at best is expected to amount to 0.5% this year. Our country is holding out far 
better with expected growth of 1.3% this year and the next.  
I  would  just  like  to  add  a  few  words  about  Brexit:  even  with  a  withdrawal 
agreement, all aspects of a possible trade agreement and its financial services 
component will still have to be negotiated in 2020. The uncertainty surrounding 
Brexit  will  therefore  continue.  Our  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of 
contingency plans, however, gives us confidence for the future of the French 
insurance industry: for our part, we are ready, for every scenario. 
Given  the  context  of  prolonged  uncertainty, we are  compelled  to pursue  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  It  would  go  against  all  logic  to  raise 
interest rates now. When there are reasons for supporting demand, which is 
apparent  in  the  excessively  low  inflation  we  see  today,  active  monetary 
policies  have  to  be  maintained.  This  is  the  main  reasoning  behind  the 
strengthening of our forward guidance, which we reasserted yesterday at the 
Governing Council. We now foresee that the ECB’s floor rate will remain at its 
current  level  of  -0.5%  or  lower,  until  there  is  a  lasting  convergence  in  the 
inflation outlook towards a rate that is sufficiently close to, but below, 2%. The 
low interest rates, and even the negative interest rates, are nothing new: what 
Page 3 of 6 
 
is  new  is  that  the  low  interest  rates  are  going  to  continue,  and  have  to 
continue, given the global economic cooldown.  
The current low interest rate environment also has positive effects that must 
not be underestimated. If the ECB had not acted to bring down interest rates 
and purchase assets, there would have been between 1 and 1.5 percentage 
point of inflation less in the euro area during the 2015-18 period, but above all 
there would have been less growth (of approximately 2.5 percentage points) 
and fewer jobs in France and Europe. The insurance profession, like banks, 
benefits from this improved economic environment. Since 2013, the euro area 
has created 11 million jobs. Mario Draghi, whose term comes to a close next 
Thursday, has been far more than a great ECB president. He has been a great 
servant of Europe. 
  B. This low rate environment calls for vigilance and adaptation 
Nonetheless, and this is an undeniable fact as it is mechanical, low rates are 
putting pressure on European insurers’ SCR coverage ratios. Their solvency 
ratio remained stable in 2018 at an average of around 240%, but it is true that 
it declined sharply in the first half of 2019 to 225% [Q2 2019]. This level is still 
high though, and testament to the resilience of all Europe’s insurers: it gives 
them the time and capacity they need to make the essential adaptations. The 
impact  of  low  rates  on  insurers’  solvency,  especially  for  those  companies 
covering long-term risks, has already been one of the supervisor’s priorities for 
a number of years. This year the ACPR has again strengthened its supervision 
of  the  management  of  low  interest  rate  risk  by  ensuring  “ongoing  close 
monitoring” of those firms that are most exposed. In this context, I would like to 
urge insurers to intensify their efforts in two areas: reducing the rates paid to 
policyholders, and diversifying their products and business model. 
The reduction in revaluation rates – of around 0.17% or 17 basis points on 
average per year since 2011 – has to be continued and stepped up after being 
put  on  hold  last  year.  For  insurers  to  meet  their  long-term  commitments 
securely, they have to – and this is imperative – pass on the lower returns on 
their  investments  to  the  remuneration  rates  on  life  insurance  policies.  The 
Page 4 of 6 
 
rates  currently  being  paid  to  existing  policyholders  are  still  high:  1.8%  on 
average.  
In parallel, the only way insurers can meet their long-term return requirements 
is to diversify their products. Unit-linked policies accounted for more than a 
quarter of gross inflows in September 2019, but only 7% of net inflows. This 
discussion  is  relevant  for  new  subscriptions;  for  top-up  payments  into 
existing policies, the terms of the contract must of course continue to apply. 
With regard to new policies and new ad hoc inflows, these should not lead to 
the  returns  paid  to  existing  policyholders  being  overly  diluted.  The  duty  of 
advice  applies  here:  it  has  to  be  tailored  to  the  individual  client  and  to  their 
particular situation, but it is rarely good advice to invest 100% in euro funds or 
100%  in  unit-linked  policies.  So  I  am  asking  you  to  use  your  innovative 
capacity and promote offerings that, alongside eurocroissance and retirement 
savings, could make up a category of investments where the risk is contained, 
somewhere between euro products and unit-linked policies. At the ACPR, we 
are fully prepared to facilitate these initiatives, by supporting any demands for 
regulatory  adjustments  that  might  prove  necessary,  and  without  ruling  out  a 
recalibration of the tax rules applicable to different products. 
But more broadly, over the medium-term, it is life insurers’ business model that 
needs to be redesigned. We need to think about this together, and get ready to 
use all the levers that can help in this transformation.  
 
II. 
Our ambition for the Solvency II review 
I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  your  second  major  concern:  Solvency  II.  We  are 
entering  a  consultation  period  that  is  absolutely  critical  and  that  will  lead  in 
June next year to the issuance of an opinion by EIOPA. This opinion, which 
will  be  reviewed  by  the  Commission,  will  form  the  basis  for  the  negotiations 
with the Council and Parliament that are scheduled to start in early 2021.  
Here  again,  we  need  to  put  the  challenges  posed  by  Solvency  II  into 
perspective.  Let  me  remind  you  that  this  is  the  most  ambitious  reform  ever 
undertaken  in  insurance.  The  new  regulatory  framework,  based  on  an 
Page 5 of 6 
 
approach that takes into account all risks to which insurers are exposed, has 
undeniably  strengthened  the  resilience  of  the  European  insurance  market. 
However, and you yourselves see this every day, the prudential requirements 
imposed by Solvency II have a number of drawbacks, including being volatile 
and  complex.  To  remedy  this,  let’s  take  advantage  of  the  window  of 
opportunity  offered  by  the  directive’s  review,  and  push  for  four  priorities  that 
are essential for financial stability and for the sound financing of the economy: 
All  things  being  equal,  the  revision must  not  lead  to  an  increase  in 
(i) 
capital requirements for the European insurance industry.  
It would be counterproductive to artificially lower the capital requirement 
by  stopping  equity  investments.  But  despite  the  advances  obtained  in 
2018, this asset class is still being penalised. We are therefore calling 
for a reduction in the shock applied to all equity categories, to make the 
standard easier to read and reduce insurers’ capital charge. “Insuring in 
the  long  term”,  to  come  back  to  today’s  topic,  means  providing  our 
MTEs and SMEs with greater access to equity financing. Our economy, 
like that of our euro area neighbours, is seriously lagging behind in this 
field: in France, equity financing only amounted to 79% of GDP in 2019, 
compared with 122% in the United States.   
(ii) 
(iii)  The weight of the risk margin, which on average accounts for 30% of 
capital  requirements  at  the  European  level,  needs  to  be  reduced.  The 
current  method  of  calculation  is  too  prudent  and  penalises  long-term 
insurance products such as savings, retirement and prudential products. 
(iv)  Last, we need to move towards greater simplification: “What is simple 
is always wrong. What is not is unusable”.i This irrefutable observation 
from  Paul  Valéry  should  be  an  incentive  for  us  to  push  for  concrete 
the  standards  and  converge  supervisory 
measures 
practices.  I'm  thinking  about  a  reduction  in  the  reporting  burden  and 
requirements  for  activities  that  are  low  risk.  And  on  a  more  structural 
level,  I'm  thinking  about  the  overcomplexity  of  the  method  for 
to  simplify 
 calculating mathematical reserves, which undermines the comparability 
of prudential balance sheets. 
Page 6 of 6 
With the upheaval currently underway in standards, it would be a mistake to 
roll out IFRS 17 too prematurely. Let’s take it slowly, and grant our insurers a 
little respite so they can assimilate the regulations and prepare, to the best of 
their abilities, for the future requirements. This extra time would also be useful 
for the IASB, to allow it to take full account of the concerns of Europe in the 
current low rate environment. 
 My conclusion aims to be a conviction, one that I hope you will share: we are 
waging  these  battles  collectively  for  the  benefit  of  the  insurance  industry, 
which  is  a  key  player  in  the  economy.  We  are  also  waging  them  to  protect 
policyholders, who are one of the ACPR’s core responsibilities. And we are 
waging  them  to  prepare  for  the  future  and  to  be  able  to  make  the  massive 
investments that will be necessary. Beyond the issue of low rates, therefore, 
insurance  has  an  essential  role  to  play  in  this  world  which,  more  than  just 
being “short-term”, is also undergoing major upheavals. A climate upheaval, 
first  and  foremost,  and  I  welcome  EIOPA’s  “sustainable  finance”  group,  co-
chaired by the ACPR, which will also modify Solvency II to take better account 
of climate-related risks in the governance and management of insurers’ risks. 
Second,  a  digital  upheaval,  which  is  completely  transforming  your  activities 
and raising crucial questions about the protection of policyholders’ data, and 
about the rising threat of cyber risk and how to insure against it. Yes, this world 
really needs insurance. Thank you for your commitment and your attention.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
i Paul Valéry, Mauvaises pensées et autres, 1942. 
