Philip R Lane: Interview in La Repubblica
Interview with Mr Philip R Lane, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
La Repubblica, conducted by Ms Tonia Mastrobuoni on 14 November 2019 and published on 20
November 2019.
 Christine  Lagarde  takes  office  as  President  of  the  ECB  at  a  difficult  moment.  The
Governing Council is split about the decisions taken in September.
I  wouldn’t  agree  with  your  description!  Of  course,  the  September  decision  did  have  pros  and
cons, and it was not unanimous. But now we are two months on. That decision is made and we
are  moving  forwards.  Moreover,  at  Governing  Council  level  this  year  there  are  many  new
members. It’s natural, with a new composition, to have discussions about how we operate as a
group.
How’s the economic situation in the eurozone? Despite fears it could slip into recession,
Germany’s growth has slightly ticked up.
In  Germany, even though manufacturing is taking a hit, the wider economy, the consumption-
driven  part  of  it,  is  still  in  good  shape.  For  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  remember  that
manufacturing only represents about 17% of GDP. It’s more important in Germany and in Italy
than  it  is  in  the  wider  European  economy,  but  in  the  end  it’s  only  a  limited  fraction  of  overall
activity. We can have a lot of bad news about manufacturing, but it may still be dominated by
good news coming from services and consumption.
So do you think that the ECB’s very accommodative September package is still justified?
There’s no doubt that, compared with 2017, there’s been a sustained slowdown, but in the euro
area  we  don’t  see  a  recession.  The  bigger  issue  is  that  the  European  economy  has  been
growing more slowly than we hoped. It’s a disappointing performance, but not a negative one.
We expect that there will be forces that help the recovery over the next year or two, including our
monetary policy, which is going to contribute because it is leading to lower lending rates to firms
and households.  Our baseline scenario is a recovery in economic performance, but we have
been consistent in highlighting that there’s also downside risk.
The  OECD  said  recently  that  Donald  Trump’s  erratic  trade  wars  might  be  the  main
reason for the global downturn, because they discourage investments.
It’s a significant factor that  has  been  here  for  nearly  two  years.  But  the  question  now  is:  is  it
getting  worse?  In  recent  weeks,  compared  with  the  worst-case  scenario,  there’s  been  some
optimism on the US-China trade relationship. That said, there remains a long-term discussion to
be  had  about  whether  the  world  will  restore  its  commitment  to  a  global  trading  system,  or
whether, over time, we will see a bigger set of barriers that limit global trade.
How could a hard Brexit affect the eurozone’s fragile economy?
A deal has been agreed between the UK Government and the European Union, which of course
will be tested in the next election. The worst-case scenario of a no-deal Brexit in the short term
has been eliminated and the uncertainty over it is fading. But even under the deal there is going to
be a more challenging economic relationship between the United Kingdom and the EU27. That is
regrettable and it’s damaging, although – as the United Kingdom is a mid-sized economy – more
of the damage will be in the United Kingdom than in the EU27.
There is a big discussion about the risk of a secular stagnation in Europe. You rule out a
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
recession in the short term, but do you see this risk of a “Japanese scenario” in the long
term?
The bigger issue with secular stagnation is not that Europe would have soon a recession; it’s that
Europe and the wider world might grow at a very slow pace. It remains a relevant discussion
because the big question is: are we going to grow at a low rate of maybe 1% a year? Or are we
going to see a better performance than that? A lot depends on that in terms of living standards.
One way to look at the issue – and I think this is very important – is that governments have a lot
of opportunities in this environment because the decisions they make in terms of their policies
towards business, their policies towards education, their policies towards employment, all of this
matters  very  much.  Essentially,  if  the  policy  choices  by  governments  are  more  favourable  to
economic performance, then some of this stagnation fear may fade.
Do you mean countries that have a fiscal margin to use investments to boost growth, like
Germany, should act?
That’s one element, but the other element which is for everyone, all countries – for Germany, for
Italy, for every country – is that there are many non-financial policies that matter. It’s too narrow
just to say let’s look at the budget deficit. We know that sometimes some of these policies take
years to pay off. A country’s attitude to education, to the business environment, a country’s legal
system,  its  labour  market,  the  way  it  addresses  an  ageing  population;  these  are  all  difficult
issues, there are no easy answers. But that’s really where a lot more attention should be paid.
There  are  two  very  recent  cases  that  seem  perfect  examples  of  what  you  were  just
saying about the best framework to do business. One is the surprising announcement by
Elon  Musk  that  he  will  build  Tesla’s  European  Gigafactory  in  Germany.  The  Italian
example of Arcelor-Mittal abandoning Ilva seems the very opposite case. You have legal
uncertainty, a law that has changed from one government to the other. What do these
examples say about “doing business” in Germany and Italy?
It’s not for a central banker to declare which particular policies should be adopted, but I think it’s
important that all countries can learn from each other.  This is one of the potential gains from
being  a  member  of  the  European  Union.  We  have  seen  many  examples  where,  in  a  given
country, there might have been an intense debate about a particular policy. But then a number of
years later we see that a country which adopted a particular policy is succeeding. Take Spain, for
example, which has been growing very, very well. I think there’s a strong consensus that some of
the policies they adopted in terms of reforming, for example, the labour market, have helped that.
It’s important to remain optimistic that policies can make a difference. It is not the case that we
are in a fatalistic situation where nothing can be done. Political leaders can make decisions that
can improve the performance of their economies.
And many reforms don’t cost anything.
Yes, there might be good policies that do not cost anything. It’s not only about fiscal policy. And
when there is an upfront cost, the European fiscal framework recognises that. It’s part of the way
the fiscal policy is assessed. If you have a reform that may involve some upfront costs, that can
be taken into account in calculating the fiscal space.
Going back to the secular stagnation, this scenario would also be very difficult for the
ECB because it would condemn it to long-term accommodative policies. And recently
Olivier  Blanchard  said  that  “monetary  policy  is  almost  out  of  ammunition,  but  if  the
central banks say it too explicitly, the markets may freak out.” Is that true?
We all have to recognise that the situation we face now is very different from the normal central
banking experience 15 or 25 years ago.  This has led to the famous question: is this the new
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
normal? I think this discussion will continue for as long as a very substantial amount of monetary
accommodation is needed, as you say. There will be a lot of discussion about where exactly the
limit is.  But our assessment here at the  ECB is that we’re not at the limit and that if more is
needed, we can do more. We’ve learned a lot in the last five years. Since 2014 the ECB has
been exploring ways to provide monetary stimulus even though the policy rate turned negative in
2014. And our assessment is that our measures have been very successful. But I would also
agree with your basic question: if the overall economic performance was stronger, then indeed
the situation would be less difficult. We’ve talked about the role of reforms that can boost the
growth  rate.  But  we  also  say,  as  you  know,  that  those  countries  which  have  fiscal  space,
especially if they are facing a slowdown, can do more to raise demand through fiscal policies as
well.
The inflation target of the  ECB hasn’t been reached for a long time. And it won’t be
reached for years. So there is ongoing discussion about whether it would be better to
change the target. Do you agree?
No  matter  what  the  exact  definition  of  the  target  is,  the  current  inflation  rate  of  around  1%  is
unsatisfactory. The discussion about how exactly to define the target is more relevant the closer
you  get  to  it.  When  we’re  sufficiently  far  away,  we  need  to  make  sure  we  are  providing  the
necessary monetary stimulus to help inflation increase over time. That is actually our forecast.
We  do  not  expect  the  current  inflation  rate  to  remain  where  it  is.  We  do  expect  that  all  the
stimulus we are providing will help inflation to move up over time. We now see it in wage inflation,
which at the euro area level is now in line with our projections. What remains is converting the
wage inflation into price inflation. Our projections say that this will happen in the next couple of
years.
Coming back to a country like Italy: it has been growing very slowly for a very long time
now, 20 years. How do you think it can grow faster?
When the discussion is about how to improve long-term economic performance over a longer
time period, over ten or twenty years, the primary focus should not be on monetary policy but on
other policies. Monetary policy is very important, but tends to have a temporary effect. The exact
formula for Italy can really only be worked out by a discussion at the expert and political level in
Italy. But the fact that the ECB has provided so much monetary accommodation provides a good
environment for reforms. The conditions are now very favourable to implement policies to foster
growth, in any country.
Many Germans say this accommodative stance has been a moral hazard for countries
like Italy that haven’t made the necessary reforms. Some are even accusing the former
Italian President of the ECB, Mario Draghi, of helping Italy with low interest rates and the
government bond buying programme, exploiting German savers.
Let me first of all stress an important point. All of our discussions in the Governing Council are
about the aggregate euro area, not about individual countries. Essentially, when we look at the
inflation rate, when we look at unemployment, when we look at investment, all we look at is the
overall picture. The Governing Council makes the decision collectively, so the nationality of the
President is not a factor in how the policy is made. At the European level, concerns about moral
hazard  are  addressed  via  the  EU  fiscal  framework.  It’s  the  responsibility  of  the  European
Commission and the European Council to monitor and discipline Members States, not that of the
ECB. And that’s appropriate, because fiscal policy is a political competence. It is not for the ECB
to  be  involved  in  that.  What  we  do  say  is  that  all  countries  are  benefiting  from  favourable
financing conditions. We do think that the low interest rate environment provides an opportunity
for those countries which need to reduce their debt ratios – and that’s many countries. These
countries should use the interest rate windfall to reduce their debt ratios rather than be tempted
to spend all of the windfall on new expenditures or tax cuts.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  how  do  you  respond  to  the  accusations  that  your  monetary  policy  is  exploiting
German savers?
There are many savers in Germany, but there are also many savers elsewhere. Italy has a high
savings rate, so there are many households in Italy that are in the same situation of receiving a
lower interest rate on their savings. That’s true in every country. Some households, typically older
and richer households, are savers. Other households, because they’re at a different point in their
life, or their individual circumstances are different, are debtors. Roughly speaking, about 30% of
European households are in debt, so their attitude to low interest rates would be quite different
from someone who’s fortunate enough to have a significant amount of savings.
Do  you  think  that  this  accommodative  monetary  policy  fuelled  right-wing  populism  in
northern  European  countries?  As  you  know,  the  former  German  Finance  Minister,
Wolfgang Schäuble, accused the ECB of having strengthened the AFD.
I  think  this  discussion  has  to  evolve  over  time.  The  ECB  or  any  other  central  bank  has  to
recognise  what  the  market  forces  are  delivering.  The  big,  difficult  discussion  is:  how  do
governments respond to that in terms of their reform policies, in terms of their fiscal policies?
Essentially, if the world economy is growing slowly, if there is not sufficient support from fiscal
policy, if the reform policies are not sufficiently ambitious, then the policy choices for the ECB or
any other central bank are going to be quite limited.
On the other hand, right-wing populists in southern European countries, the Italian Lega
for  example,  often  blame  the  euro  for  the  weak  growth  of  the  last  decades.  How
dangerous are those discussions for the future of the common currency?
It’s  an  important  debate  and  it’s  an  evolving  one.  Recent  Eurobarometer  surveys  show  a
significant improvement in the attitude of individuals towards the euro. Some of the worst of this
is fading. One has to remember that the euro remains a very young currency; it’s only 20 years
old  this  year.  We  should  all  recognise  how  important  it  has  been  to  reform  the  institutional
architecture of the euro area, particularly in the last years. It’s a massive regret that some of the
reforms that are now in place had not been implemented in advance of the crisis.  The crisis
could have been managed better if we had already put the European Stability Mechanism (ESM),
the banking union and so on in place earlier. Thanks to these reforms, we now have a lot more
stability, which has helped the euro area to perform better. But other important factors have had
a role in influencing the debate around the euro.
Which ones?
In  the  last  25  years  a  number  of  developments  overlapped  with  the  introduction  of  the  euro.
We’ve  had  major  changes  in  the  world  economy,  which  have  been  especially  challenging  for
some European countries because of the rise of competition from the emerging economies. We
have also had the IT revolution, and the ageing of the European population, which has a long-
term effect on how the European economy operates. I think it’s an interpretation error, a fallacy,
to say all of the problems we have had are due to the euro. I’m pretty sure the euro has had a
much less important contribution than these wider forces. Then we could also consider that one
of the major reasons why Europe performed quite well in the 1990s was the success of moving
forwards with the Single Market. Building a single market across the European Union provided
new  opportunities.  That’s  now  been  pretty  stagnant  for  a  long  time. A  renewed  emphasis  on
building  the  Single  Market  would  provide  new  opportunities  for  firms  across  Europe,  including
Italian firms. Coming back to what many people ask: where can the euro be helpful? I think the
single currency can help sustain renewed efforts in completing the Single Market in goods and
services.
There is very strong rhetoric in Germany about always being a creditor towards other
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries. Isn’t it also true that no other country gains so much out of a currency that is
far too weak compared with its economy and boosts its exports?
I don’t think it’s useful to put a label on any country, saying “this country wins, that country loses.”
We absolutely have to recognise that all of the ESM debt has been paid back. At the same time,
the  risk  of  bearing  losses  was  there.  In  other  words,  the  ESM  was  a  very  important  act  of
solidarity, a sign that the member countries stand with each other if needed.
It’s reasonable and important to recognise that solidarity is there and it involves the willingness to
bear that risk. The fact that the stronger countries stood behind the more vulnerable countries
was  an  important  and  risky  move.  It  has  been  successful.  If  we  look  at  international  trade,
definitely, the last 25 years have been a period when, by and large, the exporting countries have
gained.  Germany,  but  also  Italy,  have  benefited  from  the  euro  being  a  major  stable  global
currency. But let me emphasise right now: in the last year the exporting countries are of course
those that are suffering the most from the global slowdown. It doesn’t always go in one direction.
The third pillar of the banking union, the common deposit scheme, is still missing, but
the German Finance Minister, Olaf Scholz, has now proposed completing it, but still with
some  caveats  that  led  the  Italian  Finance  Minister  to  reject  the  proposal.  Roberto
Gualtieri warned that the German proposal would harm the competitiveness of European
banks. What do you think about this?
I  think  that  there’s  room  for  negotiation.  There  are  valid  concerns  in  the  German  paper,  but
equally it’s not framed with red lines.
Are you sure?
Well, I don’t read it as a set of red lines; I read it as a set of important issues where there is room
for negotiation. My view is that there is a middle course, there is a way to reconcile these different
concerns.  Risks have come down.  The non-performing loan ratios have come down.  There’s
more  and  more  evidence  of  stability  in  Europe,  and  the  conditions  now  are  much  more
favourable to a negotiation than several years ago, when the amount of concern about risk was
much greater.
One of the critical points for some countries seems to be the German request to limit the
exposure of the banks to government debt.
Right, but I think that banks in the euro area can diversify their sovereign bond holdings without
taking on currency risk. They already do, to an extent. The question is: what is a reasonable level
of diversification? All countries should be confident that, by and large, while their own banks may
hold less of their domestic debt, this should be offset by new sources of demand for the home
sovereign debt from the other countries. If the banks across the euro area are essentially holding
the  debts  of  all  countries  in  a  risk-adjusted  way,  then  in  net  terms  there  may  be  very  little
difference for the debt issuers. Their debts are just differently shared.
In Germany and outside there is a huge discussion about the “schwarze Null”. There are
some economists and politicians that even think that the government should change the
constitution, and the famous debt brake of 0.35%, to give it more margin to act when the
economy goes bad. Do you agree?
The issue is more general, because Germany is not the only low-debt country. In general terms,
it’s an interesting economic question. I think these debt brakes can play a useful role when you’re
trying to move from being in a high debt situation to a safe level of debt. Once you’ve achieved
that, the question is: what is a reasonable framework? Once you’re in the safe zone I think that
fiscal policy can be conducted differently.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Germany is there now, its debt is around 60%.
All countries know that there can be many pressures on public spending in the years  ahead,
basically because of the ageing of the population, the rising costs of healthcare and, of course,
there’s going to be significant pressure on the public finances from what is necessary to tackle
climate change. However, in a world where interest rates are so low, I think it’s perfectly possible
to reconcile the fact that you need to make sure that your long-term fiscal goals are achieved
with the fact that the business cycle is also affected by fiscal policy. And probably this can’t be
summarised  in  a  single  rule.  Historically,  this  was  not  especially  relevant  because  the  fiscal
multipliers have traditionally been low. Essentially, central banks would offset fiscal stimulus if it
was proven to be inflationary. But in a world of low inflation and low interest rates, we think fiscal
multipliers  under  the  current  conditions  are  quite  high  if  you  have  the  fiscal  space.  I  think  we
should be confident that there isn’t really a kind of excessive trade-off between being stimulating
in the short term, while still making sure that we’re sufficiently prudent that long-term goals can
be achieved. I think that a gear shift is required. For a long time the overwhelming focus was on
how  to  make  sure  the  high  debt  levels  came  down.  But  at  some  point  that  gear  shift  has  to
happen for those countries which have been successful.
In Italy there is a heavy brain drain, many young people go abroad. This poses a problem
for the future of the country as well. And many highly qualified young people choose
France or Sweden or Germany because they earn much more. Should Italian companies
raise salaries?
One of the great achievements of the European Union has been free movement of people – the
freedom to move across borders. At an individual level, of course that’s a fantastic gain from
being  a  member  of  the  European  Union.  But  it  can  also  be  a  difficult  choice  to  make  for  the
individuals  concerned,  as  people  by  and  large  would  like  to  live  in  their  home  country.
Governments  should  recognise  that  if  opportunities  are  greater  abroad,  many  will  take  that
decision.  However, if wages are not backed by productivity, they should not go up.  The way  I
would phrase it is: countries need to make sure that their economy is sufficiently productive to
sustain the high wages that would make sure they not only attract their local workers, but they
are also a hub for workers from across the rest of the EU.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
