 11.12.2019 
 Opening remarks 
Conference Climate Change. Challenges for the Financial System/Banco de 
España 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
    Good morning, 
Welcome to the Banco de España for this Conference, where we intend to take a look at 
the  main  challenges  that  climate  change  poses  for  the  financial  sector.  The  Conference 
takes  place  amid  two  intense  weeks  of  the  COP25,  which  is  full  of  other  interesting 
conferences and events. But I assure you that you won´t regret your decision to be with us 
today.  
The World Meteorological Organization certified last week that 2019 will close a decade of 
exceptional  global  warming,  retreating  ice  and  record  sea  levels,  driven  by  greenhouse 
gases from human activities. 2019 is on course to become the second or third warmest year 
on record.  
The  global  average  temperature  in  2019  was  about  1.1  degrees  Celsius  above  the  pre-
industrial period.1 The IPCC estimated that we could reach a temperature increase of 1.5oC 
between 2030 and 2052;2 but, given the latest evidence, this may actually occur sooner. 
There  is  now  broad  consensus  that  global  warming  above  2°C,  relative  to  pre-industrial 
levels, would have significant economic and social consequences. The effects of climate 
change are widespread. It impacts directly on the environment, ecosystems and marine life, 
but  it  has  also  important  implications  in  terms  of  human  health,  water  resources,  food 
production and migration.  
There is no time for procrastination. We need to accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions through the implementation of decisive and forceful climate policies, and we need 
to begin now. We are already in “extra time” as far as this particular match is concerned, 
and the score is currently not favourable to us.  
This sense of urgency is widely shared. The COP25’s slogan “Time for Action is now” clearly 
reflects  this.  In  addition,  less  than  two  weeks  ago,  the  European  Parliament  declared  a 
climate  and  environmental  emergency,  calling  for  reductions  in  global  emissions  to  be 
stepped up and demanding more financial support to fight climate change.3 
Today we are honoured to have with us Lord Nicholas Stern, who has been a prominent 
advocate of this urgency for quite some time.  
It is well known that one of the main research developments in this field was the 2006 report, 
commissioned by the British government and led by Lord Stern.4 The report concluded that 
the benefits of strong and early action far outweighed the economic costs of not acting.5 
Two  of  the  main  findings  of  the  report  were  that  the  costs  of  stabilising  climate  were 
significant but manageable, while delayed action was dangerous and much more costly. 
Importantly,  the  report  concluded  that  there  was  still  time  to  avoid  the worst  impacts  of 
climate change, if we took strong action.  
                                                                                              
1 Source: World Meteorological Organization, 3 December 2019, January to October. 
https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/2019-concludes-decade-of-exceptional-global-heat-and-high-impact-
weather 
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2018). 
3 European Parliament, press release 29-11-2019. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20191121IPR67110/the-european-parliament-declares-climate-emergency 
4 http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publication/the-economics-of-climate-change-the-stern-review/ 
5 https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100407163608/http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/d/Summary_of_Conclusions.pdf 
2/5 
Of course, it is worth repeating that these conclusions were flagged already in 2006, more 
than thirteen years ago. Unfortunately, it would seem that it hasn´t been till recently that this 
call for action has been taken seriously. In his keynote presentation  Lord Stern  will shed 
some light on whether we are still in time to avoid the worst impact. Thank you very much 
for accompanying us today. 
 Still, we shouldn´t forget that the fight against climate change also has a human and social 
dimension.  The  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy  must  also  be  “fair”  or  “just”  for  the 
economic  sectors  most  affected.  This 
the  2030 
Agenda for Sustainable  Development,  which  commits  to  eradicate  poverty  and  achieve 
sustainable development worldwide by 2030, ensuring that no one is left behind.  
the  objectives  of 
is  one  of 
The Agenda integrates in a balanced manner the three dimensions (economic, social and 
environmental)  of  sustainable  development  through  seventeen  Sustainable  Development 
Goals.  Ms.  Cristina Gallach,  High  Commissioner  for  the  2030  Agenda,  will  moderate  the 
panel that will follow Lord Stern´s presentation, and will share with us the progress that is 
being made in this respect. Thank you very much, Cristina, for being here today. 
I am sure we are all looking forward to hearing Lord Stern’s speech. But first, let me say a 
few more words about the implications that the transition to a low-carbon economy has for 
the financial sector, and the kind of actions that Supervisors and Central banks are taking 
to address this global challenge.  
By  definition,  this  kind  of  transition  involves  structural  economic  changes  that  affect 
practically  all  economic  sectors  and  activities;  the  investments  required  to  achieve  this 
transformation of the economy are huge and demand a significant mobilisation of financial 
resources.  
The  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy  affects  the  financial  sector  in  two  ways.  First, 
because  of  the  financial  risks  that  climate  change  and  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon 
economy entail. Second, due to its role in channeling the funding needed to carry out the 
large investments required to comply with the Paris Agreement. 
Obviously, this transition involves both challenges and opportunities for the financial sector. 
In terms of opportunities, it is clear that the activity of banks in relation to green finance is 
growing  forcefully.  Financial  institutions  are  actively  issuing  green  bonds  or  syndicated 
loans related to sustainable finance.  
In addition, banks are increasingly offering other types of services to their clients. According 
to the Risk Assessment Questionnaire carried out by the EBA (European Banking Authority) 
in June 2019, 90 % of the banks responding to the questionnaire have developed or plan to 
develop green products and/or services based on environmental considerations, of which 
the  most  popular  products  would  be  energy-efficient  mortgage  loans,  followed  by 
commercial real estate loans and green car loans.6 
Although in recent years there has been progress in the development of new products, with 
green bonds the most developed green financing instrument, the scale of the investment 
challenge remains significant. According to the European Commission7, to achieve the EU's 
                                                                                              
6  EBA  (2019).  https://eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/documents/10180/2854739/916f8c4b-7099-4aba-
ac1f-882cfd4c3583/RAQ %20Booklet %20Spring %202019.pdf?retry=1 
7 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/green-finance_en 
 3/5 
 2030 targets agreed in Paris, including a 40 % cut in greenhouse gas emissions, we have 
to fill an investment gap estimated at 180 billion EUR per year.  
The  effects  of  climate  change  and  actions  to  mitigate  them  also  pose  risks  for  both 
insurance companies and banks. It is well known that the climate change-related risks may 
be divided into two categories: physical and transition risks. This requires banks to consider 
climate change-related risks and the transition to a low-carbon economy in their integrated 
risk management.  
One of our panelists, Mr. Sean Kidney, co-founder and CEO of Climate Bonds Initiative, will 
be able to give us an overview of the evolution and prospects of green financing instruments, 
in particular green bonds. Meanwhile, Ms. Danae Kyriakopoulou, OMFIF´s8 Chief Economist 
and Director of Research, will give us her insight into this adaptation by the financial sector 
to the challenges posed by climate change risks. Thank you for your participation in today´s 
panel. 
As regards international collaboration in the field of sustainable finance, I believe both the 
Paris Agreement and the  2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development acted as a wake-up 
call for supervisors and central banks to join forces, setting in motion a whole agenda of 
policies intended to contribute to the objective of avoiding this increase above 2oC. In this 
short period of time, many initiatives, both from the official and private sectors, are being 
undertaken. Let me cite a few examples,  
-  The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, created at the request of 
the Financial Stability Board but comprising in its entirety members of the industry. 
This  Task  Force  has  produced  voluntary  disclosure  standards  for  companies  in 
general, which are becoming more and more relevant, as investors, consumers and 
corporates demand sustainability-related information to make informed decisions. 
-  The  European  Commission  Action  Plan  on  Financing  Sustainable  Growth,  which 
should contribute to making the EU a leading force in the global fight against climate 
change. 
-  The International Platform on Sustainable Finance.  
-  The Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action, which comprises governments 
from more than twenty countries joining forces to address the challenges posed by 
climate  change.  We  are  also  honoured  to  have  with  us  Ms.  Ana  de  la  Cueva, 
Secretary of State for Economic & Business Affairs, who will close this conference 
and inform us about this initiative. 
-  Last, but certainly not least, I  want to mention the  Network of Central Banks and 
Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), created two years ago as a 
“coalition of the willing” and a voluntary-based forum.  
The NGFS has grown from 8 members to over 50 since 2017, which is a clear sign of its 
success.  Through  the  NGFS  we  have  been  able  to  share  practices  and  increase  our 
understanding of the implications that climate change has for central banks and supervisors, 
contributing to the inclusion of these risks in our micro and macro-prudential supervisory 
                                                                                              
8 Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum. 
4/5 
 frameworks.  Notably,  the  NGFS  has  produced  three  key  reports,  which  include 
recommendations not only for central banks and supervisors, but also the industry. 
We also have today with us the chairman of the NGFS, Mr. Frank Elderson, who is likewise 
a member of the SSM9 Supervisory Board, where we sit together. I am aware that Frank 
receives innumerable requests to speak on behalf of the NGFS, so I am also very grateful 
for his presence here today.  
Let  me  conclude.  Climate  change  is  a  global  phenomenon  and  all  of  these  initiatives 
evidence the fact that cooperation is key. Of course, official institutions and governments 
must cooperate, but so too must the public and private sectors. We are all together in the 
same boat, this planet, so we must also learn and work together to achieve the same shared 
objective. 
The Banco de España is aware of the importance of this challenge, and is also developing 
its own strategy: it is analysing the possible implications of climate change for the stability 
of the Spanish financial system, assessing data gaps and developing the methodologies 
and responses it may adopt in its micro and macro-supervisory role. We have also been 
conducting  several  initiatives  to  help  raise  awareness  of  the  importance  of  this  issue, 
including workshops and meetings with the industry to learn more about how the sector is 
coping with climate change. 
Despite  all  these  efforts,  there  are  still  obstacles  and  methodological  challenges  to 
overcome. These include the longer and uncertain horizon that must be applied to assess 
these risks, and the finalisation of a common taxonomy enabling us to distinguish what is 
"green" and what is "brown". 
I am sure our outstanding speakers today will help us to shed light on these issues, and I 
look forward to the discussions this morning. As I mentioned earlier, the slogan of the United 
Nations Climate Change Conference, COP25, is “Time for Action is now”, so I believe it is 
time for me to stop talking and move to Lord Stern´s presentation. Thank you very much.  
                                                                                              
9 Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
 5/5 
