Benjamin E Diokno: Role of Islamic banking in promoting financial
inclusion in the Philippines
Speech by  Mr  Benjamin  E  Diokno,  Governor of  Bangko  Sentral ng  Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  4th  International  Islamic  Finance  Conference,  Manila,  25
November 2019.
 Assala Mualaukum!
I  wish  to  thank  the  National  Commission  on  Muslim  Filipinos  and  the  Department  of  Foreign
Affairs for giving the BSP this opportunity to talk about the role of Islamic banking in promoting
financial  inclusion  in  the  country.  It  is  a  timely  and  relevant  topic  that  we  are  only  happy  to
discuss in a forum like this.
Indeed,  for  a  country  with  Muslims  representing  10%  of  its  people,  our  financial  inclusion
narrative would be incomplete without touching on Islamic banking and finance. This statement
becomes  even  more  relevant  when  faced  with  the  inconvenient  truth  that  the  three  poorest
provinces in the country are predominantly Muslim, namely: Lanao del Sur, Sulu, and Basilan.
Financial inclusion has become widely recognized as an enabler for inclusive growth and poverty
alleviation, offering a path to shared prosperity for all.  This is because the ability to use wide-
ranging,  well-designed  financial  services  enable  individuals  to  build  financial  resilience  and
pursue economic opportunities. As the broader population become more productive participants
in the economy, financial inclusion can also reinforce the country’s economic growth.
Islamic finance shares the same promise, but focusing in particular to the socioeconomic needs
of the Muslim population. If we are to address the needs of our underserved Muslim brethren in
Mindanao and elsewhere in the country, we need to deliberately promote both  Islamic finance
and financial inclusion.
Financial inclusion has been a strategic goal of the BSP, even long before it became an explicit
mandate under its recently amended charter.  Under Republic Act No. 11211 signed in February
2019,  BSP  is  mandated  to  “promote  broad  and  convenient  access  to  high  quality  financial
services and consider the interest of the general public.”
For  us  in  the  BSP,  this  is  a  strong  recognition  of  financial  inclusion  as  an  important  national
development goal. As you may be aware, account penetration—the basic indicator of inclusion—
stood at a low 22.6% based on our 2017 Financial Inclusion Survey. Meanwhile, 40% of adults
with loans reported borrowing from informal sources.
Right now, financial inclusion in the country may be at a dismal state. But the BSP is optimistic
that  significant  improvement  will  be  seen  in  the  near  future.  In  the  last  few  years,  BSP  has
focused on addressing barriers to access and supporting the development of an inclusive digital
finance ecosystem. At the center of all these efforts is wider use of the digital payment system.
With  an  enabling  regulation  and  supporting  infrastructure,  digital  and  mobile  technologies  are
making geographical barriers irrelevant and the operations of service providers significantly cost
efficient.  Serving  rural  and  low-income  client,  including  those  in  the  poorest  provinces  in
Mindanao, can become viable for innovative service providers.
For  instance,  regulations  and  technology  have  made  it  possible  for  a  bank  to  tap  cash-rich
outlets such as gasoline stations and pawnshops as a low-cost access point in lieu of a branch
through  which  its  clients  can  do  banking  transactions  like  deposits,  withdrawals  and  bills
payment.  BSP  has  also  incentivized  banks  to  offer  basic  deposit  accounts  or  BDA  with  zero
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
maintaining  balance,  opening  deposit  not  more  than  P100  and  simplified  documentary
requirements. The basic deposit accounts product features are designed to meet the need of the
unbanked for a low-cost, no-frills, easy to open account.
Our goal is not just for people to easily open an account but for them to actually use it on a
regular basis so that they can build a transaction history that can be used by banks and other
formal lenders as basis for granting credit. This is part of the motivation of the BSP to push digital
payments  by  allowing  and  encouraging  people  to  use  their  accounts  for  various  payment
transactions.
We  are  doing  this  through  deliberate  reforms  to  promote  an  interoperable  and  efficient  retail
payment  system.  Thus,  we  now  have  PESONet  and  Instapay  which  allow  accountholders  to
conveniently send and receive funds to and from any e-money or bank account.
BSP continues to work closely with the payments industry and other government agencies on
various  initiatives  to  make  sure  people  can  use  their  account-linked  mobile  wallets  to
conveniently send money to family, pay bills, pay vendors, public transport and such regular day-
to-day transactions.
In fact, last week we just launched our EGov payment facility and QR Ph, which is part of efforts
towards a cash-lite society.
All these are the foundational elements of our envisioned inclusive digital finance, underpinning
our effort to ensure anyone whether poor or rich, in a city or in a remote barangay, can open and
use and account, and enjoy the conveniences and other benefits of digital payments.
While these are indeed noteworthy developments, we know that the work is far from finished.
Beyond account ownership, financial inclusion entails the availability of a range of products that
meet the diverse needs of the population, particularly the minorities and the vulnerable sectors.
To  create  a  truly  inclusive  financial  system,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  needs  of  the  Muslim
Filipinos who are excluded due to religious reasons are being addressed. 
A World Bank study showed that approximately 9% of the population exclude themselves from
the formal financial system due to religious reasons in Muslim majority countries. This is where
Islamic banking and finance comes in.
Islamic finance can deepen financial inclusion not  only  because  it  delivers  Shari-ah-compliant
products  for  the  Muslim  communities  but  also  because  its  very  essence  is  based  on  the
principles  of  social  justice  and  equality.  Islamic  finance  products  are  specifically  created  to
support  the  needs  and  protect  the  rights  of  the  poor  and  underserved.  Islamic  finance  and
financial inclusion, therefore, share a common end-goal.
As  you  may  know,  in  Islamic  finance,  products  such  as  sadaqah,  waqf,  and  qard  are  called
social solidarity instruments because they are designed to uplift the plight of the less privileged
through the wealth of those who have more in life.
As the name suggests, social solidarity instruments provide wealthy individuals and businesses
a channel through which they can financially support the poor in the community.
Other Shari’ah compliant products can also support not only individuals but also small business
owners such as sale-based contracts (i.e. murabahah, salam etc.), lease-based contracts (i.e.
ijarah) or guarantee contracts (i.e. kafalah). Providing the appropriate products and services to
the small and medium enterprises is key to broad-based growth.
Islamic  finance  can  also  help  the  country  attract  funds  from  Islamic  investors  looking  for
opportunities  to  support  infrastructure  requirements  particularly  in  the  Bangsamoro.  Poverty
alleviation efforts have necessitated development of critical rural infrastructure that can support
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the quality of life and the livelihood of the rural folk.
Simply put, we cannot afford to overlook the role of Islamic finance in promoting social equity, not
when  there  are  still  predominantly  Muslim  provinces—like  the  Bangsamoro  that  have  poverty
incidences as high as 68%.   In fact, in the 2018 Bangsamoro Organic Law, the Bangsamoro
Government, the BSP, Department of Finance and the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos
are mandated to jointly promote the development of an Islamic banking and finance system in the
country.
This has been further strengthened with the passage of the Republic Act No. 11439 – an Act
Providing  for  the  Regulation  and  Organization  of  Islamic  Banks  in  2019.  This  law  marks  an
important milestone in the country’s Islamic finance journey which started in as early as 1973
with the establishment of the Philippine Amanah Bank. Even back then, the Philippines has been
one of the first Muslim-minority countries to recognize the importance of Islamic Finance. The
bank  eventually  became  the  Al-Amanah  Islamic  Investment  Bank  which,  to  date,  is  the  only
Islamic bank in the country.
The newly enacted law aims to bring forth the full potential of what the country has started in
1973 as an early mover in Islamic financing – that is to promote real socioeconomic development
in Muslim Mindanao through Islamic Financing. Republic Act 11439 is envisioned to facilitate the
development of Islamic Financing in the country by allowing other domestic and foreign Islamic
banking players, either full-fledge Islamic banks or Islamic banking windows, to operate.
As regulator, BSP envisions a system that accommodates Islamic finance within a flexible but
secular unitary framework. Licensing framework for Islamic banks will be anchored on that for
conventional  banks  with  supplementary  prudential  requirements  that  recognize  the  inherent
characteristics of Islamic banking and finance, particularly compliance with Shari’ah principles.
To level the playing field and provide an opportunity for more players, the framework provides
conventional banks to offer compliant products and services through business units or windows
that  take  into  consideration  Shari’ah  parameters  and  compliant  mechanisms  particularly  the
separation  of  funds.  In  addition,  this  legal  framework  awards  non-Muslim  investors  the
opportunity to invest and diversify their portfolios.
BSP, together with the other members of the Interagency Technical Working Group on Islamic
Banking and with the support of our development partners, will work toward ensuring that the
legal  framework  is  effectively  implemented  through  appropriate  rules  and  regulations.    As
mandated by the law, government will also endeavor to achieve neutral tax treatment between
Islamic banking transactions and equivalent conventional banking transactions.
Beyond  our  regulatory  goal  of  promoting  stability  and  level  playing  field,  BSP  is  committed  to
support the growth of the  Islamic banking industry in the country.  Under its amended charter,
BSP is empowered to institute reforms and issue enabling policies to ensure that the  Islamic
banking industry receives appropriate liquidity and other financial support.
With all these developments, I am optimistic about the future of Islamic finance in the country.
We now have the much awaited and much needed regulatory framework to usher in a vibrant
Islamic Finance industry marked by multiplicity of players.
This is not to say our work is done. We could even say that the work has just begun. The seeds
for a vibrant Islamic financing industry have been planted. It is now up to us – the government
and the industry as a whole – to nurture the seeds with concrete next steps.
We all have a stake in the development of Bangsamoro and in the future of our country. Let us
waste no time in working toward our shared vision of a prosperous nation for all Filipinos.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you and mabuhay!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
