Denis Beau: Ten years after Lehman, is the financial system safer?
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at a Conference at
Sciences Po Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 18 October 2019.
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Financial  Stability  Unit  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech,  and
particularly E. Rocher and S. Frappa.
 A little over ten years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and with the financial system facing
new challenges, how successful have the reforms undertaken after the 2008 crisis been? Is the
financial system now safer? In view of the magnitude of the work carried out by regulators and
supervisors  and  the  efforts  of  intermediaries  to  adapt  to  the  resulting  renewed  regulatory  and
supervisory  framework,  at  the  international,  European  and  national  levels,  the  answer  is
undoubtedly yes. I would like to devote the first part of my presentation to developing the reasons
why I believe this is the case. But I think we need to take a more in-depth look, which I propose to
do in the second part of my presentation by asking the following question: is the financial system
now safe enough? In view of the development of the sources of vulnerabilities in the financial
system,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  a  given  that  the  strengthening  we  have  observed  is
sufficient and efforts therefore need to be pursued.
1. Ten years after Lehman Brothers, the financial system is now safer
The crisis that followed the Lehman collapse demonstrated the importance of a sound financial
system  that  could  withstand  shocks  without  hampering  the  financing  of  the  economy.  The
economies that, after a macroeconomic shock, suffer a financial shock because their banking
sector is too fragile, experience more serious and protracted crises. This lesson led to a vast
reform programme of financial system regulation and supervision in order to address the many
shortcomings that led to the development of significant vulnerabilities.
1.1  MANY  OF  THE  SHORTCOMINGS  IN  THE  REGULATORY  AND  SUPERVISORY
FRAMEWORK HAVE BEEN REDUCED
A comprehensive reform was thus carried out, covering practically all the areas of the financial
system, focusing on four main areas:
(a) Shoring up the resilience of financial institutions
For banks,  under  the  impetus  of  the  G20  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  Basel
Committee  has  established  new  prudential  rules,  “Basel  III",  whose  main  features  aim  to
enhance  the  level  and  quality  of  capital,  limit  the  use  of  financial  leverage  and  introduce  new
liquidity  requirements.  These  rules  must  ensure  that  banks  are  able  to  cope  with  short-term
pressures on their refinancing and regulate their transformation activity. Lastly, the framework
introduces  for  the  first  time  a  “macroprudential”  component,  consisting  of  a  countercyclical
capital  buffer  and  a  surcharge  for  global  systemically  important  banks  (additional  capital  and
leverage ratio).
Most  G20  jurisdictions  have  adopted  this  framework.  In  Europe,  the  Capital  Requirements
Regulation  and  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRR  and  CRD)  transpose  the  Basel  III
agreement.  When  transposing  this  agreement,  Europe  also  added  additional  components:  a
systemic  risk  buffer,  “Pillar  2  capital  measures”  to  cover  risks  not  covered  or  not  sufficiently
covered by regulations (interest rate risk, governance risk, etc.), requirements on remuneration
policies and practices, etc.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
For the insurance sector,  a  harmonised  prudential  framework  has  been  applied  in  Europe
since 2016: Solvency II introduced the principle of risk-based regulation, and quantitative capital
requirements have been significantly increased.
Beyond the regulatory framework alone the institutional framework has been strengthened in
many  countries.  Macroprudential  authorities  have  been  set  up  (as  in  France,  as  of  2010)  to
ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole and to facilitate coordination between the
various  supervisors.  In  Europe,  the  creation  of  the  three  supervisory  authorities  (2011)  has
enabled progress to be made in the adoption of a Single Rulebook. Lastly, in the euro area, the
introduction  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  in  2014  has  allowed  us  to  bring  our
prudential supervision of the banking sector in line with best practices.
(b) Put an end to “too big to fail", i.e. ensure that, in the future, a failing bank, even a large one, will
no  longer  have  to  be  bailed  out  by  public  funds.  Since  2009,  these  institutions  qualified  as
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs)  have  been  defined  as  those  whose
“disorderly  failure,  due  to  their  size,  complexity  and  systemic  interconnection,  would  cause
significant  disruption  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  to  economic  activity".  Banks
designated as systemic at the global level by the FSB, and in France at the national level by the
ACPR,  are  subject  to  enhanced  supervision  measures.  In  addition  to  the  capital  surcharges
already mentioned, systemic banks must comply with specific requirements for the preparation
of  recovery  plans  to  deal  with  crises. A  resolution  strategy  could  be  implemented  if  recovery
measures prove insufficient. This plan could include the use of bail-in mechanisms.
(c ) Making  OTC  derivatives  markets  safer:  the  2008  financial  crisis  demonstrated  the
strength of market infrastructures. In particular, central counterparties (CCPs) have held up well.
These  entities  play  a  very  specific  operational  role  in  ensuring  the  successful  settlement  of
securities  transactions  or  the  execution  of  derivative  contracts  by  acting  as  an  intermediary
between  counterparties.  As  a  result,  they  are  key  players  in  the  financial  system.  The  very
cautious  risk  management  applied  by  CCPs  and  the  existence  of  mechanisms  to  handle  the
defaults  of  their  participants  limit  contagion  phenomena.  The  resilience  of  CCPs  has  led
international regulators to: (i) confirm their central role in controlling risks in the financial system,
with  multilateral  clearing  by  CCPs  being  considered  safer  than  bilateral  clearing  between
participants. This has resulted in an extension of the clearing obligation to all standardised OTC
derivatives;  (ii)  improve  their  resilience  by  further  strengthening  their  risk  management
framework,  as  the  concentration  of  clearing  among  a  small  number  of  entities  requires  a
particularly robust framework.
The principles applicable to financial market infrastructures have also been strengthened, with
the publication in 2012 of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI). This is still the
reference text for market infrastructure regulation today. In Europe, these PFMI were translated
into hard law through the European market infrastructure regulation (EMIR), which was adopted
in 2014 and is applicable to CCPs and central trade repositories.
(d) Better regulate the non-bank financial system to enable sound market financing: the
aim  is  to  strengthen  supervision  of  shadow  banking  as  the  financial  crisis  showed  that  the
accumulation  of  risks  on  the  periphery  of  the  banking  system,  sometimes  without  effective
oversight, could have devastating effects.         
We  now  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  non-bank  financial  system,  thanks  to  the  FSB’s
mapping work, which makes it possible to measure its developments and the risks associated
with it. The FSB has also worked to strengthen investment fund regulations to better manage
liquidity  risk  –  recent  episodes  of  massive  capital  outflows  by  UK  and  French  funds  have
demonstrated  the  importance  of  managing  this  risk  well  –  and  leverage  risk.  With  regard  to
money market funds, European regulations have made it possible to strengthen their resilience
to  the  risk  of  a  sudden  and  massive  investor  retrenchment,  and  increased  liquidity  and
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
transparency  requirements  have  been  in  place  since  January  2018. Securitisation,  which  in
2008 may have appeared to be a factor for crisis propagation (via subprime lending), has been
subject to new prudential rules, making it possible to better mitigate its risks while promoting the
sound development of this instrument. The new European framework creates a label to identify
high quality securitisation transactions, which meet the criteria for simplicity, transparency and
standardisation (STS label).
1.2  THE  IMPLEMENTATION  OF  THESE  REGULATORY  CHANGES  COMBINED  WITH
FINANCIAL  INTERMEDIARIES’EFFORTS  TO  ADAPT,  HAVE  GENERATED  TANGIBLE
SIGNS OF INCREASED FINANCIAL SYSTEM RESILIENCE.
For the financial system, I would like to give three examples:
(a) Significant improvement in the solvency and liquidity of banks    
The own funds of major French banks have almost tripled since the crisis. Their Common Equity
Tier 1 (CET1) ratios increased from 5.8% to 13.6% between 2008 and 2018. European banks
have  improved  their  short-term  liquidity  ratios,  catching  up  with  or  even  outstripping  their
international peers as from 2015. The long-term liquidity ratio for European banks is changing
more  slowly  but,  at  the  end  of  2018,  stood  at  around  110%,  a  level  higher  than  that  required
under Basel rules.
As regards insurance, the introduction of Solvency II has also resulted in an overall increase in
the own funds of European insurers.
(b) Balance sheet consolidation and a reduction in NPLs
Continuing high levels of non-performing loans in some euro area countries pose a number of
problems, since they constrain banks’ profitability and generate provisioning needs that weigh on
the level of own funds, and even a viability risk for the most fragile banks.
But since the introduction of the SSM, large European banks have overall significantly reduced
their  outstanding  NPLs.  This  outstanding  amount  reached  EUR  587  billion  in  March  2019,
compared  with  over  EUR  1,000  billion  at  the  end  of  2014.  French  banks,  for  their  part,  have
always outperformed their European peers: their NPL ratio has always been below the European
average,  now  standing  at  2.8%  (against  3.1%  for  the  EU).  Furthermore,  French  banks
consistently displayed an NPL coverage ratio of more than 50% over the December 2009-June
2019 period, well above the 45% average for European banks.
(c) Results of the recent stress tests
Prudential  stress  tests  are  simulation  exercises  designed  to  assess  the  impact  of  a  given
economic  and  financial  scenario  on  an  institution’s  prudential  situation,  in  order  to  test  its
financial  soundness.  During  the  crisis,  they  were  first  used  as  a  crisis  management  tool  to
identify the most vulnerable banks for which recapitalisation measures were needed. Their role
then evolved into an essential and flexible tool for the supervision, oversight and management of
risks and vulnerabilities of banks considered individually (microprudential supervision) as well as
for financial stability purposes (macroprudential supervision).
Stress tests have thus contributed to an increased resilience of the financial system: (i) Stress
tests  shore  up  banks’  capital  positions  by  serving  as  a  basis  for  calculating  additional  capital
requirements  (“Pillar  2  Guidance”  or  P2G);  (ii)  the  publication  of  individual  stress  test  results,
which  is  accompanied  by  the  disclosure  of  individual  bank  data,  ensures  transparency  and
enhances market discipline; (iii) regular stress test exercises under the aegis of the supervisory
authority encourage banks to develop their internal risk management processes and information
tools.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The comparison over time of the aggregate results of the stress tests conducted by the EBA and
the ECB testifies to the increased soundness of European banks. In the event of an adverse
scenario, the 2018 stress test showed that the banks’ solvency ratio would be 9.9%, i.e. 100
basis points higher than the level obtained by the stress test conducted in 2016.
However, we must be careful not to become complacent: risks are increasing and, while some
recent events have confirmed the relevance of the instruments deployed (see in particular the
H2O  incident),  the  fact  that  they  ultimately  proved  benign  does  not  mean  that  in  a  stressed
market environment the outcome would not be less favourable. It is therefore vital to continue to
shore up the resilience of the financial system
2.  We  should  not  take  it  for  granted  that  the  financial  system  has  been  sufficiently
reinforced
2.1 VULNERABILITIES ARE EVOLVING AN INCREASING
Global  macroeconomic  risks  have  increased  markedly.  World  growth  is  slowing  and  is
overshadowed  by  major  uncertainties.  According  to  the  latest  forecasts,  world  GDP  should
expand  by  3.0%  in  2019,  down  from  3.8%  growth  last  year  (IMF),  largely  as  a  result  of  the
slowdown in emerging countries, especially China, and to a lesser extent in certain advanced
economies. In the euro area, our forecasts are for 1.1% growth in 2019, down from 1.9% in 2018.
The  main  uncertainties  weighing  on  growth  are  the  risks  of  an  escalation  in  protectionist
measures  and  of  a  no-deal  Brexit  which  could  lead  to  a  tightening  of  financial  conditions  in
Europe.
The rising tendency in macroeconomic risk is helping to maintain and reinforce accommodative
monetary policies, as well as the “low-for-long” direction of and expectations for interest rates.
This low interest rate environment is fuelling an increase in household and corporate debt, in
both advanced and emerging economies. In France, private sector debt reached 132.3% of
GDP  at  end-2018  (+45  percentage  points  since  2000).  Household  debt  has  risen  by  8
percentage points of GDP since the end of the crisis (59.8% of GDP).
In Europe, bank profitability is coming under increasing pressure from a number of risks:
The first of these is the maintenance of a low interest rate environment for a long time. This
is not just the fault of the central banks: an accommodative monetary policy is justified in
light  of  the  euro  area’s  economic  situation;  but  beyond  this,  low  long  rates  also  reflect  a
structural  weakness  in  growth.  What  is  more,  monetary  policy  and  low  rates  also  have
positive  effects  for  banks,  such  as  a  reduction  in  their  cost  of  risk  and  increase  in  their
lending volumes. However, the fact remains that the current environment is compressing net
interest  margins  for  retail  banks,  which  finance  themselves  with  deposits  –  and  not  at
variable rates in the markets – and is lowering returns on insurers’ investments.
The second risk, which is more structural, is the digital transformation of finance, which
is  revolutionising  modes  of  use  and  bringing  significant  benefits  to  customers.  However,
adapting  to  this  change  requires  huge  investment  by  banks,  to  adjust  their  information
systems and develop new, personalised service offerings. The digital transformation is also
putting downward pressure on revenues due to increased competition from new market
entrants (neobanks, GAFA, etc.). In response to this, financial institutions need to unleash
new productivity gains, by exploring even further the possibilities of automation and artificial
intelligence (AI), and adapting their branch networks on all levels (size, , density).
The  digital  transition  is  also  leading  to  a  rising  threat  of cyber  risk  and,  more  broadly,
operational risks (large-scale theft, data corruption), to which financial institutions are more
than ever exposed.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last,  financial  intermediaries  also  have  to  adapt  to  a  new  imperative  –  the  need  to  take
account of the risks linked to climate change, which I shall come back to later.
2.2  TO  CONSOLIDATE  THE  RESILIENCE  OF  THE  RESILIENCE  OF  THE  FINANCIAL
SYSTEM,  WE  THEREFORE  NEED  TO  COMPLETE  THE  PROGRAMME  OF  REFORMS
AND ADAPT IT TO THE NEW RISKS
2.2.1.  “Finish  the  job”:  complete  the  programme  of  reforms  and  ensure  its  coordinated
implementation at the global level.
(a)  Finish  the  implementation  of  Basel  III. On  7  December  2017,  the  Basel  Committee
adopted an important accord finalising the Basel III framework. The text completes the overhaul
of the international prudential framework begun in 2009, by notably allowing financial institutions
to continue using internal models, subject to strict conditions. This accord will gradually be rolled
out as of 2022 with full implementation scheduled for 2027.
In  the  EU,  the  transposition  of  the  Basel  accords  will  result  in  a  modification  of  the  Capital
Requirements Regulation and Directive (CRR3/CDR6). The Commission has already begun this
legal  work  by  asking  the  EBA  to  analyse  the  impact  of  the  reforms  on  the  European  banking
industry and economy.
The Banque de France and ACPR support the principle of a full and faithful application of the
Basel accords within the EU. This implementation has to be reciprocal and must be harmonised
at  the  international  level.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  global  banking
system,  and  for  guaranteeing  a  level  playing  field  among  banks.  The  implementation  will  also
need to take account of the specificities of the European economic and financial environment.
(b) Finalise the adoption of a European resolution framework for CCPs and insurers
The resolution of CCPs is the last major topic on the FSB’s work programme. By reinforcing the
central role of CCPs in the markets, the new framework risks creating entities that are “too big to
fail”: it is important therefore that we have tools to handle CCP crises efficiently, without resorting
to a state bail-out that would ultimately leave taxpayers bearing the cost of default. As a result,
after  having  set  out  strong  expectations  in  2017,  the  FSB  is  currently  refining  an  international
CCP resolution framework, which will be enshrined in a new European regulation.
In insurance, France is one of the first EU Member States to have put in place a recovery and
resolution  regime  for  insurers  with  the  Sapin  2  Law  of  9  December  2016.  The  Order  of  27
November  2017  also  gave  the  ACPR’s  Resolution  College  the  power  to  start  resolution
proceedings for failing insurers and take steps to maintain their critical functions or safeguard
financial stability. The framework comprises a preventive arm, under which the largest insurers
are obliged to draw up preventive recovery plans. At the European level, there is currently no
shared  approach  to  the  resolution  of  insurers.  However,  there  is  clearly  a  need  for  such  a
framework  to  facilitate  the  resolution  of  insurers,  in  particular  cross-border  groups,  and  help
strengthen the European insurance market for the benefit of policyholders
(c)  Finally,  and  most  of  all  in  my  view,  it  is  also “time  for  macroprudential  policy”.  The
numerous  instruments  developed  since  the  crisis  should  now  be  put  to  work  in  preserving
financial stability. This is what is being done in France, for example, with the gradual activation of
countercyclical capital buffers or measures limiting the exposures of the main banks to large,
highly indebted corporations.
2.2.2. Adapt the framework to new risks 
In addition to applying the regulatory standards, the supervisor is also, of course, paying close
attention to how business models evolve, in order to identify emerging risks, monitor them and
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
devise possible solutions.
Several new areas of risk are coming under particular scrutiny:
With  regard  to cyber risk,  the  planned  solutions,  especially  to  increase  cyber  resilience,
need  to  be  harmonised  and  coordinated  at  the  international  level  to  maintain  a  clear  and
coherent regulatory framework for all financial sector participants. The Banque de France
made the rationalisation and harmonisation of current regulatory efforts a key theme of its
G7  presidency  this  year. As  part  of  this,  23  global  authorities  (finance  ministries,  central
banks, bank supervisors and markets) took part in a cyber resilience exercise in June 2019,
with the aim of strengthening their operational resilience to a major cyber incident impacting
the global financial system. The exercise, which was by nature highly complex and the first
of its kind in the world, marked a huge step forward in terms of global cooperation. Thanks to
its  success,  G7  countries  agreed  to  draw  up  a  programme  of  exercises  for  the  coming
years.
The FinTechs and BigTechs (especially the big US and Asian companies that are driving
the  digitalisation  of  the  economy)  offer  new  opportunities  (new  cyber  security  solutions,
reduction  in  the  cost  of  internal  management  for  client  entities,  increase  in  financial
inclusion, etc.), but are equally a source of additional vulnerabilities, notably in terms of cyber
risk, the weakening of financial ecosystems and the development of questionable practices
in  the  use  of  data.  The  Banque  de  France  is  working  actively  on  these  issues  within
international and European fora, to promote the sharing of experiences and harmonisation of
rules and practices, and encourage efforts to make financial sector agents more resilient.
We also need to continue assessing the reforms already put in place, to check that they
deliver  the  expected  effects  and  to  identify  any  unintended  consequences.  The  FSB’s
assessment  shows  that  although  certain  measures  have  largely  been  implemented
 requirements for systemically important institutions, clearing – other aspects still have to be
finalised,  notably  with  regard  to  the  monitoring  of  non-banking  financial  institutions.  Only
when these reforms are fully implemented will the financial system be effectively protected.
T h e European 
the  EU’s
macroeconomic resilience. First we need to finalise Banking Union on an institutional level.
One  positive  contribution  would  be  to  work  towards  a  European  deposit  guarantee
scheme. This could be based, at least initially, on covering liquidity requirements, with no
permanent  transfers  between  Member  States.  We  also  need  to  ensure  the  harmonised
application  of  banking  regulations  in  all  Banking  Union  countries,  and  avoid  the  risk  of
fragmentation,  which  would  reduce  the  expected  benefits  of  a  union.  It  is  also  vital  to
strengthen  the  integration  of  European  financial  markets.  The  action  plan  for  the  Capital
Markets Union, launched by the Commission in 2015, has allowed a few advances to be
made,  with  the  creation  of  European  cross-border  funds  and  a  pan-European  retirement
savings product. We must go even further on this, and create a genuine Financing Union
for Investment and Innovation, that would better channel Europe’s savings surplus (3% of
GDP) towards productive investment, by shoring up companies’ capital and increasing their
ability to develop and innovate.  For this, we need to (i) facilitate cross-border investment by
harmonising accounting, tax and bankruptcy rules; (ii) develop incentives for equity financing;
(iii) develop European securities and savings products (venture capital funds, green bonds,
securitised  portfolios,  etc.)  aimed  at  providing  long-term,  diversified  financing  to  Member
States.
Finally, with its strong international commitment on climate issues, Europe must play its full
role in initiatives to tackle the risks linked to climate change. The Banque de France was
one of the founders of the NGFS or Network for the Greening of the Financial System, and
provides secretariat services for the platform which now has 42 members and 8 observers,
representing  5  continents.  The  NGFS  aims 
to  share  best  practices  and  make
recommendations  to  central  banks  and  supervisors  on  how  to  better  integrate  climate-
integration  projects are  also  essential 
increasing 
for 
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
related risks into their financial stability monitoring and microprudential supervision. Within
the framework of the NGFS, the ACPR and Banque de France have begun looking at ways
to conduct climate-related stress-tests. In parallel, and in line with the energy transition law,
the ACPR  has  published  two  reports  on  the  climate  risks  facing  the  French  banking  and
insurance  industries,  and  has  set  up  a  Climate  and  Sustainable  Finance  Commission
tasked with monitoring financial institutions’ commitments and publishing its findings in an
annual report prepared jointly with the AMF.
 My conclusion, therefore, is that we should not just assume that the significant strengthening of
the financial system over the past decade is enough. 
Now  more  than  ever,  it  is  vital  that  we  remain  vigilant,  to  face  up  to  the  risks  threatening  to
undermine  our  financial  stability.  This  means  rigorous  supervision,  and  the  adoption  of  a
multilateral  and  coordinated  approach  in  order  to  implement  and  complete  the  reforms  to  our
financial regulation. Safeguarding financial stability, to make the financial system more secure
over the long term, is a global challenge and one that requires a global response. 
  7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
