Jerome  H  Powell:  Opening  remarks  -  “Community  Listening
Session"
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jerome  H  Powell,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve  System,  at  a  “Community  Listening  Session",  a  Fed  Listens  event  at  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, 9 October 2019.
 Good morning. I am happy to be here in Kansas City for the 13th of 14 Fed Listens events. I look
forward to hearing the perspectives of the community and business leaders participating today.
The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holding Fed Listens events around the country as
part  of  a  comprehensive  and  public  review  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  tools,  and
communications practices. Almost all of the Fed Listens meetings, like this one, have been open
to the press and live-streamed on the internet. Both the breadth and transparency of the review
are unprecedented for us.
One reason we are conducting this review is that it is always a good practice for any organization
to occasionally take a step back and ask if it could be doing its job more effectively. But we must
pose that question not just to ourselves. Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve
significant  protections  from  short-term  political  pressures,  we  have  an  obligation  to  clearly
explain what we are doing and why. And we have an obligation to actively engage the people we
serve so that they and their elected representatives can hold us accountable. We have invited
you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects your lives and the
lives of the people your organizations represent. We want to hear your perspective on maximum
employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us.
Now is a good time to conduct the review. Unemployment is at a half-century low, and inflation is
running  close  to,  but  a  bit  below,  our  2  percent  objective.  While  not  everyone  fully  shares
economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall, it is—as I like to say—in a
good place. Our job is to keep it there as long as possible. While we believe our strategy and
tools have been and remain effective, the U.S. economy, like other advanced economies around
the  world,  is  facing  some  longer-term  challenges—from  low  growth,  low  inflation,  and  low
interest rates. While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, “What’s wrong with
low inflation and low interest rates?” Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently,
interest  rates—are  too  low,  the  Fed  and  other  central  banks  have  less  room  to  cut  rates  to
support the economy during downturns.
So, in this review, we are examining strategies that might better allow us to symmetrically and
sustainably achieve 2 percent inflation. Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among
consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in
several advanced economies. More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help
keep  actual  inflation  around  our  target,  thus  preserving  our  ability  to  change  interest  rates  as
appropriate to meet our mandate. We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy
tools  will  be  adequate  when  the  next  downturn  comes.  Finally,  we  are  asking  whether  our
communications practices can be improved to better support the effectiveness of our policy.
After today, we have one Fed Listens session remaining, later this month in Chicago. At the July
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we
have learned so far from the Fed Listens events. We continued that discussion at our September
meeting and have a lot left to do. We plan to publicly report our conclusions during the first half of
next year.
One clear takeaway of the sessions so far is the importance of sustaining this historically strong
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
job market. People from low- and moderate-income communities tell us that this long recovery,
now in its 11th year, is benefiting them and their neighbors to a degree that has not been felt for
many years. Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to
offer training. And people who have struggled to stay in the workforce in the past are getting new
opportunities.
Once again, I’m happy to be here. Now it is your turn to speak. We’re listening.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
