REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, AT THE PANEL ON “DEVELOPING SUSTAINABLE CAPITAL 
MARKETS: MAPPING THE CHALLENGES AND SETTING PRIORITIES”. OMFIF–
DZ BANK, Washington, DC, October 19, 2019.1 
I thank the organizers for the invitation to participate in this panel.  
Mainly  as  a  result  of  increasing  carbon  dioxide  and  other  greenhouse  gas 
emissions that have come about as a byproduct of economic activity at large, 
but particularly in sectors heavily reliant on fossil fuels, global temperatures 
are at present higher relative to pre-industrial levels, and are projected to rise 
further  in  coming  decades.  In  addition  to  the  environmental,  health  and 
broader welfare costs that such damage is already impinging, climate-related 
risks are among the main threats faced by the world in the medium- to long-
run,  especially  in  view  of  scenarios  with  potentially  catastrophic  and 
irreversible consequences, which are currently envisaged as plausible. 
Given the complex and multidimensional nature of the issue at hand, as well 
as the extensive and, to a significant degree, unknown ramifications that may 
ensue, any sensible proposal with realistic chances to effectively contribute to 
a  solution  must  contemplate  the  simultaneous  and  coordinated  action  of 
diverse, albeit complementary, policy tools. In addition, even though unilateral 
efforts at the domestic level are essential, international cooperation is needed 
to successfully overcome these challenges. 
Why is the involvement of central banks in these issues important? 
                                                           
1 The views and opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
 
1 
 
  To start with, climate change is expected to have substantial macroeconomic 
consequences in coming decades, as it will adversely affect output in a number 
of sectors. The most severe impact will fall on climate-sensitive sectors, such 
as  agriculture,  forestry,  coastal  real  estate  and  tourism.  This  may  also  be 
reflected on global inflation, to the extent that agricultural and other prices 
fluctuate more widely, as a result of more frequent and more severe extreme 
weather events. It is also worth noting that although vulnerabilities vary across 
countries, those that will likely be most exposed to these risks are among the 
group of developing economies, in view of the sectoral composition of their 
GDPs,  their  geographical  location,  their  poverty  levels  and  a  more  limited 
capacity to adapt. 
Average  estimates  of  the  impact  of  a  3  degrees  Celcius  increase  in  world 
temperatures point to a 2 percent decline in potential global GDP by the end 
of this century.2 However, these estimates are surrounded by considerable 
uncertainty. In addition to the complexities of modelling and calculating the 
impact of climate change on the environment and then on the economy, most 
of them are based on historical data, and do not consider neither extreme 
events nor the potential non-linearities that could substantially accentuate the 
economic  consequences  of  climate  change.  In  this  respect,  it  is  worth  to 
mention, for instance, the migration pressures and conflict risks that could 
derive from global warming. 
A  proper  consideration  of  the  consequences  of  climate  change  is  also 
important  for  central  banks  in  view  of  their  implications  for  the  financial 
                                                           
2  See  Farid,  Mai  et  al.  (2016):  “After  Paris:  Fiscal,  Macroeconomic,  and  Financial  Implications  of  Climate 
Change”, IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 16/01, January. 
 
 
 
2 
 sector.  Beyond 
to 
consequences, this has two dimensions. 
related 
those 
the  above-noted  macroeconomic 
On  the  one  hand,  at  the  microprudential  level,  central  banks  and  other 
financial authorities ought to undertake a continuous and careful evaluation 
and monitoring of the risks for individual financial institutions deriving from 
their exposure to assets, projects, entities and/or income streams that are 
directly affected by climate-related developments. Efforts have been carried 
out  in  this  regard  both  at  the  national  level  and  internationally  through 
institutions  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  International 
Association of Insurance Supervisors.  
However, this process is only in its early stages and more work is needed in a 
number  of  areas.  For  instance,  climate  change  scenarios  are  not  typically 
considered in financial sector stress testing. Furthermore, action is needed to 
ensure that financial institutions incorporate environmental scenario analysis 
into  decision  making,  and  to  support  this  process  through  a  more  active 
disclosure of data on the environmental sources of risk for the financial sector 
and a better understanding by regulators both of these risks and the tools 
needed to face them.  
Due to their potential magnitude and overarching scope, possibly amplified by 
ensuing  market  responses,  climate-related  shocks  to  individual  financial 
institutions  may  easily  propagate  and  give  rise  to  system-wide  disruptions. 
Therefore,  climate  change  also  poses  financial  stability  risks,  an  issue 
incorporated in the mandate of many central banks. As a result of the apparent 
long-term  characteristics  of  these  risks,  and  insufficient  awareness  both 
   3 
among  investors  and  financial  institutions  of  the  climate-related  nature  of 
some of their assets, they rarely incorporate them in their risk management 
frameworks.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  potential  for  contagion  and 
market disruption resulting from a climate shock may be substantial. 
Assuming that these risks will materialize only in the long run is mistaken. For 
instance, losses for insurance companies as a result of climate-related events 
are today almost 10 times larger than the average observed during the 1980s.3 
Moreover, an evaluation of these risks is extremely complex, and more so in a 
context of the existing data constraints. Therefore, major efforts will still be 
needed to develop a set of data, indicators and models that can allow a proper 
assessment of the financial stability implications of global warming. Increased 
disclosure  of  firms’  carbon  footprints,  prudential  requirements  for  the 
insurance  sector,  addressing  possible  misalignments  within 
financial 
regulation and practices, and the use of financial instruments that reduce and 
better allocate climate-related risks would also enhance financial stability in 
the transition to a low-carbon economy.  
On the other hand, the investment needs to hold the increase in global average 
temperature  below  2  degrees  Celsius  relative  to  pre-industrial  levels  are 
substantial. According to recent estimates, some additional USD 600 billion per 
year will be needed, on average through 2030, in order to keep infrastructure 
investment across transport, energy, water and telecom systems consistent 
with the above-noted limits on global warming. This is on top of the resources 
required  in  these  areas  to  sustain  growth  and  meet  the  basic  population 
                                                           
3 According to data from Munich Re NatCatService (as of October 2019). 
 
 
  4 
needs, estimated at around USD 6.3 trillion per year during this period.4 The 
challenge will be how to finance needs of this scale.  
Clearly, financial markets can help to meet this goal, by increasing the capital 
channeled  to  these  projects.  In  particular,  with  financing  requirements 
significantly  exceeding  the  resources  available  through  the  banking  and 
corporate sectors, the need for a major role of bond markets is underlined. In 
this context, although not unilaterally, but rather in coordination with other 
authorities and stakeholders, central banks have a role to play. Green finance 
has grown substantially in recent years, but there certainly is ample potential 
for further development as significant gaps vis-à-vis the resources required for 
the fulfillment of international commitments on the matter remain. With this 
purpose in mind, a number of actions and strategies can be harnessed.  
Among  these,  it  is  worthwhile  noting  that  notwithstanding  the  significant 
progress achieved over the last years in terms of the definition, standards and 
best practices in relation to green activities and finance, additional efforts in 
this direction are needed, with particular attention towards their improved 
adoption,  compliance  and  monitoring.  Naturally,  more  transparency  and 
clarity regarding the projects that are being financed, as well as the associated 
risks,  would  result  in  increased  confidence  and,  thereby,  interest  from  the 
broad  investor  community.  Importantly,  this  would  also  help  overcome 
important barriers for institutional investors who, owing to their more strict 
criteria and requirements, may have been impeded to resort to this type of 
instruments due to insufficient visibility of the projects and activities to which 
                                                           
4 See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2017): “Investing in Climate, Investing in 
Growth”, May. 
 
 
 
5 
 resources are being channeled. Additional barriers for the development of the 
green  bond  market  are  the  absence  of  a  developed  domestic  debt  capital 
market  and  the  insufficient  number  of  bankable  and  standardized  green 
projects. 
Closely related to the above, significant efforts must still be made in order to 
bridge  remaining  data  gaps.5  The  better  equipped  investors  are  to  more 
accurately assess returns and risks associated to green financial instruments, 
the  more  likely  they  are  to  partake.  To  this  end,  central  banks  and  other 
authorities,  not  exclusively  in  the  financial  sector  but  perhaps  also  in  the 
environmental and related realms, must join efforts to gather, generate and 
publicize relevant, dependable statistics of trusted quality. 
More directly, central banks themselves can “lead by example”, specifically by 
evaluating  the  possibility  to  systematically 
incorporate  sustainability 
considerations  as  part  of  their  portfolio  allocation  decision  process.  The 
potential  for  action  in  this  front  is  ample,  in  view  of  both  the  amount  of 
financial resources (i.e. international reserves) managed by these institutions, 
on the one hand, and the still-low extent to which they take action along these 
lines, on the other. For instance, in a recent BIS survey, nearly two thirds of the 
respondents answered “no” to the question “Does your central bank include 
sustainability  considerations  in  the  pursuit  of  its  policy  objectives?”.6  An 
increased  demand  by  central  banks  of  green  bonds  may  have  the  added 
                                                           
5 Although the nature of said data gaps is diverse and, in most cases, activity- or project-specific, they are in 
general  related  to  information  that  can  be  needed  to  efficiently  price  externalities  (both  negative  and 
positive),  assess  and  manage  risk-return  trade-offs,  and  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  market-based 
mechanisms have aided to allocate resources and risks optimally. 
6 For further details, see Fender, Ingo et al. (2019): “Green Bonds: The Reserve Management Perspective”, BIS 
Quarterly Review, September. 
 
 
6 
  benefit of contributing to the development and a more generalized adoption 
of standards and best practices in this market. Naturally, it is also important to 
consider that investment in green bonds by these institutions is not free of 
constraints such as, for instance, those related to accessibility and liquidity.  
Lastly, and rounding all this up, it is important to raise awareness and help 
develop the sense of commonality required to achieve greater adherence to a 
collective  strategy.  To  this  end,  sustained  collaboration  among  all  relevant 
parties geared towards capacity building and knowledge sharing is essential, 
while the establishment of frameworks conducive to the wider diffusion and 
disclosure  of  the  issues  and  actions  undertaken,  including  to  the  general 
public, further adds to these objectives. 
   7 
