The Economic and Monetary Union: 
Time to Break the Deadlock
Keynote address by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy
OMFIF-Banca d’Italia seminar 
“The future of the Euro area”
Rome, 15 November 2019
This  seminar  comes  at  a  difficult  juncture  for  Europe.  The  tide  of  the  global 
financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis has long fallen, but its poisonous legacy and 
geopolitical tensions are fuelling distrust, fears and even prejudices once thought long 
buried. The European construction is at a standstill while progress is badly needed in the 
key areas, where the Union is better at prohibiting things than at getting them done.
Although the single currency was a vital step on the path to European integration, the 
Economic and Monetary Union remains an unfinished construction. Europe’s architects 
knew this, and wanted and anticipated greater progress in the future. Even before the 
introduction of the euro, the unusual status of a Stateless currency had been underlined, 
as had the institutional solitude of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the problems 
posed by the imperfect mobility of capital and labour.
The risks inherent in this situation materialised with unanticipated violence during 
the sovereign debt crisis. The inadequacy of the euro area’s economic governance was laid 
bare. Hesitancy in defining the procedures to support countries in difficulty fuelled fears 
of a break-up of the euro. Spreads on government bond yields widened dramatically, in 
some cases by far beyond what would have been justified by the economic and financial 
conditions of the countries affected, making these conditions all the more difficult to 
overcome.
The proposals for reform drawn up after the peak of the crisis envisaged the gradual 
strengthening of integration, first in the financial area and then for public finances. Yet, 
seven years later, only partial progress has been made. The banking union is incomplete 
and not without flaws, the foundations for the capital union are still being laid, and fiscal 
union has been postponed to an unspecified future date.
Concerns about the public and private financial vulnerabilities accumulated during 
the crisis and mutual distrust keep progress on hold. While risk reduction and sharing 
should go hand in hand and mutually reinforce one another, uncertainty around how 
to  proceed,  disagreement  on  the  sequence  and  effects  of  interventions,  and  fears  of 
negative  spillovers  produce  a  standstill  in  the  reform  process.  As  a  consequence,  the 
euro area’s economic integration is being held back and the area itself continues to be 
exposed to financial risks.
This deadlock must be broken and the conditions must be created to allow for steps 
to be taken in the future that appear impossible today. Against this background, I would 
like to share some reflections with you, first, on how sovereign and banking risks are being 
dealt with in Europe, and second, on the state of play of fiscal and capital markets unions.
Sovereign and banking risks
The  widespread  concern  over  high  public  debts  is  justified.  They  are  a  source 
of  systemic  risk.  Even  if  fundamentally  solvent,  highly  indebted  countries  are  more 
vulnerable to liquidity shocks and negative markets’ assessment of national authorities’ 
commitment to financial stability. In addition, in a currency area, a sovereign debt crisis 
can have strong repercussions for neighbouring countries, given the close economic and 
financial links.
A  reform  of  the  Treaty  on  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  to  reinforce 
its  role  in  preventing  and  managing  sovereign  crises  in  euro-area  member  states  is 
currently being finalised. It is part of an effort aimed at reducing uncertainty as to how 
and when a sovereign debt can be restructured. Clarifying the conditions and procedures 
for restructuring would certainly reduce the part of the cost of a sovereign default which 
can be attributed to uncertainty over the manner and timing of its solution.
But this is only a small part of the cost of sovereign insolvency. Moreover, this is a 
matter to be handled with care. The small and uncertain benefits of a debt restructuring 
mechanism must be weighed against the huge risk that the mere announcement of its 
introduction may trigger a perverse spiral of expectations of default, which may prove to 
be self-fulfilling. We should all keep in mind the dire consequences of the announcement 
of  private  sector  involvement  in  the  resolution  of  the  Greek  crisis  after  the  Deauville 
meeting in late 2010.
The  importance  of  rigorous  budgetary  policies  at  a  national  level  cannot  be 
overestimated. But reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio requires time and there is the risk 
that a crisis might interrupt the process, without this being the direct consequence of a 
policy decision. Europe should seek ways to support and protect the efforts that must 
be made by member states to reduce their debt. This is why some form of supranational 
insurance is needed, for example through the creation of a European debt redemption 
fund (ERF) financed by dedicated resources of the participating countries.
The mechanism can be designed in a way that prevents systematic transfers across 
countries  while  reducing  the  risk  of  financial  instability  for  the  area  as  a  whole.  The 
introduction of an ERF would strengthen national commitment to debt reduction (as the 
share of national debt transferred to the fund would be backed by a dedicated revenue 
stream)  and  reduce  the  systemic  relevance  of  (residual)  national  debt.  This  would  be 
2
instrumental in enhancing the credibility of the no-bailout clause and the enforceability 
of European fiscal rules.
In  the  academic  and  political  debate,  the  introduction  of  a  sovereign  debt 
restructuring  mechanism  is  often  linked  to  proposals  to  introduce  prudential 
requirements limiting banks’ sovereign exposures. Here, it is important to bear in mind 
that  the  sovereign-bank  nexus  does  not  operate  exclusively  through  banks’  direct 
exposures: a sovereign crisis would also affect banks through an increase in their cost 
of funding (particularly in the event of rating downgrades) and, above all, through its 
effects on the overall economy. A sharp rise in the perceived risk of one State’s debt 
can quickly trigger a recessive spiral, kindling social tensions with unpredictable results. 
The blow to the banking system would be severe, irrespective of its capitalisation and 
direct exposure. Thus, if we really want to break the sovereign-bank nexus, we need 
to reduce the risk embedded in sovereign bonds, not just the amounts held by banks.
Moreover, simply shifting risky bonds from the balance sheet of banks to those of 
other sectors would not reduce the overall risk. Finally, since prudential requirements on 
sovereign exposures are not imposed in any other jurisdiction, if we were to introduce 
them in the European Union or in the euro area, we would need to provide financial 
markets with an alternative “risk-free asset”, such as a Eurobond of some sort − and the 
debt redemption fund I mentioned before would be instrumental.
Reducing banks’ sovereign exposures and the ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs) 
to total outstanding loans are often considered as preconditions for the completion of 
the banking union. Other important sources of risk have, however, not been sufficiently 
considered.  Recent  initiatives  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  to  determine  the 
most appropriate treatment of illiquid and opaque assets on banks’ balance sheets are 
meant to respond to these concerns.
Even worse, the vulnerability produced by an incomplete framework for the effective 
and orderly management of banking crises has also been, and still is, overlooked. On 
the one hand, consensus has grown around the idea to postpone the implementation 
of the ESM backstop to the Single Resolution Fund until 2024 unless further progress 
has been achieved in risk reduction measured solely in relation to NPL volumes (and in 
building up buffers of liabilities to be used in a crisis). On the other hand, a situation is 
accepted whereby a disorderly liquidation is the only possible outcome for the crises of 
small and medium-sized intermediaries which, like most European banks, are not subject 
to resolution (albeit – it must be noted – they are required to contribute to the Single 
Resolution Fund).
The recent suggestions from Germany on the completion of the banking union is a 
welcome development in that it shows willingness to keep the dialogue open. However, 
they fail to address some of the issues I just mentioned. Banking risks are once more 
exclusively identified with NPLs and sovereign exposures. Moreover, when considering 
a revision of the prudential treatment of the latter, there is no mention of the need to 
introduce a European safe asset, which is particularly at odds with the frequent references 
made to the US model, where the role of federal debt as a safe asset is paramount.
3
An adequate fiscal capacity and the implementation of the capital markets union
If  sovereign  and  bank  risks  management  is  a  source  of  concern,  turning  to  the 
state of play of discussions about the fiscal union and the implementation of the capital 
markets  union  will  provide  little  consolation.  Monetary  policy  was  the  sole  line  of 
defence against the risk of euro area financial fragmentation during the sovereign debt 
crisis and against the risks of deflation that emerged in the years thereafter. The ECB’s 
Governing Council demonstrated its readiness to use all of the instruments available and, 
if necessary, to introduce new ones to pursue the objective of price stability. It has been 
largely successful, but its actions could have been even more effective had they been 
accompanied by other economic policies.
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  remains  at  levels  that  are  still  too  low,  and  these  low 
levels  are  pushing  down  short-term  inflation  expectations  once  again.  The  risk  of  a 
de-anchoring  of  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  has  re-emerged.  The  Governing 
Council response has been timely, appropriate and proportionate. But once again we are 
seeing that to make the fullest possible use of the expansionary potential of monetary 
policy measures, other policies should move in the same direction.
Fiscal policies that support economic activity in the euro area can deliver a faster 
return to price stability. To ensure sustained higher growth, reforms are needed to remove 
any  obstacles  to  development,  foster  innovation  and  help  modernise  the  productive 
system. Acting in isolation, monetary policy can do nothing but continue along the path 
of “non-standard” measures. This increases the risk of adverse side effects, which, in turn, 
need to be kept under control using instruments of an increasingly administrative nature.
As the former President of the ECB recently recalled, “we need a euro area fiscal 
capacity of adequate size and design: large enough to stabilize the monetary union”. This 
is no subversive statement. Economic theory as well as the concrete experience of other 
successful monetary unions, most notably the United States, suggest that the euro area 
would greatly benefit from the establishment of a supranational fiscal capacity. Indeed, a 
report on the appeal of a fiscal union − the MacDougall Report − was published as early 
as 1977 on behalf of the European Commission, and even the 1970 Werner Report makes 
reference  to  it.  Later  on,  the  technical  papers  accompanying  the  1989  Delors  Report 
discussed the topic in depth.
On 3 May 1998, when Europe was completing the last steps before the adoption 
of the single currency, Tommaso Padoa Schioppa wrote in a column in Corriere della 
Sera:  “the  Union  has  full  competence  for  microeconomic  policy  […],  but  its  capability 
for macroeconomic policy is, with the exception of the monetary field, embryonic and 
unbalanced: it can avoid harm (excessive deficits) but it cannot do good (a proper fiscal 
policy). […] It is thus right not only to applaud yesterday’s step but also to underline its 
unfinished nature, the risks and the rashness”.
Nevertheless, little progress has been made in the way of remedying the asymmetry 
of having a single monetary policy and yet multiple national budgets, perhaps out of 
fear of sharing the debts that could result from the operation of a fiscal union. Yet, as 
4
I have observed, a common fiscal capacity can be structured in such a way as to avoid 
systematic cross-country transfers, thus reconciling the full exercise of macroeconomic 
stabilization with the balancing of public accounts in each country. Fiscal union would 
make  it  possible  to  implement  policies  consistent  with  the  cyclical  conditions  in  the 
various member states and in the euro area as a whole, promptly and with no doubts as 
to their legitimacy. The single currency needs to interact with a single fiscal policy.
It has been argued that national fiscal policies could absorb the effects of cyclical 
fluctuations  in  member  states  and  that  financial  markets  could  provide  an  insurance 
analogous to the one that would be provided by a fiscal union. However, cross-country 
spillovers may reduce the effectiveness of national initiatives and, in the current situation, 
several national budgets have little room for manoeuvre due to high public debts. In 
addition, European financial markets are far from being perfectly integrated, which clearly 
limits their viability as shock absorbers.
In the United States, in Canada and in other federal countries, a significant share of 
individual states’ income variability is offset by the federal fiscal system (estimates based on 
different methods average at 10-15 per cent for both the US and Canada). The difference 
between the euro area and fully-fledged federations in terms of shock- absorption capacity 
is even higher when we look at capital markets.
The  smooth  functioning  of  a  currency  area  requires  a  single  capital  market  that 
facilitates access to financing for businesses. In addition, an integrated market helps to 
absorb local macroeconomic shocks, increases the robustness of the economic system, 
and strengthens financial stability. It would also obviously aid the effective and speedy 
transmission of fiscal and monetary policy measures.
But it is a complex endeavour. It entails decisive action towards the harmonisation 
of company, securities, bankruptcy and tax laws, as well as of supervisory procedures. 
While such a harmonisation may begin with changes in relevant national legislation and 
focus on those areas which may produce broader effects, the ultimate goal must be one 
of achieving a single rulebook. Above all, a single capital market requires a common safe 
asset. Addressing this gap would support the banking and capital markets by creating 
a  homogeneous  product  of  a  high  quality  and  significant  size  that  could  become  a 
benchmark for investors and improve financial integration.
 I  do  not  think  that  I  have  to  struggle  to  convince  you  of  the  lack  of  significant 
progress  with  the  European  construction.  There  has  been  a  substantial  transfer  of 
sovereignty on economic and financial matters, especially in recent years. It is indeed 
illusory to believe that we can direct the course of the economy and finance, patently 
global phenomena, from within the narrow confines of individual European countries. 
The construction, however, is lopsided and incomplete; its very sustainability requires 
that the missing elements be incorporated soon.
Today,  proceeding  by  means  of  compromise  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult. 
Distrust leads to disaccord, and in the exasperated pursuit of mutual reassurance and 
5
short-term  gains,  the  necessary  steps  are  hard  to  take.  The  concrete  achievement  of 
monetary  union,  banking  union,  capital  markets  union,  and  even  the  prospect  of  a 
common  fiscal  policy,  all  call  for  a  leap  in  quality.  Europe  must  remain  an  anchor  of 
stability in a world that appears ever more unstable and politically unpredictable.
The introduction of a safe asset in the euro area is a clear and immediate objective. 
It is a technical endeavour, but it is also the common denominator to the three unions 
(banking, capital markets, fiscal) that must flank monetary union. By partly replacing national 
government  bonds,  a  European  debt  instrument  could  help  to  diversify  the  sovereign 
exposures of financial institutions. It could reduce the risk of flights to safety by investors 
in times of market tension and enable the financial market to play an effective role as 
shock absorber, thereby also enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. It could be 
an instrument for funding shared automatic stabilisers within a common fiscal capacity.
As I have said, it is possible to design mechanisms that enable a safe asset to be 
introduced with the necessary safeguards against the risk of opportunistic behaviour. But 
aside from the rules, the essential requirement for the viability of this solution lies in a 
renewed and convinced commitment by all to the European project and a willingness to 
pursue common solutions for common problems.
6
Grafica a cura della Divisione Editoria e stampa della Banca d’Italia
