 Keynote Speech made by Dr Indrajit Coomaraswamy, 
Governor, Central Bank of Sri Lanka at the International Conference on 
Social Enterprise & Social Finance 
Monday, 28th January 2019 at Waters Edge 
 
A Social Enterprise is recognized as an important business model that 
applies new commercial strategies to maximize improvements in 
financial, social and environmental well-being. In fact, it is a tool for 
creating positive social impact; 
promoting social change; 
and achieving environmental sustainability. Social enterprises contribute 
in multiple ways to enhance social inclusion while nurturing women and 
youth with economic empowerment.  
 
Sri Lanka’s efforts to increase Social Enterprise & Social Finance  
date back to the late 20th century. The early efforts took the form of loans 
that were granted to overcome the major barriers  SMEs faced in raising 
capital through traditional methods. Thereafter, various measures have 
been taken to promote and support social enterprises by providing 
educational, technical and business support services in addition to 
finance: 
❖  Numerous schemes over the years to promote SMEs. They have 
 had a very mixed track record. 
Plethora of institutions.  Highly fragmented institutional 
infrastructure with weak coordination 
❖  Need holistic approach focusing on training, inputs, finance and 
markets 
❖  Marketing most intractable problem.  MSMEs need to be linked to 
supply chains to address the marketing challenge. 
 
To achieve balanced and inclusive growth, it is necessary to have all 
stakeholders connected to markets: goods and service markets as well as 
factor markets. Interconnected markets enable the economic ecosystem 
to foster synergy and enhance productivity for all stakeholders.  They also 
provide income generating opportunities to all segments of the society 
leading to reduction of poverty on sustainable basis. 
 
The task of transforming our economy into a social enterprise economy 
continues to be challenging. Though there have been advances, several 
bottlenecks still persist thereby inhibiting the expected outcomes. The 
contribution of social enterprises to environmental sustainability, 
therefore, remains below potential.  The role of social enterprises in 
1 
 social inclusion, livelihood development and poverty reduction has room 
for improvement. 
 
Although, the social enterprise sector in Sri Lanka is gathering 
momentum, a range of different needs have to be fulfilled to uplift its 
contribution to the economy.  These include business modelling, 
planning, product design, sales and marketing.  In this connection, 
impact investment has been recognized as key to scale up the social 
enterprise sector rapidly. Further, its social, environmental and economic 
impact needs to be assessed and reported according to global standards.  
In this connection, greater use needs to be made of triple bottom line 
accounting.  In addition, social entrepreneurs need to be recognized and 
rewarded for their achievements at the national level.  
 
Emphasis upon knowledge sharing and awareness building on the nexus 
between social enterprise and social impact can make a significant 
contribution towards promoting a more effective and efficient process to 
encourage social enterprises across Sri Lanka. Today, you are gathered 
here to deliberate on current trends, challenges and opportunities in 
building a social enterprise ecosystem and to help social enterprises and 
SMEs to scale up and create social impact, under the timely theme of 
“Think Social -Produce Social - Buy Social”. I believe this conference 
would be an effective pathway, particularly for emerging and prospective 
entrepreneurs to explore new markets for social goods and services and 
also an opportunity to share knowledge on successful social ventures at 
both local and global levels.  
 
You are all aware that maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment 
through economic and price stability and financial system stability are the 
core objectives of the Central Bank. Promoting regional development is 
one of the agency functions of the Central Bank.  Promoting social 
enterprises is therefore, associated with the broader objectives of the 
Central Bank. 
 
In that context, the Central Bank, on behalf of the Government, has a 
mandate for targeted lending to the microfinance, SME and agriculture 
sectors, as well as youth and women. In implementing this mandate, the 
Central Bank has been facilitating and implementing refinance schemes, 
interest subsidy schemes and credit guarantee schemes targeting the 
MSMEs. 
  
2 
 In addition, the Central Bank has embarked upon developing a National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS), to introduce an evidence-based, 
prioritized, better resourced, and more comprehensive approach to 
expanding access to financial services. This would be an essential policy 
tool that will coordinate and implement cross-cutting actions and reforms, 
to increase financial inclusion in the country. With this national level 
strategy, it is expected to bring-in under-served segments of the society to 
the formal financial sector. Further, the Central Bank has been conducting 
awareness programs on financial literacy and financial management as 
well as capacity building programs covering entrepreneurship and skills 
development for the needy segments of the population, with special 
focus on youth and grass root level entrepreneurs.   
 
Furthermore, the Central Bank is attaching priority to improving payments 
and settlement systems and encouraging the use of electronic and mobile 
payment systems, with the objective of increasing financial inclusion 
through reducing transaction costs with the advance of technology. In 
addition, through the SME National Policy Framework, the Government 
has also set out the policy direction, the challenges to be addressed and 
the intervention strategies to be pursued to achieve regional balance and 
resource efficiency in developing SMEs.  
 
These initiatives have yielded encouraging outcomes.  Yet, I believe, Sri 
Lanka still has a great deal of untapped potential in developing social 
enterprises.  There is much scope to increase the use of financial services, 
technology and business support services in order to promote social 
enterprises. To achieve this, a more dynamic approach, which entails the 
combined effort of all stakeholders, including state and private entities 
following a cohesive policy framework, is required to match available 
resources with the needs of the sector. 
 
Despite the numerous challenges, it is encouraging to observe the 
emergence of organizations, which are seeking to operate their 
commercial ventures to achieve the twin objectives of a social mission 
and profit generation.  Their prospects are being enhanced by the trend in 
consumer choice towards healthier, Eco-friendly and "social goods".  
"Social buyers" who are keen to buy goods and services from social 
enterprises are emerging as a new force.  
 
In conclusion, a concerted effort is needed to establish policies and 
systems to support the growth of the emerging social enterprise sector in 
Sri Lanka. I hope today’s deliberations will deliver outcomes which will 
3 
 assist social entrepreneurs to lead social change by stimulating economic 
growth, innovation and the development of social capital.  Social 
enterprises have an important role to play in Sri Lanka meeting the SDGs. 
 
Thank you.  
 
 
4 
