Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus:  Building  trust  and  transparency  -
collaborate, accelerate, strengthen
Speech  by  Ms  Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  11th  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism
Financing (IFCTF) 2019, Kuala Lumpur, 5 November 2019.
 Last year, I spoke at this same conference about our shared responsibility to combat financial
crime and the need for us to have a deep understanding of new and emerging risks. I also called
on reporting institutions to strengthen their compliance functions.
I was therefore delighted to learn that the theme of this year’s conference is “Building Trust and
Transparency: Collaborate, Accelerate, Strengthen”.
This afternoon, I would like to briefly expand on some of the ideas that I put forward last year,
which will build on this year’s conference theme.
First, on the point on collaboration. We speak a lot about how combating financial crime is a
shared responsibility. This is because of its massive impact, imposing a cost to governments,
businesses and individuals. A Thompson Reuters report from 2018 revealed that nearly half of
2,000  plus  large  companies  surveyed  were  victims  of  financial  crimes  in  the  past  one  year,
losing an estimated 3.5% of their turnover.
This goes to show that this is a battle that needs to be waged together. Key to this is the sharing
of  information.  Over  the  years,  we  have  put  in  place  various  arrangements  to  enable  smooth
information  flows  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  law  enforcement  community,  within  a
controlled environment.
These “public-private partnerships” (PPP) are vital as they allow the financial intelligence unit, law
enforcement agencies and reporting institutions to leverage on intelligence-led collaboration and
information  sharing  to  detect  financial  crime  and  terrorism  financing.  This  will  further  support
investigation  and  prosecution  processes.  For  Malaysia,  our  goal  is  to  formalise  and  further
deepen what we have built over the years. As such, I am pleased to announce that the PPP will
be officially launched shortly by our  Prime  Minister.  I wish to also express my appreciation to
other  participating  agencies  in  the  PPP  namely  Polis  Diraja  Malaysia,  the  Suruhanjaya
Pencegahan Rasuah Malaysia, Jabatan Kastam Diraja Malaysia and the Securities Commission
Malaysia, and also the 18 reporting institutions.
Second,  reporting  institutions  must accelerate  efforts  to  further  expand  and  develop  their
AML/CFT toolkit to deal with new and emerging risks.
At our end, Bank Negara is in the process of reviewing our AML/CFT policies. A key outcome of
this  review  is  the  move  of  our  regulatory  framework  towards  being  more  “risk-based”  and
“principles-based”. We have come a long way since the AMLA was gazetted in 2001. Since then,
reporting institutions have matured in understanding and have fully implemented the regulatory
requirements. This is also supplemented by the issuance of various guidance, technical notes
and updates on regulation.
We believe that the industry is ready to build and expand its capacity in this area. While we are
moving to being more risk-based, there is still a lot more to be done. This includes educating
everyone in the industry that “risk-based” does not mean “total risk aversion”. While it is crucial to
protect our financial system from being abused, it is also necessary for financial institutions to
serve  their  roles  and  purposes  in  the  economy  and  for  the  society.  Accordingly,  the  new
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulatory framework demands reporting institutions to take greater ownership of their individual
AML/CFT  frameworks.  Reporting  institutions  must  strengthen  their  internal  governance  and
controls to preserve financial integrity, not because Bank Negara tells them so, but because it is
the right thing to do.
This  demands  a  high  level  of  maturity  by  the  industry.  For  individual  institutions  which  have
established  a  mature  control  environment,  there  will  be  greater  latitude  to  design  control
frameworks  in  a  way  that  is  more  operationally  flexible.  On  the  other  hand,  for  individual
institutions who are not quite there yet, the new framework raises the compliance bar, calling for
them to strengthen awareness, governance and processes to ensure they have the capabilities
to preserve integrity of the financial system.
On this point, I wish to applaud the Financial Services Professional Board (FSPB) on its recent
publication  of  standards  on  whistleblowing  and  on  managing  conflicts  of  interest.  By  working
together to set and voluntarily commit to baseline standards, the industry can demonstrate its
readiness for a more risk-based regulatory approach. I hope that the industry will adopt these
standards and this means moving beyond symbolic gestures, to the diligent implementation of
policies and programmes that promote the desired culture.
Bank Negara is also committed to ensuring that regulatory requirements support the country’s
digital economy agenda. We are in the midst of developing e-KYC policy guidance to streamline
practices  of  industry  players  in  leveraging  new  technology.  The  guidance  will  clarify  desirable
outcomes of e-KYC adoption, and set out best practice as well as standardised parameters to
measure effectiveness of e-KYC solutions. Our hope is that with its promise of seamless digital
on-boarding of customers and lower costs, increased prevalence of e-KYC will help increase
competition while also advancing the financial inclusion agenda – and this must be done without
compromising  on  financial  integrity  outcomes.  We  will  consult  the  industry  and  other  relevant
parties through the publication of an exposure draft early December this year.
Third, we must strengthen our defences in view of new risks and changing environment.
Recent  years  have  seen  authorities  across  the  globe  intensifying  action  against  financial
institutions  for  harbouring  criminal  activity.  We  see  multi-billion  dollar  fines  and  all  forms  of
regulatory sanctions, with some facing the threat of closure.
On our part, Bank Negara will continue to use supervisory levers to sustain positive changes and
drive  improvements  in  the  compliance  culture  in  the  industry.  This  includes  seeing  increased
oversight by senior management and board of directors, more robust remedial measures and
increased investments in strengthening compliance.
We prefer if the industry can strengthen their defences against financial crimes pre-emptively, on
their  own.  But  Bank  Negara  will  also  not  hesitate  to  use  enforcement  levers  to  deal  with
instances where there are persistent gaps and non-compliance with rules. Over the years, we
have  worked  to  enhance  our  enforcement  framework  to  ensure  that  enforcement  actions  are
just, proportionate and transparent. In order to uphold transparency of enforcement actions, we
have started publishing actions taken against financial institutions for non-compliances of rules
under our purview. The intention is to clarify our regulatory expectations and to expedite change
in culture by knowing the incentives and consequences of non-compliance.
In January, we lowered the daily Cash Threshold Report (CTR) from RM50,000 to RM25,000. Up
to September, over five million CTR reports were received, representing about RM483 billion in
cash  transactions.  It  is  still  too  early  to  draw  any  concrete  conclusions,  but  what  we  have
observed  across  the  industry  is  the  total  value  of  cash  transactions  reported  has  increased
marginally,  while  the  number  of  CTR  reports  received  have  nearly  doubled.  The  significant
increase  in  CTR  received  since  January  provides  us  important  data  points  that  enable  more
rigorous monitoring of peculiarities in cash transactions and identification of ML/TF risk on newly
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
identified entities that have not been captured previously. These additional insights also lead to
better quality of disclosures to relevant law enforcement agencies especially in relation to fraud,
tax evasion and corruption crimes.
The regulatory and law enforcement community is also in the midst of exploring introducing a
Cash  Transaction  Limit  (CTL)  to  complement  the  existing  financial  integrity  measures.  While
new to Malaysia, many other countries such as France, Italy and India have already implemented
it. This measure will further mitigate the abuse of cash by addressing the ease of conducting
high-value cash transactions. Even with the rise of electronic payments, we cannot wash over
the fact that criminals still prefer cash because it is widely accepted, anonymous in nature and
untraceable.  For  this  purpose,  the  National  Coordination  Committee  to  Counter  Money
Laundering (NCC) will be consulting the public on this proposal later this month. The NCC wants
to  make  an  informed  decision. As  such,  we  hope  that  all  of  you  could  get  the  word  out  and
encourage the public to provide feedback on the proposed measure.
Closing
As a regulator, Bank Negara can only do so much to protect the financial system against money
laundering and terrorism financing risk. Reporting institutions, as responsible corporate citizens,
must also play their parts to safeguard the financial system and economy.
Our hope is that over these two days, participants at this conference will draw new insights and
perspectives,  forge  new  networks,  and  strengthen  their  resolve  in  carrying  out  this  important
mission to uphold the integrity and the trust of the people in our financial system.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
