  Regulation & Supervision: from old fault lines to emerging concerns 1   
 
 
 
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests,  
Sabah-al-khair and a very good morning. 
 
I am delighted to return to this forum for the third time in a row, and I am grateful to 
H.E. Dr. Abdulrahman A. Al Hamidy for inviting me to speak before this august 
gathering. 
Taking this opportunity today, I would like to touch upon two areas. First, where the 
years of regulatory reforms have left us in terms of addressing the fault lines that global 
financial crisis (GFC) laid bare, and second, what are the emerging regulatory & 
supervisory concerns going forward. 
 Fixing the old fault lines 
Let me start with the first question: where the years of regulatory reforms have left us? 
It is well over a decade since the GFC took the financial world by storm. Around ten years 
back,  in  2009, the  world  was  reeling from  a  financial  crisis  that  was  unique  in both  its 
origin and scale. Epicenter of the crisis was advanced countries and the US in particular. 
And in terms of scale, as research by BIS has highlighted, cumulative output loss since the 
GFC  has  been  a  hefty  25%  of  the  world’s  GDP,  excluding  the  enormous  social  costs 
associated with high unemployment and lost output. 
Rising  to  the  occasion,  global  leaders  moved  quickly  to  address  the  threats  to  global 
financial  system  –  a  feat  that  appears  particularly  impressive  in  current  times  of trade 
spats and growing nationalism. GFC also led to a fundamental shift in our approach to 
banking  regulation  and  supervision,  essentially  by  exposing  the  fault  lines  in  the 
inadequacy of earlier regulatory architecture. 
                                                           
1 Keynote speech delivered by His Excellency Dr. Mohammad Y. Al-Hashel, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait in the 
14th High Level Meeting for the Middle East & North Africa Region, jointly organized by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Institute and the Arab Monetary Fund, on December 11, 2019 in Abu 
Dhabi, UAE. 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيو
- 
كلا كنب
 
 - 2 - 
By now, those fault lines are well-understood. Banks held too little capital and of poor 
quality.  Inadequacy  of  capital  was  further  weakened  by  the  absence  of  a  backstop 
measure to contain excessive leverage. Banks that were too big to fail enjoyed the market 
power but were not required to internalize the cost of risks they brought to the overall 
system. Suitable measures of liquidity, in both funding and market sense, were lacking. 
And the efforts to contain systemic risk, both in its time and structural dimension, were 
hardly in sight. In a nutshell, the rule book was evidently deficient. 
And  if  that  was  not  enough,  banking  supervision  was  micro  prudential  in  nature. 
Supervisors  believed  that  ensuring  stability  of  individual  institutions  would  make  the 
system as a whole stable, thus largely ignoring the buildup of systemic risk. 
The GFC brought into sharp focus the gaps  in our regulatory regime. As Paul Romer, a 
Stanford Economist, once said, ‘A crisis is a terrible thing to waste’. Thankfully, lessons 
from the GFC were not wasted.  Central banks and financial regulators made great strides 
in  building  a  more  stable  and  resilient  financial system.  The  regulatory  reforms by the 
BCBS under Basel III regime not only refined the existing rules but also introduced wide-
ranging measures which were earlier missing or inadequate. 
Thanks  to  these  efforts,  the  old  fault  lines  have  been  largely  fixed.  Capital  adequacy 
regime  has  been  enhanced,  with  higher  and  better  quality  capital.  Additional  capital 
conservation buffer and countercyclical capital buffer requirements have also been put in 
place to help banks maintain additional cushion and limit the buildup of systemic risk. 
Likewise, leverage ratio has been phased in as a backstop to CAR. On the liquidity front, 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Net Stable Funding Ratio have further strengthened banks’ 
capacity to withstand liquidity stress and to make their funding structure more stable. To 
address  structural dimension  of  systemic  risk,  capital  charge for  SIFIs has  been  added, 
recovery  and  resolution  regimes  have  been  strengthened  and  safety  nets  have  been 
improved.  Of course, this list is not exhaustive. 
While the world has not seen a crisis similar to GFC to determine if these reforms have 
made the financial system resilient enough, there is sufficient evidence to suggest that 
our banks are considerably more stable than a decade ago. Even the impact of oil price 
shock  of  2014  on  GCC  banks  have  been  muted  at  most,  though  degree  of  resilience 
certainly varies from one country to another. Still, there is broader agreement that our 
banks entered the low oil price environment from a position of strength which was built 
through prudent regulatory reforms. 
Now, as the rule book is mostly in place, it is time for supervision to step up. After all, 
regulation can only go that far; without effective supervision, it is hard to ensure timely 
and consistent implementation and achieve financial stability at large. 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 3 - 
The role of effective supervision is also critical because not every risk can be pre-defined 
in a rulebook. While overseeing the dynamic world of finance, supervisors must be agile 
enough  to  suitably  correct  course  in  line  with  the  constantly  changing  nature  of  the 
banking industry or the emergence of new risks. 
In the second part of my speech, I would like to touch upon two such emerging concerns; 
cyber threats and climate change. 
Addressing Emerging Concerns 
Ensuring resilience against Cyber threats 
First, consider the issue of cyber threats. Growing footprint of technology is influencing 
every  facet  of  the  banking  business,  transforming  banks’  internal  processes  as  well  as 
their  engagements  with  customers.  As  the  role  of  technology  deepens  from  a  mere 
support function to a platform central to everything that banks do, the likelihood of new 
risks emanating from ubiquitous and connected technologies loom large. Materialization 
of  such  risks  will  not  only  disrupt  vital  financial  services  but  will  also  undermine  the 
security and confidence in the financial system. 
In  fact,  the  scale  and  sophistication  of  cyber-attacks  is  already  on  the  rise.  Examples 
include data breach at Target of 70 million credit card users, a cyber-attack on Equifax 
compromising  data  of  143  million  customers,  and  the  hacking  of  over  100  million 
customers’ data at Capital One Bank. 
No wonder, cyber risk features as a key concern in different industry surveys. For instance, 
respondents to the Bank of England’s Systemic Risk Survey of 2H-2018 quoted the risk of 
a ‘cyber attack’ as the second major threat to the system, only behind the Brexit induced 
political risk. 
The growing threats of cyber risk need to be reflected in banks’ operational risk capital 
charge. Incidentally, the Basel Committee has revised its operational risk methodology by 
replacing  the  existing  three  techniques  with  a  simplified  Standardized    Measurement 
Approach and expects that its implementation, due by January 2022, will increase capital 
risk charge for operational risk by 18% for a group of banks currently using Standardized 
Approach of the old regime. While it is not clear how much of the increase in operational 
risk charge is driven by the recognition of growing cyber threats, greater capital allocation 
for operational risk is a step in the right direction, given the increasing significance of such 
low probability but high impact risks. 
However, reliance on capital alone will not suffice. Supervisors must ensure that banks 
improve  their  operational  resilience  by  strengthening  their  ability  to  respond  to  and 
recover  from  cyber-attacks.  At  a  minimum,  mitigating  cyber  threats  would  require 
effective collaboration between regulators and the industry, adequate contingency and 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 4 - 
recovery  plans  by  banks  and  sound  security  practices  by  all  participants  of  financial 
market infrastructure. In Kuwait, we are in the process of putting in place an advanced 
platform for effective information sharing about cyber threats that can later be used at 
the regional level. 
Supervisors in this regard can leverage CPMI-IOSCO guidance that calls for ‘resilience by 
design’, encouraging to incorporate sound security features in the system right from its 
earliest stage of conceptualization.  This approach will help address the potential cyber 
compromises that could stem from banks’ dependence on legacy technologies. 
To help strengthen cyber resilience of financial institutions, Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
is  currently  working  on ‘identifying  practices to help  financial  institutions  recover  from 
and  respond  to  cyber  incidents’.  Next  year,  they  are  planning  to  release  a  toolkit  of 
effective  practices  that  banking  industry  can  use  in  improving  operational  resilience 
against cyber threats. 
Coping with climate change  
The second emerging issue warranting our close attention is climate change. According 
to UN estimates, around 60 million people were affected by extreme weather events in 
2018 alone. And within this year, we have witnessed the damaging impact of wildfire in 
California, hurricane in Bahamas, cyclone in Bangladesh and typhoon in Japan. 
 
Thankfully, the issue of climate change, after languishing on margins for years, has finally 
caught policy makers’ attention. As Victor Hugo once said, ‘nothing is as powerful as an 
idea whose time has come’. It seems that time has finally come for the climate change to 
receive the attention it deserves. 
 
Climate  risks  stem  both  from  climate  shocks  like  floods,  hurricanes  and  other  severe 
weather events as well as from trends such as warming temperatures, melting glaciers 
and rising sea levels. Broadly speaking, these weather developments pose two types of 
risks to the financial sector; physical and transition. Increasing severity and frequency of 
extreme  weather  events  could pose  serious  physical  risks  by  damaging  the assets  that 
constitute  banks’  exposures.  Additionally,  natural  disasters  can  damage  public 
infrastructure and destroy livelihood, hurting economic activity in general. 
 
On the other hand, transition risk stems from the economic impact of a shift to a low-
carbon  economy.    Factors  like  development  of  environment-friendly  technologies, 
changing public sentiments, and new laws to govern carbon emission can cause a shift in 
economic  activity  towards  greener  projects.  As  a  result,  the  value  of  carbon-intensive 
assets might drop as investors’ risk perception and preferences change. Sectors like oil, 
gas, coal and utilities are particularly vulnerable in the long run as transition risk might 
devalue their assets and displace their workforce. 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 5 - 
International  Energy  Agency  (IEA)  estimates  that  achieving  Paris  Agreement  target  on 
climate change would require, by 2050, about 80% decrease in the CO2 intensity of the 
building sector, 95% of world energy supply to be of low carbon and 70% of new cars to 
be  electric.  This  will  cause  significant,  even  if  slower,  shift  in  the  structure  of  our 
economies with strong bearing on the financial sector. 
 
That  is  why  the  NGFS,  the  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  for  Greening  the 
Financial System, has argued that ‘climate related risks are a source of financial risk and 
therefore fall squarely within the mandate of central banks and supervisors to ensure that 
financial system is resilient to these risks’. 
 
Regulators need to determine how best to incorporate and operationalize climate related 
risks  in  their  prudential  policy  settings.  It  would  require  expanding  the  risk  matrix  to 
formally include climate related risks and enhancing the analytical tools to assess financial 
sector  exposures  to  extreme  weather  events.  Bank  of  England  has  announced  that  in 
2021, it will start stress-testing banks on different climate pathways. Ultimately, the key 
is to retool the regulatory regime to factor in risks to climate change in a holistic fashion, 
instead of adding on an additional item in the risk matrix. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Let me conclude. 
 
While we have managed to fix the fault lines exposed by the GFC, our understanding and 
ability to respond to some of the emerging risks remain limited. This is true for both cyber 
threats and climate change. A feature common to these risks is their wider impact through 
multiple  entry  points.  Hence,  the  key  to  address  both  lies  in  sharing  information  and 
strengthening cooperation.  
 
If we are grappling with risks that transcend sectoral and national boundaries, so should 
our response. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11/12/2019 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
