Denton Rarawa: Launch of the 2018 CBSI Annual Report
Remarks by Mr Denton Rarawa, Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at launch of
the 2018 CBSI Annual Report, Honiara, 20 May 2019.
 Salutations
·        The Honourable Minister of Finance & Treasury,
·        Other Honourable Ministers and Members of Parliament,
·        Representatives of the Diplomatic Corps,
·        Senior Government officials,
·        Central Bank Directors,
·        Heads of Statutory Authorities,
·        Heads of Financial Institutions,
·        Representatives of Non-Government Organizations,
·        Representatives of the Private Sector,
·        Representatives of the Media,
·        Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honour  to  warmly  welcome  you  all  and  thank  you  for  accepting  our
invitation  to  the  launch  of  CBSI’s  2018  Annual  Report.  This  event  is  one  of  the  important
occasions  in  the  Bank’s  calendar.    It  provides  me  an  opportunity  to  account  for  the  Bank’s
operations and financial outcomes during the year. However, before I do that, let me first of all
present to you an assessment of economic conditions last year, as well as share some food for
thought on how we can progress our economy going forward.
At last year’s annual report launch, I talked about the need to “reform to transform” our economy
after 40 years of nationhood. Today, I want to focus on reforms in the next four to six years. What
realistically we could do to move our economy forward. These reforms should drive growth for
the next ten years. So, the theme for this morning is about “setting the foundation for robust,
broad-based and inclusive growth”.
I.  Solomon Islands economy in 2018
The Solomon Islands economy witnessed another successful year in 2018. CBSI estimates that
the economy grew by 3.9 percent, up from 3.7 percent in 2017. This result was driven mainly by
favourable performance in the services sector, particularly from wholesale retail, transport and
financial services. The positive outcomes in the primary and secondary sectors (mainly forestry
and fisheries) and (construction and manufacturing) also contributed to this growth.
Performance in all key export commodities, with the exception of copra, were positive. Round
logs grew by 3 percent to 2.7 million cubic metres last year, the highest level of production on
record.
Labour  conditions  expanded  during  the  year.  Based  on  SINPF  data  as  a  proxy  employment
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicator show an increase of 7 percent to more than 58,000 active contributors. Staffing levels in
the public sector rose by 2% to over 17,000 employees. There was also a pickup in both the
locally based work force and seasonal workers in Australia and New Zealand.
Consumer  price  pressures  rose  in  2018.  Headline  inflation  reached  4.2  percent  in  December
against 1.8 percent at the end of 2017. This rate was within the Bank’s forecasted range and was
driven  by  stronger  supply-side  domestic  inflation,  along  with  the  rise  in  imported  prices.
Categories  responsible  for  the  spike  in  consumer  prices  during  the  year  were  education,
transportation, food, and alcohol and tobacco.
External  conditions  remained  firm  during  the  year.  Despite  a  reduction  in  the  trade  surplus,
improved  investment  income  and  tourism  receipts  narrowed  the  current  account  deficit. As  a
result, the country’s gross foreign reserves increased by 10 percent to $5 billion. This level of
reserves  was  sufficient  to  cover  nearly  13  months  of  imports  and  is  well  above  the  CBSI’s
precautionary import cover threshold of 6 months.
Developments in the monetary sector also point to sustained growth. Broad money rose by 7
percent  to  $5.2  billion  due  to  increases  in  both  net  foreign  assets  and  private  sector  credit.
Lending by banks to the private sector grew by 4 percent to $2.4 billion during the year. Major
borrowing 
transportation  and  manufacturing.
Nonetheless, interest rate margins remained high at around 10.5 percent.
industries  were  construction,  distribution, 
Meanwhile liquidity levels in the banking system continued to accumulate, rising by 14 percent to
$2.2 billion and was largely driven by the growth in net exports. Excess liquidity remained high,
although we believe it is not inflationary, particularly in view of the much lower credit growth and
the supply-side nature of inflation in the country.
With respect to government’s finances, 2018 was a positive year. The fiscal position returned to
an  estimated  surplus  of  $191  million  after  two  successive  years  of  deficits,  reflecting
considerable fiscal consolidation. Revenue in particular rose on strong collection from tax and
trade-related  duties,  while  total  expenditure  only  grew  marginally,  amidst  a  reduction  in
development  spending.  Meanwhile,  government  debt  increased  moderately  and  remained  at
around 11 percent of GDP.
Turning to the outlook for the economy, CBSI projects the Solomon Islands economy to grow by
3.7  percent  in  2019.  This  moderation  in  growth  reflects  the  key  assumption  that  forestry  will
finally decelerate as part of the government’s new policy to achieve sustainability in the forestry
sector.  Nevertheless,  growth  is  expected  to  be  driven  by  the  transportation  and  construction
sectors, related to major infrastructure projects, the onset of mineral production, wholesale retail,
manufacturing and fisheries.
Over the medium term, the economy is expected to grow by an average 4.5%. This is expected
to  come  from  positive  spill-over  from  projects  such  as  the  submarine  cable,  Tina  Hydro,  the
Pacific Games and projected robust outturns in mining.
However, there are potential risks on the horizon. These include potential slower growth from an
uncertain global outlook, the negative impact of climate change and pests on our crops, and an
uncertain fiscal stance. Moreover, the narrow economic base would limit the economy’s future
growth potential and leave it susceptible to a range of shocks.
Now let me briefly account for CBSI’s operations in 2018 before I turn to my theme for today
“setting the foundation for robust and inclusive growth”.
II. CBSI operations in 2018
2018 was also a good year for the Central Bank. Strong performance from investment income
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and growth in other incomes, led to an operating profit of $84 million. This is more than double
the profit of $30 million in 2017. The net assets position of the balance sheet also increased to
$149 million at the end of 2018 up from $45 million in 2017.
In terms of its investments, CBSI strategically invested portions of the foreign reserves in secure
asset  portfolios  overseas  to  generate  income  and  sustain  the  reserves.  Improved  financial
market conditions and favourable deposit rates, particularly in the United States contributed to the
surge in interest income to $86 million from $49 million in 2017.
The Bank’s governance was strengthened at the start of the year with the appointment of three
new  directors  to  take  it  to  a  full  complement  of  nine  board  members.  In  September,  we
farewelled former Deputy Governor Mr Gane Simbe and welcomed Dr. Luke Forau as the new
Deputy Governor. At the end of the year, two directors, Mr John Usuramo and Mr Harry Kuma
ended their terms. Mr Kuma, of course, is now the new Minister of Finance & Treasury. I would
like to thank both of them for their contribution and services to the Bank, and congratulate the
new  Minster  on  his  appointment.  At  the  same  time,  let  me  also  congratulate  Mr  McKinnie
Dentana  on  his  appointment  as  the  new  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and
Treasury.
With respect to staffing, the total number of staff in the Bank increased by 4 percent to 159 in
2018. The increase was due to the creation of new positions recommended by an institutional
review conducted during the year by a former senior Reserve Bank of New Zealand official. CBSI
endeavours  to  be  an  employer  of  choice  and  continues  to  recruit  talent,  and  develop  its  staff
through both short and long-term capacity development.
There were some important currency developments during the year. In July, the Bank launched
the commemorative $40 note and a coloured $2 coin to celebrate the country’s 40th anniversary
of independence. In August, a new $5 polymer note was endorsed. This new note was launched
for  circulation  recently  on  2nd  May  2019  during  the  World  Tuna  Day.  The  Bank  plans  to
progressively update its suite of notes as part of a currency reform process that started in 2010.
These  are,  aimed  in  part,  to  enhance  the  security  of  the  notes  and  to  reflect  changes  in  the
economy.
In terms of financial stability, the Bank maintained its supervision and examination of financial
institutions  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  remains  safe  and  secure.  To  that  end,  one
potential risk to the financial system and potentially the country was resolved with the securing of
a US dollar correspondent banking relationship (CBR) between one of the commercial banks and
an overseas bank.
Reforms  to  the  financial  infrastructure  were  made  during  the  year  with  the  World  Bank/IFC
assisting  the  Central  Bank  to  procure  key  elements  of  the  National  Payments  System.  The
accompanying legislation, the National Payments System Bill was tabled in parliament, however
could not be enacted due to the dissolution of the 10th Parliament in December. CBSI will work
with the new Government to progress this important legislation this year.
With respect to its work on financial inclusion, the National Financial Inclusion Strategy II was
reviewed  in  August  by  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Program,  resulting  in  a  refocus  in  its
strategy. It was also pleasing to note that the Bank was recognized for its work in this space with
two awards at the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum in Sochi, Russia. 
One  of  the  awards  was  for  the  Bank’s  contribution  to  championing  regional  efforts  to  find
solutions to the issue of ‘de-risking’ and the closure of CBRs.
Let me now return to the theme of my presentation this morning.
III. “Setting the foundation for robust, broad-based and inclusive growth”
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Following our recent national general elections, we have chosen our leaders for the next four
years. With the government now settling in, I would like to encourage all of us, the private sector,
non-government organizations, civil society groups, communities and all Solomon Islanders to
work with our government as they take us forward.
I also believe this is an opportune time to rethink and strategize how we could realistically map
our future.
As we heard earlier, the economic forecast for the next four years is for an average growth of 4.5
percent. However, there are several issues with what would have been quite a positive outlook.
Firstly, as I have discussed during previous annual report speeches, this rate of growth is far too
slow and will not transform our economy. We have a rapidly growing population that will demand
more resources and support. We need to address our high population growth.
Secondly, the 1 percentage point increase to 4.5 percent (from 3.5 percent over the past five
years) only reflects the major infrastructure projects that will take place in the next few years.
Once they are completed, growth is expected to return to its normal trend.
Thirdly,  growth  has  only  centred  on  a  few  commodities  like  logs  and  have  been  far  from
inclusive, meaning that people in the rural areas have not benefited from the positive spill overs of
development or in pidgin “Mefala rural pipol no lukim nomoa growth ya”.
What should we do?
I will share some thoughts on possible policy directions that could and should be undertaken in
the next couple of years.
(a) Robust Growth
To realistically grow the economy without overheating it, we should be growing at an average of
6% over the medium term. To achieve this, we should address structural issues in the economy,
and appropriately invest in the growth areas that we can realistically develop and sustain.
Now, Government has successfully made strides in some structural reform areas over the past
couple  of  years,  from  the  business  and  regulatory  environments  to  communication  and  taxes
which, are being implemented. Nonetheless, more needs to be done.
To grow at 6 percent means it will only take us around 12 years to double growth. Such a growth
also has to be inclusive, cross cutting and achievable. So how do we go about it?
(b) Foundations for an inclusive and broad-based economy
To illustrate this point, we could lay the foundations of a broad-based economy by putting more
emphasis on agriculture and tourism (without disregarding the other sectors).
Agriculture is an inclusive growth area because most people in our rural areas can participate
and benefit from its positive spill overs. To revitalize the sector, we should seriously invest in:
1.              Replanting.  Aside  from  the  current  stocks,  we  need  to  replenish  the  stock  of  our
agricultural current commodities over the next three to four years.
a.       For cocoa, the country needs to boost output by an additional 3,000 metric tons per year.
This means growing an additional 885 hectares of cocoa plants. And if the country can export
10,000 tons a year, foreign exchange earnings will increase significantly. This will at least reduce
the gap in the revenue loss from the expected decline in logging.
b.      To boost copra and coconut oil production, we would need to plant nearly 2 million new
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
coconut trees.
c.       While, palm oil would need an additional 800 hectares. This is only a 12 percent increase
from the current acreage of palm oil plantations.
2.              Growing  new  cash  crops.  The  country  needs  to  promote  the  growing  and  export  of
promising cash crops, such as kava, cassava and noni, and even delve into new ones like ginger
and chilli.
3.       The key stakeholders. Enhance and properly resource the Ministry of Agriculture, and
associated  agencies  such  as  CEMA  to  appropriately  support  farmers,  while  also  liaising  with
development partners and programs such as PHARMA.
With respect to tourism, this is a growth sector with cross cutting positive spill overs and can be
a catalyst for infrastructure, employment, education, wholesale retail, transport and technology
development.  As  such,  Tourism  Solomons’  target  of  reaching  60,000  visitors  by  2025  is
achievable, if we invest in:
1.       Around two medium size brand hotels in the country to act as an anchor for the growth of
other tourism standard hotels.
2.       Better sea, air and land infrastructure around the country to support this industry that would
also facilitate trade. The recent opening of Munda for international air services is a commendable
start.
3.       And as earlier expressed, enhance and properly resource the key stakeholders such as
the Ministry of Tourism, and Tourism Solomons, in conjunction with other stakeholders to actively
promote this sector.
Now  these  are  just  some  ways  we  could  shape  our  economy  as  we  see  slowdowns  in  the
forestry  industry,  and  strive  to  diversify  the  economy.  There  are  of  course  other  important
sectors such as fisheries and manufacturing, where due to time, we may discuss at another
time.
Finally,  as  we  rethink  about  the  future  of  our  economy,  I  would  like  to  encourage  the  new
Government,  stakeholders  and  our  development  partners  to  continue  the  discourse.    The  key
question  I  would  like  to  leave  with  us  is,  how  can  my  institution,  company,  constituency  and
myself contribute to transforming the economy onto a more robust growth path? Because the
plans and action today would lay the foundations for the prosperity of our future generations.
And talking about our future generation, investing in our young people is critical. Not only in their
education  and  health  but  also  in  creating  employment  opportunities  for  them.  Greater  priority
should be accorded to investing in and developing our human capital so that they can make a
meaningful contribution to our country.
Conclusion
In conclusion, as I have stated earlier, 2018 was a favourable year for the economy. While the
forecasts for the years ahead are positive, the projected growth is still not enough to sustain our
growing population. We also need to widen the economic base and make it more inclusive. This
is  nothing  new  and  has  already  been  articulated  in  the  National  Development  Strategy  2016–
2035, in particular NDS Objective 1. Sustained and Inclusive Economic Growth. We only need to
implement it. As such, we really need to “walk the talk” and invest in our key sustainable sectors
as a foundation for more robust and inclusive growth.
Finally, may I take  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  various  institutions,  ministries,  SOEs,  financial
institutions, NGOs and companies who contributed to this report and our work in 2018. As usual
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the views expressed in this Report are of course entirely the responsibility of the Bank.
I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Auditor  General  and  the  contracted  external  auditors,
PricewaterhouseCoopers  (PwC)  of  Fiji  for  finalising  our  accounts.  Thanks  to  Skrinhaus,  our
printer and Kitano Mendana hotel for the venue and other services provided.
A special acknowledgement to the CBSI Board of Directors for their unwavering commitment to
the Bank in ensuring effective governance and policy direction. And finally, to my staff for their
efforts in achieving the Bank’s mandate.
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  these  few  words,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  commend  the  2018  CBSI
Annual Report for your reading.
Thank you for listening and May God Bless Solomon Islands.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
