Gent Sejko: Bank of Albania’s support for new graduates and the
importance of ongoing education
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, to the graduation ceremony of the
students of economics, University of Tirana, Albania, 7 November 2019.
 Dear students,
Distinguished members of the Faculty,
Dear parents, relatives and friends,
Thank you for inviting me here and for the wonderful welcome. It is a great pleasure for me to
have the opportunity to address this audience on this special day for you, your families and the
academic staff of the Faculty. Today, you have the absolute right to be proud, enjoying the
reward of your laborious efforts and sacrifices throughout the years of your studies, from the first
grade to the completion of university studies. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  wish  you  all  successes  in  the  long  and  challenging  journey  of  post-
university  life.  Starting  tomorrow,  you  will  not  return  to  university  auditoriums,  you  will  start
making your own journey, as new perspectives and opportunities open up.  Starting tomorrow,
you  will  enter  into  a  new  stage  of  your  life,  characterised  by  complex  and  rather  challenging
relationships.  This is the big truth of human life, and I hope that you have already grasped it.
Looking  at  your  achievements,  the  appraisal  of  your  professors  and  the  results  from  your
internships at the Bank of Albania, I can only be optimistic about your ability and sagacity to find
the right path in life. 
My appeal today for you is to embrace a different philosophy of thinking and acting, more modern
and forward-looking, obviously always capitalising on our best national values and traditions. My
advice  is:  never  absent  yourselves  from  knowledge  and  books.  Education  is  a  never-ending
experience and process, and will accompany you throughout your carrier, notwithstanding your
specific engagement, a bright member of the academia, a successful entrepreneur in the private
sector  or  an  expert  of  important  public  or  international  institutions.    To  be  on  the  top  list,  you
should always update your knowledge on the most recent theories, trends and findings, which
explain the most basic laws and functioning of markets and economy.
As the administrator of an important institution in the field of the economic and financial policies
decision making, I have always believed and supported the involvement of the new generation in
the daily activity of the institution. Beyond the fact that the new generation dominates the human
resources in the Bank of Albania, we try to maintain the interest and the inclusion of students in
our  everyday  activity,  through  a  range  of  various  educational  and  informative  programs.    The
Bank of Albania is open for all students studying in finance and economics or other related fields
for internships, continuously supporting the scientific and research work of the students.  I take
this opportunity to assure you that, in the future, the Bank of Albania will continue to fully support
the new and talented generation of Albania, as we keep our doors open, in all possible ways and
forms. 
Dear students,
Today you have reached an important milestone in your life.  It is up to you, only to you, to take
the destiny in your hands, and determine with courage, determination and the characteristic
vivacity of your age the future path in your lives. Wherever you are, in Albania or abroad, never
give up on your ambitions and dreams. To make them come true, you have to work tirelessly,
with confidence, integrity and professionalism.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
I wish and hope everyone would find the right path!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
