Joachim  Wuermeling:  A  new  world  ahead.  What  do  sustainable
finance and digitalisation mean for supervision?
Keynote speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the occasion of the European Supervisor Education Initiative (ESE) conference,
Munich, 17 October 2019.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Sustainability and digitalisation are two megatrends of our time, and they are both highly relevant
for  the  financial  sector.  They  have  been  the  showcase  topics  of  many  financial  sector
conferences already. But this here is a very specific conference – one by and for supervisors,
designed to advance their knowledge.
2 Why to combine sustainable finance and digitalisation in one conference
Let us look at a major challenge for supervisors in the realm of sustainable finance: The analysis
of climate-related risks and the quest for appropriate analytical methods. We know by now that
our traditional and tested backward-looking approach is not up to the task; we need a forward-
looking perspective. The task is complicated by the fact that climate-related risks tend to be long-
term risks by nature. How can we tackle them? Can we make banks undergo a climate-related
stress test? Is it even possible to go beyond our traditional horizon of three to five years without
sacrificing too much accuracy?
I  am  not  aiming  for  an  answer  here.  My  point  is  that  when  faced  with  these  challenges,  we
struggle to tackle them using only our traditional methods.
Regarding  the  digitalisation  of  banks  and  the  entire  financial  sector,  we  are  making  similar
observations.  You  see,  digitalisation  extends  far  beyond  digitising  traditional  businesses  and
processes – it has led to transformation of finance, and in some cases even disruption. It comes
as  no  surprise  that  supervisors  might  feel  insecure  when  applying  the  supervisory  toolkit  to
innovative businesses.
Just as a random example, supervisors might be confronted with a financial institution whose
mid-term goal is not to earn profits, but to grow as quickly as possible. This kind of strategy might
be  sensible  in  the  age  of  platform-based  companies  fighting  for  market  supremacy,  take  e.g.
Libra. If business is all about “the winner takes it all”, this alters not only economics, but also
raises the question about the focus of supervision.
Of course, solvency and liquidity ratios remain at the core of our interest. But the next question
is, how do we deal with all the new issues of a company growing at high speed – e.g. its long-
term profitability or also  its  risk  management  keeping  pace  with  expanding  business?  Does  it
suffice  to  confront  bank  managers  with  those  issues  at  the  annual  regulatory  meeting?  Are
targeted  on-site  inspections  the  best  way  forward?  Existing  supervisory  standards  do  set  the
right framework, but supervisors might need clearer guidance in order to exert the necessary
amount of pressure on the supervised entity.
3 Where do we stand?
So where do we stand today?
Although sustainable finance is no longer an entirely new topic, it is still difficult to grasp. At the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
same time, we are clearly moving beyond great political speeches.
To  supervisors,  tackling  sustainable  finance  means  tackling  environmental,  social  and
governance (“ESG”) risks; here, we have so far mostly but not exclusively focused on climate-
related risks. 
Much  of  the  pioneering  work  at  the  international  level  is  being  done  by  the  members  of  the
Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). Compared to about one and a half years
ago, when the newly founded NGFS entered into its productive phase, we have certainly made
good progress.
We have built a broad consensus that ESG risks, in particular climate-related risks, are financial
risks.
And we have started analysing regulatory implications and setting supervisory expectations.
But we are still in the process of developing an understanding of the channels through which
these  risks  could  materialise,  from  both  the  micro-  and  macroprudential  perspectives.  Unlike
other risk factors, the way climate change-related developments including policy measures will
impact the macro economy is not well understood. Our current activities could be considered as
“sensitivity  analyses”  exploring  potential  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system  under  different
assumptions.  Of  course,  the  objective  of  the  global  efforts  on  the  part  of  central  banks  and
supervisors is to add stress tests or scenario analyses to our toolbox.
Therefore, the CRR II and CRD V contain not only new disclosure provisions but also mandates
for the European Banking Authority (EBA) to examine the integration of ESG risks into pillar 1 and
pillar  2.  Work  on  pillar  2  has  already  started  and  is  being  conducted  jointly  by  the  EBA  and
National  Competent  Authorities  (NCAs)  in  the  EBA  Sustainable  Finance  Network.  Here  in
Germany, a guidance note on the treatment of sustainability risks by financial institutions drafted
by  BaFin  is  currently  up  for  public  consultation.  Other  countries  have  already  published
supervisory statements.
But: If you were to randomly pick a local supervisor and ask them about the role of ESG risks in
day to day supervision, you would find climate-related risk relatively absent thus far. Overall, we
are currently only beginning to move from theory to practice. And this is where the real challenge
lies.
There  are  several  areas  where  progress  is  needed,  the  most  pressing  of  which  is  risk
management. We have recently surveyed all German LSIs and asked them to what extent they
are taking into account climate-related risks in their risk management and what they are planning
for the near future.
The  good  news  is:  Around  one-third  have  integrated  climate-related  risks  into  their  risk
assessment,  at  least  in  part.  The  not  so  good  news: Around  two-thirds  have  not  integrated
climate-related risks at all. Of these, only a third are planning to do so in the future.
Our findings are consistent with surveys among SIs conducted by the SSM, EBA, and the NGFS.
Clearly, the integration of ESG or even only climate-related risks into banks’ risk management is
still in its early stages. This will have to change soon if we bear in mind the work on regulatory
standards in the EU and BaFin’s guidance note on ESG risks that is expected to be finalised
before the end of the year, but more importantly because climate-related risks are relevant.
This has been a short fly-over over the progress made so far regarding sustainable finance. How
about digitalisation of the financial sector and supervisory challenges?
Digitalisation is not that new anymore; it has now diffused into various niche topics and existing
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervisory compartments – e.g. cyber and IT security; third parties and open banking; business
model  analysis;  regulatory  perimeter  (esp.  regarding  FinTechs  and  BigTechs).  Also,  the
prudential and supervisory treatment of crypto tokens has become a separate realm – with many
connections to traditional segments such as operational risk or prudential requirements.
We  have  achieved  significant  progress  in  updating  and  concretising  our  standards,  e.g.
regarding IT-related expectations or also regarding outsourcing activities.
However, within most of those topics, fundamental questions remain. For example, should we
directly  supervise  third  parties  such  as  cloud  service  providers? And  how  do  we  deal  with  IT
becoming more and more crucial to the functioning of the financial sector? We do exert pressure
on banks to remedy their gaps in IT risk management – but when it comes to regulatory action,
the “traditional” focus of banking supervision, namely solvency and liquidity, is what counts. Is
this logic still valid in the digital age?
Summing up, we are witnessing significant advances in both topics, but their practical design is
not yet decided.
4 What are common strategic challenges?
Now the question is: What are underlying structural causes (if any) for that? And how should we
best deal with these grounds in order to move forward quickly and successfully? I will confine
myself to three aspects that I find particularly important.
First,  both  topics  are  per  se  very  complex  already,  consuming  time  and  energy  in  daily
supervision and beyond.
The  NGFS  nicely  summed  up  the  reasons  for  complexity:  “Assessing  the  impact  of  climate
change can be challenging due to the uncertainties associated with the course of climate change
itself, the breadth and complexity of transmission channels, first and second round effects as
well  as  the  need  to  consider,  in  aggregate,  some  combination  of  both  physical  and  transition
risks.” Therefore, analysing how exactly they would influence a particular bank’s balance sheet,
let alone the entire financial system, is a very complex endeavour.
The same holds for digital innovations. Have you had the chance to read through an outsourcing
agreement? Today, banks tend to have multiple of such outsourcing relationships, and the share
of processes outsourced to third party vendors is still increasing – especially due to digitalisation.
For  a  supervisor,  keeping  up  to  date  regarding  outsourced  processes  may  thus  become  a
challenge in itself.
Second and adding to the complexity, both topics require new expertise.
To develop a climate stress test, we first need to understand the different scenarios of global
warming  and  how  weather  and  climate  phenomena  would  develop  under  them. Assuming  a
given set of socioeconomic drivers, technologies and policies, we then need to translate climate-
related risks and mitigation pathways for finance risk assessments, ideally at the asset level.
The  same  holds  for  digital  innovations.  For  example,  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  supervisory
response  for  all  types  of  crypto  tokens;  each  individual  case  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
merits. This in turn requires going into the nitty-gritty of the business case and understanding its
technological features along with its legal classification.
Third, they are horizontal topics that don’t easily fit into the organisational structure of supervisory
institutions.  That  makes  grasping  the  topics  in  their  entirety  and  treating  them  consistently
difficult.  The  FinTech  hubs  and  sustainable  finance  networks  we  are  seeing  emerge  within
supervisory institutions are an attempt to overcome this challenge.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
If our organisational structures do not fit and, more broadly, our supervisory structure doesn’t fit,
then  we  should  not  hesitate  to  adjust  to  the  new  realities.  We  must  pinpoint  where  and  how
exactly we must adapt.
And that’s the task I want to define for today and tomorrow.
How do we deal with a lack of expertise in certain fields? Do we create it from within? Do we
acquire it from without?
How do we deal with the complexity and the horizontal nature of the topics?
How can we improve cooperation between different departments internally, cooperation between
each other and cooperation with other players like academia, NGOs, etc.?
These are the questions I invite you to ponder over the coming two days.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Sustainable finance and digitalisation pose unprecedented challenges for supervisors. In some
areas, they have exposed the limits of our current approach to supervision. And they are forcing
us to adapt.
I have sketched some of the strategic challenges that follow, but I have not provided a solution.
That is what I am inviting you to think about during the conference.
And  in  case  you  might  get  lost  in  details,  remember  that  our  anchor  point  is  quite  simple:  to
maintain our ability to perform solid supervision under new circumstances.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
