As prepared for delivery
Good afternoon, everyone. When I give a closing keynote I try to 
bear in mind that you’ve been listening for hours to complex and 
technical material. I wish I could say that I’m here to offer some 
light relief, but, alas, no.
The topic I’m going to address this afternoon is both complex 
and technical. It’s the recent turmoil in the repo markets and the 
Fed’s actions to address it.
I’m going to start by laying out the Fed’s operating framework 
for carrying out monetary policy. This will take me into aspects 
of the “plumbing” of the financial system, which may seem like 
an esoteric topic to many, but it’s one of critical importance, so 
please bear with me.
I will then go over the money market turmoil from a month ago 
that led the New York Fed to conduct open market operations to 
stabilize short-term interest rates. I’ll conclude by describing the 
path forward as laid out in the Fed announcements this past 
Friday.
1
Before I go any further, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer 
that the views I express today are mine alone and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee 
or others in the Federal Reserve System.
Monetary Policy, Interest Rates, and Ample Reserves
As a prelude, it’s worthwhile to step back and remember how this 
all connects to the Fed’s overarching monetary policy goals. 
The Federal Reserve has two goals set by Congress: maximum 
employment and price stability. The main way we achieve these 
goals is by controlling the federal funds rate, the rate at which 
banks lend each other money overnight in the form of unsecured 
loans. This rate in turn affects overall financial conditions and 
thereby the wider economy.
At each of its meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) decides on the target range for the federal funds rate, 
which currently stands at 1-3/4 to 2 percent.
2
But how does this work—that is, what keeps the federal funds 
rate within the target range? The Fed has an operational 
framework in place designed to keep interest rates where the 
FOMC wants them. We call this an “ample reserves” regime.
Back in January of this year, the FOMC communicated its 
intention to continue to implement policy according to this 
regime.
3
The key benefit of this approach is that it’s a simple, effective 
way of controlling the federal funds rate and thereby influencing 
other short-term interest rates. 
The ample reserves framework has three elements designed to 
maintain the federal funds rate within the target range. 
The first, not surprisingly, is supplying an amount of reserves 
that banks hold at the Federal Reserve that is “ample.” By that, 
we mean that the supply of reserves is adequate to efficiently and 
effectively implement monetary policy. Here, “efficient” means 
that the level of reserves is not excessive, relative to what’s 
needed to be effective. And “effective” means that typical 
temporary movements in the demand or supply of reserves don’t 
cause large changes in the federal funds rate without active 
management of reserves. I’ll come back to the challenge of 
knowing what constitutes “ample” later. 
The second element consists of the interest rates that the Fed 
itself sets and that influence the federal funds rate. These 
“administered” rates, as they are known, include the interest rate 
paid to banks on their reserve balances and the overnight reverse 
repo rate that the Fed pays to a wider set of money market 
participants on a similar, risk-free overnight investment. 
These first two elements—an ample quantity of reserves and 
administered interest rates—are meant to do the lion’s share of 
work to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. 
But there may be relatively infrequent situations when these two 
elements are not enough to keep the federal funds rate within the 
target range. Therefore, the third element is the directive from 
the FOMC for the New York Fed’s Open Market Trading Desk 
(the Desk) to conduct open market operations as needed to keep 
the federal funds rate within the target range. For example, 
through repurchase agreements of Treasury and agency 
securities, the Fed can temporarily increase the amount of 
reserves in the system.
To support the economy in the aftermath of the financial crisis, 
the FOMC increased its long-term securities holdings 
dramatically. This led to a similarly large increase in reserves, 
which peaked at about $2.8 trillion in 2014. Subsequently, 
growth in non-reserve liabilities such as currency and reductions 
in the Fed’s securities holdings caused reserve levels to decline. 
As the level of reserves has come down, we stepped up our 
monitoring of the effect of reserve levels on interest rates. The 
level of reserves consistent with “ample” is inherently highly 
uncertain, so we have been actively looking for signs that 
reserves might be growing scarce. Along with in-depth analysis 
of conditions in money markets, we conduct surveys of banks 
and other outreach to market participants to understand the 
factors that influence the demand for reserves.
4
To smooth the transition to a level of reserves consistent with the 
framework, the FOMC announced a slowing of the pace of the 
reduction in securities holdings at its March meeting this year 
and stopped it outright at the July meeting.
5
Based on a variety of metrics and information, the supply of 
reserves appeared ample during the summer and into early 
September. The funds rate traded well within the target range 
and money markets functioned well. 
Recent Developments in Money Markets
With the stage set, I’ll turn to market conditions over the past 
month and the Fed’s actions. 
Conditions in money markets became highly volatile about a 
month ago. Secured and unsecured rates moved higher and 
became more disparate on Monday, September 16, and this 
intensified the following day. 
We had expected a number of factors—including corporate tax 
payments and the settlement of newly issued Treasury securities
—to put some upward pressure on short-term rates. However, 
the size of the reaction in repo rates, the spillover to the federal 
funds market, and the emergence of strains in market 
functioning were outside of recent experience.
In response to the simultaneous increase and widening 
dispersion in repo rates and the federal funds rate, on the 
morning of Tuesday, September 17, the Fed conducted the first 
non-test repo operations in many years, followed by daily 
operations. These actions had the desired effect of reducing 
strains in markets, narrowing the dispersion of rates, and 
fostering conditions in money markets to keep the federal funds 
rate within the target range. To ensure that the federal funds rate 
remained within the target range going forward, we announced 
daily overnight and regular term repo operations, which 
continue to this day.
6
The Path Forward
Our open market operations have succeeded at keeping the 
federal funds rate within the target range and have stabilized 
conditions in short-term funding markets. 
At the same time, recent experience has provided important 
lessons for the successful operation of the ample reserves 
framework. 
A confluence of events contributed to the volatility in money 
markets a month ago. But one telling observation is that when 
increases in the Fed’s non-reserve liabilities caused the level of 
reserves to fall well below those prevailing during summer and 
early September, strains in money markets emerged. And when 
the prior level of reserves was quickly restored through 
temporary open market operations, normal interest rates and 
market functioning returned. 
In light of these events, we have learned that the ample reserves 
framework has worked smoothly with a level of reserves at least 
as large as we saw during summer and into early September. 
Although temporary open market operations are doing the trick 
for the time being, anticipated increases in non-reserve liabilities 
would cause reserves to decline in coming months without 
further actions.
7
Based on these considerations, last Friday the FOMC announced 
that the Fed will be purchasing U.S. Treasury bills at least into 
the second quarter of next year.  Specifically, the Desk 
announced an initial monthly pace of purchases of $60 billion. 
These permanent purchases will, over time, bring the underlying 
level of reserves—by which I mean absent temporary open 
market operations—to a level consistent with the ample reserves 
framework on a sustained basis. 
In concert with these purchases, the FOMC announced that the 
Desk will continue temporary overnight and term open market 
operations at least through January of next year.  This 
combination of permanent Treasury bill purchases and ongoing 
temporary open market operations is designed to provide 
8
effective control of the federal funds rate over the next several 
months.
I should emphasize that all of these actions are aimed at the 
implementation of monetary policy and do not in any way 
represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. The goal is 
to make sure that the federal funds rate stays within the target 
range set by the FOMC. 
As we move forward, we will continue to learn about demand for 
reserves and other Federal Reserve liabilities and market 
functioning, and may adjust the specifics of the plan as 
appropriate. 
What Does All of This Mean for SOFR?
That’s a lot on monetary policy, interest rates, reserves, and 
repos. 
But before I close, I’d like to emphasize an important point about 
a particularly important repo benchmark rate, and that’s the 
Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR. SOFR is the 
reference rate that the Alternative Reference Rates Committee 
(ARRC) has selected as the preferred replacement for LIBOR.
At the same time that we saw turmoil in the repo market, we saw 
a temporary spike in SOFR. As market participants make 
preparations to transition away from LIBOR, they’re 
understandably watching SOFR very closely. 
There are a few things I’d like to highlight with respect to SOFR. 
First, a temporary spike is not surprising, given that SOFR 
reflects rates on real-world transactions. Second, the very fact 
that we saw a spike in SOFR is an indication of how 
representative of its underlying market it is. It’s based on actual 
transactions, rather than judgment (like LIBOR), which is part of 
what makes SOFR so robust. Third and final, is that in the vast 
majority of use cases, the relevant metric for SOFR is an average 
over time. Focusing on overnight SOFR isn’t particularly useful 
in this context, as financial contracts will generally refer to an 
average of SOFR over many weeks or months. 
My message to you is: Don’t let last month’s temporary spike in 
SOFR, or hope for the creation of some other replacement 
reference rate, become an excuse for delaying your transition 
away from LIBOR. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again: like 
death and taxes, the end of LIBOR is unavoidable, and we must 
do all that it takes to prepare for a LIBOR-less future.  And the 
existence of LIBOR is only guaranteed for another 807 days.
10
9
Conclusion
I’ve talked through a lot of important issues this afternoon, and I 
greatly appreciate your attention. 
The events I’ve described are an apt reminder of the importance 
of well-functioning financial markets and the vital role the 
Federal Reserve plays in providing liquidity. They are also a 
demonstration of our ability to act swiftly and effectively to 
execute our monetary policy implementation goals and keep the 
federal funds rate within in the target range. 
Thank you. 
1
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary 
Policy Implementation, October 11, 2019; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations, October 11, 
2019.
2
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary 
Policy Implementation, October 11, 2019.
3
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary 
Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, January 30, 2019. Further 
details were announced in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance 
Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, March 20, 2019.
4
 For an example of such a survey of banks, see Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, February 2019 Senior Financial Officer Survey.
5
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheet Normalization 
Principles and Plans, March 20, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, FOMC Statement, July 31, 2019.
6
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations, 
September 20, 2019.
7
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary 
Policy Implementation, October 11, 2019.
8
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary 
Policy Implementation, October 11, 2019.
9
 John C. Williams, LIBOR: The Clock Is Ticking, Remarks at the 2019 U.S. Treasury 
Market Conference, New York (September 23, 2019).
10
 John C. Williams, 901 Days, Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial 
Markets Association, New York (July 15, 2019).
