Benjamin  E  Diokno:  The  importance  of  transaction  accounts  for
employee
Closing remarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Financial Inclusion Forum for the Labor Sector, Manila, 18
November 2019.
 Director  Bacay and officials from the  Department of  Labor and  Employment (DOLE), leaders
and  convenors  of  the  various  Tripartite  Industrial  Peace  Councils  (TIPCs),  representatives  of
associations of informal workers and kasambahays, our partners from digital financial service
providers,  my  colleagues  from  the  BSP,  dear  friends  from  the  labor  and  employment  sector,
ladies and gentlemen, a pleasant day to all of you.
I  trust  that  this  morning’s  presentations  and  discussions  were  informative  and  productive.  To
start, we gave everyone an overview of BSP’s financial inclusion agenda and digital payments
initiatives to put in context our call to promote the use of transaction accounts for payments of
salaries.
Our speakers from the financial service providers also shared practical and actionable ideas on
how their products can meet the needs of both wage earners and their employers.  I hope these
presentations have not only armed you with knowledge, but also inspired you to help become our
partners in financial inclusion, particularly through the use of transaction accounts for payment of
wages and salaries.   
Nonetheless,  allow  me  to  drive  home  a  few  more  insights  on  financial  inclusion  and  digital
payments.
Digitalization is rapidly and significantly transforming the way we do things in so many aspects of
our lives. We are now able to shop, book a vacation adventure, get a cab, sell goods, watch a
movie, wherever and whenever, without having to leave the house and stepping into a physical
store.  The mobile phone has become such a powerful tool, an almost all-in-one instant access
to any type of service one might need.
Based on the September 2019 Global WebIndex Report , there are more than 69 million internet
users  aged  16–64  years  old  in  the  Philippines.  Of  this  number,  91%  searched  online  for  a
product and 62% made an online purchase via a mobile phone. From the same study, 67% of
Filipinos have an active social media account.
The digital life is upon us, and we can harness this to make sure internet access and mobile
phone ownership do not only lead to better social connections and convenient shopping, but also
and  more  importantly,  to  greater  ability  for  all  Filipinos  to  use  welfare-enhancing  financial
services.
For the BSP, this starts with ensuring more Filipinos have access to a transaction account – in
particular, an account that they can use not only to save money, but also to directly send and
receive  funds  to  and  from  anyone;  in  other  words,  an  account  that  can  be  used  for  digital
payments.
This  is  why  our  financial  inclusion  and  digital  payments  agenda  necessarily  go  hand-in-hand.
One is both an enabler and a requisite for the other.
Digital payments – that is, account to account fund transfers – make accounts a valuable and
practical tool for anyone, even to those who say they do not have money to save.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
A transaction account makes it easy, affordable, and convenient to pay bills, to send money to
family wherever they are, pay government fees, and make online purchases. We do not have to
take time off our weekends and free time just to fall in line to do these transactions. All we have to
do is use our mobile phones.
Our  vision  is  to  have  more  market  vendors,  jeepney,  and  tricycle  drivers  accepting  digital
payments through QR code linked to transaction accounts.
This means we do not have to always bring cash with us when we go to work or the market–
thereby reducing risk of theft. For the market vendors and drivers, that means they do not have to
handle cash which make them less vulnerable to counterfeits aside from theft.
The  benefit  of  using  transaction  accounts  extends  to  the  employers.  When  employers  pay
salaries  directly  to  the  account  of  their  workers  through  PESONet,  it  can  potentially  lower
administrative and overhead costs, and reduce risks associated with cash distributions during
paydays.
As people and businesses use digital payments, they are able to build a rich digital footprint that
can be used by banks, Fintechs and other lenders in evaluating and granting credit. This means
people can have better and wider financing options.
Digital payments also underpin a whole range of innovative digital services requiring the instant
transfer  of  funds  between  transactors.  The  use  and  popularity  of  apps  like Airbnb,  Grab  and
Lalamove are made possible because of digital payments. Clients use their account-linked digital
wallet  or  credit  card  to  pay  the  service  providers-  the  drivers  and  the  property  and  food  stall
owner – which helps build trust and reliability in the transactions in the app.
These  digital  payment-supported  apps  are  not  only  convenient  for  users  but  also  gives  wider
access  to  business  opportunities  and  markets  to  our  micro  entrepreneurs  and  high-skilled
workers. There are even apps that provide home cooks, plumbers and electricians, and house
cleaners to market their services and get paid digitally through the platform. This is potentially a
great platform for our workers and skilled laborers to augment their income.
I hope through these examples you are able to see the benefits of having a transaction account
and  why  financial  inclusion  matters.  When  we  have  a  transaction  account,  we  enjoy  all  the
benefits afforded by digital payments and innovations. When we have a transaction account, we
are able to meaningfully participate in the gains of an increasingly digital economy.  Hindi tayo
napag-iiwanan.
And so we organized this forum, as we believe that you, the labor and employment sector, have
much to gain and can play a big role in advancing financial inclusion. Payment of salaries and
wages is a compelling opportunity to open transactions accounts for our workers.
And  based  on  existing  official  data,  there  are  25.5  million  strong  workforce  in  the  country—a
massive client base that is hard to ignore for both financial service providers and policymakers in
our pursuit of our financial inclusion agenda.
And so it is my hope that you come out of this forum with an enthusiasm to drive the financial
inclusion journey of our country. Use your collective voice to ensure workers can maximize the
benefits  of  their  employment  through  better  access  to  financial  services,  starting  with  a
transaction account. Having a transaction account is key.
We  are  living  in  a  most  remarkable  time  as  we  see  our  country  enjoying  continued  strong
economic  growth  with  digitalization  becoming  a  critical  enabler  of  economic  and  financial
inclusion. I hope that together we can seize these opportunities and enable all Filipinos to reap
the benefits of our economic growth and achieve prosperity for all.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Before  I  end  my  talk,  allow  me  to  thank  our  partners  from  the  DOLE  for  convening  our
participants and for working with the BSP to make this forum a reality. DOLE has just recently
joined the interagency  Financial  Inclusion  Steering  Committee.   Yet it wasted no time at all to
show its commitment to promote financial inclusion in the labor sector.
I would also like to thank our friends from the private sector: Gcash, Paymaya, Union Bank and
Cebuana Lhuillier Rural Bank for generously giving their time to talk here in this forum.
This forum is evidence of what we in the BSP have been saying all along—that financial inclusion
is not just a whole of government but a whole of nation undertaking.  
Maraming salamat at mabuhay!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
