 13.12.2019 
 Welcome address 
Conference “Financial integration and inclusive development: A view from the 
Mediterranean Countries”/Banco de España e Instituto del Mediterráneo (IEMed) 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
    Good morning ladies and gentlemen,  
 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to this Conference on Financial integration 
and inclusive development: A view from the Mediterranean Countries, hosted by Banco de 
España and jointly organised with the European Institute of the Mediterranean (IEMed) and 
the support of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
 
Let me start by thanking our colleagues from the European Institute of the Mediterranean 
and  from  the  OECD  for  their  cooperation  in  organising  this  Conference.  The  European 
Institute of the Mediterranean (IEMed), created in 1989 with the participation of the Spanish 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, the Government of the Autonomous Community 
of Cataluña, and the Barcelona City Council, incorporates a broad representation of civil 
society and is a leading institution in the analysis of Euro-Mediterranean relations. 
 
In  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  Euro-Mediterranean  Partnership's  Barcelona 
Process, and with the objectives of the Union for the Mediterranean, the aim of the IEMed 
is to contribute to mutual understanding, exchange and cooperation between the different 
Mediterranean countries. And Banco de España is delighted to collaborate to this objective 
in the field of economic and financial relationships. Our second partner today, the OECD, is 
playing  an  invaluable  role  in  the  international  arena  to  shape  policies  that  are  decisively 
contributing to the well-being for all. It is no exaggeration to say that the world count on the 
leadership of the OECD in many fronts such as those that we are going to discuss today: 
financial inclusion, capital flows, migration, among others. 
 
This is the fifth edition of this Conference organised by IEMed, with the support of the Banco 
de España, to discuss economic and financial matters in the Mediterranean region. The first 
and third editions took place in Barcelona, in 2014 and 2017, the second in Rabat in 2015 
and the fourth in Tunisia in 2018, on those occasions with the support and hospitality of 
Bank  Al-Maghrib  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Tunisia.  Past  editions  of  this  conference  had 
provided useful exchanges of ideas between different actors with interests in the economic 
and financial developments in this region. I firmly believe that forums like this are particularly 
relevant to shape public policy in times of change as those we are witnessing today. The 
deep-rooted transformations in economic and financial relations globally force us to re-think 
the design of economic policies in order to better contribute to the progress of our society. 
In particular, these forums are instrumental for central banks in its role of providing guidance 
for economic policies that are not in their mandates. Let me add that in order to exert this 
role  of  assessing  public  policies,  central  banks  need  to  be  granted  with  political  and 
operational independence, in order to provide recommendations free from political pressure 
or vested interests. 
 
The  theme  of  this  Conference,  Financial  integration  and  inclusive  development,  is 
particularly timely at this current juncture of the world economy. Global economic growth is 
at its lowest level since the global financial crisis, partly as a consequence of the high level 
of  uncertainty  surrounding  trade  and  international  relations.  This  weakness  of  the  global 
economic  landscape  is  adding  to  the  new  challenges  that  have  emerged  over  the  last 
decades:  population  aging,  migration,  security  threats,  the  emergence  of  new  economic 
and  political  powers,  and  climate  change,  to  mention  only  some.  And  this  evolution  has 
taken place in an era of increasing globalization, that is being threatened by the emergence 
2/3 
 of protectionist measures, and of digitalization and rapid development of new technologies. 
Together, these developments constitute a new frontier for policies that make it necessary 
to  promote  mutual  understanding  and  make  extensive  coordinated  efforts  in  the  field  of 
policies.  In  order  to  preserve  the  benefits  derived  from  financial  interconnectedness  and 
technological innovation, it is now of the essence to put in place an internationally agreed 
response that allows to achieve the benefits of innovation while ensuring the mitigation of 
its potential risks. Policy-makers have the responsibility to support the research and analysis 
to base to foster growth and fight inequalities.  
 
In this Conference we are going to debate on a number of challenges that our countries are 
currently facing: from technological innovations in finance to migration flows in search for 
better  opportunities,  going  through  increasing  financial  interdependences  or  the  need  of 
boosting financial education. I have no doubt that the quality of the discussions we have 
today will allow us to deepen our understanding of these challenges and, hopefully, allow 
us to draw some useful conclusion in terms of economic policy.  
 
I leave the floor now to Mr. Isidro González, Deputy Secretary General of the Union for the 
Mediterranean, thanking him as well as you all for your presence here today, and thanking 
Mr. Senén Florensa, President of the Executive Committee of IEMed, for the cooperation in 
the organisation of this event. 
 
Now, Isidro, the floor is yours. 
 3/3 
