Luis  de  Guindos:  Opportunities  and  challenges  for  the  euro  area
financial sector
Opening speech by  Mr  Luis de  Guindos,  Vice-President of the  European  Central  Bank, at the
22nd Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2019.
 I am honoured to open the 22nd Euro Finance Week. We gather here every year to discuss the
recent financial and economic developments in the euro area and beyond. As we are going to
publish our Financial Stability Review in two days’ time, today I will focus on the health of euro
area  financial  institutions  and  the  opportunities  and  challenges  they  face  in  the  current
environment. I will also offer some policy considerations.
Opportunities and challenges for euro area banks
Let  me  start  with  euro  area  banks,  which  have  been  reporting  persistently  low  profitability  in
recent years. The aggregate return on equity of the sector slightly declined to less than 6% in the
12 months to June 2019. This weak performance is broad-based, with around 75% of significant
banks  generating  returns  below  the  8%  benchmark  return  demanded  by  investors  for  holding
bank equity.
Poor profitability of course reflects both cyclical and structural factors.
The current macro-financial environment in the euro area is challenging for euro area banks. The
recent softening of the macroeconomic growth outlook and the associated low-for-longer interest
rate environment are likely to weigh further on their profitability prospects. Many market analysts
are concerned about the drag on bank profitability that could result from the negative impact of
monetary policy accommodation on net interest margins. And net interest margins are indeed
under pressure.
Just focusing on this one aspect is misleading, however. Importantly, it neglects the first-order
effect  of  monetary  policy  in  supporting  economic  activity.  Without  this,  bank  lending  volumes
would have been significantly lower and provisioning costs substantially higher. These factors,
together with the increase in asset values, have broadly offset the negative impact of low rates
on  net  interest  margins.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  the  two-tier  system  for  reserve
remuneration will help mitigate the cost of negative interest rates for banks.
Structural  factors  are  at  the  heart  of  weak  bank  profitability,  however.  In  particular,  euro  area
banks face challenges linked to the sector’s overcapacity. There are too many banks. Many of
them have low market shares and so are under high competitive pressures, also from outside
the sector, for example from fintech companies. Another important dimension of overcapacity in
the euro area is persistent cost inefficiencies. Banks are not fully benefiting from economies of
scale  and  are  relying  on  overlapping  physical  distribution  networks. As  a  result,  their  cost-to-
income  ratios  –  currently  at  66%  –  are  high  when  compared  with  those  of  their  peers  in  the
United States and the Nordic countries.
So, how can euro area banks return to sustainable profitability? And how can they make more
decisive progress in tackling structural challenges and cost inefficiencies? Let me mention two
avenues which would support an increase in bank profitability.
First, there is room for banks to adjust their business models. In fact, ECB analysis has found
that  the  best  performing  banks  have  diversified  their  income  sources,  improved  their  cost
1
efficiency and invested in digital technologies to a greater extent than their peers.
Second,  consolidation  via  mergers  and  acquisitions  may  allow  banks  to  exploit  economies  of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
scale and scope, which should bring about improved performance. Cross-border mergers, while
less likely to produce cost savings or economies of scale, would have an additional benefit of
improved  risk  diversification  and  would  thus  result  in  more  resilient  profitability.  To  this  end,
policy-makers  may  need  to  remove  obstacles  to  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions,
promote further integration and pursue the banking union agenda.
It is also worth recalling the good news. Banks have noticeably improved their resilience over the
past few years. This largely reflects the new regulatory framework. They now need to hold more
and higher-quality regulatory capital and they must maintain liquidity buffers. They also need to
finance  themselves  through  stable  funding  sources. And  they  have  to  plan  for  their  potential
resolution  and  issue  debt  instruments  that  can  be  bailed  in.  While  these  adjustments  can  be
challenging in the short term, in the long term they increase the banking sector’s resilience to
adverse shocks, reducing the likelihood of costly financial crises.
In fact, the euro area banking system already complies with the new requirements for high-quality
capital and liquidity buffers. But even though banks have improved their capital positions in recent
years, only a small fraction of bank capital requirements are in the form of the countercyclical
capital buffer (CCyB), which authorities can release in the event of systemic stress to help avoid
costly  economic  deleveraging.  This  suggests 
the  current  composition  of  capital
requirements may need to be rebalanced to give the CCyB a more prominent role.
Opportunities and challenges for euro area non-bank financial institutions
that 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  euro  area  non-bank  financial  sector,  which  has  grown  rapidly  since  the
global financial crisis. Its total assets have almost doubled over the last ten years, growing from
€23 trillion in 2008 to almost €46 trillion in June 2019.
Euro  area  non-banks  are  playing  an  increasingly  important  role  in  financing  the  euro  area
economy,  especially  through  their  sizeable  investments  in  bonds  issued  by  euro  area  non-
financial corporations. Euro area investment funds, insurers and pension funds jointly hold half of
these bonds, as opposed to 7% held by euro area banks. The greater role of non-banks can be
positive  from  a  financial  stability  perspective  as  it  helps  diversify  the  sources  of  financing
provided to the real economy. Moreover, life insurers and pension funds typically provide one of
the most stable sources of long-term financing.
But, similar to banks, non-banks also face several challenges in the current environment, with
profitability  being  one  of  the  major  concerns.  As  bond  yields  have  fallen,  non-bank  financial
intermediaries  are  holding  a  growing  share  of  low-yielding  bonds,  which  decreases  their
investment income in the medium term.
Many non-banks tend to compensate this by searching for yield in riskier, more illiquid and higher
duration  assets.  This  can  be  a  welcome  and  intended  outcome  of  monetary  policy
accommodation as it may help to ease financing conditions for non-financial corporations. But
this  trend  also  has  a  flip  side,  it  contributes  to  rising  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  non-banks’
balance sheets.
Liquidity  risk  is  a  particular  source  of  concern,  as  illiquid  funds  can  face  severe  difficulties  in
dealing with large-scale outflows. Over the past one and a half years there have been several
cases of UCITS funds under such stress. All these funds had large liquidity mismatches on their
balance sheets as they invested in illiquid assets but offered daily redemptions.
Another source of concern is the elevated exposure of non-banks to highly indebted segments of
the  corporate  sector.  Excessive  risk-taking  may  adversely  affect  the  ability  of  non-banks  to
absorb  shocks,  especially  if  economic  conditions  deteriorate.  Moreover,  downgrades  of
corporates  to  sub-investment  grade  ratings  may  force  non-banks  to  sell  assets  to  fulfil  their
investment  mandates.  This  could  amplify  price  movements  in  credit  markets  in  times  of  low
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
market  liquidity.  It  could  also  generate  spill-overs  to  the  wider  financial  system  and  the  real
economy, as funding flows might recede and the cost of corporate financing might increase.
Against  this  background,  we  need  to  think  about  potential  gaps  in  the  current  regulatory
framework. In particular, we should embark on developing a macroprudential framework for the
non-bank financial sector, which is still in its infancy. Additional policy instruments should ensure
that  non-banks  can  sustain  their  financing  of  the  real  economy  under  different  economic
conditions.  They  should  aim  to  mitigate  risks  related  to  procyclical  risk  taking  and  excessive
leverage, liquidity and maturity transformation. One could consider macroprudential restrictions
on  fund  leverage  and  additional  liquidity  management  tools  that  align  redemption  terms  more
closely  with  the  liquidity  of  funds’  assets,  for  example.  The  policy  tools  should  also  provide
incentives  for  non-banks  to  internalise  the  impact  that  their  actions  have  on  the  rest  of  the
financial system and the real economy. In particular, such policy tools could mitigate non-banks’
potential to amplify exuberance in upturns and adversely affect financial and economic conditions
in downturns.
Of course we cannot have a one size fits all approach for non-banks and we need to account for
differences 
in  balance  sheet  structures  and  business  models  when  designing  any
macroprudential policy framework. But the growing size of non-bank financial institutions, their
greater importance to the financing of the real economy and their interconnectedness with the
rest of the system highlight the importance of developing a sound macroprudential framework for
this sector.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Currently,  one  of  the  most  significant  vulnerabilities  of  euro  area  banks  relates  to  their  weak
profitability  prospects.  The  lacklustre  outlook  reflects  both  structural  and  cyclical  factors.  The
banking  system  is  operating  with  significant  overcapacity  resulting 
in  persistent  cost
inefficiencies and competitive pressures. At the same time, the weaker cyclical momentum and
associated  low  interest  rates  are  weighing  on  bank  profitability,  although  monetary  policy
accommodation has supported lending volumes. However, we need to acknowledge that banks
have made significant progress in repairing balance sheets since the outbreak of the financial
crisis. Nevertheless, a rebalancing of the current composition of capital requirements towards a
more  prominent  role  for  the  CCyB  could  help  mitigate  costly  economic  deleveraging  in
downturns.
Non-bank financial intermediaries have grown rapidly over recent years in the euro area, which is
a welcome development. But similar to banks, they are also facing profitability headwinds in the
current environment. As a consequence, they are searching for yield in riskier assets. Given their
increasing  importance  in  financing  the  real  economy,  their  increased  risks  and  vulnerabilities
highlight the need for the development of a macroprudential framework for this sector.
1
See Andersson, M., Kok, C., Mirza, H., Móré, C. and Mosthaf, J., “How can euro area banks reach sustainable
profitability in the future?”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November 2018.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
