 November  7,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Japan's Experience and Its Implications for China   
-- Monetary Policy and Financial System --   
Speech at the PBC School of Finance, Tsinghua University                 
 Masayoshi Amamiya 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon everyone. It is a great honor to have this opportunity to speak to you today 
at the esteemed Tsinghua University. 
 China  and  Japan  are  only  separated  by  a  narrow  body  of  water.  This  nearness  has 
historically  enabled  us  to interact  actively,  and  our two  countries  have  been  learning  from 
each other for a long time. However, knowledge and culture have flowed in one direction or 
the  other  over  time.  During  the  19th  and  20th  centuries,  western-style  science  and 
technology were transferred through Japan to China, as Japan advanced in its modernization. 
But before that, over the centuries, Japan had learned a great deal from China. The legacies 
are still evident in many parts of our society today. For example, learning Chinese classical 
literature  and  poems  is  a  part  of  student  life  in  Japan.  When  I  was  a  student,  I  remember 
struggling to recite poems written by Li Bai or Du Fu and reading Chunqiu or the Analects 
of Confucius. 
 I would like to quote a phrase in Chinese that has remained with me over the years. 
  为穷而不困（Wèi Qióng Ér Bú Kùn）、忧而意不衰也（Yōu Ér Yì Bù Shuāi Yě） 
Never become troubled in adversity, never become depressed when worried. 
These are words from Xunzi. The calligraphy in Slide 1 was written by Yasushi Mieno, the 
26th  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ),  who  had  a  deep  understanding  of  China.  He 
gave  this  calligraphy  to  me  when  I  served  as  his  secretary.  These  words  were  originally 
intended  to  explain  the  attitude  toward  learning.  Mr.  Mieno,  however,  found  in  them  the 
importance  of  fulfilling  the  responsibilities  of  the  central  bank  with  determination.  He 
always said "one should not run away even when faced with great adversity." 
 Mr. Mieno enjoyed a good relationship for a long time with Liu Hongru, who was Deputy 
Governor of the People's Bank of China (PBC) at that time (Slide 2). Mr. Mieno once told 
me  that,  upon  the  two  of  them  having  drunk  their  hotel  dry,  Mr.  Liu  gave  Mr.  Mieno  a 
nickname, "Mr. Prodigious Drinker (海量先生<Hǎi Liàng xiān sheng>)." As you are aware, 
Mr.  Liu  not  only  made  great  contributions  to  financial  system  reform  in  China,  but  also 
 1 
made  efforts  to  establish  and  develop  the  Graduate  School  of  the  PBC,  which  is  now  the 
PBC School of Finance here at Tsinghua University. 
 With  these  close  connections  in  mind,  today  I  would  like  to  share  Japan's  experience  and 
lessons learned from a central bank's perspective.   
 The main themes of my speech are monetary policy and the financial system. On monetary 
policy, I will explain the transition of the BOJ's monetary policy instruments from the 1980s 
to the early 1990s in response to financial liberalization. On the financial system, I will talk 
about  how  Japan  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  that  occurred  after  the  collapse  of  the 
bubble economy and continued through the 1990s and the early 2000s. I will then close my 
speech  by  introducing  an  example  of  financial  cooperation  between  our  two  countries; 
namely,  the  currency  swap  agreement  between  the  BOJ  and  the  PBC  that  was  concluded 
last year. 
 I. Monetary Policy: Toward Further Utilization of Interest Rate Instruments 
Let me start with a discussion on monetary policy. I would like to talk about the experience 
and lessons regarding the transition of the BOJ's monetary policy instruments in the process 
of financial liberalization. 
 Japan's Experience 
Up  until  the  mid-1990s,  interest  rates  on  bank  deposits  and  loans  in Japan were  regulated 
based  on  the  BOJ's  loan  rate  to  commercial  banks.  This  loan  rate  was  referred  to  as  the 
official  discount  rate.  At  that  time,  the  BOJ  conducted  monetary  policy  by  adjusting  the 
official  discount  rate.  However,  during  the  period  of  rapid  economic  growth,  demand  for 
funds  constantly  exceeded  supply.  It  was  difficult  to  control  banks'  lending  activities  by 
simply adjusting the official discount rate. For this reason, in 1957, the BOJ introduced an 
instrument that directly influenced banks' lending behavior. Specifically, it set the amount of 
loan growth for individual banks. This policy tool was called window guidance. 
 At  that  time,  this  was  a  very  effective  monetary  policy  instrument.  By  the  late  1980s, 
however,  the  effectiveness  of  window  guidance  declined.  This  is  because,  on  the  back  of 
 2 
financial  liberalization,  the  financial  intermediary  channel  for  the  corporate  sector  became 
diversified  and  overseas  funding  expanded.  To  begin  with,  there  was  a  prominent  shift  in 
corporate finance from bank loans to the issuance of corporate bonds (Slide 3). Furthermore, 
there was a rapid increase in lending by non-banks, which were difficult for the central bank 
to control directly (Slide 4). In addition, foreign currency and Euroyen lending, which was 
called  "Impact  Loans,"  also  increased  sharply  during  this  period  on  the  back  of  capital 
account liberalization (Slide 5). In response to these changes, the BOJ expanded the scope 
of window guidance to various types of bank lending activities. Nevertheless, managing the 
complex flow of funds of financial institutions amid financial liberalization was not feasible, 
and the effectiveness of window guidance declined. 
 For this reason, the BOJ shifted from quantity control to interest rate control through open 
market operations. This is because interest rate instruments can affect not only bank lending 
but also overall financial activity. Window guidance was finally abolished in 1991. 
 Implications for China 
In China, financial liberalization has made progress steadily in recent years. The size of the 
short-term money market and the bond market has been increasing. As a result, short-term 
interest  rates,  as  well  as  primary  and  secondary  interest  rates  on  government  bonds,  are 
being  formed  in  the  financial  markets.  The  benchmark  interest  rates  set  by  the  PBC  still 
seem to have a certain impact on bank deposit and lending rates. However, the regulation, 
which  requires  that  deposit  and  lending  rates  be  kept  within  a  certain  range  vis-à-vis  the 
benchmark  interest  rates,  has  already  been  abolished.  In  addition,  gradual  capital  account 
liberalization has made both overseas funding and investment easier than before. 
 Under such circumstances, the PBC has been increasing the role of open-market operations 
in  conducting  monetary  policy  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  it  also  continues  to  use 
guidance  such  as  macro-prudential  assessment  (MPA),  which  exerts  a  direct  influence  on 
bank  lending.  The  PBC  recognizes  MPA  as  an  important  element  of  its  financial  control 
framework,  which  consists  of  monetary  policy  and  macro  prudential  policy.  In  fact, 
Governor Yi Gang mentioned last December that China's monetary policy is still on the way 
of  shifting  from  quantity  control  to  price  control  and  that  quantity  control  remains  very 
 3 
important at this stage.1 
 The current situation in China bears some similarities to that of Japan from the late 1980s to 
the  early  90s  when  the  BOJ  increased  the  role  of  open  market  operations  while  giving  a 
supplementary  role  to  window  guidance.  Based  on  the  BOJ's  experience  during  the 
transition phase, I would like to emphasize the following three points. 
 (1)  Effectiveness  of  Central  Bank's  Guidance  to  Influence  Bank  Lending  under 
Financial Liberalization 
The first point is that the effectiveness of direct control of bank lending inevitably declines 
as financial liberalization progresses. 
 As I have mentioned, the effectiveness of window guidance by the BOJ decreased as firms 
diversified  their  funding  sources  on  the  back  of  financial  liberalization.  I  would  like  to 
introduce my own experience related to this. 
 In  the  late  1980s,  I  was  part  of  a  team  at  the  BOJ  responsible  for  implementing  window 
guidance. At that time, Japanese banks were very active in providing loans. I still remember 
how they repeatedly emphasized that the demand for funds was strong on the back of robust 
economic  activity.  We  tried  to  check  whether  that  demand  was  based  on  sound  economic 
activities  or  on  speculative  investments.  We  also  examined  whether  the  increase  in  bank 
lending  was  justified  given  the  diversification  of  firms'  funding  sources.  However,  it  was 
almost  impossible  to  examine  every  single  loan  thoroughly.  Meanwhile,  once  banks  were 
granted a certain amount of increase in lending, they used up  the full allotment. They took 
the  approval  by  the  BOJ  as  though  they  had  been  given  the  green  light  for  an  increase  in 
loans.  In  addition,  since  the  BOJ  only  controlled  the  increase  in  lending,  the  outstanding 
amount  of  bank  lending  itself  always  exceeded  the  previous  year's  result  even  though  the 
BOJ asked for a restrained stance. As a result, bank lending and money stock continued to 
grow  rapidly  in  the  late  1980s  (Slide  6).  In  retrospect,  I  think  that  the  BOJ's  window 
                                                   
1  Gang  Yi,  "China's  monetary  policy  framework:  supporting  the  real  economy  and  striking  a  balance 
between internal and external equilibrium," speech at the Tsinghua University in Beijing, December 13, 
2018. 
 
 4 
guidance not only failed to adequately curb the expansion of credit but also contributed to 
the formation of the asset-price bubble to some extent. 
 In China in recent years, corporate bond issuance has been increasing (Slide 7). Non-bank 
lending, often called shadow banking, has also been surging (Slide 8). In addition, there has 
been  an  increase  in  funding  from  foreign  markets  through  the  bond  issuance  by  overseas 
subsidiaries (Slide 9). In this context, it is necessary to be well aware that the development 
of these alternative funding methods in China could make the central bank's quantity control 
less effective. 
 (2)  Financial  Liberalization and  Importance  of  Interest  Rate  Instruments  for  Monetary 
Policy 
The second point is  that, as financial liberalization proceeds,  interest rate control becomes 
more effective with a view to controlling financial conditions. 
 It  was  not  just  because  of  the  diversification  of  corporate  funding  channels  that  window 
guidance became less effective in the late 1980s. At that time, the BOJ was quite hesitant 
about  raising  interest  rates  due  to  several  reasons,  such  as  subdued  inflation  and  fear  of 
sharp appreciation of the Japanese yen. From 1987 through 1988, the BOJ required banks to 
take  a  disciplined  lending  approach  through  window  guidance  and  gradually  strengthened 
the guidance. However, with the official discount rate being unchanged, the effect was very 
limited. 
 My  sense  is  that  the  desirable  policy  effects  could  have  been  obtained  if  the  official 
discount rate had been appropriately raised at that time. This is because changes in interest 
rates  affect  a  wider  range  of  financial  activities,  including  those  not  directly  affected  by 
window  guidance.  Also,  as  liberalization  of  deposit  and  lending  rates  proceeds,  banks' 
lending stance and firms' funding needs become more sensitive to changes in interest rates. 
Based  on  its  experience,  the  BOJ  shifted  to  interest  rate  control  in  conducting  monetary 
policy. At the same time, the policy rate was changed from the official discount rate to the 
short-term market rate that should be guided through open market operations. 
  5 
At present, the PBC uses a quantity control instrument for exerting direct influence on bank 
lending  while  putting  more  importance  on  interest  rate  control  through  open  market 
operations,  as  mentioned  earlier.  The  former  policy  tool  of  quantity  control  plays  an 
important  role  in  supplementing  interest  rate-based  monetary  policy  during  the  transition 
phase  of  financial  liberalization.  Nonetheless,  based  on  Japan's  experience,  interest  rate 
instruments need to be utilized with a view to affecting a wide range of financial activities, 
including bank lending.   
 In  this  regard,  the  PBC  announced  this  August  that  banks  reporting  the  Loan  Prime  Rate 
(LPR),  which  is  the  reference  rate  for  interest  on  bank  lending,  should  determine  their 
lending  rates  by  referring  to  the  rate  of  money  market  operations  conducted  by  the  PBC. 
The  PBC  also  stated  that  all  financial  institutions  should  determine  interest  rates  on  new 
loans based on the LPR. The announcement is expected to make banks' lending rates change 
more  flexibly  than  in  the  past,  and  it  could  lead  to  further  utilization  of  interest  rate 
instruments. 
 (3)  Importance of Developing Financial Markets 
The  third  point  is  that  it  is  important  to  develop  financial  markets  so  as  to  raise  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy using interest rate instruments. 
 In  order  to  increase  the  policy  effectiveness  of  guiding  short-term  interest  rates,  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  interest  rates  should  be  firmly  established.  In  other  words, 
changes  in  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  need  to  be  transmitted 
effectively through various interest rates, including the government bond yields. To achieve 
this,  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  liberalize  various  interest  rates,  but  also  to  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  markets  and  thereby  facilitate  arbitrage  transactions  across 
markets. 
 In  the  case  of  Japan,  the  BOJ  has  made  various  efforts  to  develop  financial  markets.  Our 
efforts  focused  not  only  on  short-term  money  markets  but  also  on  bond  markets  and 
derivatives markets including futures (Slide 10). 
  6 
In  China  today,  various  financial  markets  are  also  being  developed.  In  light  of  our 
experience,  I  would  like  to  point  out  some  issues  that  are  particularly  important  going 
forward. 
 First of all, increasing the diversity of market participants is critical. Liquidity of financial 
markets will improve when there are more transactions among diverse market participants 
with different business models, asset and liability structures, and views on the future course 
of  interest  rates.  In  addition  to  developing  domestic  institutional  investors,  encouraging 
entry by foreign  financial institutions has great significance. In Japan, the entry of  foreign 
financial  institutions  into  bond  markets  has  increased  since  the  1980s,  and  they  have 
contributed to the smooth and flexible formation of both short- and long-term interest rates. 
 Moreover,  communication  and  cooperation  between  the  central  bank  and  market 
participants  is  vital.  It  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  the  needs  and  burdens  of  market 
participants  when  establishing  transaction  rules,  statistics,  and  payment  systems.  The  BOJ 
has  engaged  in  frank  discussions  with  market  participants  through  regular  meetings  and 
forums with specific themes. 
 In this regard, it is very encouraging to see that such initiatives  are already being taken in 
China. For example, financial markets have become increasingly open to foreign investors, 
especially  since  last  year.  Liquidity  of  financial  markets  will  increase  significantly  as 
participation by foreign financial institutions increases. Furthermore, the relevant authorities, 
including  the  PBC,  have  started  to  make  efforts  to  increase  market  liquidity,  such  as 
allowing  more  banks  to  trade  bonds  via  stock  exchanges.  These  efforts  are  expected  to 
develop a market environment with enhanced market mechanisms.   
 II.  Financial  System:  Preparation  for  an  Orderly  Exit  of  Insolvent  Banks  from  the 
Market 
Now,  I  would  like  to  move  on  to  the  next  theme,  the  financial  system.  Financial 
liberalization has a significant impact on the business environment and behavior of financial 
institutions.  As  the  liberalization  proceeded  in  Japan  in  the  1980s,  financial  institutions 
became  concerned  about  the  decline  in  profitability  and  the  competition  among  them 
 7 
became  fierce.  As  a  result,  they  started  lending  aggressively,  which  eventually  led  to  the 
creation  of  the  asset-price  bubble  (Slide  11).  After  the  burst  of  the  bubble,  Japan 
experienced a severe financial crisis and several major financial institutions failed. 
 Let me review a series of events leading to the financial crisis. 
 Japan's Experience 
After the burst of the bubble, small and medium financial institutions began to fail in 1991. 
The  main  cause  of  this  was  their  excessive  lending  during  the  bubble  period,  and  the 
consequent piling up of nonperforming real estate loans. In 1995, the resolution of non-bank 
housing loan companies, which had a significant amount of nonperforming loans, became a 
serious issue. At that time, however, the injection of public funds was not supported by the 
general public. Meanwhile, business conditions of financial institutions perceived as sound 
started  to  deteriorate.  From  1997  to  1998,  the  default  of  a  middle-sized  securities  firm 
triggered a series of failures of major banks and a major securities firm. In fact, the number 
of failures of Japanese financial institutions increased sharply in the late 1990s (Slide 12). 
 In February 1998, belatedly, the necessary legislation was put in place to inject public funds 
into the financial system. However, the amount of public funds injected into major financial 
institutions  was  not  sufficient and  their  soundness continued to  deteriorate. Finally,  a  firm 
resolution framework was established in October 1998, for the smooth processing of failing 
financial 
institutions 
including 
temporary  nationalization.  Several  major  financial 
institutions  with  serious  problems  were  nationalized  temporarily,  and  a  large  amount  of 
public  funds  was  injected  into  other  major  financial  institutions.  In  2002,  the  Japanese 
government  introduced  a  program  that  encouraged  the  acceleration  of  disposing 
nonperforming  loans.  With  these  measures,  Japan's  financial  crisis  finally  took  a  turn  for 
resolution. The nonperforming loan ratio started to decline (Slide 13). 
 During  the  financial  crisis,  the  BOJ  provided  necessary  liquidity  as  the  "lender  of  last 
resort."  In  addition,  it  provided  equity-type  funds  such  as  capital  and  subordinated  loans, 
which was beyond the traditional role of a central bank. These capital injections by the BOJ 
were unusual but necessary steps to prevent the materialization of systemic risk at the stage 
 8 
before the establishment of the aforementioned resolution framework, including the bailout 
by public funds. 
 Implications for China 
In China today, the business environment of financial institutions is changing rapidly due to 
financial  liberalization  and  the  slower  economic  growth.  In  addition,  with  the  heightened 
uncertainty about the global economy, the business conditions of financial institutions might 
be affected in the future. Given the relatively high  level of debt, it is important to  be well 
prepared for the potential risk that failure of individual financial institutions might become 
systemic and have a significant impact on economic activity. 
 Based on Japan's experience, I would like to emphasize the following three points. 
 (1)  Importance of Establishing Financial Safety Nets 
The first point is the importance of building institutional frameworks that contribute to the 
stability of the financial system, namely, financial safety nets. 
 In  order  to  prevent  failure  of  individual  financial  institutions  from  spreading  through  the 
financial  system,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  quick  and  smooth  resolution  framework.  In 
addition,  various  prudential  schemes  are  needed  for  maintaining  the  soundness  and 
confidence of the entire financial system. 
 In  Japan,  a  deposit  insurance  system  was  established  at  a  relatively  early  stage  in  1971. 
However,  other  key  financial  safety  nets  were  introduced  belatedly  after  Japan  faced  and 
dealt with the financial crisis caused by the burst of the bubble. The main examples of these 
safety  nets  included  the  resolution  mechanism  for  financial  institutions,  the  mandatory 
disclosure scheme on nonperforming loans, accounting standards for the adequate write-off 
of nonperforming loans, and the prompt corrective action framework (Slide 14). 
 In  the  case  of  Japan,  the  government  established  these  safety  nets  while  dealing  with  the 
failure  of  financial  institutions  and  the  financial  crisis.  As  a  result,  it  took  a  long  time  to 
restore  financial  stability.  In  particular,  there  was  no  legal  framework  for  injecting  public 
 9 
funds into financial institutions. Moreover, in the beginning of the crisis, the general public 
was strongly opposed to the idea of injecting public funds. Therefore, business conditions of 
financial institutions deteriorated further until the injection was realized. 
 In  China,  a  deposit  insurance  system  was  established  in  2015.  Now,  it  is  important  to 
develop financial safety nets further while the financial system is sound. 
 In  this  regard,  China  introduced  measures  this  year  to  encourage  financial  institutions  to 
increase  capital  through  the  issuance  of  perpetual  bonds.  This  approach  is  in  line  with 
actions  taken  by  other  financial  authorities  around  the  world.  At  present,  based  on  the 
experience of the global financial crisis, a common understanding among the authorities is 
that financial institutions should secure adequate capital on their own,  relative to their size, 
rather  than  rely  on  public  funds  in  the  case  of  financial  stress.  In  order  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness  of  capital  reinforcement,  regardless  of  the  source  of  funds,  financial 
institutions need to monitor their own financial conditions carefully and, if necessary, raise 
capital  proactively.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  since  financial  institutions  initially  underreported 
the  amount  of  public  funds  they  needed,  the  government  was  not  able  to  inject  sufficient 
funds for capital reinforcement at an early stage. This experience shows the importance of 
establishing an accounting standard of nonperforming loans and appropriate disclosure. 
 (2)  Dispelling the Myth that Banks Never Fail 
The  second  point  is  the  importance  of  the  recognition  within  society  that,  although 
individual financial institutions could fail, just like non-financial firms, the stability of the 
financial system can be maintained. 
 If  the  general  public  perceives  that  "banks  are  fail-safe,"  a  moral  hazard  is  caused  among 
depositors and banks, leading to the accumulation of risk for the financial system. 
 Looking  back,  there  was  a  myth  in  Japan  that  banks  could  not  fail.  In  other  words,  the 
possibility of a bank's failure was not considered realistic. In fact, deposit insurance had not 
been triggered for 20 years, since its establishment until 1991. 
  10 
If  we  look  back  further,  Japan  experienced  a  severe  financial  crisis  caused  by  a  series  of 
financial institution failures in the 1920s.  Based on this experience, the Japanese financial 
authorities  adopted  an  administrative  approach  called  the  "convoy  system."  This  system 
strictly  regulated  competition  among  financial  institutions  with  respect  to  interest  rate 
setting  and  business  operations  in  order  to  ensure  that  even  financially  weak  institutions 
would  not  fail.  The  myth  that  Japanese  banks  could  not  fail  was  formed  by  this  "convoy 
system" and by undue trust in financial authorities. In addition, there was another myth that 
land  prices  could  never  fall.  In  fact,  the  business  conditions  of  Japanese  banks  were  also 
supported by this "land price myth." 
 It was not until the burst of the bubble and subsequent financial crisis that these two myths 
were debunked. Things changed all of a sudden, and the impact of a series of bank failures 
and the credit crunch in corporate finance on the Japanese economy was extremely severe. 
 If  there  is  a  myth  in  China  that  banks  never  fail,  it  is  important  to  dispel  it  in  normal 
circumstances. At the same time, it is also important to build trust among the general public 
that financial stability as a whole will be maintained even if individual financial institutions 
fail.  For  example,  one  approach  is  to  encourage  financial  education,  including  promoting 
better understanding of the deposit insurance system among the public. 
 Until  this  year,  China  had  not  seen  any  bank  failures  since  that  of  Hainan  Development 
Bank  in  1998.  After  Baoshang  Bank  was  temporarily  nationalized  this  May,  there  was  a 
case  of  one  major  national  bank  acquiring  an  urban  commercial  bank.  Accumulating 
examples  like  these  would  help  raise  social  awareness  of  how  the  financial  stability  is 
secured apart from the failure of individual banks.   
 (3)  Deep Understanding of the Markets' Reaction 
The third point is that  it is important to pay attention to how financial markets respond to 
various policy measures for strengthening financial stability. 
 When  faced  with  financial  stress,  the  resolution  of  financial  institutions,  the  disposal  of  a 
large amount of nonperforming loans, and financial system reform are inevitable in order to 
 11 
protect  and  strengthen  the  financial  system.  However,  the  authorities'  actions  could  cause 
strong  reactions  by  the  financial  markets,  which  might  have  counter-productive  effects  on 
financial stability itself. Let me introduce two cases from Japan's experience. 
 The  first  case  is  the  default  of  Sanyo  Securities  in  the  interbank  market  in  1997.  Sanyo 
Securities, a medium-sized securities firm, was not a depository institution, and the amount 
of  the  default  was  relatively  small.  Nevertheless,  the  impact  on  the  financial  markets  was 
significant. As this was the first-ever default in the Japanese interbank market since World 
War II, market participants became skeptical that those to whom they lent money might fail 
at  any  time.  Financial  institutions  showed  strong  reluctance  to  provide  even  short-term 
funds, and as a result a severe credit crunch occurred. Actually, the financial crisis in Japan 
was triggered by this small default event in the financial markets. 
 The  second  case  relates  to  what  was  called  the  Japan  premium.  In  1997  to  1998,  when  a 
number  of  major  financial  institutions  failed,  Japanese  banks  were  required  to  pay  a 
premium  for  raising  funds  in  U.S.  dollars.  At  that  time,  the  Japanese  government  was 
promoting  deregulation  of  financial  markets  under  the  "Big  Bang"  reform  programs  and 
expediting the painful disposal of the nonperforming loans of financial institutions. Market 
participants  were  concerned  about  whether  or  not  financial  institutions  were  able  to 
withstand  the  drastic  reform  and  the  disposal.  In  this  situation,  the  Japanese  banks, 
including even those with strong balance sheets, had to  pay a premium of up to 100  basis 
points when raising funds in U.S. dollars. This was a heavy burden for the Japanese banks, 
and  some  market  participants  were  concerned  about  a  spillover  of  the  financial  crisis  in 
Japan to the rest of the world, which fortunately did not happen. 
 These examples show that financial markets sometimes react strongly to events when faced 
with  financial  stress.  As  a  result,  their  reaction  itself  may  amplify  financial  instability  or 
make it difficult for the authorities to promote financial sector reform. 
 In  China  today,  the  authorities  have  started  to  tackle  the  resolution  of  financially  weak 
banks,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  They  have  also  been  promoting  "financial  supply-side 
structural  reform"  to  further  strengthen  the  financial  system.  Both  efforts  are  steps  in  the 
 12 
right  direction.  However,  when  tackling  the  resolution  and  promoting  financial  sector 
reform,  it  is  important  to  pay  attention  to  the  market's  reaction,  and  to  communicate 
carefully with the financial market. 
 Conclusion 
Today,  I  have  described  Japan's  experience  and  its  implications  for  China  by  focusing  on 
monetary policy and financial stability. In closing, I would like to talk about the importance 
of mutual learning and cooperation between Japan and China. 
 At  present,  China  is  simultaneously  facing  a  transition  from  rapid  economic  growth  to 
slower  growth,  financial  liberalization,  and  a  declining  birthrate  and  aging  population. 
Japan  has  already  experienced  all  of  these  events.  Meanwhile,  the  two  countries  are  now 
experiencing the same sorts of changes; for example, the digital revolution. In particular, the 
development of the digital economy in China has been remarkable,  and this has drawn the 
attention of many Japanese companies. It will become more and more important for Japan 
and  China  to  cooperate  and  learn  from  each  other.  In  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I 
explained  that  knowledge  and  culture  have  flowed  in  one  direction  or  the  other  between 
Japan and China over time. Compared with the past, the time now seems ripe for us to learn 
from each other by sharing our knowledge and experience. 
 Furthermore,  as  the  economic  and  financial  ties  between  the  two  countries  grow  stronger, 
there  are  increasing  opportunities  for  the  two  central  banks  to  cooperate  in  addressing 
common issues. I will give you an example. 
 In October of last year, the BOJ and the PBC signed a currency swap agreement, allowing 
for  the  exchange  of  local  currencies  between  the  two  central  banks  of  up  to  200  billion 
renminbi, or 3.4 trillion yen (Slide 15). By utilizing the swap agreement, the BOJ would be 
prepared  to  provide  liquidity  in  renminbi  should  Japanese  financial  institutions  face 
unexpected difficulties in renminbi settlements, and vice versa with provisions of yen by the 
PBC. The agreement is designed to enhance the financial stability of the two countries, and 
hence support economic and financial activities for economic development in each country. 
  13 
Lastly, I would like to conclude my speech by referring to the words from Xunzi again. The 
passage that I mentioned in the beginning of my speech continues in this way (Slide 16). 
  知祸福终始而心不惑也（Zhī Huò Fú Zhōng Shǐ Ér Xīn Bú Huò Yě） 
This  means  that  "the  aim  of  learning  is  to  understand  misfortune  and  fortune,  ending  and 
beginning, and ultimately, to be able to guide yourself." In this world of great uncertainty, I 
feel that these words have marked relevance to the continuing efforts of Japan and China to 
learn from each other and deepen mutual cooperation. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
   14 
