 News conference 
   Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
Introductory remarks by Andréa M. Maechler 
 
I would like to begin by reviewing developments on the global financial markets, paying 
special attention to the situation on the Swiss franc money market. I will also brief you on 
how preparations to replace Libor are progressing. After this, I will address the importance of 
climate risks for the SNB’s investment policy. I will close with a few remarks about the 
SNB’s involvement in the new Innovation Hub being set up by the Bank for International 
Settlements.  
Situation on the financial markets 
Economic concerns and political uncertainty have shaped developments on the global 
financial and foreign exchange markets in recent months. For instance, the tug of war in the 
US-China trade dispute weighed on investors’ risk sentiment, especially in the third quarter. 
Interest rates declined significantly around the world during this phase. Yield curves flattened 
markedly. In some countries, long-term interest rates even dropped below the level of short-
term rates. The yield on ten-year Confederation bonds fell to a historic low of −1.1% in 
August (cf. chart 1). 
Investor sentiment picked up again from September against a backdrop of monetary policy 
easing by the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank and somewhat more 
favourable economic data. The equity markets benefited in particular from reduced trade 
tensions in October, with some of the major share indices reaching new highs in November. 
The Swiss Market Index (SMI) has gained almost 5% since mid-year, recently surpassing the 
2007 peak by over 12% (cf. chart 2). 
In this environment, interest rates recovered slightly from their lows and yield curves also 
steepened again. However, yields on government bonds issued by countries considered safe 
by investors have mostly been below mid-year levels of late; around 28% of government debt 
  Page 1/6 
  News conference 
 Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
worldwide is still trading at negative yields. In Switzerland, the yield on 10-year 
Confederation bonds recently stood at −0.5%, approximately the same level as in mid-2019.  
Overall, uncertainty dominated the financial markets – a fact that was also reflected in foreign 
exchange market prices. Weaker economic data weighed particularly heavily on the euro, 
which has depreciated by some 2.5% in trade-weighted terms since the end of June. On the 
other hand, currencies considered safe havens by the markets were able to appreciate in this 
environment. The Japanese yen and the Swiss franc have gained slightly since mid-year; the 
franc thus remains highly valued. The situation on the foreign exchange markets is still fragile 
(cf. chart 3). 
Money market developments 
Let me now turn to developments in the Swiss franc money market. Thomas Jordan has 
already mentioned the adjustments we have made to the way we calculate exemption 
thresholds for the negative interest rate. These changes came into effect on 1 November. 
Since then, many banks have been benefiting from higher exemption thresholds and have an 
incentive to take on liquidity via the money market. 
As expected, this demand for liquidity led to higher trading volumes and a slight rise in 
SARON and other short-term repo rates in the week following the introduction of the new 
calculation basis (cf. chart 4). The SNB was active in the repo market from time to time in 
order to keep SARON close to the SNB policy rate.  
The Swiss franc repo market functioned smoothly throughout the transition, not least thanks 
to the state-of-the-art and reliable money market infrastructure. The SNB trades using the 
same infrastructure as the banks on the interbank market. This is particularly helpful as it 
ensures that the SNB’s operations are highly effective. 
Transitioning from Libor to SARON 
SARON is currently establishing itself as the leading reference interest rate for financial 
products in Swiss francs and is replacing Libor. As you know, the UK’s financial regulator 
will only be supporting Libor until the end of 2021, so it is important that the transition 
process on the market take place now. Over the last few years, the National Working Group 
on Swiss Franc Reference Rates (NWG) has put forward recommendations on how to proceed 
with replacing Libor. Market participants must now act decisively to implement these 
recommendations.  
A SARON-based swap market is especially important for the financial markets. Swap markets 
are used to hedge interest rate risk (e.g. in mortgages); the associated transactions produce a 
swap curve, which serves as a benchmark for pricing and valuing bonds and loans. To date, 
however, trading – and hence liquidity – in SARON swaps has been low. This will change 
once more SARON-based cash products become available. The successful transitioning away 
from Libor therefore hinges on the development of such products.  
  Page 2/6 
  News conference 
 Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
In order for SARON to be used as the reference rate for cash products, a longer-term interest 
rate must be calculated from the daily rate. As early as 2018, the NWG recommended various 
options for calculating an average interest rate based on realised SARON values. This 
approach, known as compounding, is also gaining traction abroad. A wide range of options 
for calculating such average rates has been proposed and evaluated. At its latest meeting, the 
NWG was more specific and narrowed down its set of recommended options.1 As a result, 
market participants can now begin embedding the compounding approach in products such as 
mortgages.  
In addition to new SARON-based cash products, solutions must be found for existing Libor-
based products. Ideally, these will be replaced by new, SARON-based contracts. At the very 
least, the existing contracts must be furnished with fallback clauses, which will come into 
effect when Libor is no longer available as a reference rate. 
I should stress that it is evident that the Swiss franc Libor will cease to exist. The stage has 
been set for the transition to SARON, and it is now up to market participants to use the time 
until the end of 2021 to complete the work that remains to be done. A successful transition 
from Libor to SARON is crucial for the smooth functioning of the Swiss franc money and 
capital markets. 
Importance of climate risks for the SNB’s investment policy 
I would now like to say a few words about the importance of climate risks for the SNB’s 
investment policy. Let me start by summarising this policy. Our asset management is 
governed by the primacy of monetary policy. In applying its investment policy, the SNB has 
two main objectives. The first is to ensure that the balance sheet can be used for monetary 
policy purposes at any time. In particular, the SNB must be in a position to expand or shrink 
its balance sheet if needed. The second objective is to preserve the value of currency reserves 
in the long term. A high degree of asset liquidity and diversification is required to ensure 
sufficient room for manoeuvre in the implementation of monetary policy. As the SNB does 
not pursue any strategic or structural objectives with its investments, it seeks to achieve the 
broadest possible market coverage in managing its assets.  
So what do climate risks mean for the SNB’s investment policy? In the context of investment 
policy, climate risks are not fundamentally different from other financial risks – they too can 
trigger or amplify market fluctuations, which influence the attractiveness of certain assets. By 
opting for broad coverage of entire markets, the SNB takes into account the complexity of the 
many different risks. We regularly review changes in the risk landscape and factor them into 
our investment policy where necessary. Furthermore, as an investor the SNB has long had in 
place a clear set of exclusion criteria for companies that violate Switzerland’s fundamental 
norms and values. For instance, it does not invest in companies that systematically cause 
 1 Relevant documents are available on the SNB website: www.snb.ch/en/ifor/finmkt/fnmkt_benchm/id/finmkt_reformrates 
   Page 3/6 
  News conference 
 Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
severe environmental damage. Given the monetary policy requirements of our mandate, we 
are convinced that the approach we have chosen is appropriate.  
Foundation of the BIS Innovation Hub 
In October, the SNB announced that it was collaborating with the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS) to establish the BIS Innovation Hub Centre in Switzerland. This Hub 
Centre, which is scheduled to commence operations at the beginning of 2020 alongside the 
Hub Centres in Hong Kong and Singapore, will initially focus on two projects. 
The first will examine the integration of central bank money into a distributed ledger 
technology infrastructure, with a view to facilitating the settlement of tokenised assets 
between financial institutions. With respect to integrating digital central bank money, the 
focus is on two options: an SNB-issued digital token for financial institutions (‘wholesale 
central bank digital currency’) and an interface with the Swiss Interbank Clearing payment 
system. The project will be carried out as part of a collaboration between the SNB and SIX 
Digital Exchange in the form of a proof of concept.  
The second project will address the growing demands placed on central banks to be able to 
track and monitor fast-paced electronic markets. We are convinced that the work of the new 
BIS Innovation Hub will make an important contribution to central banks’ understanding of 
developments in the fintech area. 
 
   Page 4/6 
  News conference 
 Charts 
Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
       Page 5/6 
  News conference 
 Berne, 12 December 2019 
Andréa M. Maechler 
     Page 6/6 
 