 KEYNOTE SPEECH 
GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE,   
INVESTMENT & PENSIONS EUROPE 
CONFERENCE, COPENHAGEN 
 
      
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY  
   3 December 2019 
 CHALLENGES FOR THE PENSION SECTOR IN A LOW INTEREST RATE 
ENVIRONMENT 
Pension schemes are fundamentally a system for reallocating resources 
between generations and over time, depending on the system. There are 
many different setups for facilitating and formalising this transfer of 
resources. Importantly, the system is built on contracts and trust. Trust that 
setting aside part of your salary during your working life will be 
reciprocated by adequate post-retirement income. And trust that price 
stability will guard against unexpected losses in purchasing power and 
living standards.  
Has this contract and this trust always held up historically? No. An example 
is the double-digit inflation which substantially eroded the value of pension 
incomes in the 1970s and early 1980s.  
During the following period, stronger mandates for price stability and 
inflation targeting were given to many central banks. And we now seem to 
have moved well beyond the risk of high inflation in Europe. In fact, we 
may even have become a little too successful in this regard. In recent years, 
there has been a lot of focus on "missing inflation" and a "flattening of the 
Phillips curve". The challenge has been reaching the 2 per cent inflation 
target from below, rather than from above.  
Thus, the situation today is in many ways the opposite of what it was in the 
1970s. However, the trust in the pension system and the contract between 
generations may again be at risk. Albeit for an entirely different set of 
reasons.  
Side 1 af 7 
  Today, I would like to focus on some of the current challenges facing 
pension providers and, ultimately, pension savers. Only by recognising and 
understanding the environment we are facing, can we prepare ourselves 
for the consequences and limit systemic risks. The environment I am 
alluding to is that of low interest rates, low growth, higher life expectancy, 
and higher dependency ratios. Not a cocktail that many of you dream of, 
I'm sure.  
Lower growth amid continued low interest rates 
To set the scene, I would like to begin by briefly taking stock of the 
economic outlook and implications for monetary policy.  
Growth rates in Europe and further abroad are set to taper in the coming 
years. The economic momentum has slowed during 2019. While the 
likelihood of a recession in Europe may be limited, a slowdown seems 
unavoidable. Weaker trade growth, investment, and a contraction in 
manufacturing are starting to spill over to other parts of the economy. 
Furthermore, high levels of uncertainty persist, including from Brexit and 
trade tensions between the U.S. and China.  
Inflation remains subdued. Wage pressures have increased somewhat 
during the upswing, as labour markets have tightened. But the pass-
through to inflation has not yet materialised. Core inflation in the euro area 
has fluctuated around 1 per cent since 2015. Part of the explanation for 
persistently low inflation may be related to globalisation. Global rather 
than national labour supply is playing an increasing role in domestic 
inflation.  
In the aftermath of the financial crisis, monetary policy played a key role in 
supporting the recovery with both conventional and unconventional 
measures. The result is well-known: very low interest rates in many 
economies and large central bank balance sheets. In Denmark, the key 
monetary policy rate has been negative since 2012 with the exception of a 
few months.  
Now, the next slowdown may hit the European economy before monetary 
policy has had a chance to normalise – although our definition of "normal" 
has also been called into question. In recent months, central banks across 
the world have once again adopted a more dovish stance. This reflects the 
weakening of economic activity, increasing risks to growth, and subdued 
inflation.  
I do not subscribe to the view that central banks have run out of 
ammunition. But considering the starting point, monetary policy may be 
Side 2 af 7 
  hard pressed to play as prominent a role in support of the economy as 
during previous downturns. In that light, it is even more important that 
fiscal buffers are built in good times. Higher public debt sustained by 
central banks is not a long-term solution. 
Structural factors put downward pressure on interest rates 
To further complicate matters, market rates are not only being held down 
by monetary policy, but also by structural factors. While low inflation is 
playing a part in keeping nominal rates low, real interest rates are also low. 
At Danmarks Nationalbank, we have attempted to estimate the natural real 
interest rate – called r* – for Denmark. R* is defined as the real interest rate 
when the economy is growing in line with its potential.  
These estimates are associated with considerable uncertainty. But it is well-
established that r* has been on a declining trend over the past couple of 
decades. We find that the natural rate in Denmark has declined by about 4 
percentage points since the mid-1990s. It became negative during the 
financial crisis. We expect that r* will remain low in the coming years and 
perhaps decline even further. 
This finding leads to a couple of questions. Why is r* declining? And what 
are the implications? 
As to the "why", several global structural factors are driving the decline. 
One factor is lower structural economic growth. In many advanced 
economies, we have to get used to structurally lower growth going 
forward, due to modest productivity growth.  
Another factor relates to the global savings glut. When desired saving 
exceeds desired investment, the interest rate falls to balance the two. If we 
take a closer look at who is saving, we see that a large share of global 
savings is concentrated among the richest households in the U.S., China, 
and Japan.  
In countries like China, households have increased their demand for 
financial assets. Understandably, the incentive to self-insure has increased, 
as the Chinese have become wealthier and expect to live longer. This 
incentive is further strengthened by inadequate access to social safety nets.  
But demographic changes are also boosting savings in European 
households, as rising life expectancy leads to higher savings for retirement. 
This means that ageing populations not only challenge pay-as-you-go 
pension systems – with fewer workers paying for the retirement of larger 
Side 3 af 7 
  generations. They also present challenges for funded systems by lowering 
structural interest rates and thus, returns on savings. 
This leads to my second question – what are the implications of a lower r*? 
A number of effects are worth considering. The effectiveness of monetary 
policy to respond to an economic contraction may be hampered. Real 
rates will have to be lower than r* to stimulate the economy.  
Another key implication is that the structural factors holding down r* are 
neither expected to be short-lived nor to reverse anytime soon. Therefore, 
lower rates are probably here to stay for even longer than justified by the 
business cycle.  
Low interest rates and low growth present challenges for pensions  
Continued easing of monetary policy and lower structural interest rates will 
intensify the challenges currently facing institutional investors and the 
pension system in particular. These challenges are further compounded by 
the gloomy outlook for growth, as well as demographic developments. 
For defined contribution schemes, current contribution levels are likely to 
produce disappointing and inadequate results, all else equal. Similarly, the 
costs of defined benefit guarantees will increase. The lower the rate of 
interest, the higher the present value of liabilities. This weakens long-term 
solvency and exacerbates challenges of underfunding. 
The funding gap is widening and a recent G30 report assessed the global 
gap at about 16 trillion USD in 2050. Increasing dependency ratios widen 
the gap from the demand side. And protracted low rates of return add to 
the gap from the supply side.  
It is clear that pension schemes will not be able to meet their obligations to 
retirees solely based on investment returns from bonds. This year, about a 
quarter of bonds issued by governments and companies worldwide have 
been trading at negative yields. At the latest bond auction in Denmark, 
yields on government bonds and T-bills were negative for all maturities. 
Many Danish pension savers received negative returns on their portfolios 
last year. 
Fundamentally, pension companies and savers can either choose to take 
on more risk or adjust expectations and savings behaviour. Some might 
point to a third option: relax regulation, for example on required funding 
ratios. This is not really a viable option. Turning to policymakers for 
regulatory lenience may provide some relief in the short term, but it will 
not secure sustainable long-term solutions. 
Side 4 af 7 
  That leaves more risk or more realism. Let's turn to risk first. 
Increased exposure to riskier and illiquid assets is… risky 
It follows from simple math that achieving the same expected return target 
in a low-rate environment requires taking on more risk. Achieving a 7 per 
cent return when the risk-free return is 5 per cent is much easier than if it 
the risk-free return declines to 2 or even 0 per cent.  
Over the past decade, pension providers have diversified and changed 
their asset allocation mix. Moving into riskier assets with higher returns 
may have offset the drop in yields. Strong gains for equities and a 
tightened gap between yields on corporate and government bonds have 
provided opportunities. In the past years, the economic upswing has 
supported these developments. But with the economy set to slow, 
opportunities will be more limited going forward. 
Exposures to alternative and less liquid assets, such as real estate and 
infrastructure, have also increased. Danish pension funds increased their 
alternative investments by about 30 per cent over the past two years. In 
many ways, this makes sense for long-term investors with long horizons. 
Also, pension funds are playing an important role in providing much-
needed investments, for example to mitigate climate change and support 
the transition to a low-carbon economy. 
However, there are several risks to be wary of. First of all, many of these 
assets are untraded. This makes it difficult to estimate expected return and 
price risks correctly. They are mark-to-model instead of mark-to-market. To 
put it bluntly, if my pension is invested in long-term illiquid assets, I would 
prefer my pension company to be run by a younger CEO. That way, I would 
be able to hold him or her accountable for how these investments pan out 
– avoiding moral hazard problems. 
A second risk relates to liquidity. A larger share of illiquid assets in 
portfolios increases liquidity risks. From 2023, pension companies' liquidity 
needs will become even larger when the requirement for central clearing of 
interest rate swaps and other derivatives is introduced. Central clearing 
reduces the systemic risks of derivatives transactions. But potentially large 
liquidity needs require sound liquidity management in order to avoid the 
risk of forced sales of assets. 
Setting aside more liquid assets to cover liquidity risks also means fewer 
funds available to invest countercyclically. Pension funds will then have less 
flexibility to buy assets traded at distressed price levels. This may also be 
Side 5 af 7 
  unfortunate from a systemic perspective, if pension funds are less able to 
play a stabilising role in periods of market stress.  
As a central banker, I am not – as many of you – burdened with promises of 
delivering certain levels of return to pension scheme members. However, I 
am tasked with keeping tabs on the stability of the financial system as a 
whole. Therefore, I would have serious concerns about investment 
strategies based on continuously increased risk-taking in the search for 
yield.  
In its recent financial stability report, the IMF also identifies increasing 
holdings of riskier and more illiquid assets by institutional investors as a 
key vulnerability in the global financial system. 
Expectations and behaviour should be adjusted to avoid insecurity 
This brings me to my last and most important point today. Going forward, 
there is no substitute for (1) acknowledging the conditions we face today, 
(2) increasing transparency about implications for pension plans, and 
finally, (3) adjusting expectations and behaviour accordingly.  
A growing number of pension plans are recognising the impact of the low 
rate environment and adjusting expected return assumptions. In Denmark, 
the Council for Pension Projections recently reduced their return 
assumptions over a ten-year horizon for eight out of ten asset classes.  
By reducing the stock of defined benefit plans, pension funds have 
transferred a large share of the risk from the low yield environment to 
present and future pensioners. Today, many pension savers have a higher 
degree of freedom when planning their retirement income. Individuals are 
better able to match their savings and investment plans with their desired 
income, as well as their risk temperament. But this assumes that individual 
savers are well-placed to make informed investment decisions. With 
options come responsibility and trade-offs. 
Allow me to use an illustrative example. A Danish pensioner – let's call him 
Lars – pays 15 per cent of his real constant salary during all 40 years of his 
working life to save for 20 years of retirement. With an annual real rate of 
return at 5 per cent, Lars can look forward to annual retirement payouts at 
nearly 100 per cent of his annual income as a wage-earner. On the other 
hand, if real returns decline to 1 per cent, Lars' payout would drop to 
about 40 per cent, all else equal. Clearly, if yields are declining, something 
has to give. 
Side 6 af 7 
  Ultimately, pension savers will be faced with the following choice going 
forward: increase contributions, delay the age of retirement, or accept 
lower payout. Put simply: pay more now, work longer, or spend less later. 
Not a popular set of choices.  
On the first option, it is clear that increasing contributions to secure future 
income is an important step. Mandatory savings programs have become 
widespread. Micro studies from Danmarks Nationalbank show that 
mandatory programs are a better instrument for boosting pension savings 
than tax deductions. The latter tend to be inefficient and expensive. From a 
macroeconomic perspective, it is worth noting that increasing savings may 
dampen economic growth, as private consumption is reduced. Especially in 
countries like my own, where savings ratios are already historically high. 
Turning to option two: work longer. Increasing the official retirement age 
has been an important part of labour market reforms in many countries. 
These reforms are often politically difficult to implement and are constantly 
under threat of being rolled back in some countries. But they are necessary 
to maintain long-term sustainability of public finances in the face of ageing 
populations. 
Finally, the third option. Accepting lower post-retirement income is not an 
easy sell. This has been clearly exemplified in recent developments in the 
Netherlands. Yet, in some countries it may be necessary to re-evaluate 
what we can accept as a reasonable standard of living. With more 
transparency and fewer unrealistic guarantees, it will be easier for pension 
savers to adjust savings and consumption patterns at an earlier stage.  
This leads to a pertinent question: who will pick up the retirement bill for 
our younger generations? It is not clear that future pensioners will accept 
lower benefits, even though they are currently taking on more risk. The 
government – and ultimately taxpayers – may end up as "pension providers 
of last resort". 
The task of bolstering the pension system to withstand pressures from 
lower rates and higher dependency ratios cannot be delegated to the 
individual pension saver. These issues are critical for the pension system as 
a whole, as well as for public finances. Pension scheme design and public 
policy need to support and incentivise the transition to a more sustainable 
balance between (1) paying more, (2) working longer, and (3) accepting 
lower pension income. Kicking the can down the road will only postpone 
and aggravate the challenges which need to be addressed. 
Side 7 af 7 
