Arthur Yuen: Welcome remarks - HKMA Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter-Financing of Terrorism Regulatory Technology Forum
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the HKMA Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)
Regulatory Technology (RegTech) Forum (Excerpt), Hong Kong, 22 November 2019.
 1.  First of all let me welcome you all to this AML/CFT Regtech Forum, which we intend to be
the first in a series.
2.  In particular let me thank everyone for the very positive response and participation of key
stakeholders  including  the  FinTech  Association  of  Hong  Kong,  experts,  academia,  other
regulators  as  well  as  our  partners  in  government  bureaux,  Companies  Registry,  Joint
Financial  Intelligence  Unit  (JFIU),  Law  Enforcement  Agencies  (LEAs)  and  Hong  Kong
Association of Banks.
3.  Let me start with a question that speaks to why we are all here today: how effective are we,
really, in our important role in anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing? We all
recognise  the  efforts  of  the  banking  sector  over  many  years  –  and  continuing  today  –  in
helping to combat money laundering and terrorist financing.  This has recently been praised
by the  Financial Action  Task  Force (FATF), which gave us a very good score card in its
Mutual Evaluation Report on Hong Kong. 
4.  But, despite the mutual evaluation result, no system is perfect and most of the challenges
we face – money laundering from fraud, tax crimes and corruption to name but a few – are
global in nature. And the continuing efforts of the banking sector also represent challenges of
their own: banks filed over 68,000 or 90% of the suspicious transaction reports (STRs) with
the JFIU in a year.  And that is just the STRs: we all know what that means in terms of the
massive amount of data that banks are monitoring, screening and analysing on an ongoing
basis.
5.  The more difficult part of the answer to my question therefore means looking forward and
requires vision and – dare I say it – aspiration – because we know that FATF evaluations
represent a snap shot. There are always new and emerging risks, to which the HKMA and
banks  have  stayed  vigilant  and  agile;  criminals  are  also  exploiting  new  technology  and
innovations to create terrible harm to consumers and the integrity of the financial system. 
Banks  that  play  a  frontline  role  in  combating  that  harm,  not  only  by  applying  preventive
measures when on-boarding customers, but increasingly through the value of information
they are able to extract and feed into the AML/CFT eco-system and the close cooperation
with the LEAs and the HKMA in converting STRs and intelligence into actions like arrests
and asset recovery.
6.  This is the challenge we face so we’ve taken a step back from the FATF evaluation report
and asked ourselves some potent questions: is our system working as well as we would like
it to be? Are the supervisory tools and techniques we have been using for years still fit-for-
purpose?
7.  Let me start by saying that the HKMA is committed to ensuring we all have the right tools
and expertise to deliver an effective response. That’s why we are all here.
8.  Responsible innovation will drive the agenda for responding to those questions, and it is very
clear that data and technology are at the heart of that.
9.  Technologies like robotic process automation and natural language processing are already
being used by quite a number of banks to automate existing processes but there are still a
lot of banks using highly manual processes. We need to accelerate this transition.
10.  Machine learning is also increasingly being used in AML work, for example to reduce false
positives in monitoring and screening, but many banks are still grappling with huge numbers
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
of false positives. We need to enable a wider application of technology to AML work in the
sector.
11.  Moreover, data driven approaches applying network analytic tools are already proving to be
valuable  in  more  effectively  identifying  risk  in  banks  and  a  game  changer  in  how  global
money laundering networks are tackled. At the moment not every bank has the full capability
to participate or even consider such an approach. Greater collaboration is required if we
are really going to improve outcomes in combating networks, because currently each one of
you can only see a part of the picture.
12.  Many of you will know that similar changes are taking place globally in AML/CFT; technology
is  providing  practical  solutions  that  are  being  applied  in  the  real  world.  So  what’s  holding
some of us back?  Should we be afraid to experiment, to change the way we are doing AML
work?
13.  Let me be very clear about one thing: the risk for all of us is being complacent, of carrying on
as we have been and not confronting the barriers that may stand between us and progress.
We should not be afraid of trying out solutions that we feel will have genuine impact, even if
some turn out not to deliver everything they promise.
14.  With that in mind, our focus in these two days is to bring banks, regulators, technologists
and  other  important  players  within  our  AML/CFT  eco-system  together  to  challenge  our
thinking,  tackle  pain  points  and  discuss  how  we  can  move  further  ahead.  Working
collaboratively  with  like-minded  people,  we  need  to  be  ambitious  because  this  is  just  as
much  about  the  human  element,  the  impact  of  global  financial  crime,  as  it  is  about
compliance with AML/CFT requirements.
15.  We want to help enable change in banks because we recognise that, the better banks are
able to apply a data driven, technology-enabled approach to AML work, the better we are
able to discharge our role and achieve the HKMA’s statutory objectives.
16.  So this is also about the HKMA changing as a regulator; modernising the fight against money
laundering requires change and regulatory support, a more flexible approach, and we are
committed  to  further  developing  the  approach  that  has  been  started  through  our  various
initiatives.
17.  So my message is simple. The purpose of engaging every one of you in these two days is to
enable  and  encourage  banks,  whatever  stage  you  are  at  in  your  Regtech  evolution,  to
consider, test and responsibly implement technology-enabled innovations in the fight against
financial  crime,  facilitated  by,  as  well  as  contributing  to,  an  effective AML/CFT  regime  in
Hong Kong.
18.  On our part we are going to be using a number of tools, including continued engagement
through forums like this, to follow up and see that positive changes are happening in banks
and the wider eco-system. The HKMA and the banking sector will continue to contribute to
AML/CFT  efforts  in  Hong  Kong,  and  through  our  supervisory  processes,  regulations  and
guidance, we support banks’ efforts to innovate and fully grasp the benefits of RegTech.  We
welcome your feedback.
19.  Please enjoy today, I know the team have put a lot of thought into making it interesting and
thought provoking.
20.  Let us seize this opportunity to develop a stronger collective vision of what each of us can
contribute towards a more effective response to money laundering.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
