Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Labour  market  in  the  21st  century  -  the  way
forward
Welcome remarks by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at
the Economics conference “Labour Market in the 21st Century: The Way Forward”, Vilnius, 15
October 2019.
 Dear  guests  and  distinguished  speakers:  A  sincere  ‘thank  you’  for  joining  us  at  the  yearly
Lithuanian economics conference organised by the Bank of Lithuania.
This marks our third annual economics conference. The first one tackled income inequality. Last
year,  we  brainstormed  on  how  to  create  a  sustainable  pension  system  that  would  seem
trustworthy not only to its creators, but also to the people of Lithuania.
It is obvious that we do not steer clear of difficult topics. Quite the opposite – we are creating a
meaningful tradition of gathering every year to deliberate on the fundamentals: urgent issues that
pose high risks. In other words, we are taking the initiative to seek measures that could solve – or
at least facilitate solving – key problems. Especially those that demand a systematic approach.
This is precisely why we have invited you to discuss the labour market this year. We consider
labour  market  dynamics  an  alarming  issue.  Labour  market  developments  are  among  the
strongest factors – and possibly the strongest one – contributing to where we will find ourselves
in 50, 20 or even 10 years. What do I mean exactly?
According  to  Eurostat  data  and  taking  into  account  differences  in  prices,  before  the  crisis
Lithuania’s  GDP  per  capita  amounted  to  a  meagre  60%  of  the  EU  average.  Today,  we  have
reached more than 80% of the Community’s average. Of course, GDP per capita is not a perfect
indicator  of  well-being.  Nonetheless,  we  cannot  deny  it  –  convergence  is  progressing.  With
household income growing at a faster rate than the overall price level, this process is felt by an
increasingly larger fraction of society. And this is the good news.
However,  there  is  also  bad  news.  This  is  how  I  would  describe  it:  convergence  will  not  be
sustainable nor long-lasting if we do not overcome the growing challenges of the labour market.
We have seen instances in the EU when convergence among countries stalls. Or, even worse,
when  countries  start  moving  backwards  instead  of  forwards.  The  main  hindrences  in  such
economies are often found in their labour markets.
Colleagues,
I do not wish to sound overly pessimistic. If we did not believe that we still have the time and the
skills to identify the correct solutions, we would not have invited you to this discussion. Therefore,
I am going to name three issues that I deem of utmost importance when considering economic
policy  proposals  today.  These  are:  demographics,  technological  progress  and  regional
disparities.
Let  us  take  the  first  item,  demographics.  In  the  past  20  years,  the  working-age  population  in
Lithuania  has  shrunk  by  almost  a  quarter.  Today,  there  are  around  1.8  million  working-age
individuals.  If  no  significant  changes  occur,  there  will  be  fewer  than  1.5  million  working-age
1
people in 2030, and just over a million in 2060 .
It is important to note here that this year we will be able to mark the net migration rate in green
rather than red, meaning that more people are coming to Lithuania than leaving it. Therefore, the
total population should increase – for the first time since 1992.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s not deceive ourselves, though. One year is not enough to claim a sustainable trend.
Additionally, immigration (at least at the current pace) is not going to be a demographic magic
bullet. The decrease of working-age population is going to continue in Lithuania as the ageing of
the population will outweigh the positive impact of immigration.
Under these circumstances, some employers, especially in certain sectors, are already forced to
compete  for  every  single  employee  by  increasing  wages.  This  is  good  news  for  workers.
However, with wages growing faster than efficiency, in the long term we are risking a loss of
competitiveness and the positions that we have fought for in foreign markets.
And that would be terrible news for everybody. Hence, it is likely that our country’s employers,
seeking  to  avoid  that  turn  of  events,  will  pursue  ways  to  adapt  to  the  decreasing  number  of
employees other than offering larger wages.
Research  shows  that  human-performed  task  automation  is  likely  to  happen  more  swiftly  in
countries faced with demographic challenges . As such, there is an imperative to discuss the
challenges and possibilities of technological progress.
2
According to the OECD calculations , medium risk of job automation in Lithuania  amounts  to
more than 50%. This means that a person could be replaced by a robot in every second current
workplace.
3
There  would  certainly  be  losers  in  this  situation:  those  who  are  swept  away  by  the  wave  of
progress and find themselves in a worse position than the one they began in. This would place
an additional burden on the social security system.
But how many winners would this bring? Those who have new jobs created by the technological
progress? Are we ready to reap the rewards of the fourth industrial revolution – to successfully
apply big data, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology?
To prepare ourselves for that, we are going to need highly qualified workers. Yet, there is already
a  shortage  of  them  even  today.  In  Lithuania,  around  a  third  of  the  population  falls  into  a
qualification mismatch category, meaning that their skills do not match labour market demands.
Let  us  not  forget  that  the  negative  effects  of  technological  development  are  geographically
imbalanced. Less urbanised locations will probably face faster development of automation due to
the prevailing type of work there. These ongoing processes may further increase labour market
inequality between Lithuania’s regions.
This leads us to the third challenge we are going to delve into today: regional disparity.
It  is  already  evident  that  more  and  more  jobs  are  being  created  in  large  cities  rather  than  in
peripheral areas. Up until the crisis of 2008, the unemployment rate in big cities matched the rate
in the more remote regions. After the crisis, profound differences came to the fore: the average
unemployment rate in such regions is double the size of that in cities.
Changes in Lithuania’s economic structure shrunk the importance of the agricultural sector and
amplified that of the service sector. Clearly, regions find it difficult to adapt to these structural
changes.  What  we  have  there  now  is  structural  unemployment  –  something  that  cannot  be
reduced even by the fast overall expansion of the country’s economy.
We  are  also  witnessing  the  consequences  of  persistent  unemployment.  People  are  leaving
smaller cities. Birth and mortality rates are quite similar throughout the counties in Lithuania, but
migration rates differ significantly. Over the last 20 years, the number of young age workers in
our country’s regions has shrunk by a half, except for the three biggest cities.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Colleagues,
I have just set forth three problems that we consider paramount. How are we to solve them? We
have no crystal ball to turn to for answers. We can turn to each other, though. We have gathered
here to try to arrive at possible ways of overcoming these challenges by means of discussion
and search for best international practises.
Each of the challenges I have identified is quite distinct from the others. Together, however, they
are so closely connected that at first sight it is hard to tell cause and consequence apart. It is like
the proverbial chicken-and-egg. Clearly, then, in order to achieve real results, we must act on
several fronts at once while bearing in mind the big picture.
Firstly, we have to create regulatory labour market instruments that combine employer flexibility
and  safety  of  the  employee.  Moreover,  such  instruments  should  stimulate  more  active
participation of different population groups in the labour market. I am thus thrilled that the keynote
speech  will  shortly  be  delivered  by  Professor  Werner  Eichhorst,  one  of  the  most  prominent
experts of labour market regulation policy in Europe.
It is also obvious that Lithuania is in desperate need of long-term and far-sighted migration policy
to both entice emigrants to return home and attract foreign workers.
What is more, when discussing quantity, we should not forget quality, especially if we seek to
prepare ourselves for technological changes and the impending fourth industrial revolution.
What skills will be most in demand? No one knows. And anyone who thinks they do are probably
mistaken. As  the  astronaut  Buzz Aldrin  once  said,  ‘You  promised  me  colonies  on  Mars. And
instead, I got... Facebook’. I take this to mean that we can only guess what the future has in store
for  us.  Which  is  why  we  have  to  move  towards  an  educational  system  that  is  flexible  and
oriented  towards  lifelong  learning,  both  formal  and  informal,  including  adult  education  and
effective  retraining.  Such  a  system  is  the  only  way  to  prepare  our  people  for  rapid  structural
change.
Lastly,  we  need  a  real  regional  policy  –  one  that  is  effective  and  adequate  for  the  current
situation. One that would not only help maintain economic life throughout Lithuania, but would
also prompt a shift towards higher value-added economic activities.
Undoubtedly, education should have an especially important place in this policy in order to ensure
equally  good  quality  of  education  to  all  children  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  In  Lithuania,
schoolchildren in cities are ahead of their peers in rural areas by one year in assessment of their
mathematics  skills.  This  difference  is  two  times  larger  than  the  average  for  the  developed
4
countries .
Hence, we are not providing equal opportunities for young people to graduate from school, obtain
high-level qualifications and find a well-paid job. And this is an especially unfair form of inequality
of opportunities. It creates a vicious cycle: the number of jobs that ensure dignified income in
rural regions is not increasing, at least not at a rate that we would like. Yet, with the lack of a
qualified labour force, investors who create high added-value are not coming to these regions –
so they are not creating such work places.
Dear Colleagues,
As I have mentioned, we have chosen the topic of the labour market for this conference because
we consider it one of today’s most burning issues. Additionally, we chose it because economists’
projections, unfortunately, show the worst-case scenarios as the more likely ones. But the main
reason  is  that  we  can  still  adjust  those  scenarios  so  that  the  curves  go  upwards  rather  than
downwards.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  am  aware  that  we  will  neither  make  nor  implement  decisions  today.  Yet,  seeing  such  a
professional, engaged and competent group of participants, I am confident that we can stimulate
a positive turn.
That is my hope for all of us here.
I thank you for your time, and wish you fruitful discussions.
1
2
3
4
Eurostat projections.
E.g. Abeliansky A., Prettner K. 2017; Acemoglu D., Restrepo P. 2018.
Nedelkoska L., Quintini G. 2018.
OECD 2017, Education in Lithuania, Reviews of National Policies for Education, OECD Publishing, Paris.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
