Joachim  Wuermeling: Welcome  speech  -  Deutsche  Bundesbank
reception on the occasion of Euro Finance Week
Welcome speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Deutsche Bundesbank reception on the occasion of the Euro Finance Week,
Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2019.
1 Introduction
 Ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s reception on the occasion of Euro Finance Week.
Gathered  here  this  evening  are  not  just  high-ranking  representatives  from  Germany’s  banking
industry but also stakeholders from European and German banking regulators and supervisors.
Frankfurt,  home  to  so  many  global  players  in  the  banking  world  as  well  as  the  ECB  and  the
Bundesbank, sees itself as an integral part of the worldwide financial community. Bearing this in
mind, there are three topics I would like to cover in my welcome address this evening:
First, the importance of the Basel standards for us; second, the global role of the German and
continental  financial  centre;  and  third,  the  competition  worldwide  banks  are  facing  from  tech
firms.
2 Importance of implementing Basel III
Ladies and gentlemen, the smaller the financial crisis gets in the rear-view mirror, the fainter the
calls for tight regulation become. But let me make one thing quite clear: we need this Basel III
framework, and we need it just as it was finalised back in late 2017.
You see, we all agree that everyone stands to benefit from a set of globally agreed minimum
standards designed to promote stability.
And  that  is  why  I  firmly  believe  that  instead  of  discussing  ways  to  undermine  or  weaken  the
standards  in  the  EU,  we  need  to  work,  at  both  a  global  and  a  European  level,  towards  full
implementation of the standards worldwide. I have no doubt that our guest of honour this evening
– Pablo Hernández de Cos – sees things in exactly the same way.
All the more so as the positive effects of the reform package clearly outweigh any downsides it
might have. After all,  Basel  III is a prime example of how global collaboration and cooperation
really can work – that ability is priceless, especially in an era when unilateralism is on the rise
and individual countries choose to “go it alone”. But the Basel regime offers more than just this
admittedly somewhat idealistic aspect – it also has a tangible, real-world upside: with Basel III,
we  now  have  a  global  minimum  standard  that  will  apply  across  more  than  100  countries
worldwide – one that will bolster financial stability and minimise the additional regulatory work as
a result of harmonisation.
This standard will help put credit institutions’ capital base on a sound and sustainable footing and
thus  instil  further  confidence  in  the  banking  sector.  This  latter  point,  especially,  should  be  of
particular interest to credit institutions.
But let me make one thing perfectly clear: we know full well that regulation is always a burden.
And that is why institutions are also within their rights to call for a stop.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The good news isn’t new at all: the end is in sight. That means that the banking representatives
here  this  evening  will  very  soon  have  planning  certainty  for  the  remainder  of  the  regulatory
agenda.
And the supervisors among us should also turn our attention to new developments. In the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, we have already started looking to new vistas – amongst
other initiatives, we have been evaluating the efficiency of standards and taking a look at digital
risks.
But let me say one more thing about Basel III: in this debate, it is important to have a clear view of
the  facts.  The  Basel  III  monitoring  exercises  and  quantitative  impact  studies  have  given  us  a
robust and granular overview.
And  judging  by  the  facts  we  now  have,  I  must  concede  that  the  figures  thrown  around  in  the
debate surrounding Basel III and the demands which these numbers were used to justify did take
me aback at times.
You  see,  our  impact  studies  found  the  increase  in  capital  requirements  to  be  measured,  on
average. The areas where requirements have risen show just how risk-sensitive the reforms are:
we are seeing increases in the capital required in areas which are more at risk – equity interests,
for instance.
And  at  the  same  time,  there  are  credit  institutions  which  take  on  less  risk,  so  naturally  their
capital requirements will be lower going forward.
So in my view, everything suggests that seamless implementation of Basel III is the way forward
– besides the global pledge given by Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann, let’s not forget our
duty to preserve financial stability.
European implementation of the Basel regime represents an opportunity to take factors unique to
Europe  and  Germany  on  board.  This  is  something  for  European  and  German  legislators  to
decide.
The  European  Commission  and  the  German  Federal  Government  give  BaFin  and  the
Bundesbank  an  opportunity  to  inform  their  thinking,  and  we  encourage  them  to  stick  to  the
standards.
I  am  a  fervent  supporter  of  Basel-compliant  and  risk-sensitive  implementation  of  the  reform
package finalising Basel III. But at the same time, I firmly believe that the forthcoming revision of
the CRR and CRD regimes should be used to further simplify the regulation of small and non-
complex institutions adopted as part of the banking package as a way of boosting proportionality.
Basel III offers a number of ways to achieve this. We explored these opportunities in a joint non-
paper  prepared  by  the Bundesbank,  BaFin,  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  German
Banking Industry Committee, and we intend to bring our thoughts to the table during deliberations
in Brussels.
3 Global role of the German and continental financial centre
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the reasons that Federal Minister of Finance Olaf Scholz cited in
his new push to complete the European banking union is the need to preserve Europe’s “financial
sovereignty”. And he’s got a point: we here in continental  Europe cannot rely as much as we
once did on the free movement of financial flows around the globe.
Post-Brexit, we will no longer have the global financial powerhouse of  London within the  EU’s
jurisdiction. The multilateral principles and rules guaranteeing a level playing field for trade and
investment worldwide are increasingly being called into question, creating a sense of uncertainty,
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly in trade relations.
Under these circumstances, we need to be able to finance the EU’s real economy, including the
necessary digital innovations and the transition towards a less carbon-intensive economy, under
our own steam – for example, by forging a network of continental financial centres.
EU  regulators,  banking  supervisors,  and  above  all  the  banking  industry,  need  to  rise  to  this
challenge; this includes completing the banking union, pressing ahead towards a capital markets
union and implementing the Basel standards.
Financial  flows  on  the  continent  should  not  be  channelled  via  offshore  financial  centres,  but
remain within a continental, perhaps even more digital ecosystem. If we need more capital than
we  have,  or  we  want  to  invest  more  capital  than  we  need,  it  is  up  to  us  to  put  in  place  the
necessary channels linking us to the global financial system.
New tasks might be in the offing for the Eurosystem infrastructure here – as you will know, some
third parties have already called for efforts to be made on this front.
4 Global competition banks are facing from tech firms
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  banking  services  revolve  around  processing  data,  so  they  lend
themselves to a greater or lesser degree to full digitalisation – unlike industrial products, say, or
personal services. It’s hardly surprising, then, that digital firms – big and small – are also looking
to enter the financial market.  I could use my entire speech here this evening to list the digital
initiatives that have taken place in just the past six months.
For us as banking supervisors worldwide, this is a huge challenge. It’s a fundamental upheaval,
and not just in terms of what we supervise.  New market agents, new business models,  new
products and combinations with non-banking products are shifting financial services outside the
traditional banking perimeter – and thus also beyond the reach of regulators and supervisors.
But if risk-relevant links in the financial value chain evade supervision, for credit institutions, it’s a
matter of a level playing field, but for us as supervisors it’s a question of financial stability.
We are market-neutral, and prefer neither incumbents nor new providers. We will, however, do
everything in our power to defend the prudential space – and by that, I mean the space in which
the  legislator  has  issued  a  mandate  for  sovereign  supervision  in  the  public  interest.  Digitally
driven “unbundling” of financial and monetary functions by initiatives ranging from the cloud to
Libra should not mean taking activities outside the existing perimeters of public oversight.
5 Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  following  the  severe  financial  crisis,  we  have  succeeded  in  creating  a
new architecture for a resilient and at the same time high-performance financial system.
One part of that architecture is Basel III, and that’s the way it should stay. That was the first point
I made in my welcome address this evening. We should turn our attention more to other matters
instead, such as our future role in financing the European economy – that was my second point
– or how we address digital financial technology – which was my third and final point.
To  this  end,  there  needs  to  be  close  cooperation  across  the  global  banking  supervision
community  and  dialogue  with  credit  institutions. At  the Bundesbank,  we  are  very  interested  in
these two initiatives and hope that, by hosting this evening’s event, we can help make progress
on both fronts.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
