Money – Changing Features and Eternal Requirements 
08.10.2019 | Cape Town | Burkhard Balz 
 Welcome
 Changing features or “panta rhei”
 Eternal requirements or: fundamental principles
 Looking ahead
 Closing remarks
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to be here at the University of Cape Town today. The 
University of Cape Town is not only the oldest university on the African continent, but is 
also renowned for its academic excellence. A stable ranking among the top rated 
universities in the world is testimony to your outstanding success. Moreover, UCT 
earned a reputation as one of the institutions exerting sustained opposition to 
apartheid, particularly in higher education.
South Africa and the South African Reserve Bank are important partners for Germany 
and the Deutsche Bundesbank. We share common responsibilities in the group of 
twenty. The 20 leading industrial countries and emerging markets have a particular 
responsibility for global ﬁnancial stability and economic growth.
The Bundesbank has therefore chosen to post a representative to the German Embassy 
here in South Africa in order to foster our joint partnership.
All in all, plenty of excellent reasons bring me to South Africa, where I am very much 
looking forward to gaining ﬁrst-hand impressions of the country and the University of 
Cape Town and to sharing my thoughts with you.
Changing features or “panta rhei”
As member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, I am responsible for 
economic education and payments and settlement systems. These topics are closely 
related to my speech today. And, of course, as a central banker, it won’t (Tonne) come 
as a surprise that I also want to talk about money. Given the tremendous pace and 
intensity of current changes to payments and to the features of money, I would like to 
talk to you today about “Money – Changing Features and Eternal Requirements.”
When people talk about money in Europe, they are mainly referring to banknotes and 
coins, as well as commercial bank money in giro accounts. Indeed, in Europe, cash is 
still king – at least at the point of sale. Even in Germany, cash accounts for 
approximately 50% of the value of transactions made at points of sale. But at the same 
time, more than 21 billion cashless transactions were recorded in Germany, i.e. (that is)
credit transfers, direct debits (for paying utility bills, for example) as well as card 
payments.
However, there are many changing features in money nowadays: mobile payments, 
instant payments, P2P payments, crypto-tokens, stable coins and many more. But it’s 
not just about new forms of money. It’s about a whole new landscape, too – the 
buzzwords here are “blockchain” and “distributed leger technology” (DLT).
The world is changing. Faster and faster, so it seems. Some argue this has to do with 
technological progress which may speed up.
I believe that most of the perceived acceleration of change is mainly related to 
improvements in communication. For centuries, even important messages took weeks 
to be transmitted over long distances.
A letter from the Pope in Rome to the bishops in Northern Europe, say, could take 
several weeks to be delivered in stages by messengers on horseback.
The time it took for such a letter to be delivered stayed roughly the same from the time 
of the Roman Empire until the mid-19th century.
In 1844, Samuel Morse sent the ﬁrst message using Morse code, thereby inventing the 
concept of electronic messaging. One of the forerunners of digitisation.
This cut the time it took to transmit messages from weeks to seconds. A more 
pronounced acceleration has never taken place.
However, Morse code was expensive to use, and was therefore reserved for urgent and 
short messages. Today’s choice of messenger services makes worldwide communication 
almost free of marginal costs, and very convenient. So it is used for everything, and 
sometimes over-used.
The much faster pace at which we can send messages and data has had an impact on 
almost every economic activity as well as every social interaction. News and rumours 
spread faster. But is the news actually more important? Can we see an acceleration in 
technological progress?
In fact, technological progress as measured by growth accountants has not increased 
over the last few decades. Instead, it has decreased or stayed roughly the same.
It is certainly true that the recent changes are also the result of the disruptive digital 
evolution. New players such as ﬁntechs and bigtechs have emerged. But structural 
change as such is not a novelty. The mobile wallet functions offered by Apple and 
Google are convenient and innovative. But, in the end, it all comes down to the 
processing of “classic” credit card payments.
Therefore, I would prefer to talk about the perceived acceleration of change. 
Fundamental change may be rather rare. In addition, change is and has always been an 
essential feature of human life.
Around 2,500 years ago, the Greek philosopher Heraklit coined the phrase “panta rhei”, 
which translates as “everything ﬂows”. This famous aphorism was illustrated later by 
Plato. According to his metaphor, you cannot step into the same river twice, because 
the previous water has ﬂowed away and new water is permanently rushing in to take 
its place.
Eternal requirements or: fundamental principles
So the question arises: if everything is in a constant state of ﬂux, how can we measure 
the direction and speed of change? How can we tell temporary spikes from structural 
breaks? How can we assess the change and determine what actions we should take?
The answer can also be found in ancient Greece, roughly 200 years after Heraklit. The 
mathematician Archimedes said: “Give me but a ﬁrm spot on which to stand and I shall 
move the earth.”
Of course, this statement refers primarily to the functioning of levers. After all, 
Archimedes was also an engineer.
However, the sentence is also open to metaphorical interpretation: We need a ﬁrm spot 
for measuring and controlling the movement of something else. A ﬁrm spot on which 
to stand could be a fundamental principle. The detection of change requires the 
existence of something ﬁxed.
So to interpret the ongoing change, let us start with something which we take for 
granted. I refer to these as “eternal requirements”.
I must add a humble caveat here. Nothing man-made is of eternal nature. However, 
given the speed of change in ﬁnance, some aspects of money seem to hold almost 
eternally, because they have been true for much longer than the internet has been 
around and, I am convinced, they will survive the current debates.
I am referring to ﬁve fundamental principles which could provide suitable guidance for 
central banks in judging most of the new, emerging features of forms of money, tokens 
and the like:
1. Money relies on trust.
2. Trust in money is based on fundamental values.
3. The most important feature of money is stability.
4. Stable money requires monetary policy.
5. Monetary policy requires the independence of a responsible institution, i.e. (that is) a 
central bank.
Principle 1: Money relies on trust
Let me spell out what that means. The ﬁrst principle, money relies on trust, is the most 
important one.
If people lose trust in money it will be rendered useless and worthless. Therefore, 
maintaining trust in money is the most important task of any monetary authority.
The inventors of blockchain claimed that they could create a payment system, including 
a new sort of money, “without the need for a trusted third party.” And the media 
dubbed blockchain the “trust machine”.
However, a closer look reveals a missing link. It is correct that blockchain enables us to 
send digital tokens. And everyone involved can check that the token has been sent only 
once by its previous owner. So, blockchain solves the famous “double-spending” 
problem.
However, the trust in that token – let’s call it Bitcoin for the sake of argument – is 
conﬁned to the virtual world. Bitcoins do not exist outside the blockchain. They can 
only be transferred across the blockchain and cannot leave it.
A security, by contrast, embodies a claim in the real world. While that security can be 
transferred via distributed ledger technology, its migration onto the blockchain depends 
on the existence of a body, such as a central securities depository, to link real, off-ledger 
assets with the digital world.
And yes, there might be many ways of creating trust among potential users. But it can 
be only money which is accepted universally in the country in question. It is not enough 
that a few people or a small group believes that it could be money.
Money is indeed a mysterious topic. How could it be that kauri shells or stone slabs 
were used as money in ancient times? But this simply shows that money is always a 
social phenomenon, rather than purely a matter of mathematics or algorithms. And in 
the end, money must be based on real experiences. Because, in the end, it is not the 
virtual experience which counts but the reference point in the real world: the possibility 
of exchanging money for goods – today, tomorrow, next week, and in the coming 
years.
Principle 2: Trust in money is based on fundamental values
The second principle is: Trust in money is based on fundamental values.
There are two forms of money: money as a good or money as a claim.
Money as a good could mean consumer goods such as cigarettes or commodities such 
as gold. These have intrinsic value for consumers or producers. And the fundamental 
intrinsic value is the basis for trust in money.
Money as a claim is the dominant form of money nowadays. This could be a claim on a 
commercial bank or on a central bank. Ultimately, the safest form is a claim on a central 
bank. We call that central bank money. So euro coins and notes are counted as 
liabilities in the balance sheet of the Bundesbank.
And the basis for its value is the stability of the Bundesbank and the Eurosystem as a 
whole, as well as the integrity of all the central bankers working to guarantee price 
stability and safe and eﬃcient payments within the euro area. And although monetary 
policy in Europe is currently the subject of heavy debate, overall, the Eurosystem has 
done a good job in the past two decades.
In addition, the basis for the stability of the euro is also the constitutional backing of 
the Eurosystem by its member states and the ﬁscally sound behaviour of its respective 
governments.
The euro is underpinned by the entire Eurosystem and all participating countries and 
their economies.
Crypto-tokens like Bitcoin and others, however, do not have an intrinsic value and do 
not constitute a claim on anyone; nor do they have a public authority responsible for 
issuing them in line with a mandate for price stability. They are lacking any fundamental 
basis. This renders their value arbitrary.
As a result, I do not share the view that crypto-tokens like Bitcoin can be considered 
“gold 2.0”. Attempts to imitate some of the features of the provision of gold, notably a 
ﬁxed quantity and growing marginal costs for provision, does not mean that you have 
created something like “digital gold”. And that brings me to the next principle.
Principle 3: The most important feature of money is stability
The third principle is: The most important feature of money is stability.
The purpose of money is to be used in payments, to be used as a store of value and as 
a unit of account.
All three functions require money to be stable.
Therefore, the 2,000 or more crypto-tokens invented thus far are not primarily used as 
money. Most of them display such extreme volatility in terms of value that people 
refrain from using them for payments or as a store of value.
In response to the sharp price volatility of many existing crypto-tokens, there have been 
attempts for some time now to develop crypto-tokens that are stable in value. These 
are referred to as “stable coins”. Stable coins are crypto tokens whose value is often 
pegged to an existing currency (or basket of currencies) and backed by matching 
collateral.
So stable coins beneﬁt from a sort of derived stability. This could be interpreted as a 
compliment to the successful, stability-oriented monetary policy of central banks.
Principle 4: Stable money requires monetary policy
This leads us directly to the fourth principle: Stable money requires monetary policy.
The advent of Bitcoin rekindled a debate about automatic monetary policy. Some 
people believed that a stable money supply would guarantee stability. The supposed 
limit of 21 million bitcoins was seen by some as a key to stability.
The facts are different. And the reason is simple. The price of money depends on supply 
and demand. A ﬁxed supply or a ﬁxed algorithmic increase of supply is by no means a 
guarantee for stability.
The economy develops, ﬂuctuates and – hopefully – grows. Payment patterns change. 
The velocity of money changes. All of these factors will result in price volatility if the 
money supply does not react accordingly.
Therefore, stable money requires monetary policy.
Principle 5: Monetary policy requires the independence of a responsible institution, 
i.e. (that is) a central bank
And who should be responsible for that monetary policy? I believe in principle 5: 
Monetary policy requires the independence of a responsible institution, i.e. (that is) a 
central bank.
We should strive to make an institution responsible for monetary policy. That means 
supplying money and setting an interest rate so that price stability is maintained. 
Moreover,  safe and eﬃcient payment systems should be promoted so that currency 
can ﬂow easily and safely.
Trust in money must be accompanied by stable and eﬃcient payment and settlement 
systems. These do not necessarily have to be operated by the central bank. However, 
the central bank should at least be responsible for distributing central bank money.
This central bank should, of course, be accountable to the general public and should act 
as transparently as possible. However, its independence must be guaranteed.
History is full of examples in which unsound public policy has wrongly harnessed the 
central bank to support and even ﬁnance the government. This has led, in all cases, to a 
lack of focus on stability and has eroded trust in the central bank and trust in the 
currency.
We should not make the same mistakes as in the past. Because money will only work if 
the authority remains responsible. If a central bank does not fulﬁl its task, it will lose 
trust, legitimacy and, in the end, its money.
A clear focus on stability, central bank independence, and a prohibition government 
ﬁnancing via central banks are key pillars of a successful monetary policy.
Looking ahead
Having laid out these principles, it is clear that, notwithstanding any new features of 
money, the role of a central bank will not become obsolete. A stable currency is and will 
always be of utmost importance. We need trust.
What does this mean for those modern endeavours of tokenisation, digitalisation and 
the use of distributed ledger technology? How should we react towards stable coins or 
crypto-tokens?
As for digitalisation – this is a long-standing tradition in the world of ﬁnance. Money in 
our accounts, bookings in our payment and settlement systems – all these have already 
been electronically digitalised for decades.
And back in the 90s, in the “electronic” not yet “digital” age, we toyed with the idea of 
creating “electronic money” as a form of innovative banknotes. Consequently, new 
regulatory regimes were invented and developed. However, these promises did not 
become a reality – at least not in Europe and not beyond a few “niche” use cases. In 
Germany, the card-based e-money product vanished after 20 years of very limited 
success.
In the end, bringing innovation to fruition is a very complex process – particularly in the 
network industry of payments. Apart from convenience and safety, cost is a key 
criterion. Looking at the new technologies, a system based on distributed ledger 
technology may very well turn out to be superior in terms of transaction costs. In that 
case, we would be open to adopting it.
The Bundesbank is undertaking its own experimental studies into how we could use 
blockchain or DLT for payments or settlements. We have discovered that modern 
versions of blockchain are more than capable of handling the volumes of transactions 
currently settled in our conventional systems.
However, they are somewhat more resource-intensive and a fair bit slower. So the 
overall assessment hinges on a cost-beneﬁt calculation over the entire lifecycle of, say, 
securities. In the medium term, we imagine that DLT-based settlement systems might 
contribute to reducing overall transaction costs in securities settlement. And we are 
closely monitoring all related efforts.
This relates only to the technological aspect. We are open to new devices, new 
settlement techniques or new message systems.
What presents more of a fundamental issue, however, is money.
The fundamental role of central bank money will not diminish. You can see that even 
the crypto community is betting on the stability of central bank money when it comes 
to creating stable coins.
And many developers of new DLT-based prototypes have asked us to bring central bank 
money to the ledger. The question of creating digital central bank money has become a 
topical issue nowadays.
We have several answers to this. First, today, commercial bank money is used in most 
cases. We believe that, in the area of retail, digital commercial bank money could also 
be used in DLT-based systems.
Second, many stable coins are digital commercial bank money.
Third, we could imagine what is referred to as a trigger solution. That means that a DLT
-based settlement of any transaction of goods or securities would trigger a payment via 
conventional payment systems. Perhaps it could even trigger a payment in central bank 
money, e.g. (for example) via TARGET2 in the Eurosystem.
That trigger solution would make use of the stable and eﬃcient existing payment 
systems. And in the case of central bank money, the current access to central bank 
money would remain unaltered.
Fourth, digital central bank money in the form of a wholesale token may be considered 
if a DLT-based settlement system proves superior to conventional systems. In that case, 
a token could be issued by the central bank to a closed group and for a limited 
purpose. Neither access to central bank money nor the supply of central bank money 
has to change for that. It is again more of a technical question. Repercussions for 
monetary policy implementation and ﬁnancial stability could be ruled out.
Fifth, digital central bank money for the general public, i.e. (that is) non-banks, as a sort 
of “digital banknote”, would bring with it a number of knock-on effects that are not 
very well understood as things stand. If a central bank were to issue digital central bank 
money for everyone, a potential far-reaching substitution between sight deposits with 
commercial banks and digital central bank money would result.
In addition, further repercussions for ﬁnancial stability and monetary policy 
implementation are to be expected.
To sum up, we have quite a number of ways to bring cash to the ledger. Issuing digital 
central bank money for everyone is not the only solution. What’s more, it is the solution 
with potentially the furthest-reaching implications for stability, and the highest risk. 
Therefore, it should not be our ﬁrst choice. These reservations should not be pushed 
aside lightly.
Closing remarks
Ladies and gentlemen, times are changing. However, some requirements stay the same.
This is also true with regard to changing structures. Concerns have been voiced that the 
ﬁnancial industry, and notably the payments landscape, will change considerably, but 
not necessarily due to new, small, fast-evolving FinTechs with innovative ideas. In 
Germany and Europe, established banks are increasingly viewing FinTechs as “partners” 
rather than competitors. This is because banks can beneﬁt from the innovative potential 
of these newcomers, while FinTechs can beneﬁt from the existing customer relations 
and consumers’ trust in banks. The most recent debate instead focuses on the 
“BigTechs”, in particular GAFA (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple) as well as the big 
Chinese players WeChat (Tencent) and Alipay (Ant Financial). This is because these 
providers have a global and very strong customer base with up to billions of users. They 
have enormous power and they have excellent digital know how. Most of them, by the 
way, are already very active in banking and ﬁnance.
The announcement of Facebook and other big companies, such as Mastercard, Visa 
and Spotify, to create Libra might be considered a quantum leap. Are we witnessing the 
birth of a new, global payment system allowing billions of people without bank 
accounts to become ﬁnancially integrated? Will consumers beneﬁt from very cheap 
cross-border payments? And might we also see a crowding-out of eﬃcient and 
established payment solutions by convenient “social media” banking?
We should be careful. At the moment, everything is based on one white paper; most of 
the ﬁner points are yet to be clariﬁed. This is true for the construction of Libra as a 
“basket of currencies” as well as for details on the overall ecosystem and the underlying 
technology.
Therefore, I believe that it is too early to arrive at a ﬁnal assessment of this 
phenomenon. We simply need more information.
But international authorities have already reached a consensus that these developments 
must, in any case, meet high regulatory standards. The general equation “same 
business = same risks = same regulation” is a cornerstone of our thinking, perhaps also 
a kind of “eternal” truth. Innovation in the ﬁnancial industry must not lead to a vicious 
circle in regulation.
Therefore, it is essential to identify what kind of regulations would apply to these 
constructions. And, in addition, we as a central bank must ensure that we can continue 
to meet our objectives, that is price stability, ﬁnancial stability and secure and eﬃcient 
payment systems.
At the same time, Libra has exposed the weaknesses of global payments: high cost of 
cross-border payments, long execution times and still a considerable number of people 
not having access to ﬁnancial services. This is a wake-up call for us, especially for us 
central bankers.
It is a call for us to use modern technologies to improve our systems, enhance security 
and to attain a higher degree of eﬃciency.
Thank you very much for your attention.
