Speech of the Governor on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of 
the CBK 
 Honourable... 
It  is  my  great  honour  and  pleasure  to  welcome  you  today  for  marking  the  20th 
anniversary of the establishment of the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo. 
It is my great pleasure to have representatives of local and international institutions 
among us today, without whom it would not be possible to achieve the successes we 
have achieved to date. Therefore, on behalf of all CBK staff and on my behalf, I 
would like to express my heartfelt gratitude for all that you have done for us over 
the years and for the honour you have done to us by joining us in marking this very 
important anniversary for us. 
To better understand the situation we are in, and the way we are heading, it is a good 
idea to go back a little retrospectively to remember how we got here, and to use the 
past as a driving force to move towards a more successful future. 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo was established in 1999, at a time when 
Kosovo  was  beginning  to  build  all  institutions  from  scratch.  Along  with  the 
establishment of institutions, the foundation of the market economy in our country 
was also beginning. 
 Faqe 1 nga 7 
CBK as a new institution, in spite of the great efforts to organize the institution itself, 
where everything was starting from scratch, began to commit itself towards building 
the financial infrastructure necessary to create the conditions for the financial system 
to  start  functioning  in  Kosovo.  This  way,  the  CBK  soon  began  the  activity  of 
building the payment system, formulating the regulatory framework for the financial 
sector, and developing other functions necessary to serve the country's economy.  
The beginning of the CBK's operation coincided with the time when most of the 
countries  in  the  region  were about  to  complete  the  transition  process,  where  the 
omissions made at the beginning of this process, made the transition lengthy and 
difficult.  
CBK showed high diligence and learned from the difficulties that other central banks 
of transition countries went through, and chose the model that proved successful in 
developing an efficient and sustainable financial sector. In this way, CBK laid the 
foundations of a financial system based on private ownership and from the beginning 
opened the doors for the entry of foreign financial institutions. In fact, it was foreign 
financial  institutions,  especially  banks,  which  first  started  operating  in  Kosovo, 
bringing contemporary financial industry experiences and restoring the trust of the 
local  people  in  the  financial  system.  Also,  the  CBK  has  consistently  followed  a 
sound licensing policy, which has served as a base for the sound development of 
Kosovo's financial system.  
 Faqe 2 nga 7 
Today, after 20 years, we are proud of the achievements of our institution and for 
that, I would first of all like to express my gratitude to all the CBK employees who 
with great enthusiasm and dedication have managed to transform the CBK into a 
modern  institution,  capable  of  serving  the  country's  economic  stability  and 
development. During this period, the CBK has made significant progress in all its 
pillars, managing to build a modern payment system and providing efficient cash 
supply  services  to  the  economy;  financial  regulatory  framework  in  line  with 
international  standards  and  advanced  supervisory  capacities;  qualitative  statistics 
and economic and financial analysis that provide decision-makers and the public,  
with a proper understanding of developments in the country's economy; and has 
consistently shown high efficiency in providing banking services to the Government 
and citizens.  
These achievements would not have been possible without help of our international 
friends, which help was comprehensive and unreserved, who, with their experience 
and great desire to help, made our way become quicker and less troublesome. On 
this occasion, I would like to express special gratitude to international institutions 
such as the International Monetary Fund, the US Treasury, USAID, the World Bank, 
the European Central Bank, GIZ and many other institutions that have provided and 
continue  to  provide  a  very  important  contribution  for  the  development  of  our 
institution. 
 Faqe 3 nga 7 
 Our work to date has, above all, been crowned with a sound financial system, which 
at  its  rapid  pace  of  development  has  become  one  of  the  main  promoters  of  the 
development and stability of the Kosovo economy.  
The banking sector, as a key component of Kosovo's financial system, has continued 
to  expand  the  activity  of  lending  to  the  local  economy,  serving  as  a  sustainable 
source of financing. Domestic deposits continue to be the most important source of 
financing for banks, and their steady growth has led banks' lending activity to have 
a low level of sensitivity towards changing financing conditions in foreign markets. 
The careful behaviour of banks, together with close supervision and regulation by 
the CBK as well as overall macroeconomic stability in the country, has ensured the 
Kosovo banking system, to have a satisfactory level of sustainability towards all 
aspects of banking risks. On this occasion, I would like to point out the very low rate 
of nonperforming loans, only 2.2%, which represents a desirable quality of the loan 
portfolio for many developed countries. Therefore, today I am pleased to present a 
banking sector with steady growth in loans and deposits, with good quality of loan 
portfolio, high level of capitalization and strong liquidity position. Kosovo's banking 
sector  has  also  made  progress  in  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  financial 
intermediation, prompting loan interest rates to decline significantly in recent years.  
 Faqe 4 nga 7 
Similar progress has been made in other components of the Kosovo financial system. 
The insurance sector has grown steadily and has shown sufficient ability to cover 
liabilities towards insurance policy holders. 
The  pension  sector has  also  shown satisfactory  performance, where the value of 
contributions  continues to  increase,  while  careful  asset  management  has  enabled 
their value to increase overall.  
Another important segment of our financial market continues to be microfinance 
institutions, which in recent years have accelerated the pace of credit growth, thus 
increasing their importance as an alternative source of credit financing in the Kosovo 
economy.  
 The CBK has also played an important role in the establishment and development of 
other  institutions  important  for  Kosovo's  financial  stability  and  economic 
development such as the Deposit Insurance Fund of Kosovo and the Kosovo Credit 
Guarantee Fund.  
   Faqe 5 nga 7 
I  consider  that  all  this  that  I  have  presented  so  far,  presents  a  good  basis  for 
concluding  that  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo  has  passed  twenty 
successful years, during which it managed to transform into a modern institution and 
to develop a financial system capable of contributing to the prosperity and stability 
of the country's economy. 
However, we are aware that we have many more challenges ahead - challenges that 
other banks in the region are facing and beyond. Business models and strategies of 
financial institutions are already changing with great dynamics, which requires an 
equally  great  dynamic  for  developing  regulatory  and  supervisory  capacities  for 
financial  institutions.  Regulatory  reforms  should  enable  the  renewal  or  further 
development of financial intermediation, but at the same time must allow sufficient 
supervision and control over these institutions and activities they perform. 
However, I have full confidence that our capacities and excellent cooperation with 
other international central banks and financial institutions serve as a strong guarantee 
that  the  CBK  will  continue  to  be  successful  in  the  future  against  the  challenges 
ahead. 
   Faqe 6 nga 7 
The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo  has  also  changed  its  logo  on  this 
anniversary. The new CBK logo visually reflects its activities, values and attributes 
for better representation. The visual elements of the new logo give the CBK a unique 
identity. Within itself, the new symbol has the meaning of growth, security, statistics 
and money. The colours of the new logo are colours contained in the flag of Kosovo, 
the flag of the European Union and the logo of the European Central Bank.  
  In the end, I would like to thank you once again for participating in marking this very 
important  anniversary  for  us  and  wish  you  fruitful  discussions  with  the  highly 
respected panellists, that we will have during today's conference, which will address 
topics that are very important for the economy and the financial sector. Now, I have 
the pleasure to invite His Excellency the President of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaqi, 
for an occasional speech.  
  Faqe 7 nga 7 
