Christine Lagarde: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 12 December
2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to our press conference. Today is the first time that I have had
the privilege and pleasure of chairing the monetary policy meeting of the Governing Council of the
ECB. I am delighted to proceed now with reporting on the outcome of our meeting, together with
the  Vice-President.  The  Governing  Council  meeting  was  also  attended  by  the  Commission
Executive Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We expect them to remain at their present or lower levels until we
have seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a level sufficiently close to, but below, 2%
within  our  projection  horizon,  and  such  convergence  has  been  consistently  reflected  in
underlying inflation dynamics.
On 1 November we restarted net purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) at a
monthly pace of €20 billion. We expect them to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the
accommodative impact of our policy rates, and to end shortly before we start raising the  key
ECB interest rates.
We also intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the
key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The incoming data since the last Governing Council meeting in late October point to continued
muted inflation pressures and weak euro area growth dynamics, although there are some initial
signs of stabilisation in the growth slowdown and of a mild increase in underlying inflation in line
with  previous  expectations.  Ongoing  employment  growth  and  increasing  wages  continue  to
underpin the resilience of the euro area economy.
The  comprehensive  package  of  policy  measures  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  in
September  provides  substantial  monetary  stimulus,  which  ensures  favourable  financing
conditions for all sectors of the economy. In particular, easier borrowing conditions for firms and
households are underpinning consumer spending and business investment. This will support the
euro  area  expansion,  the  ongoing  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and,  thus,  the  robust
convergence of inflation to our medium-term aim.
In  the  light  of  the  subdued  inflation  outlook,  the  Governing  Council  reiterated  the  need  for
monetary  policy  to  remain  highly  accommodative  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  to  support
underlying inflation pressures and headline inflation developments  over  the  medium  term.  We
will, therefore, closely monitor inflation developments and the impact of the unfolding monetary
policy  measures  on  the  economy.  Our  forward  guidance  will  ensure  that  financial  conditions
adjust in accordance with changes to the inflation outlook. In any case, the Governing Council
continues to stand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation
moves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP growth was confirmed at 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2019,
unchanged  from  the  previous  quarter.  The  ongoing  weakness  of  international  trade  in  an
environment of persistent global uncertainties continues to weigh on the euro area manufacturing
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector  and  is  dampening  investment  growth. At  the  same  time,  incoming  economic  data  and
survey information, while remaining weak overall, point to some stabilisation in the slowdown of
economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  The  services  and  construction  sectors  remain  resilient,
despite some moderation in the latter half of 2019. Looking ahead, the euro area expansion will
continue  to  be  supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  further  employment  gains  in
conjunction with rising wages, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance and the ongoing –
albeit somewhat slower – growth in global activity.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the December 2019 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in
2019, 1.1% in 2020 and 1.4% in both 2021 and 2022. Compared with the September 2019 ECB
staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised down slightly
for 2020.
The  risks  surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook,  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  rising
protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets, remain tilted to the downside, but have
become somewhat less pronounced.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation increased from 0.7% in
October 2019 to 1.0% in November, reflecting mainly higher services and food price inflation. On
the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,  headline  inflation  is  likely  to  rise  somewhat  in  the
coming months. Indicators of inflation expectations stand at low levels. Measures of underlying
inflation have remained generally muted, although there are some indications of a mild increase
in line with previous expectations. While labour cost pressures have strengthened amid tighter
labour markets, the weaker growth momentum is delaying their pass-through to inflation. Over
the medium term, inflation is expected to increase, supported by our monetary policy measures,
the ongoing economic expansion and solid wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  December  2019  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual  HICP inflation at 1.2% in
2019, 1.1% in 2020, 1.4% in 2021 and 1.6% in 2022. Compared with the September 2019 ECB
staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised up slightly for
2020 and down slightly for 2021, mainly driven by the expected future path of energy prices.
Turning  to  the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 5.6% in  October 2019,
unchanged  from  the  previous  month.  Sustained  rates  of  broad  money  growth  reflect  ongoing
bank credit creation for the private sector and low opportunity costs of holding M3 relative to other
financial instruments. The narrow monetary aggregate M1 continues to be the main contributor to
broad money growth on the components side.
The growth of loans to firms and households remained solid, benefiting from the continued pass-
through of our accommodative monetary policy stance to bank lending rates. The annual growth
rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  increased  to  3.8%  in  October,  up  from  3.6%  in
September, while the annual growth rate of loans to households continued on its gradual upward
path,  reaching  3.5%  in  October.  Our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  will  help  to
safeguard  very  favourable  bank  lending  conditions  and  will  continue  to  support  access  to
financing, across all economic sectors and in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued robust convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to,
2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  more  decisively  to  raising  the  longer-term  growth  potential,  supporting  aggregate
demand  at  the  current  juncture  and  reducing  vulnerabilities.  The  implementation  of structural
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
policies  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential, reduce structural unemployment and increase resilience. The
2019 country-specific recommendations should serve as the relevant signpost.
Regarding fiscal policies, the euro area fiscal stance is expected to remain mildly expansionary
in 2020, thus providing support to economic activity. In view of the weakened economic outlook,
the Governing Council welcomes the Eurogroup’s call for differentiated fiscal responses and its
readiness to coordinate. Governments with fiscal space should be ready to act in an effective
and timely manner. In countries where public debt is high, governments need to pursue prudent
policies  and  meet  structural  balance  targets,  which  will  create  the  conditions  for  automatic
stabilisers to operate freely. All countries should intensify their efforts to achieve a more growth-
friendly composition of public finances.
Likewise,  the  transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  European  Union’s  fiscal  and
economic governance framework over time and across countries remains essential to bolster
the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of Economic and Monetary
Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing work and urges further
specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
