   Launch of the Absa Africa Financial 
Markets Index 2019 
 Keynote Address by Dr. Maxwell Opoku-
Afari, First Deputy Governor, Bank of 
Ghana 
  The Ritz-Carlton Washington Hotel 1150 
22nd Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20037 
 07:20 – 07:30 AM 
     Ministers of Finance 
Governors of Central Banks 
Management and Representatives of OMFIF 
Management and Representatives of ABSA 
Executives of Financial Institutions Present  
Representatives of the IMF 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
 A very Good Morning to you all 
 1. 
Let me first begin by thanking OMFIF for extending an invitation to me to be the 
keynote  speaker  at  the  launch  of  the  Absa Africa  Financial  Markets  Index  2019.  It  is 
indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  join  you  today  and  to  also  join  such  seasoned 
distinguished  guests  to  deliberate  on  important  issues  bordering  on  capital  market 
development,  benchmarking  regulation  against  global  standards,  overcoming  regional 
integration  challenges,  and  the  use  of  new  technology  and  data  sharing  to  improve 
efficiency  and  innovation  on  the  African  continent.  These  are  critical  issues  that 
confront  African  countries  as  they  strive  to  attract  foreign  investment  for  sustainable 
development and poverty reduction. 
 2. 
The ABSA African Financial Markets Index was first launched in 2017 by OMFIF 
and  Barclays  Africa  Group  (now  ABSA  Group  Limited)  through  extensive  quantitative 
and  qualitative  research  and  analysis.  It  is  in  its  third  year  and  has  become  a  key 
reference point in the assessment of the development of African Financial Markets.  The 
Index  assesses  countries  according  to  six  pillars:  market  depth,  access  to  foreign 
exchange,  market  transparency,  tax  and  regulatory  environment,  capacity  of  local 
investors,  macroeconomic  opportunity  and  the  legality  and  enforceability  of  standard 
financial markets master agreements. 
   3. 
In  2018,  the  index  increased  its  coverage  to  include  Angola,  Cameroun  and 
Senegal,  which  brings  to  twenty  the  number  of  African  countries  covered.    Over  the 
years, there have been new initiatives and policies by the countries covered under the 
survey that have led to growth in their Financial Markets and consequently, in the wider 
African  financial sector.  Most  countries have shown  progress in  their financial sectors 
over the last two years of ranking by focusing on one or more of the pillars. 
 4. 
Kenya,  Morocco  and  the  Seychelles  have  had  the  largest  improvement  in  their 
rankings  over  the  last  year,  particularly  with  respect  to  access  to  foreign  exchange. 
Nigeria’s  score  has  also  strengthened,  due  to  policies  augmenting  market  depth  and 
enhancing the capacity of local investors.  The index has therefore served as a guide to 
where analyst and policy makers must focus in trying to improve their financial markets 
to  attract  investors.  This  year’s  edition  is  to  focus  on  policy  and  market  development 
initiatives and will undoubtedly boost developments in the regional financial markets. 
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  permit  me  to  share  with  you  how  the  ABSA  Financial 
5. 
Markets  Index  is  helping  to  shape  the  policy  dialogue  in  Ghana.    The  2017  Barclays 
Africa (now ABSA) African Financial Markets Index, noted that of the six pillars used in 
the  assessment  of  African  financial  markets,  improving  the  legal  and  regulatory 
frameworks  through  establishing  the  legality  and  enforceability  of  standard  financial 
markets  master  agreements  of  the  Ghanaian  financial  markets  could  provide  a  major 
boost and enhance liquidity in the bonds and equities markets. 
 
The  results  of  the  Barclays  survey  noted  that  in  Ghana,  ISDA  documentation 
6. 
(International Swap and Derivatives Association) was well recognized but Global Master 
Repurchase  Agreement  (GMRA)  was  in  limited  use,  Global  Master  Securities  Lending 
Agreement  (GMSLA)  was  rarely  used  and  the  insolvency  framework  needed  to  be 
strengthened.  Therefore in 2017, a stakeholder committee in Ghana, led by the central 
bank  agreed  on  key  reform  measures  that  could  improve  the  legal  framework  for  the 
financial markets in Ghana.   
  7. 
These included the adoption  of GMRA for repo  trading and at  a later stage the 
GMSLA for securities lending, the linking of the local Central Securities Depository (CSD) 
to international clearing platforms like Euroclear and the strengthening of the insolvency 
framework  in  Ghana.    The  result  of  these  reform  initiatives  is  the  publishing  of 
guidelines  for  a  GMRA-based  repo  trading  in  Ghana,  a  Country  Annex  and  country 
annexes that was just yesterday launched herein Washington D.C. 
 
Apart  from  being  a  vital  source  of  secured  financing  for  banks  and  financial 
8. 
institutions, and a key tool for the implementation of monetary policy, repos also  offer 
a  low-risk  and  liquid  investment  for  cash,  as  well  as  the  efficient  management  of 
liquidity  and  collateral  by  financial  firms  and  can  be  used  to  hedge  or  modify  the  risk 
profile of portfolios. 
 
Netting  rights  and  setoffs  are  generally  recognized  and  upheld  under  Ghanaian 
9. 
law.    With  respect  to  the  banking  sector,  the  BoG  will  issue  a  notice  to  clarify  the 
recognition  of  netting  arrangements  in  financial  contracts  in  the  Banks  and  Special 
Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) in support of efforts to recognize Ghana 
as a netting positive jurisdiction. 
 10.  Our  experiences  in  Ghana  as  a  major  destination  for  higher  yield-seeking  non-
resident  investors,  tells  us  that  access  to  foreign  exchange,  the  Pillar  2  of  the  ABSA 
Financial  Market  Index,  is  an  important  consideration  for  both  bond  and  equity 
investors.    These  investors  many  times  would  like  to  repatriate  coupon  proceeds, 
sometimes principal repayments on matured bonds and dividends in hard currency. This 
is more so during periods of tighter global financing conditions.  
 
It is therefore important to develop liquid, deep and efficient domestic interbank 
11. 
markets that can support these foreign investors to give them the required comfort to 
continue to invest in our markets.  It is our view that a liquid interbank market can be 
well  supported  when  the  central  bank  has  adequate  foreign  reserves.    It  is  for  this 
  reason  that  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  in  the  past  few  years  focused  on  building  on  our 
foreign reserve buffers to support our price stability mandate. 
 
The capacity of local investors, pillar 4 of the Absa Africa Financial Market Index 
12. 
is  an  important  pillar  which  becomes  more  critical  going  forward.    In  Ghana,  we  are 
beginning to realize  the important role  that institutional investors such  as  our pension 
funds,  asset  managers  and  insurance  firms  could  play  in  not  only  financing  part  of 
government budget but also providing long-term funding for capital projects.  This has 
become important as we seek to find the right balance between domestic and foreign 
sources of funding. 
 
That  said,  there  is  more  work  to  be  done  as  we  seek  to  develop  the  domestic 
13. 
market to enhance efficiency and create the needed market for capital. 
 13. Let me, at this juncture, turn attention to how we can leverage on new technology 
and  data  sharing  to  improve  efficiency  and  innovation  on  the  African  continent. 
Presently, Ghana is transitioning to a new kind of retail banking system where a large 
segment  of  the  population  previously  unbanked,  are  being  absorbed  into  the  financial 
services sector, via, mobile money. To further expand access to financial services, the 
Bank of Ghana and Government are initiating policies to further strengthen the financial 
and  payment  systems  to  foster  smooth  delivery  of  financial  services  and  engender 
financial inclusion. Some of these policies included agent registry, national identification 
exercise and digital property address system. Let me share a few of the initiatives that 
are already in train: 
14.  Developing  an  Agency  Registry:  Agency  network  has  become  an  important 
channel  for  delivering  financial  services  at  affordable  cost.  A  digital  Agent  Registry  is 
rolled  out  by  the  Bank  of  Ghana  in  collaboration  with  payment  services  providers  to 
enhance identification and  provide  oversight  of agent’s  business. The Registry  focuses 
on mapping and capturing of data on all agent access points and facilitating customers’ 
access  to  preferred  agent  point  for  convenient  and  efficient  service  delivery.  The 
  register will also be used to inform stakeholders on operations of agents in violation of 
regulatory and prudential requirements. 
 15.  Citizenry Identification through activities of the National Identification 
Authority:  The  banking  industry,  through  the  initiative  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  co-
operated  with  the  National  Identification  Authority  (NIA)  to  implement  a  national 
identification  system  that  meets  the  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  and  Customer  Due 
Diligence (CDD) requirements of the banking sector. The identification system is based 
on  biometric  technology  and  would  provide  continuous  verification  access  to  banks  at 
all times. The system is expected to also address incidence of identity fraud at point of 
transactions  and  serve  as  reliable  system  for  profiling  the  underserved  and  the 
unbanked. 
 16. 
Fostering  a  Digital  and  Property  Address  System:  A  Digital  and  Property 
Address  System,  was  put  in  place  by  Government  to  allocate  addresses  to  properties 
through  the  use  of  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  technology.  The  address 
system seeks  to  improve  business  operations  and  lessen  the  burden  involved  in 
identifying customer location. A national address registry is expected to be generated to 
enable financial service providers to validate home and property addresses of customers 
to facilitate financial service delivery. 
 17. 
Ensuring  Mobile  Money  Interoperability:  As  part  of  the  Bank’s  policy  to 
transform  the  payment  ecosystem,  an  interoperability  project  was  implemented  to 
boost  the  efficiency,  accessibility  and  competition  within  the  mobile  money  space. 
Under the project, disparate mobile money platforms were linked to each other through 
central switch to facilitate funds transfer across mobile money networks.  The system is 
also expected to integrate with  interbank payment systems infrastructure to create an 
integrated and interoperable  digital retail  payments  ecosystem, and facilitate seamless 
  funds  transfer  across  payment  systems.  The  project  has  the  potential  to  stimulate 
uptake in mobile financial services and promote financial inclusion. 
 18. 
The points raised above demonstrate that the ABSA Financial Markets Index for 
which  we  are  launching  the  fourth  edition  has  become  a  major  reference  point  for 
economic policy makers and financial sector leaders in Africa.  This is important in our 
quest  to  improve  upon  the  efficiency  of  the  African  financial  markets  to  attract  lower 
funding sources to better the economic life of our people.  I urge ABSA to continue to 
challenge  policy  makers  using  this  index,  other  innovative  tools  and  a  forum  such  as 
this.    On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  I  wish  to  congratulate  ABSA  for  successfully 
launching the fourth edition of the African Financial Markets Index today and to thank 
you all for the good audience. 
 19. 
To  conclude  let  me  state  clearly  that  the  potential  to  expand  our  economies 
through  structural  reforms  and  initiatives  should  form  the  cornerstone  of  all  policies. 
Ghana’s  economy  is  going  through  a  structural  transformation  and  these  initiated 
policies  are  supporting  the  move  in  that  direction.  As  a  continent,  policies  should  be 
focussed  on  how  to  develop  a  vibrant  capital  market  to  support  growth,  how  to 
benchmark our internal regulation against global standards to help improve standards, 
overcoming  regional  integration  challenges  to  support  growth,  and  leveraging  on  new 
technology  and  data  sharing  to  improve  efficiency  and  innovation.  Let  us  ponder 
critically over these issues as we go through our deliberations. 
 20. 
I  look  forward  to  fruitful  engagements  and  that  the  key  takeaways  will  help 
inform policies going forward. 
 Thank you 
 