Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Inclusion  and  digital  transformation  -  a
collaborative approach to regulating fintech
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Finance  Executives  Breakfast  Roundtable,  Manila,  11  October
2019.
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. It is always a pleasure to engage with key stakeholders of
the finance industry as it gives us the opportunity to advance the BSP’s advocacies.
In  fact,  today’s  theme  of  “Collaborative  Approach  to  Regulating  Fintech”  is  exactly  how  we
envision the landscape of overseeing the increasingly disruptive, yet, vibrant narrative of Fintech
developments.
Over the past couple of years, innovative solutions through technological advancements have
transformed the delivery of financial services by offering alternative and far convenient ways of
executing financial transactions.
It has empowered the unbanked and underbanked to participate in the economy through easier
access to financial services.
Indeed,  FinTech  players  are  moving  ahead  of  the  curve  by  developing  solutions  that  aim  to
expand delivery channels and trim unnecessary processes towards providing greater efficiency
and convenience for customers.
We, at the BSP, emphasize our support for such endeavors. We view innovators as enablers of
financial services that help us boost our financial inclusion agenda.
The number of FinTech players in the Philippines have gradually been growing in the past three
years  with  most,  or  around  75%  of  the  total  providing  payments,  alternative  financing,  and
remittance services.
2018, in particular, has been a key period for blockchain and virtual currencie.
There  has  been  an  increasing  amount  of  BSP  Supervised  Financial  Institutions  that  have
leveraged  on  FinTech  to  support  their  business  strategies  and  manage  day-to-day  business
processes.
This  prompted  us  to  craft  appropriate  regulations  to  safeguard  public  interest  while  fully
recognizing  that  these  technological  innovations  can  contribute  to  a  more  inclusive  and  safe
financial ecosystem.
Our approach to regulating FinTechs is shaped by three principles,
(a)    first, we ensure that regulation is risk-based, proportionate and fair,
(b)    second, we maintain active multi-stakeholder collaboration,
(c)    and lastly, we ensure that innovations must work for the benefit of consumers, especially
the most vulnerable ones.
Guided by these principles, came the rise of our three-lane FinTech roadmap that is crafted to
nurture  a  regulatory  environment  that  allows  innovations  to  flourish,  yet  still  mindful  that  risks
must be effectively managed and that the financial system remains safe and sound.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  first  lane  refers  to  Collaborative  Engagements.  The  continuing  collaboration  with  industry
players  and  other  financial  regulators  represents  a  “whole-of-government  approach”,  ensuring
policy consistency and minimizing, if not fully preventing, regulatory arbitrage.
With this in mind, the BSP openly engages with fintech players and innovators through a flexible
“test  and  learn”  environment  or  the  “regulatory  sandbox”  that  enables  us  to  fully  understand
emerging business models while assessing attendant risks.
I  will  not  dwell  on  specifics  but  generally,  the  framework  consists  of  five  important  steps
commencing from the enabling stance adopted by the BSP during initial engagement with the
applicant,  guided  and  clear  rules  for  implementation,  until  continuing  monitoring  of  matured
services.
With such an approach, we are able to timely employ risk-mitigating actions and craft appropriate
policies revolving around consumers’ welfare and protection and secure financial system.
The middle lane refers to our Capacity Building initiatives.
In 2018, we established a dedicated Financial Technology Subsector (FTSS) to institutionalize
the operational and cyber-resilience of the financial system.
Under FTSS is the Technology Risk and Innovation Supervision Department (TRISD), which is
primarily responsible for conducting onsite and offsite IT supervision of regulated entities, as well
as  maintaining  a  comprehensive  and  flexible  regulatory  framework  relating  to  IT  supervision.
TRISD is also in charge of cybersecurity surveillance and promoting digital or FinTech innovation
through BSP’s regulatory sandbox.
Equally  important  is  the  Payment  Systems  Oversight  Department  (PSOD)  which  is  mainly
responsible for the payments oversight, licensing and policy development for a safe, efficient and
reliable national payment system. It espouses on the use of technology as enabler of innovation
in  payment  systems  and  is  the  lead  in  enforcing  a  holistic  payment  oversight  framework,
including the National Retail Payment System.
We are also in the midst of implementing solutions that make use of artificial intelligence and
machine learning for regulatory and supervisory processes. These RegTech and SupTech tools
aim to augment areas of risk management, regulatory reporting, consumer complaint oversight
and regulatory compliance automation.
This  includes  a  chatbot,  an  automated  complaint-handling  system  which  uses  predictive
analytics to address consumer concerns and an API that automates the collection, processing,
and  analysis  of  data  from  supervised  institutions.  Supervised  entities  that  cannot  immediately
migrate to the API-based reporting can use the FI portal in submission of their reports.
All of these are aimed at streamlining our manual-intensive processes, thereby enhancing the
timeliness and quality of our risk-based decision-making and financial system supervision.
The third and final lane refers to Commensurate Regulations.
Consistent with the supervisory objectives of the BSP, we apply the same approach to FinTech
by considering the soundness of the individual institution, the landscape of the financial system,
and the risk peculiarities in individual operations.
This  ensures  that  we  promote  a  level  playing  field  for  the  new  entrants  and  that  we  will  not
hamper the innovation with unwarranted and excessive compliance requirements.
Some of our recent key issuances include:
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
(a) Circular No. 1022 which updated rules for validating client identity by accepting the PhilSys ID
and allowing the use of technology-aided know-your-customer processes to capture and record
personal customer data as well as conduct virtualized face-to-face contact or interview.
(b) Circular No. 1033 on the streamlined the process of securing licenses to engage in Electronic
Payments  and  Financial  Services,  doing  away  with  the  tedious  approval  process  of  requiring
conditional and final approval.
(c) Circular No. 1039 on the simplified the documentary or registration requirements for Money
Service Businesses and pawnshops operators.
Finally,  in  accordance  with  the  BSP’s  authority  under  Republic Act  No.  11127  or  the  National
Payment Systems Act to oversee payment systems in the Philippines, the BSP issued Circular
1049 to provide for a streamlined registration that aims to facilitate and encourage compliance of
all  concerned  entities,  particularly  those  previously  unregulated  non-financial  institutions
unfamiliar with regulatory compliance.
Soon,  a  new  Manual  of  Regulations  for  Payment  Systems  (MORPS)  will  be  prepared  to
consolidate all relevant BSP issuances. The manual will be a product of extensive consultations
among  private  and  public  stakeholders  in  the  payments  industry.  It  will  also  be  part  of  the
phased-in implementation of the NPSA that prioritizes the creation of a baseline inventory of all
OPS.
We also have the National Retail Payment System (NRPS) which leverages on the principles of
interoperability, inclusiveness and “coopetition”.
The NRPS, and the payment ecosystem that is envisioned to arise from it, is positioned to be a
platform for FinTech innovations where industry players can utilize FinTech solutions and provide
services within an organized, commercially-viable and efficient retail payment system.
Notwithstanding all of these developments, we recognize that the FinTech narrative goes beyond
just the BSP.  In fact, more pioneering solutions are cutting across regimes of different regulators
of the financial sector.
This is why in the 3rd quarter of last year, the Financial Sector Forum, composed of four financial
regulators  in  the  country,  namely  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the
Insurance Commission (IC), the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC) and the BSP,
formed a FinTech Committee aimed at harmonizing regulatory responses to FinTech innovation
in the financial sector.
Among  the  priority  agenda  that  the  FSF-Fintech  Committee  undertook  was  identifying  the
numerous  Fintech  use  cases  and  the  scope  of  authorities  of  each  regulators.  Through  clear
understanding and increased collaboration, financial regulators can quickly anticipate changes,
assess  technological  trends  across  different  sectors,  and  optimize  the  potential  of  digital
innovations to provide more convenient, and efficient financial services.
The cross-cutting nature of FinTech developments has also magnified the importance of shifting
to activity-based regulations. Likewise, I am pleased to share that the FSF-Fintech Committee is
in the initial stages of crafting a Cooperative Oversight Framework which will institutionalize our
collaboration and clarify regulations to all supervised and would be supervised entities.
But again ladies and gentlemen, we are just one side of this financial equation and we need your
support in striking the balance of ensuring that regulatory and supervisory frameworks are in tune
with emerging trends and developments.
We hope that you can actively help us shape this narrative into something that is desirable, safe,
sustainable, inclusive and rewarding for all stakeholders, most especially the Filipino people.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As we move forward in this collaboration, I hope that we all keep the benefit of the Filipino people
in mind.
Thank you for the opportunity and I am looking forward to engaging conversations with all of you.
Needless to say that the BSP, as your partner in promoting financial innovation and inclusion, will
remain  dedicated  and  committed  in  supporting  beneficial  FinTech  innovations  through  an
enabling policy and regulatory environment.
Thank you and I wish everyone a fruitful conference.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
