Joshua  Rosenberg:  Thrive  in  any  environment  -  strengthening
resilience through risk management
Remarks  by  Mr  Joshua  Rosenberg,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Chief  Risk  Officer  of  the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the GARP Global Risk Forum, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, New York City, 7 November 2019.
 As prepared for delivery
Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. Let me begin by saying
that  the  views  I  express  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
The  ability  to  thrive  in  any  environment,  in  both  normal  and  chaotic  conditions,  is  an
organizational  imperative.  We  can  strengthen  organizational  resilience—“the  ability  to  prepare
and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events”—through
risk management.  That’s because the tools of risk management help us make plans and take
action today in the face of an uncertain tomorrow. In fact, we can deliver even more value to our
organizations by defining resilience as a goal of risk management.
Today, I will talk about some of the challenges to achieving resilience and how risk management
can be part of the solution. While there are many aspects of resilience, I’m going to choose two
challenges and their connection to risk management: organizational silos and the complexity of
control.
Organizational Silos
1
2
3
The  first  challenge  is  organizational  silos.   Threats  do  not  respect  organizational  boundaries.
Some, like cyber threats, actually exploit them. Hurricanes don’t care about your organizational
chart, and cyber attackers would actually like a copy of it to use it against you.  Since threats
aren’t siloed, our defenses can’t be siloed either.
One  of  the  insights  of  enterprise  risk  management  is  that  good  outcomes  rely  on  integration
across organizational boundaries and types of risk. That’s why it’s not just risk management, its
enterprise  risk  management.   We  can  use  approaches  from  enterprise  risk  management  to
create bridges across silos.
To  start,  enterprise  risk  management  focuses  on  an  organization’s  objectives  and  the  critical
processes that support them. Critical processes span organizational units in a connected chain
of activities, starting with inputs delivered by suppliers, to value-added transformations within the
organization, to the final delivery to customers. So, to strengthen resilience, we identify the risks
to process outcomes and then design processes and controls to address those risks.
Since silos weaken resilience, you may want to look in your organization at some of the hotspots
where enterprise-wide coordination is essential. I’d start with incident response. Are you ready for
complex threats that require teamwork across organizational units? Another challenging area is
external  dependency  management.  Do  you  have  a  coordinated  and  coherent  approach  to
understand  and  manage  vendor  exposures  across  the  full  spectrum  of  risks,  including
information security, data privacy, compliance, business continuity, and credit?
Risk silos are as problematic as business-line silos.  While the specialization of risk disciplines
has  benefits,  common  negative  side  effects  are  insufficient  communication  and  coordination,
followed by information gaps and ineffective decision making.
4
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Take the case of a vendor that provides critical services and is on the brink of bankruptcy. Are
credit  risk  analysts,  operational  risk  and  business  continuity  professionals,  and  the  business
affected working together to share information, insights, and potential responses? Or, are silos
preventing information from getting to the right people at the right time to prepare and act?
Risk silos can result in siloed decisions, and looking at risks one by one is incoherent. We could
drive operational risk to zero by having no operations (I guess we can all go home early), but then
strategic risk rises to infinity. Since most meaningful decisions involve balancing risks, to get to
the  right  decision,  we  need  a  risk  picture  that  covers  all  relevant  risk  types  and  engages  all
relevant risk experts.
Similarly, real world vulnerabilities do not have to conform themselves to a particular risk type.
Think about weaknesses in identity and access management. This is a driver for risks ranging
from  cyber,  to  compliance,  to  operations,  and  more.  This  is  also  a  type  of  risk  that  can’t  be
mitigated solely through technical controls put in place by information security experts; that is, a
siloed  risk  response  is  insufficient.  So,  stronger  collaboration  and  coordination  across  risk
disciplines is one solution to the negative effects of risk silos.
Another specific pain point created by risk silos is the flourishing, and perhaps overgrowth, of risk
assessments. Most organizations have many risk reviews: often a different review for each type
of  risk.  Some  focus  on  assets,  others  focus  on  organizational  units,  and  yet  others  look  at
specific parts of processes. The result can be a set of assessments with potentially inconsistent
coverage and disconnected recommendations.
So, an appealing alternative to counter that trend and bridge siloed assessments is to integrate
risk  assessments. A  unified  approach  can  bring  together  risk  and  business  professionals  to
understand and manage the risks to critical processes. The idea is to create a common picture
of gaps and then design coordinated action plans that can target improvements in resilience.
Let’s  focus  on  business  continuity  to  see  how  an  integrated  risk  approach  can  strengthen
resilience.   Business  continuity  programs  have  traditionally  been  designed  to  restore  critical
physical or technology infrastructures that can be disrupted by threats like extreme weather or
loss of power. So, a business continuity plan might involve arranging for a backup data center if
the primary data center goes down due to a hurricane. Within an organization, different business
areas  may  develop  their  own  plans  that  are  focused  on  their  specific  business  needs  and
priorities.
An integrated business continuity plan is one that is designed to protect critical organizational
processes  and  their  essential  assets  from  the  full  range  of  relevant  threats.  An  integrated
approach begins with organizational objectives. This bridges a gap between what good looks like
to  an  individual  business  and  what  it  looks  like  to  the  organization  as  a  whole. Among  other
things, an integrated approach analyzes and plans for the impacts of disruptions on suppliers
and customers from an operational as well as reputational perspective.
Integration broadens the focus from the availability of infrastructure (e.g., the servers are up and
the facilities are accessible) to successful organizational outcomes (e.g., the organization is able
to deliver products and services).  In the current threat environment, achieving resilience is as
much about protecting the integrity and confidentiality of information as it is about maintaining
availability.  An  integrated  plan  delivers  coordinated  and  coherent  responses  to  incidents,
including ones of significant scale, complexity, and surprise that can overwhelm normal control
6
systems.
The Complexity of Control
The second resiliency challenge is the complexity of control. To improve resilience, we seek to
control outcomes, and risk management has a lot to say about control. A simple story  about
5
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
control  goes  like  this:  when  we  are  setting  up  a  business  process,  we  look  for  sources  of
problems and start adding controls. Mainly, we’ll create controls to prevent problems.
But,  recognizing  that  there  will  be  times  when  prevention  doesn’t  work,  we  also  put  in  place
controls  to  detect  problems  and  then  correct  them.  Once  the  process  is  up  and  running,  if
problems come up that we didn’t expect, we add additional controls to prevent those problems
from happening again.
I wanted to go through some examples of how this doesn’t always work well in practice. From
that, we’ll see that a systems perspective can explain why our attempts at control sometimes fail
7
and what we can do about it.
A key insight from systems thinking is that controls are part of a system. Controls interact with
other  controls  and  with  the  production  process.  One  implication  of  connectedness  is  that
changes to any part of the system can spillover and affect other parts. Controls that work well
separately may not work well together.
That’s  one  reason  why  controls  created  in  isolation  and  added  incrementally  can  create
unexpected  results.  It’s  a  weakness  of  control  systems  that  have  grown  through  an  ad-hoc
approach of “see a problem, add a control.”
Let’s walk through a scenario where controls don’t behave as expected or intended.
On Sunday, you run a business resumption exercise to test the ability of your primary data center
to fail over to your backup data center. The test appears to be a success, and you have some
useful lessons learned to make the failover process run better next time. But, when you come to
work on Monday morning, something is wrong. It turns out the test corrupted customer account
data.  Your  call  center  is  overwhelmed  with  questions  and  complaints,  because  your  billing
system sent a blast email with overdue payment notices to all of your customers.
In a simple world, controls solve problems, they don’t create them. In the real world, the control
and  production  systems  are  linked,  so  the  failed  execution  of  a  control  can,  in  and  of  itself,
8
disrupt operations. In other words, controls can cause harm.
On Tuesday morning, a hurricane damages your main office and floods the backup generator
that powers the emergency communications system. Because the emergency communication
system  is  offline,  employees  do  not  know  they  should  report  to  the  backup  work  location,  so
operations are out for the day.
In a simple world, controls are protection, they don’t need protection. In the real world, both the
production  and  control  system  can  be  damaged  and  degraded.  So,  the  control  system  itself
must be designed to operate under stress, and its performance must be monitored.
It’s  been  a  tough  week  so  far,  but  you’ve  made  it  to  Wednesday.  At  noon,  your  information
security officer tells you that a security scan has flagged a possible cyber breach. You cut off all
network connections, send non-essential employees home, and wait until the end of the day until
diagnostics are complete. The news at the end of the day is good: it turns out that the alert was a
false positive. But, the organization lost half a day of productive activity.
In a simple world, controls detect problems immediately, diagnose with perfect accuracy, and
result in corrective actions that are instantly and fully effective. In the real world, detection takes
time, diagnosis is not always accurate, solutions take time to implement, and they don’t always
work. That said, we must make decisions—including ones about whether and how to execute
controls—based on the information available at the time.
Control design and execution take place in a world in which there is uncertainty about whether
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
there is a problem, what the problem is, what to do about it, when to do something, and what the
effects of what we do will be. We can make better decisions when we understand and manage
that uncertainty.
There is also uncertainty about threats. We will never be able to envision the characteristics of all
future causes of disruption. Even when we plan effectively, we will be surprised again. And, like
any other system, the control system will exhibit performance variability. For these reasons, we
can’t  rely  solely  on  prevention.  Resilience  requires  the  ability  to  withstand  and  recover  when
threats  make  it  through  preventive  barriers,  so  a  strong  control  system  must  incorporate
preventive, detective, and corrective controls.
Perhaps  because  we  are  overoptimistic  about  prevention,  detective  and  corrective  controls
sometimes get second-class billing. For many threats, time is not on our side; the impact grows
as the detection time increases. That’s the case with “dwell time” for cyber breaches, which is
the  amount  of  time  attackers  are  on  your  network  before  you  detect  them.   It’s  important  to
decide how long you are willing to wait to find out that you have a problem, and then use that as a
requirement to design detective controls.
Underinvesting in corrective controls is problematic too. For example, how would you feel after a
ransomware attack, if you find out that your backed-up data is intact but it will take months and
millions of dollars to restore? Or, if your first corrective action is the wrong solution and makes
the problem worse? It takes time and resources to develop the tools, procedures, and skills to
accurately diagnose causes, contain the immediate threat, and implement a long-term solution.
Will you be satisfied with the performance of your corrective controls when you need them?
There’s also a bias towards automated controls that is not always well considered. Both manual
and automated controls have a place in a control system. While machines are better than people
at repetitive tasks with clear decision criteria, people are better than machines (for now) at tasks
that are ambiguous and require judgment and flexibility. When you automate controls, are you
preserving the knowledge and skills of staff who need to understand the system well enough to
solve problems when automation fails?
So, we’ve seen how controls are part of a dynamic system in an environment of uncertainty.  We
can’t  know  whether  our  controls  are  sufficient  unless  we  look  at  the  behavior  of  the  control
system as a whole. And, we can’t achieve our desired outcomes unless we design for them.
Conclusions
10
9
Today,  I’ve  highlighted  two  challenges  to  resilience:  organizational  silos  and  the  complexity  of
control.  And,  I’ve  proposed  a  set  of  solutions  based  on  risk  management  tools:  a  focus  on
organizational  objectives,  end-to-end  management  of  critical  processes,  integrated  risk
management, and a systems approach to control. These all share the common characteristic of
being integrative.
Resilient components do not necessarily add up to a resilient whole. So, organizational resilience
is an enterprise goal that is achieved through coherent and coordinated enterprise solutions.
A resilient organization is able to make better plans, decisions, and actions that deliver desired
outcomes over a range of conditions. To strengthen resilience, we seek to tame the problematic
present and constructively move forward into the hazy future. The tools of risk management can
help get us there.
1
2
National Research Council, 2012, Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative, Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press.
Gillian Tett, 2005, The Silo Effect: The Peril of Expertise and the Promise of Breaking Down Barriers, New York,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
NY: Simon and Schuster.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, 2017, Enterprise Risk Management:
Integrating with Strategy and Performance.
Philippa  Girling,  2013,  “Operational  Risk  and  Convergence”  in  Operational  Risk  Management: A  Complete
Guide  to  a  Successful  Operational  Risk  Framework.  Hoboken,  NJ:  Wiley.  Ramy  Farha, Allen  Meyer,  Evan
Sekeris, and Elena Belov, 2018, Non-Financial Risk, Convergence, and Integration, Oliver Wyman. Steve Culp
and  Chris  Thompson,  2016,  The  Convergence  of  Operational  Risk  and  Cyber  Security. Accenture.  Nader
Mehravari, 2013, Resilience Management through use of CERT-RMM and Associated Success Stories, 2013
IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security.
Richard  Caralli,  Julia  Allen,  David  White,  Lisa  Young,  Nader  Mehravari,  and  Pamela  Curtis,  2016,  CERT
Resilience  Management  Model  Version  1.2:  Service  Continuity,  CERT  Program:  Carnegie  Mellon.  Rico
Brandenburg,  Tom  Ivell,  Evan  Sekeris,  Matthew  Gruber,  and  Paul  Lewis,  2019,  Striving  for  Operational
Resilience: The Questions Boards and Senior Management Should Ask, Oliver Wyman.
David P. Moynihan, 2009, The Network Governance of Crisis Response: Case Studies of Incident Command
Systems. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 19, pp. 895–915.
Peter  Senge,  2006,  The  Fifth  Discipline:  The  Art  and  Practice  of  the  Learning  Organization,  New  York:
Doubleday.  Nancy  Leveson,  Nicolas  Dulac,  David  Zipkin,  Joel  Cutcher-Gershenfeld,  John  Carroll, and  Betty
Barrett, 2013, “Engineering Resilience into Safety Critical Systems” in Resilience Engineering: Concepts and
Precepts, Eds. Erik Hollnagel, David Woods, and Nancy Leveson. Dorchester, UK: Dorset Press. Resilience
Engineering:  Sidney  Dekker,  Erik  Hollnagel,  David  Woods,  and  Richard  Cook,  2008,  New  Directions  for
Measuring and Maintaining Safety in Complex Systems, Lund University School of Aviation.
Jonathan B. Wiener, 1998. Managing the Iatrogenic Risks of Risk Management, Risk, Health, Safety, and the
Environment, 39, pp. 9-82.
M-Trends 2019, FireEye Mandiant Services Special Report.
Nancy Leveson and John Thomas, 2018, STPA Handbook. Matthew Leitch, 2011, Intelligent Internal Control and
Risk  Management:  Designing  High  Performance  Risk  Control  Systems,  Burlington,  VT:  Gower  Publishing
Company. Deloitte, 2009, Mining Safety: A Business Imperative.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
