Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Macroprudential  regulation  and 
stability
Speech by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at the High-
Level International Forum, Minsk, 1 November 2019.
financial
Dear Governor Kallaur, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is my great pleasure to join you at this High-Level International Forum – and to celebrate the
25th Anniversary of the Belarusian Ruble. Congratulations on this important milestone.
Financial stability is key to ensuring trust in any currency. Therefore, the topic I was invited to
discuss today – namely, macroprudential regulation – fits the occasion well.
In  my  remarks,  I  will  consider  three  dimensions  to  macroprudential  policy-making:  the
international, the European, and the domestic, or national, level.
Let’s begin with a broader international perspective.
The global financial crisis taught us a lesson: microprudential regulation and supervision alone
are  not  enough  to  safeguard  the  financial  system.  Vulnerabilities  may  build  up  across  the
financial sector through complex interlinkages – even though individual entities may seem stable
on a standalone basis.
The  crisis  was  thus  a  catalyst  for  the  rise  of  macroprudential  policies.  The  focus  turned  to
ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole. International cross-cutting post-crisis
reforms – such as Basel III – helped accelerate this process.
Today, over 90% of world economies have at least one macroprudential policy measure in place.
1
The average number of measures per country is more than nine  .
In  other  words,  macroprudential  policy  has  become  mainstream.  A  saying  was  even  born,
2
paraphrasing Milton Friedman, that “we are all macroprudentialists now” .
Of course, the macroprudential domain differs across regions.
In  emerging  market  countries,  tools  to  manage  foreign  exchange  mismatches  in  the  banking
system are more popular than in advanced economies. Such measures include, for example,
limits on the net foreign exchange position.  Many countries also differentiate liquidity tools and
reserve  requirements  by  currency.  By  minimising  foreign  exchange  lending  risks  and
encouraging local currency savings, these instruments can directly strengthen the role of local
currencies.
3
Across  the  advanced  economies,  bank  capital  measures  are  the  top  choice. And,  in  recent
years, more countries are activating borrower-based instruments, such as restrictions on loan-
to-value and debt-to-income or debt-service-to-income ratios. The usage of such measures is
related  to  high  levels  of  mortgage  lending,  and  the  overall  experience  with  housing  sector
vulnerabilities in these economies.
These  are  some  of  the  examples  of  the  growing  number  of  macroprudential  measures  used
across the world. Have they been effective in ensuring financial stability?
Let  us  not  be  too  optimistic:  financial  crises  have  always  happened  and  will  always  happen.
However,  macroprudential  policy  can  surely  mitigate  the  most  harmful  manifestations  of  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  cycle  –  especially  in  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  that  encourages
excessive risk-taking.
Surely, more research is needed on the topic. But the evidence is mounting, particularly in terms
of loan-targeted instruments. For instance, many papers, including IMF research, have found that
loan-to-value and, especially, debt-service-to-income limits can reduce household credit growth
and house prices.
Dear Colleagues,
Prior to the global financial crisis, only a few countries in the EU made use of macroprudential
measures, and there was a great deal of uncertainty over which instruments to choose – and
how to calibrate them.
But that has changed. I would therefore like to quickly zoom in on the European dimension.
During the post-crisis period, macroprudential authorities came into existence in almost all EU
Member States , and the policy toolkit was built up. Important Basel III measures – such as the
countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  the  buffer  for  systemically  important  institutions  –  were
5
transposed into EU law .
4
Today, all EU Member States have set and regularly review the buffers for their domestically and
globally systemically important institutions, while a positive countercyclical capital buffer rate has
been active or announced in 12 of the Member States.
Borrower-based measures have not been fully harmonised at the EU level. Nevertheless, they
have  already  been  implemented  in  17  Member  States  to  curtail  credit  growth  and  household
leverage.
Harmonised or not, macroprudential measures have been implemented in a relatively consistent
manner across Europe. This is due, in part, to the comprehensive governance structure that was
set  up  after  the  crisis.  This  structure  features  a  two-tier  system.  Countries  are  first  in  line  to
counter systemic risk. In the euro area, the ECB is responsible for assessing measures adopted
by national authorities – and applying higher requirements if deemed necessary. The European
Systemic  Risk  Board  brings  together  all  the  relevant  institutions  to  carry  out  oversight,  and
issues recommendations or warnings – for all EU Member States and EU institutions.
Dear colleagues,
We  have  talked  about  international  and  European  perspectives.  But  final  decisions  on
macroprudential policy are taken at the national level. This is where instruments are calibrated
and  adopted  to  country-specific  circumstances.  Macroprudential  policy-making  is  still  a  rather
novel exercise: one can say that every country engages in a sort of experiment to find the right
medicine.
In Lithuania, the central bank became the macroprudential authority in 2014. Indeed, it is a very
important mandate. Lithuania does not have domestically orientated monetary policy as we have
been  part  of  the  Eurosystem  since  2015.  For  that  reason,  proactive  use  of  macroprudential
measures has become the main roadblock against the build-up of cyclical systemic risks in the
country’s financial system.
Unfortunately, we did not have such safeguards 10 years ago, when we were hit particularly hard
by the boom-and-bust cycle. House prices dropped sharply – by 30% in 2009, which was the
second-worst drop in the whole EU.
I  think  this  taught  us  a  lesson.  In  the  post-crisis  years,  Lithuania  has  been  eager  to  find  an
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
effective combination of macroprudential policy measures. In 2011, we were among the first in
the EU to establish restrictions on loan-to-value, debt-service-to-income, and loan maturity.
I have to say that, in introducing those measures in 2011, we did so without having a clear legal
mandate. We introduced them by using secondary legislation, based on general provisions under
the law governing the functioning of the Bank of Lithuania. As I mentioned, we only received a
clear legal mandate for implementing macroprudential policy three years later. From a legal point
of view, the step we took in 2011 was a risky one, but nobody challenged it – perhaps due to the
still-recent memories of the 2008–2009 crisis.
Going  further,  in  2015,  to  promote  responsible  lending  in  a  low  interest  rate  environment,  we
introduced  a  limit  on  debt-service-to-income,  while  also  introducing  an  interest  rate  shock
element. At the same time, loan maturity limit was reduced.
Taken  together,  this  is  one  of  the  largest  sets  of  borrower-based  measures  in  the  EU.  It  has
created a reliable backstop against the deterioration of lending standards. Combining different
instruments helps prevent evasion, targets a wider range of risk sources, and allows measures
to reinforce each other.
We have also been active in strengthening banks’ capital. Macroprudential capital buffers were
introduced as soon as they became available in the European regulation and thus domestic law
– starting from 2015. To prepare against potential shocks in the future, the countercyclical capital
buffer rate in Lithuania has been raised twice, and now stands at 1%. We see this buffer as a
reserve, which could be loosened in bad times to encourage bank lending to the real economy.
Today,  the  Lithuanian  economy  is  still  expanding  above  its  potential  –  according  to  our
estimations, it will grow by 3.7% this year. Despite this, we do not see signs of irresponsible
behaviour on the part of creditors or borrowers.
Much of this can be attributed to sound macroprudential policy. For instance, our assessment
reveals that had we not introduced borrower-based measures, house prices would be at least
around 7% higher today, and loan stock to households would be around 10% larger.
I am glad that macroprudential policy is also on the agenda of the National Bank of the Republic
of Belarus. You have in place the main capital buffers in line with Basel standards, as well as the
key borrower-based measures.
Here I must stress that macroprudential policy is not only about measures, but also about the
overall framework. In order to achieve financial stability, clear powers and responsibilities should
be defined. These are the steps that the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus is taking.
In terms of the framework, institutional independence is also key. The task for macroprudential
authorities  is  to  “take  away  the  punch  bowl  as  the  party  gets  going.”  Those  in  the  party  may
prefer it to continue. Authorities should thus be autonomous from outside pressures to be able to
ensure an effective implementation of the mandate.
In Belarus, some of the important work on the macroprudential framework was done during an
EU Twinning project dedicated to enhancing the potential of the National Bank of the Republic of
Belarus. The Bank of Lithuania had the opportunity to participate in the project and took a leading
role in the Financial Stability component.
For us, it was a great experience. I would like to thank the experts and the Board of the National
Bank for their outstanding dedication. It has laid a sound foundation for further development of an
effective macroprudential policy framework in Belarus.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
To conclude, macroprudential policy is – so to say – approaching its adolescence, and countries
will continue to fine-tune their frameworks and instruments. However, experience with applying
these tools is growing.
I  am  confident  that  through  knowledge-sharing  and  international  cooperation,  macroprudential
policy will play an increasingly important role in safeguarding financial stability – in all parts of the
world.
 1
2
3
4
5
IMF (2018), The IMF’s Annual Macroprudential Policy Survey—Objectives, Design, and Country Responses.
Milton Friedman’s famous line ran: “We are all Keynesians now".
Net Foreign Exchange Position is defined as the difference between assets and liabilities in a foreign currency.
All Member States but one (Italy) now have a dedicated macroprudential authority in place. In Italy, the role of
setting macroprudential measures (available in the common EU regulation) is currently carried out by the Bank
of Italy.
The CRR/CRD IV rules provide for the common regulatory framework for macroprudential supervision.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
