    
 
 
 
 
 
“No one left behind: a holistic approach to 
financial inclusion” 
 
Speech Nicole Stolk at the Seminar Financial Inclusion 
integrates the World 
4 October 2019  
   
 
 Twenty-two central banks and other financial supervisors discussed the need for a holistic approach to 
financial inclusion at the ‘Financial Inclusion Integrates the World’ conference in Amsterdam. On the 
second day of the programme, DNB Governing Board member Nicole Stolk delivered a speech in which 
she argued that wide access, good understanding and financial resilience are the basis for turning 
knowledge into smart behaviour and responsible use of financial products and services. In particular, 
consumers must be able to cope in an increasingly digital world. While digitisation is an excellent way 
to connect people, there is always the danger that people with low digital literacy cannot keep up.  
  1 
 
    
SDGs: guiding principles for financial inclusion 
 
Today is already the last day of our seminar on financial inclusion. So now I want to share some 
observations with you about the progress we have made on this subject. I would like to discuss this 
from an international perspective. But also with a focus on the Netherlands. 
 
Imagine it’s the year 2030: the seventeen UN Sustainable Development Goals have been achieved. All 
seventeen of them. Imagine how our world would be then. No poverty. Zero hunger. All people equal. 
No more climate crisis. And the 1.7 billion adults, who in 2017 had no access to financial services. 
They now all enjoy the benefits of a bank account. They can get microcredit for their businesses. They 
have peace of mind with insurance. It is a better world for everyone. And a much better world for 
central banks and other financial authorities. Because supervision and macroeconomic stability should 
not be our only focus.  
 
We also need to turn our attention to the other major challenges of the day: the digital revolution, 
safeguarding data privacy, the changing climate. Everything we can do to help make our world a more 
sustainable place. For central bankers  – but for everyone else here too – the SDGs are an excellent 
blueprint for achieving this sustainable world. 
 
Financial inclusion is featured as a target of eight of the seventeen sustainable development goals. For 
example, quality education, robust infrastructure and decent work for everyone. Financial inclusion has 
a big role to play in achieving the SDGs. It helps the poorest of the poor. For example, digital financial 
inclusion has given many women in remote rural Indian communities access to a bank account and 
microcredit. It unlocks new sources of income for them. Enabling them to lift themselves and their 
children out of poverty. I am convinced that over the next decade, we can together take substantial 
steps towards making these sustainable development goals a reality. 
 
 
Financial authorities contribute to financial inclusion 
 
Every single organization, whether in the public sector, or the private sector, should look at how it can 
contribute to these SDGs with their own activities. This is also what central banks do. It is the mission 
of De Nederlandsche Bank to safeguard a stable financial system, solid financial institutions and 
smoothly functioning payments. As a result of our mission, we contribute to SDGs such as decent 
work, economic growth and good infrastructure.  
 
Earlier this year we reviewed our strategy and priorities. We have now set out the way forward for the 
next five years. I'm sure you do the same at your organisation too. Our new strategy is called 
DNB2025. In it, we set out how we will fully integrate corporate social responsibility, or CSR, in all 
areas of our work. And today’s subject, financial inclusion, is of course a big part of CSR. Our new 
strategy means we will systematically consider the CSR impact of all our activities from now on. 
 
 
A holistic approach is needed to effectively stimulate financial inclusion 
 
We all know how financial inclusion can empower people so they can play a fuller role in society. When 
we talk about financial inclusion, we apply a broad and internationally-accepted definition. Financial 
inclusion is not just about having good access to the financial system, it is also about having 
knowledge of financial products, and improving financial resilience of people and businesses.  
2 
 
   
We need all three of these dimensions to make the most of financial products and services. Only then 
can we – can you – make a fairer and more inclusive world. Which also strengthens financial stability 
on the macroeconomic level. This holistic approach is not one-size-fits-all. It varies depending on the 
country, culture, regions and target groups. But again, it can only be effective when all three 
dimensions are covered.  
 
To stress this, I’d like to quote the wise words of two pioneers of financial inclusion: 
To begin with, Sri Mulyani Indrawati, Indonesia’s Minister of Finance and former head of the World 
Bank Group:  
 
“Financial inclusion matters not only because it promotes growth. But also because it helps 
ensure prosperity is widely-shared. Access to financial services plays a critical role in lifting 
people out of poverty. In empowering women. In helping governments deliver services to their 
people.”  
 
To help ensure prosperity! Isn’t that exactly what central banks do? 
 
Now I'd like to read the words of Vince Shorb, CEO of the National Financial Educators Council of the 
United States. He stresses the importance of deploying knowledge to learn skills, and to bring about 
changes in behaviour:  
 
“It takes more than financial literacy to truly help people work towards a stronger financial 
situation. Attention must also focus on their behaviors, self-efficacy and help them develop 
systems to truly make a positive impact.” 
 
Again, this is clearly one of the jobs of central banks and other financial authorities! 
 
 
Financial and digital inclusion initiatives in the Netherlands 
 
Now I want to consider some of the practical implications. I’d like to take a couple of minutes to show 
you how we promote financial and digital inclusion here in the Netherlands. In the hope that you, the 
bright minds gathered here, get some ideas to inspire you in your own good work.  
 
Anyone with access to payment services. Anyone with a bank account. Anyone with access to mobile 
banking. The way is also open to them to take advantage of other financial products. For example, 
savings, loans or even more complex products like a mortgage or pension. That is why everyone 
should be able to open a payment account, preferably at a bank. Nearly all adults in a rich country like 
the Netherlands have a bank account. But even here it is not a given that everyone knows how to use 
3 
 
 this account properly. Or that they will be able to keep using it. That is largely down to the speed with 
which payment methods and other financial services go digital.  
 
For many people, this is too fast. The Dutch Consumer's Association estimates this is the case for 
around a quarter of the people living in the Netherlands. 2 million older people and 2 million disabled 
people. You can pay by card or cash, but payments with smart mobile apps are becoming increasingly 
popular. Vulnerable groups like the elderly, illiterate people, and people with no internet literacy, run 
the risk of being excluded….. also in the Netherlands. 
 
Digitisation is an easy way of connecting people, but it can also obstruct financial inclusion. The 
digitisation we see happening around us requires consumers to have knowledge of digital resources. 
The Dutch government is also aware of this. That’s why it launched a major digital inclusion project at 
the end of last year. Over two and half million people in the Netherlands have difficulties using digital 
resources. On top of this, of the 17 million people living in the Netherlands, 1.2 million have still never 
used the internet. That is why De Nederlandsche Bank also focuses on stimulating digital financial 
inclusion.  
 
We need to understand that there are two sides to digitisation. On the one hand it is an excellent way 
of connecting people and giving them access to the financial system. Take something like an app on 
your mobile that lets you safely and easily transfer money to other countries. But we also have to 
make sure we don't exclude people with low digital literacy. Of course, I’m not saying we need to slow 
down digitisation. Just that it’s very important for us to guide the digital revolution in a smart way. 
 
 
NFPS is committed to broad financial inclusion 
 
Now I’d like to give you a few examples of what we are doing at De Nederlandsche Bank to improve 
digital and financial inclusion. First, We chair the National Forum on the Payment System. This 
platform brings together users and providers of payment services and products from across a wide 
range of backgrounds. They meet regularly to discuss how to improve accessibility and availability of 
these services and products. Because vulnerable groups also need to be able to participate in the 
payment system. That way, everyone who wants to or needs to, can continue using analogue banking 
services instead of digital services. And to pay in cash. 
 
 
Second, Last year the Forum approved several measures to maintain access to financial services for 
the most vulnerable groups in society. This is particularly important, considering the increasing 
digitisation of payments, and the decline in the number of bank branches in the Netherlands. The 
elderly and the disabled must be able to continue carrying out basic financial tasks on their own. Banks 
have also been asked to put a special accessibility page on their website with an overview of how they 
 4 
 
 cater to the needs of vulnerable groups. They can also appoint an accessibility coordinator. In all 
cases, it pays off if representatives of vulnerable groups are involved from the very start when 
designing new financial products and services. 
 
 
ERPB report to safeguard accessibility to the payment system 
 
Third: Another example of what we are doing is calling for improving access to payment systems at 
European level. We know all too well that you can only truly achieve something by working together. 
In recent years, in cooperation with the Euro Retail Payments Board, together with Age Europe, we led 
an informal working group with stakeholders to improve accessibility. Payment terminals, ATMs, 
internet payments, mobile payments and card payments. All these methods of payment have to be 
accessible for everyone.  
 
One particularly successful European initiative I'd like to mention is Pay-Able, a platform that strives 
for barrier-free access to payment terminals. Inspired by the European Accessibility Act, implemented 
in the Spring of 2019, we released a report outlining numerous best practices for accessibility.  
 
 
Many of these practices are of course focused on digitisation. The report outlines two concrete 
solutions: firstly, various banks have included speech technologies in their various payment apps.  
Secondly, an increasing number of ATMs and payment terminals use voice assistance and light and 
sound signals to help disabled users.  
 
And fourth and finally: I also represent DNB on the Steering Committee of the Money Wise platform. 
This platform was set up by the Dutch Minister of Finance and several other public and private sector 
organisations. Every year we carry out all sorts of projects to improve Dutch people’s knowledge of 
financial products. And to encourage financially responsible behaviour. Her Royal Highness Queen 
Máxima is honorary patron of the Money Wise platform.  
 5 
 
   
What we have learned is that campaigns for raising public awareness are much more effective when 
they fulfil two conditions. First, when stakeholders work together. And secondly if events are repeated, 
ideally internationally. You may already be familiar with Money Week. This is a programme of activities 
we put on every year to help schoolchildren learn about using cash, making card payments and 
encouraging them to use money responsibly.  
 
 
UNSGSA stimulates global financial inclusion 
 
This is just some of the work that Queen Máxima is involved in. She has also acted as the UN 
Secretary-General’s Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development for over a decade. She 
focusses on two target groups in particular: entrepreneurs in need of microfinancing, and women who 
still do not have a payment account or good financial literacy. This is one area where Fintech can play 
a powerful role.  
 
 6 
 
   
Good cooperation is the key to success for financial inclusion 
 
I think I've already said this a couple of times, but it's so important I'll tell you a third time! The key to 
success for financial inclusion is good cooperation between all stakeholders. Across the public and 
private sector. A sophisticated vision and strategy can help create support and unite stakeholders. We 
have learned that the most successful initiatives are closely in tune with the country's culture. 
Initiatives need to offer public and private stakeholders the chance to join forces and discuss their 
vision, strategy and activities. And we can learn from each other in international fora and at seminars 
like this one in Amsterdam. 
 
 
Conclusion  
 
I've described how digitisation can be an important driver in taking financial inclusion to the next level. 
I've said that good access to the payments system and financial services is not something that can be 
taken for granted. Not even in a developed economy like the Netherlands. Where almost everyone has 
a bank account. The digital revolution will continue to transform our world. We must not let the most 
vulnerable groups in our society get left behind. So they can still enjoy access to finance.  
 
I'm sure you'll agree that this is our moral duty. By stimulating good cooperation between all 
stakeholders, and by doing all of this we move one step closer to a world in which the SDGs have been 
achieved! 
 
 
Thank you very much for listening.  
 
7 
 
