Per  Callesen:  The  role  of  financing  and  regulation  amid  broader
policies to mitigate climate change
Speech by Mr Per Callesen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Green Climate
Fund's 2019 Private Investment for Climate Conference, Seoul, 8 October 2019.
 Thank you for the invitation. It is good to be back at the GCF. 2011–2014, I served as a member
of  the  Transitional  Committee  and  the  Board.  Today,  I  will  focus  on  the  role  of  financing  and
regulators in the context of broader policies to mitigate and adapt to man-made climate change. 
This past year has seen stronger engagement in climate issues around the world. This is most
welcome.  There  has  been  better  engagement  by  the  financial  industry.  Central  bankers  and
financial  regulators  are  now  involved  in  addressing  climate-related  financial  risks.  The  climate
challenge is so large that all players in our economies, all areas of policy, and all countries in the
world will have to deliver and push in the same direction.
We  need  to  be  aware  of  the  context.  Others  are  better  placed  to  consider  developments  in
emissions and the setting of targets for future reductions. My perspective is the policies needed
to meet objectives. 
I remember the early 1990s, almost thirty years ago. We understood the climate impact of CO2
emissions, and we began assessing how economic scenarios affected emissions. The policy
implication was pretty clear: Announce a credible path of gradually increasing carbon pricing to
set expectations right without affecting already undertaken investments by firms and households
too much. That has not happened. 
An appropriate pricing of fossil fuels, in line with the true costs of CO2 emissions, would still be
the  most  efficient  driver  of  the  needed  climate-friendly  innovation,  investment  and  behavioural
change of billions of people and hundreds of millions of firms. That behavioural change is needed
to incentivise the rolling out of existing and upcoming technologies. We need more information on
policies setting emissions, country by country. But we know that the current average direct global
price  of  carbon  is  2  USD  per  ton,  approximately  zero.  Only  about  20  per  cent  of  global
greenhouse gas emissions are covered by a carbon price. Only a fraction hereof is priced at
levels consistent with the Paris Agreement. The price of most CO2-intensive products, such as
oil, gas and electricity, etc., is in some cases raised by close proxies of direct carbon pricing,
such as fuel taxes. In other cases, the price of such products is reduced by fossil fuel subsidies.
Likely, the net impact of taxes and subsidies is close to zero. 
The absence of any significant carbon pricing has implications. First, it will be significantly more
difficult to cut emissions in the absence of spectacular technological advances, which we yet
have to see. Second, in addition to the cost implied by physical effects of climate change – such
as  flooding  and  droughts  –  the  economic  cost  of  mitigation  will  be  substantially  higher  than  if
driven by price incentives. Regulated energy and emission standards have a significant potential,
but are less efficient. Third, we have to hope, if we do not promote, that technological advances
have a climate-friendly bias. This may well have been the case in recent years as the costs of
renewable energy and energy savings have come down substantially and are now competitive.
But many of us underestimated the technological advances also taking place in the extraction of
fossil fuels, such as shale gas and deep water drilling. 
As regards financing, climate-friendly investments would have been more attractive in a world of
appropriate pricing and regulation of carbon. The absence of such policy action implies that we
cannot expect financing to deliver as much as we would like. Attracting financing on a large scale
requires a strong enabling environment. Investors seek the highest risk-adjusted return. But the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  sector  and  financial  authorities  can  and  should  nevertheless  complement  the  fight
against climate change, also with current public policy settings. 
What are the opportunities from the financial sector perspective?  First, lots of profitable climate-
friendly  investment  projects  exist  already.  Some  on  a  large  scale.  In  my  country  of  origin,
Denmark,  we  have  numerous  encouraging  examples  of  companies  and  institutional  investors
contributing to and benefiting from the transition to a low-carbon economy – both at home and
abroad. Others on a small scale; simple efforts to save energy in households and firms. Note
that  the  low  interest  rate  environment  has  shifted  the  investment  balance  in  favour  of  upfront
efficient capital and against outlays for energy year after year. Second, the financial sector has to
care about reputational risks. It will get questions from customers and the  media. Banks begin to
check  companies  for  their  ESG  strategies  before  lending,  out  of  concern  for  both  risks  and
reputation.  Third,  the  financial  sector  should  prepare  for  potentially  stronger    climate-friendly
policies set by governments down the line. 
Obvious and profitable climate-friendly investment needs often exist in areas of the world with
difficult  physical,  economic  or  regulatory  environments.  Such  barriers  can  be  reduced  with
technical  assistance.  These  are  areas  where  also  the  GCF  and  other  international  financing
institutions can have an important positive impact. I am encouraged by what I have learnt about
the GCF activities since I left in 2014, and share the strong plea that all countries scale up their
support for the GCF.
What is the role of central banks and financial regulators as regards climate change issues? The
Network  for  Greening  the  Financial  System,  NGFS,  is  a  recognition  of  the  need  for  global
collective leadership and co-ordinated action to effectively mitigate and adapt to climate change.
Central banks and financial supervisors take part, and my central bank is a member. We are in
particular  aiming  to  improve  our  understanding  of  how  climate-related  risks  may  impact  the
financial system and the wider economy. Many questions have yet to be answered, but we are
working  to  map  the  implications  of  climate  change  to  better  safeguard  the  financial  system
against these risks. 
Climate-related risks are unlikely to be sufficiently reflected in financial balance sheets and asset
prices.  This  is  the  case  for  both  physical  and  transitional  risks.  Physical  risks  relate  to  for
example droughts or flooding, while transitional risks arise from policy changes and technological
advances which may inter alia shift the prices of assets, leaving some stranded. By nature, the
impact of transition risks will increase, the more abrupt the transition to a low-carbon economy
takes place. The longer we delay, and we are very late by now, the more abrupt these changes
will  have  to  be.  The  more  abrupt  change,  the  more  pronounced  the  potential  effect  on  the
financial  system.  Risks  should  be  addressed  prudently  from  a  financial  stability  perspective.
Neither green nor brown investments and loans should receive special treatment which would
undermine the credibility of risk weights. Rather, we should ensure that exposure to actual risks
from  climate  change  and  the  necessary  climate-friendly  economic  restructuring  is  correctly
accounted  for.  This  would  also  send  a  strong  signal  to  those  who  seek  finance  for  their
activities. 
In conclusion, none of us – neither in the public nor private sector – can afford to overlook the
risks associated with climate change as well as the need for immediate and effective policies
and  action.  The  financial  sector  can  supplement  fiscal  and  energy  policies  to  fight  climate
change. But be careful that those who set fiscal and energy policies do not come to think that
financial institutions, central banks and supervisors can substitute for their efforts. We all have to
push  and  pull  in  the  same  direction.  Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  am  looking  forward  to
engaging with all of you at this conference. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
