 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Introductory address 
at the presentation of the Inflation Report – 
November 2019  
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
          Belgrade, 14 November 2019 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the November Inflation Report. 
Since our last gathering in August, inflation has remained low and stable, favourable fiscal trends have 
continued,  while  economic,  investment  and  export  activity  gathered  momentum.  Stepped  up 
investment deserves a special note, as it pushed GDP growth in Q3 beyond our expectations, prompting 
an  upward  revision  of  the  2019  growth  forecast  –  to  3.6%,  instead  of  the  previous  3.5%.  Given  that 
domestic factors successfully compensate for the weaker external demand, favourable macroeconomic 
trends are expected to continue in the period ahead.  
At  this  press  conference  we  will  present  our  view  of  the  current  and  expected  macroeconomic 
developments. 
Inflation  is  low and  stable  for the  sixth  consecutive  year  and is  expected  to  remain  so  in the  period 
ahead. 
Same as in the neighbouring countries, lower contributions of unprocessed food and energy prices set 
the y-o-y inflation in Serbia on a downward path over the past months. In October, inflation measured 
1.0%  y-o-y.  Since  the  start  of  the  year,  core  inflation  has  hovered  between  1.1%  and  1.5%  y-o-y, 
suggesting  that  low  inflationary  pressures  are of  a more  permanent  nature, despite  positive  trends  in 
the labour market.  
According  to  our  November  projection,  inflation  will  continue  to  move  at  low  levels  in  the  coming 
period,  as  confirmed  by the  inflation expectations of  financial  and  corporate  sectors  for one  and  two 
years ahead.  
  As  a  result  of  the  preserved  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  and  improved  business 
environment, investment remains the key factor of economic acceleration. 
Economic activity has been on the rise for twenty quarters in a row. In Q3 2019, GDP growth sped up 
to  4.7%  relative  to  the  same  period  the  year  before.  Given  that  external  demand  slowed  down 
additionally, such growth acceleration is a signal of the rising contribution of domestic factors. The key 
factor  of  economic  acceleration  in  Q3,  on  the  production  side,  was  the  construction  sector  whose 
growth  stepped  up  to  around  35%  y-o-y  owing  to  intensified  works  on  the  transport  and  energy 
infrastructure.  Faster  economic  growth  was  enabled  by  the  activation  of  earlier  investment,  which 
helped the manufacturing exports to pick up from 5% in the first half of the year to almost 9% in Q3. 
Continued implementation of infrastructure projects, further improvement in the business environment 
1 
and  favourable  terms  of  financing  gave  an  additional  impetus  to  vigorous  economic  growth. 
Improvement in the business environment is also confirmed by Serbia’s progress on the World Bank’s 
latest Doing Business list, by four notches, to the 44th position among 190 countries.  
In  view  of  the  results  achieved,  we  have  revised  our  GDP  growth  forecast  for  this  year  from  3.5%  to 
3.6%, though there is a realistic possibility that growth might turn out even higher. Growth is expected 
to pick up further to around 4% in 2020 and maintain similar dynamics in the medium term, driven by 
investment, exports and sustainably rising personal consumption.  
Consumption growth is also aided by the higher employment, owing to which the unemployment rate 
dropped to 10.3%, according to the latest available data. Taking into account the upward trend in labour 
market  participation,  the  data  on  formal  employment  gains,  good  agricultural  season  and  robust 
construction growth, we estimate that in Q3 the unemployment rate could edge down to a single-digit 
level. 
  Exports have stepped up, despite slackening external demand. Capital inflows to Serbia remain high.  
In  the  first  nine  months  of  2019,  Serbia’s  goods  and  services  exports  went  up  by  10.9%,  аnd  those 
destined to the EU by 10.6% compared to the same period last year. Thus,  the overall export growth 
rate stepped up compared to 2018, coming close to the import growth rate (11.6% y-o-y). Import  
dynamics is determined primarily by the investment cycle at home and the consequently higher needs 
for  equipment  and  intermediate  goods,  which  is  connected  with  the  high  FDI  inflow  and  partly  also 
fuelled by the rising consumer demand. On those grounds, the current account deficit will expand in the 
  2 
short  run,  but  given  that  the  imported  equipment  continuously  increases  export  capacities  of  the 
Serbian economy, it is reasonable to expect that the deficit will decrease in the medium-run. Since the 
start  of  the  year  FDI  inflow  has  reached  EUR  2.9  bn,  covering,  in  net  amount,  the  current  account 
deficit for the fifth year in a row. Together with reduced internal and external imbalances, FX reserves, 
which reached the record EUR 13.5 bn at end-October, have additionally increased the resilience of our 
economy to potential adverse developments in the international environment. 
Favourable  macroeconomic  landscape  is  crowned  by  the  elimination  of  fiscal  imbalances,  thanks  to 
the full coordination of monetary and fiscal policy measures.  
As the previous two years, 2019 has seen a fiscal surplus which on consolidated level reached 0.9% of 
GDP concluding with September. Central government public debt was reduced additionally, to 52.0% 
of GDP at end-September.  
It  is  important  to  note  that  these  results  have  been  achieved  in  conditions  of  significantly  higher 
government capital expenditure, as well as increased outlays for wages and pensions, which contribute 
to economic growth while causing no major inflationary pressures. General government deficit planned 
for this year is 0.5% of GDP, which is also a medium-term target that will keep the public debt-to-GDP 
ratio  on  a  downward  path.  No  less  importantly,  the  currency  and  refinancing  risks  are  also  reduced, 
supported by the last week’s successful reissue of the ten-year eurobond in the international financial 
market. The bond was sold at the lowest rate of return so far – 1.25%, which are the terms enjoyed by 
countries with investment grade rating. The funds raised are intended exclusively for the repayment of 
the  earlier  expensive  dollar  debt,  which  means  that  this  issue  does  not  increase  public  debt,  while  it 
does cut down interest expenses.   
   By lowering the policy rate, we have provided further support to credit and economic activity.  
Additionally  weakened  inflationary  pressures,  reduced  internal  and  external  imbalances  and  the 
consequently  strengthened  resilience  of  our  economy  to  potential  negative  impacts  from  the 
international  environment,  as  well  as  the  favourable  macroeconomic  outlook,  have  created  room  for 
further monetary policy easing.  In November, the key policy rate was again cut by 25 basis points, to 
2.25%.  Apart  from  domestic  factors,  this  decision  was  also  motivated  by  the  monetary  policy 
accommodation  of  leading  central  banks,  against  the  background  of  a  slowdown  in  global  trade  and 
economic  growth.  We  expect  that  the  NBS’s  monetary  policy  easing  will,  as  so  far,  lead  to  a  fall  in 
interest rates in the money and credit markets.  
3 
  Strong credit growth at favourable conditions gives significant support to economic growth.  
Favourable  financial  conditions  in  the  domestic  market  are  also  evidenced  by  the  lending  interest 
rates,  which  in  the  dinar  market  fully  mirrored  the  NBS’s  monetary  policy  easing.  As  for  the  euro-
indexed  loans,  favourable  terms  of  financing  were  supported  by  the  lower  interest  rates  in  the 
European money market and, to a greater extent, also by the decline in Serbia’s risk premium. What I 
want to emphasize particularly is that Serbia’s risk premium is now among the lowest in the region and 
that its sharp fall was largely driven by domestic factors. In the past months, the risk premium dropped 
several times, to even below 50 basis points, while on 12 November it touched its lowest value of 34 
basis  points.  I  would  further  like  to  point  out  that  Serbia  is  only  a  step  away  from  investment  grade, 
characteristic of economies offering high security of investment, which not only confirms the economic 
progress  and  the  results  achieved,  but  also  contributes  to  further  improvement  of  financing  and 
investment conditions in Serbia.  
A decrease  in interest rates, coupled with economic growth and positive  trends in the labour market, 
gives rise to lending. The structure of lending is favourable in terms of support to sustainable economic 
growth,  as  evidenced  by  a  significant  rise  in  corporate  investment  loans  and  a  rebound  in  household 
housing loans, with a mild deceleration in the growth of loans intended for consumption. While lending 
has  recorded  two-digit  y-o-y  growth  rates,  loans  have  a  stable  share  in  GDP,  posing  no  risk  to  either 
price or financial stability.  The reduction in the share of NPLs in total loans to 4.7% has created room for 
further credit growth and at the same time reinforced financial stability.    
  4 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
Allow  me  to  round  off  this  part  of  the  conference  by  concluding  that  the  results  achieved  have  been 
enabled  by  the  full  coordination  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  measures,  which  has  strengthened  the 
credibility  of  economic  policy.  This  credibility  is  confirmed  by  the  already  mentioned  credit  rating 
upgrade, low risk premium, more favourable position of Serbia in the international financial market, as 
well  as  by  the  high  FDI  inflow.  Such  approach  to  the  conduct  of  economic  policy  has  ensured  an 
adequate response to the challenges from the international environment which the country faced in the 
past and will surely face going forward.  In the period ahead, you can count on our full commitment to 
the  safeguarding  of  the  achieved  stability  which,  along  with  further  implementation  of  structural 
reforms, will boost the competitiveness of our economy, as well as employment and the living standard 
of our citizens.   
I will now  hand over to my colleagues  from the Economic Research and Statistics  Department  to give 
you a detailed account of our latest macroeconomic projections. 
 5 
