       October  20,  2019 
Bank  of  Japan 
日 
   For Sustainable Development of Emerging Economies 
 Speech at the 2019 Global Meeting of   
the Emerging Markets Forum 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 I. Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  give  a  speech  at  the  Emerging  Markets 
Forum today. 
 The  situation  surrounding  emerging  economies  has  been  changing  rapidly.  The  global 
economy  has  recently  been  slowing  down  and  there  are  various  downside  risks,  ranging 
from trade tensions to geopolitical risks. 
 At this difficult point in time, it is critically important for the global economy that emerging 
economies achieve sustainable growth. As you well know, after the global financial crisis, 
the  growth  of  emerging  economies  contributed  significantly  to  the  recovery  of  the  world 
economy. Over 70 percent of the recovery in the global economy since 2009  is due to the 
contribution of emerging economies. It would not be too much to say that the performance 
of emerging economies is key to the global economy. 
 From  the  medium-  to  long-term  perspective,  there  have  been  constant  structural  changes, 
including  further  globalization,  advances  in  digital  technologies,  and  climate  change.  For 
emerging economies to achieve sustainable growth, it is essential to have a long-term vision 
for the economy and society, and to navigate the transition process successfully. Making use 
of the fruits of the G20 meetings under Japan's presidency this year, I would like to take up 
three topics today that are particularly important to the medium- to long-term development 
of  emerging  economies.  Namely,  promoting  financial  inclusion,  achieving  sustainable 
growth, and addressing the prospective aging of the population. 
 II. Issues for the Medium- to Long-Term Development of Emerging Economies 
A. Promoting Financial Inclusion 
The first topic I would like to consider is the promotion of financial inclusion. Although the 
definition of financial inclusion varies, it is commonly taken to mean that "households and 
businesses  have  access  to  appropriate  financial  services  and  are  able  to  use  them 
effectively."  In  emerging  countries,  a  significant  portion  of  the  population  does  not  have 
enough access to financial services, especially people on low incomes and those who live in 
remote islands and mountainous regions. According to a report by the World Bank, about 40 
 1 
 percent  of  the  adult  population  in  emerging  countries  does  not  have  a  bank account.1  For 
those  people  to  obtain  access  to  appropriate  financial  services  would  accelerate  the 
reduction of poverty and inequality. 
 Enhancing financial inclusion  would not only help alleviate  poverty and inequality, it also 
has  huge  potential  in  promoting  economic  growth.  Many  researchers  and  policy  makers 
argue  that  financial  inclusion  would  boost  economic  growth.2  For  example,  borrowing 
from financial institutions allows a firm to invest more in R&D and capacity expansion than 
would  be  possible  using  only  its  cash  reserves.  Housing  loans  and  credit  cards  enable 
households to consume and invest more than the amount of cash at hand. Savings in a bank 
account  generate  interest income.  Access  to  financial  services  such as  these leads to more 
efficient  business  development  and  active  consumption,  thereby  promoting  overall 
economic growth of the country. 
 Financial  inclusion  would  also  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy. 
Regarding monetary policy, as most of the interest rates of borrowings and savings by firms 
and  individuals  are  based  on  policy  rates,  central  banks  can  affect  their  behavior  by 
changing  policy  rates.  This  would  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  and  help 
smooth  the  economic  cycle  in  the  long  run.  Enhanced  access  to  financial  services  would 
also  increase  the  effectiveness  of  fiscal  policy.  For  example,  ensuring  a  means  to  transfer 
money to every individual would allow policy makers to design subsidization programs that 
are  targeted  at  a  specific  segment  of  society.  This  would  make  possible  a  finer-tuned 
redistribution policy. In addition, tax collection would become more effective.   
 In  advancing  financial  inclusion,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  both  "hard"  and  "soft" 
infrastructures.  Hard  infrastructures  typically  include  telecommunications,  such  as  the 
internet  and  mobile  phones.  Soft  infrastructure  includes  for  example  the  active  use  of 
Fintech, which, in addition to improving financial literacy, would be effective in broadening 
the range of financial services available. In the short run, the introduction of state-of-the-art 
                                                   
1  Asli Demirgüç-Kunt et al., "The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and 
Fintech Revolution," World Bank Group (2018). 
2  For example, see: Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, "Finance, Inequality and 
the Poor," Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 12 (1), pp. 27-49 (2007). 
 2 
 Fintech  might  lead  to  so-called  leapfrogging.  This  refers  to  the  phenomenon  where  the 
convenience  of  services  is  drastically  enhanced  by  taking  advantage  of  new  technologies 
even  before  services  based  on  older  technologies  have  become  entrenched.  For  example, 
mobile  payments  spread  rapidly  in  China  in  just  a  few  years.  Providing  payment  services 
via mobile phone does not require conventional physical infrastructure such as branch and 
ATM  networks  that  were  considered  indispensable  in  providing  broad  access  to  financial 
services. China not only enjoys improved access to banking services but has also saved on 
the cost of building the physical infrastructure required for traditional banking. 
 That  said,  it  should  be  noted  that  these  benefits  come  with  new  risks.  For  example, 
large-scale system problems and cyber-attacks can negatively affect corporate management 
and the daily lives of individuals. Privacy protection is important, and we should be mindful 
that these new technologies might be used for money laundering and tax evasion. Moreover, 
policy  makers  should  consider  carefully  the  possible  impact  of  the  broader  use  of  digital 
technologies on financial stability and the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
 Authorities  should  endeavor  to  maximize  the  benefits  of  new  technologies  while 
appropriately  addressing  the  accompanying  risks,  through  close  cooperation,  both 
domestically and internationally. 
 B. Achieving Sustainable Growth 
The second topic is the achievement of sustainable growth. Since the industrial revolution, 
the global economy has undergone remarkable development. At the same time, however, a 
number of issues have emerged that require international cooperation to solve, such as those 
related to poverty, inequality and the environment. In 2015, the United Nations adopted the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs),  a  set  of  goals  to  be  achieved  by  2030  targeting 
poverty, the environment, and other issues. 
 Here,  I  would  like  to  provide  two  observations  on  social  and  environmental  issues  in 
relation to achieving sustainable growth. 
 First, the enormous effort and cost involved in dealing with social and environmental issues 
 3 
 is  justified  by  the  expected  returns.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  trade-off  between  solving 
social  and  environmental  issues  and  achieving  economic  growth.  Rather,  they  are 
complementary to each other. 
 For example, significant progress has recently been made in reducing poverty. According to 
the  World  Bank,  in  1981,  more  than  40  percent  of  the  world's  population  was  living  in 
extreme poverty, but the figure has fallen to around 10 percent  in 2019.3  While economic 
growth  leads  to  a  decline  in  the  poverty  rate,  the  reduction  of  poverty  and  the  resulting 
inclusive  growth  will  in  turn  enhance  economic  growth,  leading  to  a  further  reduction  in 
poverty.  The  relationship  between  economic  development  and  poverty  reduction  can  be 
regarded as mutually-reinforcing. 
 Consensus  has  not  yet  been  reached  on  the  causal  relationship  between  income  disparity 
and  growth  rate  in  economies  with  a  low  poverty  rate,  as  much  theoretical  and  empirical 
research shows differing results.4  That said, I believe an increase in the number of people 
who are given the opportunity for higher education and to learn advanced skills would lead 
to an accumulation of human capital, positively affecting economic growth from the supply 
side. With the digitalization of the economy, human capital becomes more important as the 
industrial structure changes over time, shifting from labor-intensive to capital-intensive, and 
eventually to knowledge-intensive. Moreover, the promotion of financial inclusion, which I 
mentioned earlier, and a more stable political and social situation through the  reduction of 
inequality would surely have a positive impact on economic growth by attracting business 
investment, and through stabilizing macroeconomic conditions more generally. 
 Environmental  problems  are,  needless  to  say,  a  common  threat  to  both  advanced  and 
emerging  countries.  Climate change  has  already  affected  emerging  economies  through  the 
increase in extreme weather events and natural disasters such as storms, floods, and drought. 
According  to  an  estimate  by  the  United  Nations,  the  world  population  is  expected  to 
                                                   
3  World Bank Group, "September 2019 PovcalNet Update." 
4  Some  researchers  argue  that  it  is  not  inequality  of  income,  but  inequality  of  opportunity  that 
matters for economic growth. For details,  see:  Shekhar Aiyar and  Christian Ebeke, "Inequality of 
Opportunity,  Inequality  of  Income  and  Economic  Growth."  IMF  Working  Paper  No.  19/34, 
International Monetary Fund (2019). 
 4 
 increase by 2 billion in 30 years, reaching 9.7 billion by 2050. Based on this estimate, poor 
harvests and water shortages caused by climate change would become even more serious.5 
 The effects of climate change have been studied from a variety of perspectives. For example, 
there is a wealth of research on the relationship between temperature and labor productivity. 
One  study  shows  that  an  increase  in  temperature  of  1  degree  Celsius  from  25  degrees 
reduces  work  performance  by  2  percent.6  Does  this  tally  with  your  own  experience?   
There  is  also  a  large  body  of  research concerning the  effects  of  climate  change  on  energy 
demand, public health, and social stability, among other things.7 
 My point is that there is a strong link between resolving social and environmental issues and 
macroeconomic  growth,  and  we  should  tackle  these  challenges  in  a  proactive  manner,  not 
only  to  meet  the  demands  of  society  but  also  to  enhance  medium-  to  long-term  economic 
growth. 
 The  second  observation  is  that  we  should  use  the  markets  and  incentive  mechanisms  to 
pursue sustainable growth. For example, when making investment decisions, investors have 
increasingly been taking into account environmental, social, and governance (ESG) criteria, 
alongside purely financial factors. This trend has been triggered in part by the Principles for 
Responsible Investment initiative supported by the United Nations. This initiative calls for 
investors  to  consider  ESG  factors  in  investment  decisions  while  fulfilling  their  fiduciary 
responsibilities. Although the main target of ESG investing was initially equities, it has been 
expanding to include also bonds and loans. In Europe and China especially, there has been a 
dramatic  increase  in  the  issuance  of  so-called  green  bonds,  to  finance  projects  aimed  at 
addressing  environmental  problems.  These  moves  are  expected 
to 
lead 
to 
environment-related innovation in such areas as the use of renewable energy. 
                                                    
5  United Nations, "World Population Prospects: 2019 Revision." 
6  Olli  Seppänen,  William  J.  Fisk,  and  David  Faulkner,  "Cost  Benefit  Analysis  of  the  Night-Time 
Ventilative Cooling in Office Building." (2003),   
https://escholarship.org/content/qt3j82f642/qt3j82f642.pdf?t=li4xtt 
7  Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken, "What Do We Learn from the Weather? 
The New Climate-Economy Literature." Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740-798 (2014). 
 5 
 Of  course,  appropriate  institutional  arrangements  and  guidance  by  the  authorities  are 
essential  to  maximize  the  potential  of  the  markets  and  incentive  mechanisms  to  address 
these  issues.  For  example,  governments  and  public  institutions  should  continue  to  engage 
actively in long-term and large-scale infrastructure investment, as well as in establishing the 
regulatory  systems  necessary  to  deal  with  environmental  issues.  Initiatives  to  ensure  the 
smooth  functioning  of  market  mechanisms  are  also  important,  including  establishing 
frameworks  for  the  standardization  of  ESG  investments.  Of  course  there  are  many  issues 
which cannot be dealt with solely by market mechanisms, including international assistance 
for  very  low-income  countries  and  direct  support  for  those  who  are  left  behind  in 
developing countries. 
 C. Addressing the Prospective Population Aging 
The  third  topic  is  the  prospective  aging  of  the  population.  "Aging  and  its  policy 
implications" has been adopted as one of the G20 priorities under Japan's presidency. You 
may  perhaps  think  that  aging  is  not  an  imminent  policy  issue  in  your  country.  In  many 
emerging countries, the working age population is expected to grow for a while. However, 
once  the  birthrate  declines  and  the  size  of  the  working  age  population  begins  to  decrease, 
the  shape  of  the  demographic  pyramid  could  change  drastically  within  a  timeframe  of 
perhaps 20 to 30 years. Let us take Japan's case as an example. In 1970, about 10 workers 
supported  one  elderly  person.  The  figure  had  decreased  to  4  workers  in  2000,  and  2.3 
workers  in  2015.  The  decrease  in  birthrate  and  the  aging  of  the  population  occurs  over  a 
shorter period and at a faster pace than you might expect.8 
 The good news about demographic change is that we can forecast prospective changes well 
in advance and with a certain degree of accuracy. In addition, emerging countries can learn 
from the precedents set in those advanced countries that are already experiencing problems 
related to an aging population. It is not too early to start preparing for prospective aging. 
 Although population aging has a wide range of economic implications, I would like to focus 
today  on  one  of  the  main  issues  associated  with  aging,  the  pension  system,  by  reviewing 
                                                   
8  National Institute of Population and Social Security Research, "Population Projections for Japan." 
(2017) 
 6 
 Japan's experience. The pension system is at the core of the social security system. As the 
pension system has a significant impact on people's lives, careful and detailed consideration 
is  necessary  before  implementing  reforms.  For  over  20  years  in  Japan,  we  have  been 
discussing  various  issues,  including  how  to  secure  the  financial  resources  necessary  to 
support the pension system, and have made steady progress with reforms.   
 The  Japanese  pension  system  is  largely  based  on  the  so-called  pay-as-you-go  scheme, 
where  benefits  for  the  elderly  are  paid  out  of  premiums  collected  from  the  contemporary 
working age population. Therefore, the aging of the population demands a regular review of 
the balance between premiums, benefits and government subsidies. After long and intensive 
discussion, a number of reforms have been adopted, including a raise in the pension age and 
an increase in the subsidy from the  government. A mechanism called the "macroeconomic 
slide" has also been introduced, which automatically adjusts the amount of pension benefit 
by taking into account changes in the number of people insured and average life expectancy. 
At  least  once every  five  years,  the  government  must  carry  out  a  comprehensive  review  of 
the financial conditions of the pension system, including its long-term prospects. 
 The aging of the population has huge implications not only for the pension system but also 
for  public  finances  in  general.  Expenditure  on  health  and  elderly  care  has  increased 
significantly in Japan. The proportion of social security expenses to total annual expenditure 
has soared from around 14 percent in 1970 to around 35 percent at present. Maintaining the 
credibility  of  public  finance  by  ensuring  medium-  to  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  is 
essential. To this end, planning and reviewing the social security and tax system so that they 
can adapt to demographic changes is critically important. 
 Maintaining  economic  vitality  amid  an  aging  and  shrinking  population  is  also  a  critical 
issue. From a macroeconomic perspective, labor participation and labor productivity need to 
be increased. Labor participation of the elderly and women has risen significantly in Japan 
over the past several years, helping to support economic growth. Japanese society has come 
to  accept  a  greater  diversity  of  work  styles,  better  suited  to  individual  circumstances, 
particularly for families with small children. Faced with serious labor shortages, firms have 
been making labor-saving investments, using information and communication technologies 
 7 
 and artificial intelligence to offset the shortfall in labor. In terms of industrial structure, the 
aging  of  society  can  induce  the  growth  of  new  industries,  creating  jobs  and  spurring 
innovation. Medical, health, and nursing care are prime examples. As aging is a global trend, 
industries  providing  elderly  care  services  and  support  have  a  good  opportunity  for  rapid 
growth.  Policy  makers  also  have  an important  role to  play  in  facilitating  adaptation  to  the 
changing business environment. 
 Lastly,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  aging  of  the  population  itself  is  by  no  means  a 
negative thing. The proportion of the elderly to the total population is around 30 percent in 
Japan  at  present.9  With  improvements  in  living  conditions  and  the  progress  of  medical 
technology,  the  number  of  healthy  and  active  elderly  has  been  steadily  increasing.  Let me 
give you an example of an elderly person who made a significant contribution to the world. 
The  Italian  Renaissance  sculptor,  Michelangelo,  worked  as  chief  architect  in  the 
refurbishment of Saint Peter's Basilica when he was 74 years old, coincidentally, the same 
age as I am at present. Aging can enrich our lives, and social systems should be designed so 
that the richness of aging can be enjoyed to its fullest. 
 III. Concluding Remarks 
I  have  talked  today  about  the  issues  to  be  addressed  for  sustainable  growth  in  emerging 
economies. As the issues are wide-ranging, it is no easy task to deal appropriately with all 
of  them.  However, emerging  countries  do have  a  so-called  latecomers'  advantage  in  being 
able to benefit from the leapfrogging I mentioned earlier. By making use of advanced digital 
technologies,  emerging  countries  can  skip  investment  in  the  infrastructures  that  have 
already become  obsolete in advanced economies. And when it comes to population aging, 
they  can  learn  from  the  experience  and  mistakes  of  advanced  economies.  I  believe  that 
emerging economies will make steady progress in overcoming difficulties and will be able 
to achieve sustainable and balanced development. 
 Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                   
9  Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Demographics of Japan." 
 8 
