 13.12.2019 
 Session: “Central banks, financial inclusion and digitalization: harnessing 
technology for inclusive growth” 
Conference “Financial integration and inclusive development: A view from the 
Mediterranean Countries”/Banco de España e Instituto del Mediterráneo (IEMed) 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
    Good morning. 
It is a privilege for me to chair this panel on the importance of financial inclusion and how 
digitalisation can contribute to it. It’s all the more a privilege given that the panel includes 
governors from four countries with broad experience in promoting financial inclusion, where 
significant initiatives in this area have been launched with the central bank taking the lead.  
Access to financial services continues to be a primary problem globally. On the latest World 
Bank estimates, almost 1.7 billion adults do not have access to an account offering basic 
functionalities  and,  therefore,  they  are  excluded  from  basic  services  such  as  payments, 
credit and saving. This has obvious repercussions for economic and social development, 
as there is a positive correlation both with growth and employment1, and it is thus essential 
to understand the causes behind it. In this respect, most studies have highlighted the fact 
that, although there may in specific cases be voluntary factors relating mainly to cultural or 
religious aspects, the explanation for this lack of access to financial services is usually to 
be found in involuntary factors. These include most notably a lack of funds for saving, cost, 
distance  from  the  nearest  branch,  a  lack  of  education  and  the  absence  of  the  financial 
infrastructures needed to improve the availability of financial services.  
It  is  indeed  here  where  new  technologies  can  contribute  decisively  to  overcoming  or 
lowering these barriers. Technology can reduce many fixed costs, traditionally associated 
with the development of financial services, while providing for a greater adaptation of supply 
on  the  basis  of  each  society’s  idiosyncratic  characteristics.  Unsurprisingly,  then,  the 
technological proposals linked to financial inclusion hail from different areas. We can find 
them 
in 
telecommunications  corporations  and  in  the  large  technology  consortiums  known  as 
bigtech.  
fintech  companies, 
institutions, 
traditional 
the  new 
financial 
in 
in 
As to scope, one of the activities concentrating the bulk of the initiatives is payments. Thus, 
in the past decade we have seen so-called mobile money – i.e. transactional services offered 
mainly by mobile operators – become commonplace. Adding to these, more recently digital 
wallet  solutions  have  emerged  with  multiple  functionalities  and  specific  proposals  for 
international remittances. Aside from the progress in payment solutions, developments on 
intermediation markets are providing for improvements in the financing of those groups with 
a  greater  degree  of  financial  exclusion,  such  as  microenterprises  and  small  agricultural 
producers. 
However, these developments are not spontaneous or uniform from one country to another. 
The role of regulators and their policies are thus important, at least regarding two aspects: 
the  promotion  of  the  use  and  development  of  technology,  including  the  incorporation  of 
technological improvements into financial services provision; and the need to ensure that 
headway in financial inclusion does not impair consumer safeguards or financial stability. 
I would like to offer some brief thoughts on each of these two points. 
Promoting  the  use  and  development  of  new  technologies.  Logically,  developing 
technological  solutions  requires  suitable  telecommunications  infrastructures.  They  must 
provide widespread access to the Internet, including in rural areas, while seeking to improve 
digital  education  and  offer  safeguards  against  vulnerabilities  such  as  cyber  threats.  We 
should not forget that approximately two-thirds of the adult population without access to 
                                                                                              
1 See Cull et al (2014). 
2/3 
 banks  do  have  a  mobile  phone.  And,  as  the  World  Bank  points  out,  these  devices  are 
proving essential for improving accessibility to financial services. 
Moreover,  the  development  of  a  stable  institutional  framework  –  paving  the  way  for 
competition,  providing  legal  security  to  the  new  financial  proposals  and  ensuring  an 
appropriate  level  of  interoperability  –  is  vital  for  generating  the  necessary  confidence  in 
financial services. Also, aspects such as legal recognition of digital identification, the use of 
biometrics in identification and ease of access to public data in “Know your costumer” (KYC) 
procedures,  are  matters  the  different  tiers  of  government  can  push  and  which  catalyse 
significantly the progress in financial inclusion.  
Monitoring the risks inherent in financial innovation. Along with the aforementioned risks 
linked to cyber threats, financial innovation, in particular that aimed at the most vulnerable 
population segments, can cause situations of over-indebtedness, market abuse and fraud. 
This process must then be accompanied by financial education actions, the strengthening 
of  consumer  safeguard  measures  and  the  development  of  data  privacy  policies.  But  we 
should not lose sight of the speed at which these innovations develop. Such speed poses 
difficulties for setting regulations in place since, on many occasions, their implementation 
can  only  come  about  when  the  use  of  certain  practices  has  become  widespread  on  the 
market. Hence, the use of formulas such as sandboxes or  innovation hubs may help the 
regulators act more nimbly while creating an environment in which innovators can better 
anticipate regulatory trends. 
Lastly, and before giving way to the panellists, the true protagonists of this debate, I would 
mention  the  importance  of  international  coordination  and  cooperation.  Many  of  the 
challenges surrounding financial inclusion and the use of new technologies are common to 
all countries. This is why the role of organisations such as the IMF, with the Bali declaration, 
and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, with the Maya declaration, is pivotal to boosting the 
use  of  new  technologies  in  this  field.  We  should  also  not  forget  the  role  that  global 
companies such as the bigtech can play. Indeed, financial inclusion is one of the essential 
elements highlighted by Facebook in its proposal for a global means of payment, its so-
called  Libra.  In  view  of  such  initiatives,  with  a  worldwide  and  immediate  scope,  you  will 
agree with me that international coordination is not an option but an obligation. 
  3/3 
