   INAUGURAL INUA BIASHARA DAY 2019 AND LAUNCH OF STAWI 
Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge 
Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
Safari Park Hotel 
November 6, 2019 
 As Prepared for Delivery 
I am delighted to be here this morning at the Inaugural Inua Biashara Day 2019 
and the launch of the lending product Stawi. This is a momentous occasion for our 
banking sector that has come together for the first time to showcase what they are 
doing for the Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (MSMEs). I am grateful 
to Your Excellency for gracing this occasion but more importantly for consistently 
challenging the banking industry on financing MSMEs. Let me also commend all 
the banks, the Kenya Bankers Association, and the various Government agencies 
for putting together today’s event. 
 MSMEs are the backbone of Kenya’s economy, contributing about 28.4 percent of 
the Gross Domestic Product. The approximately 7 million MSMEs are 
concentrated in the manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and transport and 
storage sectors. The resilience of MSMEs has indeed been a key strength of 
Kenya’s economic growth in recent years. 
 Earlier this year, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) made a deliberate effort to go 
where the action is to understand the needs of the MSMEs. We met vibrant traders 
in Gikomba, agile mechanics on Ogopa Lane, Kariokor, traders in the bustling 
Kondele Market in Kisumu, and creative furniture traders on Ngong Road. All of 
them need finance that is convenient, accessible and preserves their dignity as they 
may not fit the conventional brick-and-mortar bank model. In short, they need 
‘anytime anywhere’ financial services that are aligned to the nature of their 
enterprises. 
 1 
 Following this listening tour, CBK used its convening power to bring banks to the 
table to provide a solution for MSMEs. I was pleased to see a consortium of five 
banks stepping up to the plate when we did a soft launch in May 2019. It is 
gratifying to note that many more additional banks have joined the initiative. 
 Stawi rides on technology and innovation to provide a cost effective ‘anytime 
anywhere’ credit product that is tailored to the needs of MSMEs. Most 
importantly, it aims at not just providing finance but also supporting them to 
enhance their credit worthiness, business skills and ultimately grow their 
businesses. The testimonies we have heard confirm the realization of the vision of 
shared prosperity. 
 Over the last few years, Kenyans have expressed concerns on what they perceived 
as the alienation of banks from meeting their needs. Today’s event and launch is 
proof that banks have heard the cry of Kenyans. Over the last three years, banks 
have reviewed their business models to put the customer at the center. MSME’s 
have not been left behind and the variety of products targeting this sector and 
exhibited here today is welcome. 
 Today is really just the beginning for banks in scaling up support to MSMEs. A lot 
more remains to be done, not just through finance but also through capacity 
building, enabling access to markets, promoting innovation and most importantly 
through creating an enabling business environment. 
 Feedback from MSMEs will also be essential for banks to calibrate their products. 
By effectively serving the MSME sector, banks will truly be working for and with 
Kenyans. With the advances in technology and innovations, this is the vision that 
the banking sector must achieve. 
 Thank you! 
 2 
