Supporting sustainable economic growth 
through financial stability policy 
Speech delivered to Citi Australia and New Zealand Investment Conference  
On 16 October 2019, in Sydney
By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor and General Manager of Financial 
Stability 
 2 
 Good morning everyone, 
 My thanks to Citi for the invitation for me to come here today and speak with you all - it’s a 
pleasure to be here.  
 Today I’m going to start by setting the scene to give you an understanding of where the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand is currently at in achieving both price and financial stability, 
and I’m also going to outline the risks that New Zealand is exposed to in a local and global 
environment.  
 Setting the scene 
 The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s purpose is to promote the prosperity and wellbeing of 
New Zealanders, and contribute to a sustainable and productive economy. For this speech I 
want to mostly focus on how we promote sustainability by delivering on our objectives: price 
stability, maximum sustainable employment, and financial stability, and the tools we apply to 
help keep the economy productive.  
 Over the past thirty years, we have seen economic volatility decline following the introduction 
of inflation targeting, with prices becoming more stable and remaining at relatively lower 
levels (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1:  The decline in inflation volatility during the inflation targeting era in New Zealand 
 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ calculations.  
     3 
  
 
Over this same period we have also seen improvements in economic growth, as well as less 
volatility in this growth (Figure 2).  
 Figure 2:  Quarterly real GDP growth before and during the inflation targeting era 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ calculations.  
 
With monetary policy maintaining price stability and supporting maximum sustainable 
 employment, other policies we have are aimed at maintaining financial stability. What we 
mean by ‘financial stability’ is having a financial system that can withstand severe, yet 
plausible, shocks and avoid financial crises. These crises can destabilise economic activity 
and severely impact business and household income. Indeed, evidence from a wide range of 
countries over many decades shows us that when crises do happen, they are immensely 
damaging and can have long-lasting effects.1  
 Usually our price stability and financial stability policies are complementary. However, the 
low interest rate world we live in complicates achieving both of our objectives, encouraging a 
build-up of leverage in the financial system. The persistent decline in long-term and short-
term interest rates has supported very high levels of private sector leverage.  
                                                            
1 See the discussion of economic and social costs in Bascand (2018) 
    4 
As shown in Figure 3 below, the credit to GDP ratio in New Zealand remains very close to 
that observed just prior to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).  
 Figure 3:  Declining interest rates and increasing debt levels 
  
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ calculations. 
 
 
 Household debt as a proportion of disposable income has risen from 60 percent in the early 
1990s to 166 percent across all households, and for households with mortgages, the 
increase is even larger (Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4:  Debt to disposable income ratio in New Zealand 
 
       5 
 Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ Household Assets and Liabilities Survey, RBNZ estimates. 
 
 
It’s important to remember that while extremely low interest rates have been commonplace 
in the developed world for over a decade now, New Zealand’s very low interest rate 
environment is a more recent phenomenon. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) only dipped 
below 2 percent (year average) in November 2016.  
 We know that some academic studies suggest that expansionary monetary conditions can 
encourage lower lending standards and higher levels of leverage in the financial system.2 
And, as we transition into this very low interest rate environment, we will continue to monitor 
such vulnerabilities in New Zealand. 
 We recognise that the risks globally are high, and New Zealand is particularly vulnerable to 
external  events.  Our  economy  is  quite small  -  less  than  a fifth  of the  size  of  the  Australian 
economy, and just like Australia, New Zealand is heavily reliant on commodity exports and is 
very open to financial capital flows. Commodity price movements in world markets determine 
the value of our key exports, as well as the price we pay for our imports, particularly those that 
are fuel-related. Monetary policy moves by foreign central banks may generate unfavourable 
fluctuations in our exchange rates.  
 However, as Figure 5 demonstrates, the New Zealand economy has responded much more 
than Australia to downswings in the global economy. In contrast to Australia, economic activity 
in  New  Zealand  contracted  during  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  late  1990s,  and  the  US  subprime 
mortgage crisis of the late 2000s that snowballed into the GFC. This is despite the fact that 
the  Australian  terms  of  trade  has  been  through  dramatic  escalations  and  downturns,  while 
New  Zealand’s  terms  of  trade  has  experienced  relatively  less  volatility  around  an  upward 
trending path (Figure 6). 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2 Some of the literature exploring this connection includes Neuenkirch and Nöckelb (2018), Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and Suarez (2017), 
Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro and Saurina (2014), and Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008). 
    6 
  
 
 
Figure 5: Economic activity in New Zealand and Australia in the inflation targeting era 
 
 
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ calculations. 
Note: The data has been normalised to 100 in 1990 Q1. 
 
In addition to the disruptions in the global economic environment, the New Zealand economy 
 is  occasionally  affected  by  weather-related  shocks,  such  as  droughts,  that  constrain  the 
agricultural sector. In the past, we have also suffered severe damage to our infrastructure due 
to earthquakes.  
 So when the Bank sets monetary and financial stability policy, it needs to balance concerns 
about these different- and sometimes conflicting - domestic and international influences. 
 Figure 6: The terms of trade in New Zealand and Australia in the inflation targeting era 
 
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ calculations. 
     7 
 Note: The data has been normalised to 100 in 1990 Q1. 
 
Mortgage lending in New Zealand  is dominated  by floating and short one to two-year fixed 
rate  mortgages  (Figure  7).  This  implies  that  the  changes  in  the  domestic  policy  rate  and 
international bank funding market rates pass through to the effective mortgage rates relatively 
quickly, and influence the demand for housing and house prices in New Zealand.  
 
Figure 7: Time to re-price on housing loans in New Zealand 
 
 
  
Source: RBNZ Bank Balance Sheet Survey, RBNZ Standard Statistical Return, RBNZ calculations. 
 
 
When interest rates are low, households can accommodate a higher level of debt for given 
incomes; though they remain susceptible to adverse macroeconomic shocks.3 For example, 
if  bank  funding  costs  escalate  due  to  distressed  offshore  funding  markets,  lending  rates  in 
New Zealand would rise, and households may find it hard to service debt.  
 On another front, elevated dairy prices encouraged investment in dairy farms, leading to high 
debt  levels in the agricultural sector.  It’s worth noting that agricultural debt  in New Zealand 
has increased from $5 billion in 1990 to $63 billion today. Two thirds of this debt is owed by 
dairy  farms. If  New  Zealand’s  agricultural  export  revenue fell  due to  a  weakening  of global 
                                                           
3 See also the Australian case in Ellis and Littrell (2017). 
    8 
 demand or a domestic drought, the contraction of economic activity in that sector could spill 
over to lower income and spending in the household sector, thereby increasing debt defaults. 
 That’s why maintaining financial stability in this highly vulnerable environment is challenging. 
Minor events appear manageable, but we need to be prepared for major shocks, and it is here 
that our financial stability policies are centred, including our proposals to increase bank capital 
requirements.  
 The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s approach to financial stability  
 Our approach to financial stability is dynamic, and we focus on building financial system 
resilience (Figure 8). We recently renewed our approach to financial stability4 to recognise 
that the financial system is constantly evolving, as are the risks and challenges. Our baseline 
settings are not set-and-forget, we adapt them as risks and the resilience of the financial 
system evolve. 
 
Figure 8: The Reserve Bank’s approach to financial stability 
 
 
 
Based on our understanding of the financial system, we can enhance resilience by 
 establishing rigorous baseline requirements and adapting them as necessary. Table 1 lists 
the range of prudential and macro-prudential instruments available to us. For example, we 
can increase capital buffers for banks, or we can tighten Loan-to-Value Ratios (LVRs) if risks 
related to household indebtedness are excessively heightened. We can also adjust liquidity 
requirements for banks to ensure they remain solvent.  
                                                            
4 See Bascand (2019) 
  
    9 
 As a central bank, it’s imperative that we have a full range of tools that we can use if needed 
to ensure the financial system remains stable.  
 
Table 1: The Reserve Bank’s prudential toolkit 
 
Depending on the situation, we choose the appropriate regulatory tool to address the 
identified risk to financial stability, bearing in mind efficiency costs, the level of effective self 
and market discipline, and the regulatory framework as a whole. We adapt tools in response 
to unsustainable booms in credit and asset prices in order to reduce the likelihood of crises.   
  But crisis prevention is by no means assured. As history tells us, crises come from 
unexpected sources and are hard to predict. So we need robust standards to maintain 
resilience. Minimum capital and liquidity requirements are essential tools for this purpose. 
We also need tools to manage the consequences if our financial institutions are unable to 
survive a period of stress or crisis – our crisis management regime that is under review as 
part of Phase 2 of the Review of the Reserve Bank Act.  
 Our holistic approach to macroeconomic and financial stability 
 As I mentioned earlier, the New Zealand economy is in a good space. Since the beginning of 
inflation targeting, macroeconomic volatility in general has declined. Inflation is just below the 
mid-point of the target band, and employment remains around its maximum sustainable level. 
But we are wary of potential challenges to macroeconomic management.  
     10 
 The OCR is currently set at 100 basis points, a historically low level in New Zealand, in order 
to  achieve  our  monetary  policy  objectives.  Lower  rates  still  may  be  needed  to  achieve  our 
inflation and maximum sustainable employment objectives. The Reserve Bank is undertaking 
further preparatory work on less conventional monetary policy tools5 that are available, in the 
event that the policy rate is pushed down to its effective lower bound. Novel monetary policy 
tools,  such  as  large  scale  asset  purchases  and  targeted  term  lending  that  have  been 
previously used in the United States and the United Kingdom, are tailored to support economic 
activity by strengthening credit growth. 
 
However, a highly stimulatory monetary policy stance may lead to  over-exuberant levels of 
credit growth, and as seen in empirical studies in the international literature, may lead to lower 
lending  standards.  If  looser  monitoring  standards  prevail  on  the  supply  of  credit,  the 
macroeconomic costs of a severe downturn may be amplified. Macroprudential policy can help 
to manage the movements in credit so as to ensure that macroeconomic booms and busts 
are not excessively volatile. 
 Our assessment of financial stability risks is more nuanced than debt levels per se.  We look 
at the distribution of debt as well as its growth rate, and the sustainability of the asset values 
it is attached to. While we are concerned about the levels of debt in parts of the household 
and agriculture sectors, there is scope for more borrowing and investment to take place in less 
leveraged areas. Our restrictions on high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) lending (one measure of 
high risk lending) are one tool we have that can moderate financial stability risks even while 
the stock of household debt is rising. 
 More capital is a key part of building New Zealand’s economic resilience 
 In December 2018, we proposed to increase bank capital requirements in New Zealand, to 
increase the overall resilience of the banking sector to economic shocks. We proposed that 
the capital framework should be set so that banks have sufficient capital to withstand a 1-in-
200 year event.  
 Some have questioned why we are proposing this increase in capital, given the perceived 
impacts it could have. So let me explain - first and foremost, from a societal point of view, 
setting capital requirements is a long-term game. The benefits of more capital essentially 
                                                           
5 Hawkesby (2019) 
    11 
 result from avoiding future economic and social costs that would arise from a financial crisis 
and resulting economic recession (Figure 9).   
 
Figure 9: A conceptual framework relating financial stability to economic output 
  
 
We targeted a high level of resilience to withstand severe shocks because the costs of 
severe crises are very high, while international evidence indicates that the costs of buying 
additional insurance are modest. Moreover, we would transition to this higher level of 
 resilience over time. 
 For shareholders, the increased equity funding may result in lower returns per dollar 
invested, but the flip side for them is a safer investment. Also, it is worth recalling that capital 
requirements aren’t like other regulations, in that they don’t create an ‘expense’ for banks. 
Indeed, in an accounting sense, interest expenses would reduce for the same level of 
funding. And as with most investments, less leveraged businesses earn lower but more 
stable returns. We anticipate the same for banks to an extent, and past history does indeed 
suggest there is a relationship (Figure 10).  
           12 
 
Figure 10: Return on Tier 1 Capital, and Tier 1 Capital to tangible assets (locally incorporated banks) 
 
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
9.00%
8.00%
7.00%
6.00%
5.00%
4.00%
3.00%
2.00%
1.00%
0.00%
Return on Tier 1 Capital
12 month average
Tier 1 Capital to Tangible Assets (RHS)
12 month average
Source: RBNZ GDS Survey Data, RBNZ calculations. 
 
 
Determining appropriate capital requirements is, of course, more than just counting the 
   benefits. The upsides must be balanced against the downside of higher interest rates. We’ve 
anticipated that there will be a 20 to 40 basis point increase in bank margins in the long term 
as a result of these proposals.6 While these are relatively small numbers, they will ultimately 
have an impact on investment and spending in the New Zealand economy.  
 Our approach from the outset has been to set capital requirements at a level where we can 
be confident that these costs are outweighed by the benefits of a safer financial system. 
 To calibrate our proposals for New Zealand, we drew on many pieces of analysis. These 
included international literature, stress test results and historical New Zealand data on bank 
losses and loan performance.  
 Currently we are reviewing all inputs and modelling assumptions, and carefully assessing 
submissions, before finalising the plans that will be announced in December. As well as the 
                                                           
6 Two of the External Experts, Dr James Cummings and Professor David Miles, suggest that these estimates may be on the higher side of 
what is plausible due to the cost of equity being overstated. The summary, as well as their reports, are available on the Capital Review 
page on the Reserve Bank’s website.  
    13 
 overall level of capital, we are also re-examining all other aspects of the Review, such as the 
quality of capital (capital instruments) and the transition path to the new requirements.  
 
A well-capitalised banking system also means that our banks will be able to 
access global funding markets, even in stressed conditions 
 
While higher levels of bank capital cannot stop economic fluctuations, it can help banks with 
even the more moderate downturns, not just the 1-in-200 year event we calibrate to. 
Research suggests that well-capitalised banks have easier access to funding than their more 
leveraged peers during turbulent times. 7 For the economy, this means a weakly capitalised 
banking system can undermine monetary policy responses to economic downturns as banks 
may struggle to pass through lower interest rates with their cheaper funding sources drying 
up.  
 Conversely, a well-capitalised banking system is less likely to face funding issues during 
these downturns and we would anticipate a much more orthodox response to monetary 
policy in the economy. Bank capital requirements also can have a more direct role in 
responding to these economic fluctuations through a counter-cyclical buffer. 
 Having a well-capitalised banking system in New Zealand, given we are a net importer of 
capital, also means that our banks – and the wider economy - will be able to continue to 
access global funding markets even in times of financial stress.  
 Of course, we are listening to what others are saying about our proposals. We’ve been 
consulting with the public and many of our stakeholders to fully understand the impacts they 
believe an increase to capital requirements will have. We’ve commissioned three 
internationally recognised experts to review the proposals, which have been published on 
our website. All of these views have been captured and are being considered, and if we’ve 
got it wrong, we’ll make adjustments to reflect that because it’s important that we get this 
right.  
 The international dimension 
 
We set our capital requirements according to the New Zealand specific risk environment, but 
we also acknowledge how we ‘stack up’ internationally, and why we may need a more 
capitalised banking system than those in other countries. 
                                                           
7 Gambacorta and Shin (2018). 
     14 
 We have previously compared our proposed capital levels with Basel Committee estimates 
and Standard and Poor’s (S&P) methodology, placing our proposals around the top quartile.8  
Since September 2019, S&P’s assessment of economic risks in New Zealand has improved. 
They viewed that the moderation of house prices since 2017 has reduced the likelihood of a 
severe house price correction and with it, the potential losses banks may face in such a 
scenario – that’s good news. Our financial stability risks have reduced due to a slowing 
housing market, and our LVR policy has contributed to that.  
 
The improved country rating means that the New Zealand banks’ capital positions using 
S&P’s risk-adjusted capital (RAC) ratio have improved.9 Our Capital Review proposals would 
mean that the banks’ S&P RAC ratios would increase further still, towards being among the 
best capitalised banks across a range of peer countries (Figure 11). 
 Figure 11: S&P RAC ratio – comparison of the four largest New Zealand banks to large 
banks in peer countries (October 2019) 
 
 
 
 
Source: Standard and Poor’s, RBNZ calculations. 
 
                                                           
8 Bascand (2019b) 
9 S&P calculates its own risk-adjusted Tier 1 capital ratios for many banks around the world, using a methodology that attempts to reduce 
the influence of differing national applications of the Basel framework while still taking into account the different risk profiles of the 
countries in which each bank operates. 
 
     15 
 Notes: New Zealand (post-CR) shows an estimate of the RAC ratios of the four largest New Zealand banks 
assuming the Capital Review proposals are implemented as consulted on, plus a 1% management buffer. 
Comparator banks include Erste Group, Raiffeisen Bank International, Bank Austria (Austria), ANZ Banking 
Group, Commonwealth Bank, National Australia Bank, Westpac Banking Corporation (Australia), Česká 
spořitelna, ČSOB, Komerční (Czechia), Danske Bank, Jyske Bank, Nykredit Realkredit (Denmark), Nordea, OP 
Corporate (Finland), Bank of East Asia, Bank of China (HK), Hang Seng Bank, Hongkong and Shanghai Banking 
Corporation, ICBC (Asia), Standard Chartered HK (Hong Kong), Allied Irish Banks, Bank of Ireland, Permanent 
TSB (Ireland), Hapoalim, Leumi (Israel), Arion, Íslandsbanki, Landsbankinn (Iceland), ABN AMRO, ING, 
Rabobank (Netherlands), DNB Bank (Norway), ANZ New Zealand, ASB Bank, BNZ, Westpac New Zealand (New 
Zealand), SEB, Handelsbanken, Swedbank (Sweden), DBS, OCBC, UOB (Singapore). 
 
 
We realise that the slowdown in the New Zealand housing market may be a cyclical rather 
than a structural change. In the longer term, we remain vulnerable, especially if household 
indebtedness continues to grow. This is why we need policies that aim to ensure enduring 
resilience in the financial system. Indeed, in their assessment, S&P note that New Zealand’s 
economic imbalances remain somewhat elevated because of persistent current account 
deficits, high external debt, and an economy that is exposed to fluctuations in commodity 
prices.  
 Relationship with Australia 
 
Our conservatism, relative to Australia, in our bank capital proposals reflects the higher 
macroeconomic volatility that we have endured, as I pointed out earlier. However, we have 
been, and will continue to work closely with APRA. We continuously update one another on 
our prudential regulations, we maintain a strong working relationship, and we also respect 
each other’s objectives as regulators aiming to protect our respective financial systems. 
 Conclusion 
 
With New Zealand’s macroeconomic policy framework and strong financial sector 
soundness, investors can have long-term confidence in New Zealand as an investor 
destination. The prospects of sustainable and productive growth are enhanced through 
predictable macroeconomic policy settings and avoidance of financial crises. 
 Economic and other shocks have constrained New Zealand’s economic performance 
historically. Although our macroeconomic stability has improved in recent decades, we 
remain vulnerable to external and domestic disturbances. Overall debt levels remain high 
while the concentration and persistence of high-leverage within segments of the household 
and agricultural sectors questions the quality of banks’ lending standards. 
     16 
 The more enduring that low interest rates are, and the more successful they are in promoting 
borrowing and investment, the more they are likely to pose challenges to the Reserve Bank’s 
financial stability objectives.   
 The Reserve Bank has a number of tools it applies to manage financial stability risks, and its 
LVR policies have a role in limiting the risks that could arise from increasing leverage 
through inadequate lending standards.   
 More capital is a key part of building New Zealand’s economic resilience for when severe 
shocks do occur. We are in the process of weighing up the costs and benefits of how much 
more and the type of capital that is appropriate for the desired level of resilience, and the 
timeframe to achieve it. Decisions on the Capital Review are expected to be released in the 
first week of December.  
        