 22.11.2019 
 Reflections on the Past and Future of Central Bank Independence 
Seminar on The Relevance of Central Bank Independence: Challenges and 
Outlook/Banco de México 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
    Good morning. It is my pleasure to participate in this conference on the occasion of the 25th 
anniversary of the autonomy of the Banco de México. I take the opportunity to congratulate 
you on this landmark. Events such as this contribute to highlighting the relevance of the 
independence of monetary authorities, and my words today will be along these lines.  
In my address I shall first briefly refer to the independence of the Banco de España, both as 
a national central bank in itself but also as a member of the European System of Central 
Banks.  Then,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  more  general  thoughts  about  current 
challenges to central banking from the perspective of their independence. 
The independence of the Banco de España 
The Banco de España was granted institutional independence in July 1994. So this year, as 
is  also  the  case  for  the  Banco  de  México,  marks  the  25th  anniversary  of  our  Law  of 
Autonomy. The independence of the Banco de España came about as part of the European 
economic  integration  process.  Following  the  requirements  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht 
Treaty, central banks in the European Union were meant to pursue the primary objective of 
price  stability  and  be  vested  with  a  large  degree  of  independence,  both  political  and 
operational. Participation in the monetary union also entailed a change in the relationship 
between  Treasury  and  central  bank  so  as  to  incorporate  the  prohibition  of  monetary 
financing of government deficits. 
Central bank independence was granted with a large degree of legal protection and, as a 
matter of  fact,  no  country  in the European  Union can  change it  at  its own discretion.  Of 
course,  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  does  not  mean  arbitrariness,  as  it  is  well 
counterbalanced by high transparency and accountability requirements and practices. 
Granting independence to the Banco de España some years before the introduction of the 
euro  as  a  common  currency  reflected  Spain’s  strong  ambition  to  become  a  founding 
member of the European Economic and Monetary Union. It was also the result of a firm 
political conviction as to the benefits of price stability and the advisability of delegating the 
pursuit of this goal to an independent central bank. Price stability requires a medium-term 
orientation and the independence of the monetary authority creates credibility by helping to 
keep inflation expectations anchored while avoiding time inconsistency problems.1 These 
reasons  were  particularly  compelling  for  the  Spanish  economy  in  light  of  the  previous 
experience of relatively high inflation.  
                                                                                              
1 The main argument to preserve central bank independence is that it avoids the so-called time inconsistency problem. 
When the monetary authority is not independent, it may consider other, shorter-term legitimate objectives, and may use 
monetary policy to repeatedly boost aggregate demand above what would be consistent with its inflation objective. As 
a  result,  an  inflationary  bias  may  be  generated.  This  inflationary  bias  is  ultimately  anticipated  and  incorporated  into 
agents’ expectations, and, therefore, into price-setting and wage bargaining. The upshot is higher inflation without hardly 
improving the level of output and employment in the economy. This means monetary policy loses its effectiveness and 
the commitments to price stability cease to be credible.  
2/9 
 Figure 1 
 The independence of the Banco de España, along with the new monetary policy framework 
based on direct inflation targets, was decisive in bringing inflation down and in fulfilling the 
Maastricht requirements in a short period of time.2 In this regard, the Spanish experience in 
relation  to  EMU  accession  meant  a  qualitative  leap  forward  in  terms  of  credibility, 
communication and transparency, which facilitated the anchoring of inflation expectations 
to a new regime of price stability, providing a focal point for collective wage bargaining, the 
setting of regulated prices, etc. 
The task of taming inflation did not fall entirely on the shoulders of the Banco de España, as 
Spain showed a strong and credible political will to lower inflation that helped bring about 
the anchoring role of the whole European institutional setting.  
With the launch of the euro, two decades ago, the Banco de España started to participate 
in the formulation and implementation of the euro area common monetary policy. Governors 
from the national central banks in the euro area are members of the Governing Council of 
the European Central Bank, a collegial decision-making body. Governors do not represent 
national interests and they vote in their own capacity considering the interest of the euro 
area as a whole. 
National central banks in the euro area can also carry out other functions as long as they do 
not  interfere  with  their  responsibilities in  the  common  monetary  policy.  For  instance,  the 
Banco de España is the national competent authority for banking supervision. However, all 
these additional functions do not necessarily enjoy the same level of independence3 as the 
monetary policy tasks conferred by the Treaty. With the creation of the Single Supervisory 
                                                                                              
2National inflation rates had not be more than 1.5 percentage points higher than the average of the three lowest inflation 
rates in the European Union. In 1993 inflation in Spain maintained levels close to 5%. Achieving the Maastricht inflation 
criterion required major efforts in a very short period of time. Inflation dropped to levels below 2% in 1997, allowing our 
country to join the euro area in 1999. 
3 See remarks by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of 
the  ECB,  Roundtable  Discussion  on  Central  Bank  Independence  (Frankfurt  am  Main,  12  November  2019).  – 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp191112_1~f304b47e14.en.html 
 
 3/9 
 Mechanism (SSM) in 2014, the Banco de España’s supervisory role was integrated into a 
new institutional framework with the European Central Bank at its core. I will come back to 
this function later on.  
Some lessons on central bank independence  
Let me share with you some reflections about central bank independence nowadays. This 
will be in the form of five lessons which, in my view, should be kept in mind when thinking 
about central bank independence, particularly at the current juncture of seemingly tamed 
inflation  but  with  difficulties  in  achieving  price  stability  objectives  in  some  advanced 
economies.  
1. 
Institutional settings matter 
First,  I  would  state  that  independence,  to  be  effective,  must  rest  on  a  robust  legal  and 
institutional  framework.  Independence  must  be  formally  recognised  in  all  of  its  relevant 
dimensions: namely, at the institutional, functional, personal and financial levels. This is the 
case in the euro area, where the Maastricht Treaty4 provided the appropriate framework; 
but unfortunately it is not the case in other regions, thus making the task of central banks 
much more complicated.  
2.  The need to deliver 
Second, the main reason for central bank independence is a utilitarian one: independence 
is  an  instrument  to  enhance  effectiveness  in  order  to  achieve  agreed  objectives  in  the 
general  interest,  such  as  price  or  financial  stability.  The  social  value  of  central  bank 
independence is thus inextricably linked to the effectiveness of its policies. The corollary is 
clear: central banks should employ the full set of instruments available to them to fulfill their 
mandates. 
Central banks are entrusted with the fulfilment of a precise set of objectives and, to do this, 
they are given the powerful tool of independent statutes. But trust must be earned daily and 
backed by hard evidence (on our effectiveness), and not based on faith or belief. 
3.  The extension of independence to other economic policy functions 
Third,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  time-inconsistency  argument  for  an  independent 
monetary authority is also relevant  – and thus, may also be applied  – to the need for an 
independent financial supervisor, as short-term incentives to relax supervisory policies may 
have important consequences over financial stability in the long run. In turn, this may also 
influence monetary policy-making. And this argument applies both for micro-prudential and 
macro-prudential supervision. 
 4 See article 130 (ex-article 108 TEC) of the Consolidated Versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union (2016/C 202/01): 
When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by the Treaties and the Statute 
of the ESCB and of the ECB, neither the European Central Bank, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their 
decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any 
government of a Member State or from any other body. The Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies and the 
governments of the Member States undertake to respect this principle and not to seek to influence the members of the 
decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank or of the national central banks in the performance of their tasks. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:C:2016:202:FULL&from=EN 
4/9 
 Regarding  micro-prudential  supervision,  the  importance  of  independence  in  this  field, 
besides  its  relevance  in  monetary  policy,  is  actually  a  worldwide  recognised  standard 
enshrined in the Basel “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision”5. The Basel Core 
Principles are part of the “Key Standards for Sound Financial Systems”6 determined by the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) that deserve priority implementation depending on country-
specific circumstances. Moreover, implementation of these principles is generally assessed 
through the IMF/World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAP7).  
In  the  Euro  area  setting,  the  creation  of  the  SSM  in  2014  added  this  dimension  of 
independence.8  However,  building  a  system  of  banking  supervision  in  the  euro  area  in 
parallel  with  the  monetary  union  posed  challenges  from  the  perspective  of  central  bank 
independence.  In  particular,  it  could  raise  concerns  of  potential  conflicts  between  the 
prudential supervision of European banks and the primary goal of price stability. This was 
foreseen in the institutional design of European supervision, assigning to the Supervisory 
Board – a new body within the European Central Bank – the planning and execution of the 
supervisory tasks. In consequence, separation between monetary policy and supervision 
was a key pillar for the conferral of supervisory tasks on the European Central Bank.  
Regarding macro-prudential supervision, the European institutional setting promotes its 
independence  as  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  recommends  central  banks  have  a 
prominent role in national macro-prudential authorities.9 10 In the Spanish set-up, the Banco 
de España is entrusted with deciding independently when macro-prudential tools regarding 
                                                                                              
5 See Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision – Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (September 2012) 
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs230.pdf 
 
6 For more information about the Key Standards for Sound Financial Systems, see the FSB website: 
https://www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/about-the-compendium-of-standards/key_standards/ 
 
7 For more information about FSAPs, see the World Bank website:  
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/financial-sector-assessment-program 
 
 
8 See article 19 of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European 
Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions: 
1.  When carrying out the tasks conferred on it by this Regulation, the ECB and the national competent 
authorities acting within the SSM shall act independently. The members of the Supervisory Board and the 
steering committee shall act independently and objectively in the interest of the Union as a whole and shall 
neither seek nor take instructions from the institutions or bodies of the Union, from any government of a 
Member State or from any other public or private body. 
2.  The institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union and the governments of the Member States and 
any other bodies shall respect that independence. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013R1024&from=en 
 
9 See Recitals 7 and 12 and sub-recommendation B3 of “Recommendation of the ERB of 22 December 2011 on the 
macro-prudential mandate of national authorities” (ESRB/2011/3):  
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/recommendations/ESRB_2011_3.en.pdf 
 
10 See Recital 24 of Regulation No 1092/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council on European Union macro-
prudential oversight of the financial system and establishing a European Systemic Risk Board: 
The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  should  have  a  leading  role  in  macro-prudential  oversight  because  of  their 
expertise and their existing responsibilities in the area of financial stability. National supervisors should be involved in 
providing their specific expertise. The participation of micro-prudential supervisors in the work of the ESRB is essential 
to  ensure  that  the  assessment  of  macro-prudential  risk  is  based  on  complete  and  accurate  information  about 
developments in the financial system. Accordingly, the chairpersons of the ESAs should be members with voting rights. 
One representative of the competent national supervisory authorities of each Member State should attend meetings of 
the General Board, without voting rights. In a spirit of openness, 15 independent persons should provide the ESRB with 
external expertise through the Advisory Scientific Committee. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:C:2016:202:FULL&from=EN 
 5/9 
 the banking sector should be activated or deactivated. Accordingly, other sectoral financial 
regulators are given responsibilities for activating their own tools. 
In particular, the Banco de España is now empowered to require that banking institutions 
establish  countercyclical  capital  buffers  by  credit  segment,  limits  on  concentration  in 
relation to economic activity sectors, and limits and conditions when underwriting new loans 
(in terms of loan-to-value, loan-to-income and debt service-to-income ratios, and also the 
maturity, the currency in which the operation is denominated and whether the interest rate 
is fixed or variable, among others). These new instruments complement those previously 
available  to  the  Banco  de  España  and  included  in  the  European  legislation:11  the 
countercyclical capital buffer, the systemic risk buffer and the buffer for systemic banks, 
among others.  
In addition, this year saw the creation of the Macroprudential Authority Financial Stability 
Council,  whose  main  goal  is  to  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  coordination  and  the 
exchange  of  information  on  financial  stability  issues  among  the  Banco  de  España,  the 
Ministry of Economy and Enterprise, the Spanish National Securities Market Commission 
and the Directorate-General of Insurance and Pension Funds). All in all, this new institutional 
setting is a significant step forward in reinforcing financial stability in Spain. 
4.  Other policies should also promote economic and financial stability 
The  notion  that  other  economic  policies  should  complement  monetary  policy  and  also 
contribute to economic stability has always been embedded in the design of the European 
Economic and Monetary Union. As such, from the start, the Maastricht convergence criteria 
went beyond inflation to also include targets in terms of fiscal discipline.12 
The Spanish experience in the effort to comply with these criteria illustrates and reinforces 
the critical importance of other policies, such as fiscal consolidation or liberalisation reforms. 
This  is  an  important  lesson  not  to  be  forgotten:  central  bank  credibility  is  an  essential 
element for the effectiveness of monetary policy, but monetary policy is more efficient when 
                                                                                              
11 The CRD IV/CRR regulatory package makes available a set of macroprudential instruments that national competent 
authorities  can  resort  to  with  a  view  to  preventing  the  emergence  of  cyclical  systemic  risks  or  mitigating  structural 
systemic risks, such as: a) the capital conservation buffer; b) the countercyclical capital buffer; c) the buffer for other 
systemically important institutions; d) the systemic risk buffer. Regulating capital buffers aimed to (i) ensure a level playing 
field  between  EU  Member  States,  as  an  essential  pre-requisite  for  the  functioning  of  the  internal  market,  (ii)  prevent 
regulatory  arbitrage,  (iii)  ensure  maximum  harmonisation,  and  (iv)  enhance  transparency  and  predictability  in  the 
macroprudential field. See articles 130, 131,133, 134,135-140 of CRD IV. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013L0036&from=EN 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013R0575&from=EN 
 
12 See Hernández de Cos: El reto de la unión fiscal europea (2014): 
In response to the euro area sovereign debt crisis, there has been a deep reform of fiscal governance in the European 
Union. This reform includes a strengthening of the corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact, with the setting of a 
ceiling  on  public  spending  and  the  introduction  of  greater  coordination  in  countries’  budgetary  processes.  In  the 
corrective  arm,  greater  significance  is  accorded  to  the  debt  criterion  and  the  sanctions  system  has  been  reinforced. 
Members are obliged to reform national fiscal frameworks and set up independent fiscal authorities, which must conduct 
public  assessments  regarding  the  implementation  of  national  budgetary  rules.  Overall,  the  reform  echoes  the  latest 
economic literature, which stresses that it is the design and not only the mere existence of fiscal rules that has a bearing 
on their effectiveness. However, the new framework of governance is now more complex and the room for discretionality 
in its application remains ample. Its effectiveness will thus depend on such application being strict. 
Full article available in Spanish: https://www.funcas.es/Publicaciones/Sumario.aspx?IdRef=1-01141 
 
For more information on the reform of the economic governance in the Economic and Monetary Union see Caballero, 
García Perea, Gordo (2011) available in Spanish: 
https://www.bde.es/f/webbde/SES/Secciones/Publicaciones/InformesBoletinesRevistas/BoletinEconomico/11/Ene/Fic
h/art5.pdf 
6/9 
 coupled  with  and  complemented  by  an  appropriate  balance  in  overall  economic  policy-
making. 
Actually,  beyond  accession  criteria,  this  notion  was  also  enshrined  on  an  ongoing  basis 
through the Stability and Growth Pact and, later on, with the Macroeconomic Imbalance 
Procedure.  This  latter  check  on  structural  and  broad  macroeconomic  policies  was  the 
response  to  the  hard-learnt  lesson  (especially  in  countries  like  Spain)  that  a  lack  of 
competitiveness and excessive credit cycles could seriously hamper the optimal conduct of 
monetary and financial policies and usher in financial fragmentation. 
Also, strictly in the realm of monetary policy, fulfilling our price stability mandate has become 
more challenging in recent times. Natural interest rates in the main advanced economies 
have  been  gradually  falling  over  the  last  three  decades  and  they  currently  stand  at 
historically very low and possibly negative levels. There are also good reasons to think that 
natural rates may be stuck at very low levels for long periods. This, in conjunction with a 
lower bound for policy rates, seriously curtails the space for conventional monetary policy. 
Unconventional  measures,  such  as  asset  purchases,  negative  interest  rates  and  forward 
guidance, have helped us to partially overcome the lower bound constraint, thus becoming 
a  necessary  tool  in  our  monetary  policy  framework.  Notwithstanding,  unconventional 
measures have their own limitations. 
In this context, inflation will ultimately be the outcome of the interaction between a number 
of factors. In order not to overburden monetary policy, it is essential to achieve a balanced 
policy  mix.  Such  mix  should  include  long-term  growth-enhancing  fiscal  policies  and 
sufficient structural reforms that increase productivity.  
Preserving central bank independence thus requires acknowledging this interaction among 
policies  and,  hence,  it  is  the  duty  of  central  bankers  to  call  for  an  appropriate  mix  of 
economic policies that help us achieve our price stability goal while minimising potential 
side effects. 
The specificity of the euro area, with a common monetary policy and 19 different fiscal and 
economic policies, considerably increases the complexity of finding the right alignment of 
economic policies. The aggregation of national fiscal policies does not necessarily translate 
into an adequate fiscal stance for the euro area as a whole. In short, the current euro area 
institutional architecture does not allow for a systematic implementation of an active fiscal 
policy based on targeted, timely and temporary measures. Thus, the absence of a common 
fiscal  capacity  in  the  euro  area  makes  it  difficult  to  achieve  an  appropriate  policy  mix. 
Building  this  fiscal  capacity,  with  adequate  size  and  design,  should  be  a  priority  on  the 
agenda. 
The Eurosystem should continue to push for more growth-enhancing reforms at the national 
and European levels and for the completion of a more robust euro area institutional setting. 
This  includes  completing  the  Banking  Union,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  and  creating  a 
stabilising  central  fiscal  capacity  that  will  help  the  euro  zone  economy  reduce  its 
vulnerabilities and better weather potential future episodes of stress. 
This brings me to highlight one further dimension of the value of central bank independence. 
Independence contributes to the role that monetary authorities tend to play with respect to 
other  policies. Their  technical  recommendations,  free  of  short-term  political  pressures or 
 7/9 
 vested interests, may provide valuable guidance for other economic policies. Although this 
function  is  not  always  formally  incorporated  into  the  legal  framework,  in  the  case  of  the 
Banco de España this role is recognised in our Law of Autonomy. Indeed, this legislation 
establishes a function to “advise the government”, which supports our role in evaluating 
other public policies. This is also the case of the European Central Bank, on which the Treaty 
confers  an  advisory  function  with  regard  to  proposals  for  European  Union  and  Member 
States’ legislation within its fields of competence.  
5.  The key importance of transparency and accountability 
The fifth and final reflection concerns highlighting the importance of pursuing the highest 
standards  of  accountability  and  transparency  vis-à-vis  both  society  and  the  political 
representatives.  Indeed,  accountability  and  transparency  support  both  the  effectiveness 
and  also  the  legitimacy  of  central  bank  independence.  We  need  to  keep  in  mind  that 
monetary policy is now more complex and society is constantly raising the bar for these 
standards. 
The  adoption  of  unconventional  tools  marked  a  shift  away  from  the  “one  goal,  one 
instrument” policy setting in which accountability was easier. More instruments at play might 
have also raised concerns about the possibility that central banks have stepped beyond 
their mandates, thus potentially endangering the public perception about the value of their 
independence. Yet allow me to emphasise that, in parallel, central banks have strengthened 
transparency by providing the general public with extensive information about the rationale 
behind these monetary policy measures within our existing mandates.  
In particular, in the case of the Governing Council of the ECB, the accounts of our monetary 
policy  meetings  are  published  and  the  President  and  Vice-president  hold  a  joint  press 
conference with a Q&A session after each decision. In addition, members of the Governing 
Council routinely engage in public events and deliver speeches to explain our decisions and 
the rationale behind them. And, of course, the President of the ECB regularly participates in 
sessions  with  members  of  the  European  Parliament  as  do  governors  of  national  central 
banks in their corresponding parliaments. 
I deem it essential to persevere in this direction to reinforce the democratic accountability 
of the central bank.  
In communication with the public, central banks should carefully balance the need for clarity 
and the intrinsic complexity of monetary policy decisions. To strike the right balance it is 
worth noting that transparency does not mean providing certainties on intrinsically complex 
issues but clarity on the inevitable uncertainties and trade-offs that affect monetary policy-
making. An added difficulty in the euro area is having to communicate to citizens from 19 
different countries in which public opinion sometimes focuses more on national affairs than 
on European issues.  
On  top  of  high  transparency  standards,  we  should  explore  additional  tools  that  could 
contribute to reinforcing the legitimacy of an independent public institution. In fact, I find 
that  public  policy  evaluation  could  be  a  key  and  powerful  tool  in  this  regard.  A  periodic 
evaluation of the central bank’s performance and impact in the pursuit of its objectives could 
be a very potent mechanism as regards accountability to citizens. 
8/9 
Despite  all  these  challenges,  let  me  conclude  my  intervention  by  saying  that  I  remain 
optimistic  about  the  ability,  determination  and  capacity  of  independent  central  banks  to 
keep on providing valuable services to the societies we serve.  
 Thank you very much. 
  9/9 
