Luis de Guindos: Speaking notes on climate-related risks
Speaking  notes  by  Mr  Luis  de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at
roundtable event on climate-related risks at Bloomberg, Washington DC, 17 October 2019.
General remarks
 The ECB agrees that we need a deeper understanding of climate-related risks and a
common  language  for  discussing  economic  activities  that  can  be  considered
environmentally sustainable. In particular, we welcome the development of a taxonomy
of  sustainable  activities  and  support  harmonised,  firm-level  reporting  of  carbon
emissions related to corporate activities.
At  the  international  level,  we  are  engaged  in  discussions  with  other  supervisors  and
central  banking  authorities  as  a  member  of  the  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial
System. And in Europe, we are actively involved in the work on an EU taxonomy as a
member of the Commission Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance.
We also agree on the need for credit rating agencies to develop standards or guidelines
on integrating environmental, social and governance (ESG) information into their ratings
or  other  scores.  This  would  enable  financial  and  non-financial  firms’  exposures  to
climate-related risks to be better priced and monitored.
In this regard, we welcome a recent initiative from the European Securities and Markets
Authority to draw up guidelines for credit rating agencies to disclose whether and how
ESG factors are reflected in their ratings.
We need a clear and common understanding of how climate-related risks are defined
and measured, and we should redouble our efforts to empirically measure these risks
and close knowledge gaps.
Improved  disclosure  is  an  essential  first  step.  Disclosures  by  firms,  and  financial
institutions in particular, tend to be incomplete and inconsistent. Market data providers
have developed scores that seek to consolidate companies’ quantitative and qualitative
environmental information. But they have a significant amount of discretion as to how
they construct these metrics.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
