Yannis Stournaras: Greece in Europe - reasons for optimism
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Annual  Stavros
Niarchos Foundation Lecture, Yale University, New Haven CT, USA, 19 September 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  deliver  the  Annual  Stavros  Niarchos  Foundation
Lecture. The Hellenic Studies Program at the Yale Macmillan Center does an excellent job in
studying  and  promoting  contemporary  Greek  culture  and  history.  In  my  talk  today,  I  will  first
present the lessons to be drawn from the Greek crisis. I will then discuss the progress made in
recent years and the outlook for the Greek economy, and highlight the crisis legacies and the
challenges  that  lie  ahead,  both  for  Greece  and  the  euro  area.  Finally,  I  will  put  forward  policy
proposals for addressing these challenges.
1.         Overview and lessons from the Greek crisis
From  2000  to  2007,  Greece  experienced  benign  macroeconomic  conditions  characterised  by
high rates of GDP growth (well above the euro area average), relatively stable consumer price
inflation  and  a  gradually  decreasing  unemployment  rate.  The  expansion  was  driven  by  rapid
credit growth and low borrowing costs following financial liberalisation and Greece’s EMU entry in
2001.
The Maastricht criteria for joining EMU were based solely on nominal convergence, and therefore
failed  to  incentivise  the  structural  reforms  in  the  product  and  labour  markets  and  in  the
functioning of the public sector needed to enhance real convergence, raise potential growth and
safeguard the sustainability of public finances. On the contrary, employer and employee interest
groups opposed reforms that would have increased competitiveness. Although Greece’s GDP
per capita increased during the boom period, approaching the EU average, the institutional gap
relative to the euro area did not narrow. Thus, Greece continued to lag significantly behind its
euro area partners in various indicators of governance and structural competitiveness.
The sharp deterioration of the fiscal and macroeconomic environment in 2008 and 2009, and the
subsequent  downgrades  of  sovereign  debt  and  rising  sovereign  spreads,  cut  off  the  Greek
sovereign  and  banks  from  international  capital  and  money  markets.  Substantial  deposit
withdrawals and extremely tight liquidity conditions put strain on the banking sector. An EU-IMF
financed  economic  adjustment  programme  was  initiated  in  2010,  aiming  to  correct  the
imbalances.
The  crisis  has  taken  a  heavy  toll  on  output,  incomes  and  wealth.  Between  2008  and  2016,
Greece lost over one fourth of its GDP at constant prices, and the unemployment rate rose by
nearly 16 percentage points. Furthermore, GDP per capita at purchasing power parity declined to
67.4% of the EU average in 2018, down from 93.3% in 2008. To this, one must add the large
increase of non-performing loans (NPL) ratio to about 50%, the large brain drain and massive
underinvestment, with their immeasurable economic and social consequences.
The  slide  of  the  GDP  growth  rate  into  negative  territory  raised  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to
unsustainable  levels  despite  the  fiscal  consolidation,  and  caused  debt-servicing  problems  for
households and businesses. This was the main, but not the exclusive, reason why NPLs rose
dramatically, weakening banks’ asset quality, thus making it difficult for banks to finance the real
economy. It took no less than eight years, three economic adjustment programmes, major debt
restructuring and three rounds of bank recapitalisation to resolve the Greek crisis.
The length and depth of the Greek crisis can be explained by seven factors:
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
·         First, the size and speed of fiscal consolidation were unprecedented. This primarily had to
do with the fact that the initial fiscal and external imbalances were much higher in Greece than in
other Member States under financial stress. In addition, emphasis has, on average, been placed,
over the three adjustment programmes, more on tax hikes rather than expenditure cuts, growth-
enhancing reforms and privatisations.
·           Second, the fiscal multipliers turned out to be higher than initially anticipated, and the
economy was soon caught in a vicious circle of austerity and recession.
·         Third, the sequencing of structural reforms led to real wages declining more than initially
expected, exacerbating the recession. In other words, the reform effort focused much more on
the  labour  market  than  on  the  goods  and  services  markets.  Hence,  nominal  wages  declined
faster  and  more  strongly  than  prices.  Households  experienced  a  massive  drop  in  purchasing
power, which, in turn, constrained personal consumption and deepened the recession.
·           Fourth, the non-performing loans (NPL) problem proved very difficult to manage. Mainly
the result of economic contraction, it was further exacerbated by legislative changes such as the
blanket moratorium on primary residence auctions and the abuse of foreclosure protection, as
well as several other legal and judicial impediments. With the benefit of hindsight, it could be said
that a more dynamic response during the first years of the crisis, implementing the necessary
legislative  changes  much  earlier  and  introducing  a  systemic  solution  via  a  centralised Asset
Management  Company  for  NPLs  as  other  Member  States  had  done,  could  have  reduced  the
problem we face today.
·           Fifth, certain reforms fell behind the agreed time schedule on account of a number of
factors,  including:  insufficient  ownership  of  the  necessary  reforms;  populist  rhetoric,  political
rivalry; and the resistance of various vested interests to reform. This had serious consequences:
the signing of a third economic adjustment programme, the introduction of capital controls mainly
to  stem  the  outflow  of  bank  deposits,  another  bank  recapitalisation  round  and  two  years  of
economic stagnation.
·           Sixth, political deliberations in the euro area also played their part in delaying the recovery
of the Greek economy. The Eurogroup decision of November 2012 to grant further debt relief was
put off for several years and was only implemented in June 2018. This undermined the growth
prospects of the Greek economy and prolonged the crisis. Had this form of debt relief been given
at the beginning of the first economic adjustment programme, alongside the implementation of
ambitious growth-enhancing structural reforms and an Asset Management Company to deal with
NPLs, it would have had a more positive impact on the economy, possibly limiting output and
employment losses.
·           Seventh, when the Greek crisis broke out, EMU lacked the tools to prevent or contain the
crisis. The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) failed to control the build-up of public debt in the pre-
crisis  period.  There  was  insufficient  monitoring  and  control  over  macroeconomic  imbalances,
such as the evolution of the current account and private debt. The sovereign-bank “doom loop”
amplified  the  financial  crisis  and  the  recession.  Euro  area  crisis  management  and  resolution
tools were poor or non-existent on account of highly exaggerated concerns about moral hazard,
and due to the lack of an appropriate institutional setting. There was no provision for risk-sharing
in  the  initial  EMU  architecture.  It  was  the  ECB’s  response,  especially  after  mid-2012,  which
provided the time required for euro area governments to take the actions necessary to safeguard
the stability of the financial system and strengthen EMU.
2.         Progress since the beginning of the crisis
Despite the missteps, occasional backsliding and delays, significant progress has been made
since  the  beginning  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  2010.  The  implementation  of  economic
adjustment programmes has eliminated the root causes of the Greek crisis. More specifically:
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
·         The achieved fiscal adjustment was unprecedented, turning a primary deficit of 10.1% of
GDP  in  2009  into  a  primary  surplus  of  4.3%  of  GDP  in  2018  (according  to  the  enhanced
surveillance  definition).  The  primary  surplus  in  2018  exceeded  the  programme  target  for  the
fourth year in a row.
·         The current account deficit has been reduced by 12 percentage points of GDP since the
beginning of the crisis.
·         Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored, and price competitiveness has
recorded substantial gains since 2009.
·         A bold programme of structural reforms was implemented, covering such areas as the
pension and healthcare systems, goods and services markets, the business environment, the
tax system, the budgetary framework and public sector transparency.
·         The banking system has been restructured. Today only four systemic banks control over
95% of the market, as more than ten other banks were merged or liquidated. The role of the Bank
of  Greece  was  pivotal  in  the  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  system,  the
enhancement of its corporate governance and the provision of liquidity all over Greece during the
crisis.  Today,  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  stand  at  satisfactory  levels,  and  their  loan-loss
provisions are sufficient to address potential credit risks.
A number of important reforms have been implemented, aiming to provide banks with an array of
tools for tackling the problem of non-performing loans (NPLs), including a strengthening of the
supervisory  framework,  by  setting  operational  targets  for  NPL  reduction,  the  creation  of  a
secondary NPL market and the removal of various legal, judicial and administrative barriers to the
management of NPLs.
These actions have started to bear fruit, as shown by the continued reduction of the NPL stock in
line with the targets set. Non-performing loans amounted to €75.4 billion at the end of June 2019,
down by €31.9 billion from their peak in March 2016. However, the NPL ratio remains high, at
43.6% in June 2019.
As  a  result  of  the  reforms  implemented  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  and  the  effort  of
enterprises to make up for declining domestic demand by exporting to new markets, openness
has increased substantially and the economy has started to rebalance towards tradable, export-
oriented sectors.
·         The share of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 36% in 2018. Exports
of goods and services, excluding the shipping sector, have increased in real terms by 60% since
their trough in 2009, outperforming euro area exports as a whole.
·                  The  volume  of  tradable  goods  and  services  in  the  economy  increased  cumulatively
between 2010 and 2017 by approximately 14% relative to non-tradables in terms of gross value
added.
3.         The outlook for the Greek economy
Following the stagnation of 2015–2016, GDP growth returned to positive territory in 2017 (1.5%)
and picked up to 1.9% in 2018. Recent real GDP data point to continued expansion in the second
quarter of 2019 (1.9% y-o-y). Thanks to the improved economic conditions and to the reforms
implemented since 2010, the unemployment rate, though still high, fell to 16.9% in the second
quarter of 2019, from 27.8% at the end of 2013. Looking forward, the Bank of Greece expects
that economic activity will remain on a positive growth trajectory, expanding by 1.9% in 2019 (that
is by 2.3% year-on-year in the second semester of 2019) and above 2% in 2020.
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  outlook  is  subject  to  downside  risks,  related  both  to  the  external  and  the  domestic
environment. The global growth and trade slowdown due to the imminent trade war could affect
export  growth  more  markedly,  while  the  disorderly  Brexit,  geopolitical  tensions  and  the  recent
increase in oil prices are further significant downside risks. A possible sharp correction in global
capital  and  financial  markets  could  increase  the  cost  and  reduce  the  availability  of  funding,
particularly for the private sector. There are also downside risks on the fiscal front, associated
with ongoing court rulings on pension cuts, which could weigh on debt sustainability. In addition,
an  exacerbation  of  the  refugee  crisis  could  hurt  tourism  and  trade.  However,  there  are  also
domestic opportunities, relating to a rapid implementation of structural reforms in Greece and the
reduction (both direct and indirect) of the primary surplus fiscal targets. The fact that Greece still
lags behind its peers and competitors in almost all indices of structural competitiveness, is a
huge opportunity for a rapid catch-up which should be exploited.
4.         Future challenges
Despite the progress made so far, major short- and medium- to long-term challenges and crisis-
related legacies remain.
A)    Medium- to long-term challenges
The main medium- to long-term challenges are the following:
·         The high public debt (whose sustainability improved sign ificantly in the medium term with
the measures adopted by the Eurogroup from 2012 to 2018) creates uncertainty about Greece’s
ability to service its debt in the long term, raising the cost of borrowing both for the public and the
private sector, and hampering growth prospects.
·         Greece’s negative current account balance and large negative net international investment
position.
·         The high long-term unemployment rate, which generates inequalities threatening social
cohesion and increases the risk of human capital erosion. 
·         The projected demographic decline (due to population ageing and outward migration),
which exerts downward pressure on potential growth and puts at risk the long-term sustainability
of the pension system.
·                  The  slow  digital  transformation  of  the  economy.  Based  on  the  Digital  Economy  and
Society Index of the European Commission, Greece for the year 2019 ranks 26th among the 28
EU countries, which implies a high risk of technological lag and digital illiteracy. 
·         The multi-year recession has left an investment gap and risks permanently impairing the
productive capacity of the Greek economy through a hysteresis effect. In more detail, gross fixed
capital formation (at current prices) fell from 26% of GDP in 2007 to 11.1% of GDP in 2018. The
largest  proportion  of  this  decline  (10.1  out  of  14.9  percentage  points)  is  due  to  shrinking
residential investment, which fell from 10.8% of GDP in 2007 to 0.7% of GDP in 2018.
·         Fixed capital investment net of depreciation has been negative since 2011. Specifically, in
2018, net fixed capital investment amounted to roughly -€8.8 billion or –4.8% of nominal GDP.
Positive net investment is a prerequisite, if the capital stock and thus the potential output of the
Greek economy are to increase.
·         Estimates by the Bank of Greece indicate that the net capital stock of the Greek economy
(at constant 2010 prices) declined by €67.4 billion in the period 2010–2016, to €622.2 billion in
2016. In order to raise the net capital stock over the next decade to pre-crisis levels, gross fixed
capital  formation  at  constant  prices  needs  to  increase  by  about  10%  per  year.  Excluding
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
residential  investment,  which  accounts  for  about  50%  of  the  capital  stock,  gross  fixed  capital
formation  at  constant  prices  needs  to  increase  by  about  5%  per  year  by  2029.  Although  a
business  investment  growth  rate  of  5%  per  year  over  the  next  decade  is  high,  it  is  deemed
achievable for the Greek economy based on historical experience, so long as suitable investment
and business-friendly policies are pursued.
·         Investments need to accelerate in order to bridge the investment gap in a timely manner
and avoid the so-called hysteresis effect. As recently pointed out by the European Commission,
Greece  needs  additional  public  and  private  investment  in  transport,  solid  waste  and  industrial
sewage treatment, water supply, infrastructure and energy network connectivity, mainly between
island regions and mainland Greece, in information and communication technology (ICT), and in
innovation, education and training.
·         Many of the above investments would align Greece’s environmental protection standards
with  those  of  the  rest  of  the  EU,  something  particularly  important  given  the  risks  of  climate
change. Addressing the challenge of climate change calls for coordinated efforts. Incidentally, the
Bank of Greece has been playing an active role in this area through its Climate Change Impacts
Study  Committee  (CCISC)  and  its  various  publications  on  the  topic.  Moreover,  the  Bank
participates in the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System
(NGFS),  aiming  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  financial  system  in  managing  climate  and
environmental risks, analyse the macro-financial impact of climate change and strengthen the
global response to the threat of climate change.
B)     Short-term challenges
Apart  from  the  medium-  to  long-term  challenges,  the  Greek  economy  also  faces  major
challenges in the immediate future, which need to be dealt with as a matter of urgency:
·                  Greek  government  bonds  have  yet  to  regain  investment  grade  status,  despite  the
substantial decline in their yields after the new government took office and the recent successful
issuance of a new 7-year Greek government bond at a yield of 1.9% with significant participation
from foreign institutional investors. Recently, Greek 10-year government bond yields fell below
1.4%, and, what is even more important, the corresponding spread fell below 200 basis points. It
is estimated that investment grade status could cut further the spread by 60 basis points.
·         The Greek economy continues to face very tight fiscal and monetary conditions compared
to all the other Member States of the euro area, which negatively affects its growth prospects and
overall competitiveness.
-  Primary surpluses in recent years have been very large. The high primary surplus targets and
their systematic overachievement in recent years through the curtailment of public investment
spending  and  high  taxes  have  dampened  the  growth  dynamics  of  the  economy,  reduced  the
competitiveness of Greek businesses, created a disincentive to work and invest, and caused tax
fatigue, leading to a contraction of the tax base and an exhaustion of taxpaying capacity.
-    The  monetary  policy  easing  by  the  ECB  has  indirectly  benefited  Greek  businesses  and
households, but not to the extent that it would have, if Greek government bonds had been eligible
for the Asset Purchase Programme (APP). The fact that all the other Member States enjoy much
more  favourable  financing  conditions  for  their  businesses  has  an  indirect  negative  effect  on
Greece’s overall competitiveness.
-  The high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) impairs banks’ lending capacity and increases
lending costs. This is yet another reason, on top of the previous one, why Greek businesses
continue to face higher financing costs than their European counterparts, which undermine their
competitive position, despite the significant drop in unit labour costs following the wide range of
reforms  that  were  implemented  in  recent  years.  It  is  indicative  that,  according  to  the  most
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
recently available data, the average bank lending rate for businesses in Greece is still slightly
below 5%, compared to slightly above 2% in the euro area.
·         Up to now, the business environment had not been considered investment-friendly and in
fact discouraged investment. Non-price competitiveness, so-called structural competitiveness, is
low compared to Greece’s EU partners. This is mainly due to high tax rates, weak public sector
efficiency and delays in court proceedings and rulings. Here are some numbers:
1
rd
-  According to the World Economic Forum (October 2018)  Greece ranked 103   out  of  140
countries in Checks and Balances (which refers to budget transparency, judicial independence,
efficiency of legal framework in challenging regulations and freedom of the press), 115  in Public
Sector  Performance  (which  refers  to  the  burden  of  government  regulation,  efficiency  of  legal
framework in settling disputes, e-Participation index, future orientation of government), 119  in
Property Rights Protection (which refers to property rights, intellectual property protection and
quality  of  land  administration),  and  119   as  regards  the  Strength  of  Auditing  and  Reporting
Standards.
th
th
th
-  According to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report for 2019, Greece ranks 132  out of
190 countries in terms of Enforcing Contracts. Specifically, it takes 1,580 days for a case to be
heard by the competent court of first instance and for the ruling to be enforced, compared to
582.4  days  in  the  OECD  high-income  economies.  Resolving  insolvency  takes  3.5  years,
compared to 1.7 years in the OECD high-income economies. Thus, the recovery rate is 33.2% in
Greece against 70.5% in the OECD high-income economies.
5.         Policy actions to address short- and medium- to long-term challenges
nd
The reformist policy agenda of the new Greek government, elected last July, is viewed positively
by the international financial markets, as indicated by the rapid decline in Greek government bond
yields,  which,  as  already  said,    currently  stand  at  below  1.4%.  The  government  is  swiftly
implementing  its  planned  investment  and  growth-friendly  policies,  which  involve  lowering
business  taxes  and  placing  more  emphasis  on  reforms  and  privatisations,  as  a  means  to
address  short-  and  long-term  challenges  and  reinforce  the  credibility  of  economic  policy.
Meanwhile,  the  substantial  improvement  in  budget  execution,  according  to  recently  published
Bank of Greece cash data, between end-June and end-August 2019, indicate that the primary
surplus fiscal target for 2019 will be met. This should support the efforts of the Greek government
to achieve an upgrade of government bonds to investment grade status by international credit
rating agencies. Should this happen, Greek bonds would then be allowed to participate in the
ECB’s recently-enhanced Asset Purchase Programme (APP), and, therefore, to reap substantial
benefits in terms of lower borrowing costs for the Greek economy.
To this end, economic policy should follow a three-pronged approach, aimed at:
(a) achieving the agreed fiscal targets;
(b) drastically reducing NPLs; and
(c) stepping up the pace of structural reforms and privatisations.
(a) Achieving the agreed fiscal targets
The fact that the new government immediately announced that it will respect the agreed fiscal
targets is a welcome development. At the same time, in line with what the Bank of Greece has
repeatedly stressed in recent years, the government is negotiating a reduction (both direct and
indirect) of the primary surplus target with the institutions.
A  lower,  more  realistic,  primary  surplus  target  compared  to  the  current  one  of  3.5%  of  GDP
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
through  2022,  if  combined  with  more  reforms  and  privatisations,  would  probably  imply  lower,
rather than higher public debt. This is so because, with a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 180%, a one
percentage  point-higher  growth  rate  (likely  to  materialise  if  the  lower  primary  surplus  target  is
achieved through lower taxes and social contributions, combined with more privatisations and
reforms)  and/or  100  basis  points-lower  borrowing  costs  (already  materialised,  relative  to  the
European Commission’s baseline scenario) are 1.8 times more effective in reducing the debt
ratio than an additional GDP percentage point of primary surplus.
The  fact  that  government  borrowing  costs  today  are  much  lower  than  under  the  baseline
scenario in the European Commission’s debt sustainability analysis, provides leeway for easing
the fiscal targets without compromising debt sustainability. Moreover, the Stability and Growth
Pact allows for fiscal flexibility so long as additional reforms increase potential growth.
In a nutshell, there appear to be sufficient grounds for lowering the primary surplus targets and
ample room for a compromise solution. In such a solution, primary surpluses could be lowered in
exchange for an acceleration of reforms. The outcome will be a win-win situation for Greece, as
well as for its EU partners, given that Greece will be able to return faster to a high growth path
that safeguards fiscal sustainability and the repayment of bailout funds. Downside risks related to
external factors also justify a reduction of the primary surplus fiscal target.
(b) Drastically reducing NPLs
Priority must continue to be given to reducing the high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs),
which impairs banks’ profitability and lending capacity and delays the recovery of investment and
economic  activity. As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  ratio  of  NPLs  to  total  loans  remains  very  high
(43.6% in June 2019). According to the operational targets for NPL reduction, the aim is to bring
the NPL ratio down to 35% by end-2019 and to below 20% by end-2021. Overall, despite the
progress in this regard, the pace of NPL reduction has not been fast enough to bring the Greek
NPL ratio close to the European average of 3.1% as of March 2019.
The  activation  of  a  truly  systemic  solution  to  the  NPL  problem,  which  resembles  an  Asset
Management Company (AMC), would — alongside the banks’ own efforts — be key for cleaning
up the balance sheets of banks, for bank lending to increase and for investment to recover. After
all, similar solutions have been implemented in almost all Member States under financial stress.
(c) Stepping up the pace of structural reforms and privatisations
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is necessary, as domestic savings are insufficient to match the
investments needed for high growth rates. If Greece is to attract more FDI, it must speed up
privatisations, which mobilise additional private investment, promote private-public partnerships
in various sectors and focus on removing major disincentives, such as red tape; the lack of a
clear and stable legislative and regulatory framework; an unpredictable tax system; weaknesses
in property rights protection; limited access to financing and high borrowing costs, and delays in
legal  dispute  resolution.  The  lifting  of  capital  controls  on  September  1   is  an  important  step
towards attracting foreign direct investment.
st
In addition to helping reduce the investment gap, FDI promotes closer trade links with countries
and  companies  with  state-of-the-art  technologies  and  facilitates  participation  in  global  value
chains.  This  would  increase  openness  and  improve  both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  Greek
exports.
Greater  emphasis  must  also  be  placed  on  improving  public  sector  efficiency  through  the
modernisation  and  digitisation  of  public  administration  and  state-owned  enterprises,  with  a
redesigning  of  procedures  and  responsibilities,  and  the  evaluation  and  development  of  staff
capacities and infrastructures.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Legal  certainty  and  clarity  and  a  stable  legal  framework  as  well  as  the  speedy  and  reliable
resolution of legal disputes would be fundamental to strengthening the rule of law, improving the
investment climate and accelerating economic growth.
Moreover,  international  experience  has  shown  that  robust  economic  growth  is  achieved  by
countries with good governance and strong, independent institutions.
through  policies  and  reforms 
Finally,  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen  the  “knowledge  triangle”  (education,  research  and
innovation) 
technology  diffusion,
entrepreneurship and foster closer ties between businesses, research centres and universities.
Strengthening  the  knowledge  triangle  and  ICT  would  lead  to  the  digital  transformation  of  the
economy,  an  increase  in  the  stock  of  knowledge  and  productive  capital,  the  development  of
outward-oriented sectors and, more generally, to a knowledge economy and society.
6.         The need to strengthen EMU
that  promote  research, 
(a) Progress and remaining challenges
Greece belongs to the euro area and is directly affected by its economic and financial conditions.
Hence, Greece has a very strong interest in promoting and supporting policies that strengthen
the  euro  area  economy.  Policy  makers  around  the  world  have  learned  their  lessons  from  the
Great Depression: a financial system in distress requires active central bank intervention. Thus,
when the need arose, and in the absence of an appropriate policy response by the governments,
the ECB stepped in decisively to restore market confidence, contain the sovereign debt crisis
and support the euro area economy, by safeguarding price and financial stability. The ECB used
the asset side of its balance sheet, as well as other tools such as forward guidance, in addition
to  its  standard  and  non-standard  interest  rate  policies.  Given  the  success  of  these  policies,
some of these instruments will be permanently included in the new standard framework, as the
effective lower bound will likely continue to be a binding constraint on interest rate policy in a low
inflation, low interest rate environment. Indeed, earlier this month, following subdued inflation, a
downward revision of inflation forecasts and weakening euro area growth, the Governing Council
of the ECB decided to adopt an even more accommodative monetary policy with an even lower
deposit facility rate, a new net Asset Purchase Programme (APP), more favourable terms for
TLTRO-III and a new forward guidance.
Euro  area  governments  took  a  number  of  necessary  actions  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the
financial system and to strengthen EMU. Policy actions have focused on addressing institutional
weaknesses, structural fragilities and excessive risk-taking that led to the sovereign debt crisis
and the negative feedback loop between sovereigns and banks, which in turn undermined euro
area  stability.  Other  steps  taken  involved  not  only  more  effective  regulation,  but  also  higher
capital  and  liquidity  buffers  for  banks,  early  warning  systems  and  the  development  of  macro-
prudential tools to increase resilience to potential shocks.
The eruption of the Greek crisis as well as the crisis in other Member States acted as a catalyst
for key initiatives such as the provision of intergovernmental loans to Greece; the establishment
of  the  EFSF  (European  Financial  Stability  Facility),  and  its  successor  the  ESM  (European
Stability  Mechanism).  Other  initiatives,  which  stemmed  mainly  from  the  world  banking  crisis,
included: the creation of the Banking Union with the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single
Resolution Mechanism and the – yet to be created – European Deposit Insurance Scheme; the
introduction of stricter rules on banking regulation and supervision as well as the establishment
of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). Finally, the European Commission proceeded
with the development of appropriate macro-prudential tools, which allowed for greater emphasis
on identifying and addressing system-wide risks; the strengthening of the Stability and Growth
Pact; the initiation of the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure and the European Semester.
As a result of the above initiatives, all Member States that had received EU-IMF assistance are
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
now back on their feet, macroeconomic imbalances have been corrected to a large extent, and
growth has been restored. Economic expansion in the euro area as a whole continues, albeit at a
slower pace, and EU banks have become more resilient to financial shocks over the past two
years, as reflected in the results of the EU-wide stress tests. Moreover, four additional Member
States were admitted to EMU during the crisis years.
Despite  the  progress  achieved  so  far,  the  euro  area  faces  several  challenges  ahead.  The
recovery  of  the  euro  area  from  the  financial  crisis  lags  behind  the  recovery  of  its  global
competitors. This reflects weak productivity performance and a lagging behind in innovation and
digital  technologies.  Population  ageing  and  climate  change  raise  serious  concerns  about  the
longer-term  outlook  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Post-crisis,  we  have  seen  a  halt  in  financial
integration,  which  weakens  private  risk-sharing  in  the  euro  area.  According  to  a  recent  IMF
discussion note, and in accordance to what has already been said, businesses in Greece pay a
2.5 percent higher rate of interest on their debt than similar businesses in the same industry in
France.  Moreover,  for  every  one  percentage  point  drop  in  national  GDP  growth,  consumption
drops by 0.75 percentage points, on average, in the euro area Member States, compared to only
0.18 percentage points, on average, in the United States. Economic convergence in terms of real
GDP per capita among the 12 old euro area countries (EA12) has stopped since 2010. Only the
new euro area Member States have showed sustained convergence. Divergence has widened
also in terms of unemployment rates and income inequality indicators.
b) Further policy steps to deepen EMU
Bold steps need to be taken to strengthen the euro area. In the financial sector, it is a priority to
complete the Banking Union by creating the European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). The
Banking Union will help to create a better integrated, more efficient and well-capitalised European
banking sector. Coupled with the completion of the Capital Markets Union, a single rulebook for
banks and capital markets, convergence in taxation frameworks, in capital market supervision, in
insolvency procedures and with EU rules allowing pension funds and insurance companies to
participate in long-term market investments, it can be expected to support the single market and
to fund investment and growth. More developed and integrated capital and banking markets will
reduce funding costs, improve the financing of the real economy by diversifying the sources of
financing and facilitate private risk-sharing through the capital and credit channels. For example,
as recently flagged by the IMF, if Greece were to improve its insolvency practices to best-in-class
standards, it could reduce its businesses’ average debt funding costs by about 50 basis points.
More developed and integrated capital and banking markets will also support the international role
of the euro through the creation of more integrated and liquid capital markets. However, we need
to make sure that the expansion of the non-bank sector does not endanger financial stability.
Increased risk-sharing is highly desirable, but we should not forget that greater public risk-sharing
is only possible with less, and not more, sovereignty. Risk-sharing, whether in the form of a safe
asset,  a  central  fiscal  stabilisation  tool,  a  fund  to  insure  against  unemployment,  or  a  truly
European deposit insurance scheme, should proceed simultaneously with risk reduction, such
as  the  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  or  national  discretions  in  supervisory  and  resolution
rules for banks. It is only in this way that we can transform what is in effect today in the euro area
a non-cooperative zero-sum game into a cooperative, win-win one.
In  addition,  in  a  monetary  union  such  as  the  euro  area,  the  adjustment  of  current  account
imbalances should be as symmetric as possible. Not only Member States with excessive current
account  deficits,  but  also  Member  States  with  excessive  current  account  surpluses  should
adjust.
Monetary policy alone cannot stabilise the economy. Fiscal policy should also be active in those
Member States where fiscal space exists and public debt remains sustainable. In particular, the
euro  area  urgently  needs  investment  in  new  technologies  in  order  to  catch  up  with  its
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
competitors  and  investment  necessary  to  face  the  challenges  of  climate  change.  Part  of  this
investment  will  be  public  or  in  the  form  of  private-public  partnerships.  Moreover,  euro  area
Member States need to step up structural reform efforts in the labour and product markets to
make them more flexible, which is necessary in a single currency area, and boost productivity,
and  to  make  public  finances  more  robust.  However,  the  sequencing  of  domestic  structural
policies is important: for instance, goods and services market flexibility is best achieved before,
or  simultaneously  with,  labour  market  flexibility.  Otherwise,  large  real  wage  reductions  might
occur, which are unnecessary and undesirable both from an economic and a social perspective.
In  the  context  of  economic  policy  coordination  and  with  a  view  to  fostering  real  convergence,
improvements  should  be  made  in  institutional  quality  and  good  governance  across  euro  area
Member States.
7.         Conclusions
Despite some missteps and delays in the implementation of the required reforms, Greece has
made notable progress since the start of the crisis in 2010. The implementation of economic
adjustment programmes has eliminated several macroeconomic imbalances. The economy is
now recovering and has started to rebalance towards the tradable, export-oriented sectors. The
Bank  of  Greece  expects  that  economic  activity  will  remain  on  a  positive  growth  trajectory,
expanding by 1.9% in 2019 (that is by 2.3% year-on-year in the second semester of 2019) and
above 2% in 2020. The catching-up effect from a long depression is projected to counterbalance
the  negative  effect  of  a  global  slowdown.  However,  significant  challenges  and  crisis-related
legacies  remain  (e.g.  a  high  public  debt  ratio,  a  high  NPL  ratio  and  high  long-term
unemployment),  while  the  brain  drain  and  underinvestment  weigh  on  the  long-term  growth
potential.
In order to contain future risks and address the remaining challenges and crisis legacies, the
government should implement its reform agenda as soon as possible. Moreover, the continuation
of reforms is an obligation to which Greece is bound in the context of enhanced surveillance, as
well  as  a  precondition  for  the  activation  of  the  medium-term  debt  relief  measures.  Increased
policy  credibility  through  the  implementation  of  reforms,  the  speeding  up  of  privatisations  and
unblocking  already  approved  investment  plans  will  increase  market  confidence  in  the  growth
prospects of the Greek economy. An acceleration of NPL reduction through the adoption of a
truly systemic solution will improve financing conditions for businesses and households as well
as market confidence, and will accelerate investment and GDP growth.
The  conditions  described  above  will  facilitate  Greek  government  bonds  regaining  investment
grade  status,  thus  paving  the  way  to  the  inclusion  of  Greek  bonds  in  the  ECB’s  recently-
enhanced Asset Purchase Programme (APP). This, in turn, would further lower borrowing costs
for  the  Greek  economy,  thereby  boosting  growth  and  improving  debt  sustainability.  In  such  a
benign  scenario,  growth  rates  higher  than  currently  projected,  above  3%,  could  be  achieved
through increased investment.
Last but not least, in order to enhance real convergence and strengthen the international role of
the euro, we must take steps to deepen EMU. The only realistic way forward is to simultaneously
promote risk-sharing and risk-reduction measures, to improve policy coordination and to make
sure that economic rebalancing operates symmetrically.
I  am  optimistic  that  Greece,  despite  occasional  failures  and  backtracking,  having  survived  an
acute and long economic crisis once more in its history, and contrary to almost all pessimistic
forecasts,  has  now  a  great  opportunity  to  close  the  institutional,  investment  and  structural
competitiveness gap with its peers and competitors, and catch up fast. My optimism is not based
on technocratic arguments only, but, also, on historical ones. Please allow me to conclude by
quoting  the  historian  Roderick  Beaton  in  his  great  book:  “Greece:  A  biography  of  a  Modern
Nation”: 
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
“Two hundred years ago, during the 1820s, Greeks were the pioneers who first mapped out the
route that would lead from the old Europe of great empires to the Europe of nation states that we
know today. No one should take it for granted that Greece and Greeks in future will always align
with  the  values,  traditions  and  politics  that  we  tend  to  lump  together  and  call  ‘Western’.
Geography,  and  to  some  extent  also  history,  may  pull  the  other  way.  But  as  they  prepare  to
celebrate the two-hundredth birthday of the Greek nation state in 2021, Greeks can take pride in
an achievement that by its very nature, and from the very beginning, has been won not through
isolation, but in partnership, every difficult step of the way, with other Europeans. It could not be
otherwise. Because ‘Greece’, however understood, or misunderstood, has always been part of
the modern identity of Europe too.”
References
d Abiad, A., G. Dell’ Ariccia and G.B. Li (2011), “Creditless Recoveries”,  IMF Working Paper, No.
58. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Creditless-Recoveries-24707
(2019), Monetary 
Bank 
July. www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/NomPol20182019.pdf
Greece 
of 
Bank 
December. www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/Inter_NomPol2018.pdf
(2018), Monetary 
Greece 
Policy 
2018 
of 
Policy 
2018–2019,
 Interim 
Report,
Beaton, R. (2019),  Greece: A biography of a Modern Nation, Allen Lane.
Bhatia, A.V., S. Mitra and A. Weber (2019), A Capital Market Union for Europe: Why it’s needed
and how to get there, IMF blog, 10 September.
Bhatia, A.V. et al. (2019), “A Capital Market Union for Europe”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 19/07.
Buti,  M.,  M.  Jolles  and  M.  Salto  (2019),  “The  euro  –  a  tale  of  20  years:  The  priorities  going
forward”, VoxEU 19 February. 
voxeu.org/article/euro-tale-20-years-priorities-going-forward
Codogno, L. and P. van den Noord (2019), “The rationale for a safe asset and fiscal capacity for
the Eurozone”, LSE’ Europe in Question’ Discussion Paper Series, No 144/2019 May. 
Dabrowski,  M.  (2019),  “The  Economic  and  Monetary  Union:  Past,  Present  and  Future”,  study
requested by the ECON Committee of the European Parliament. 
Draghi M. and L. de Guindos, Introductory Statement, 25 July, Frankfurt am Main.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2019/html/ecb.is190725~547f29c369.en.html
Demertzis, M., A. Sapir and G. Wolff (2019), “Promoting sustainable and inclusive growth and
convergence  in  the  European  Union”,  Bruegel,  Contribution  to  the  Informal  Ecofin  Meeting,
Bucharest, 5 April. 
Eurogroup (2019), Letter by the President Centeno to President Tusk on the deepening of the
Economic and Monetary Union, Brussels, 15 June. 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/39769/eurogroup-president-letter-to-euro-summit-president
the  Centre 
European Commission (2019) Structural reforms in Greece, 2010–2018, Final Report prepared
by 
(KEPE),  March.
publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/9e68a55f-a129–11e9-9d01–
01aa75ed71a1/language-en/format-PDF/source-100971872
and  Economic  Research 
of  Planning 
  11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
European Commission (2018), The Digital Economy and Society Index 2018, Country Report:
Greece. 
ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/scoreboard/greece
European Commission (2018), “Economic Resilience in the EMU”, Quarterly Report on the Euro
Area, Institutional Paper 086, vol. 17, no 2, July. 
European Commission (2018), “Sustainable convergence in the euro area: A multi-dimensional
process”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Institutional Paper 072, vol.16 no 3, February. 
European Commission (2019), Spring 2019 Economic Forecasts: Growth continues at a more
moderate pace, Brussels. 
ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-performance-and-forecasts/economic-
forecasts/spring-2019-economic-forecast-growth-continues-more-moderate-pace_en.
European  Commission  (2019),  2019  European  Semester,  Country  Report:  Greece  2019,
Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances,
Brussels. 
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/2019-european-semester-country-report-
greece_en.pdf
European Court of Auditors (2017), The Commission’s intervention in the Greek financial crisis,
Special Report No 17, Luxemburg. 
publications.europa.eu/webpub/eca/special-reports/greek-crisis-17–2017/en/
de Guindos, L. (2019), “Building the EU’s Capital Markets: what remains to be done”, speech at
the  Assosiation  for  Financial  Markets  in  Europe  Conference,  Supervision  and  Integration
Opportunities  for  European  and  Banking  and  Capital  Markets,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  23
May. www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190523~b1245030d5.en.html
de  Guindos,  L.  (2019),  “Deepening  EMU  and  the  implications  for  the  international  role  of  the
euro:, speech at the joint conference of the European Commission and the European Central
Bank 
16
May. www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190516~1c0d48c7d8.en.html
integration 
European 
Brussels, 
financial 
stability, 
and 
on 
de  Guindos,  L.  (2019),  “Euro  at  20  years:  the  road  ahead”,  address  at  the  European
Parliamentary Week, 19 February. 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190219~6f4c9be85b.en.html
IMD World Competitiveness Center (2019), World Competitiveness Ranking 2019, Lausanne. 
https://www.imd.org/wcc/world-competitiveness-center-rankings/countries-profiles/
Igan, D., H. Moussawi, A.F. Tieman, A. Zdzienicka, G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro (2019), The Long
Shadow of the Global Financial Crisis: Public Interventions in the Financial Sector, IMF Working
Paper No 164.
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/07/30/The-Long-Shadow-of-the-Global-Financial-
Crisis-Public-Interventions-in-the-Financial-Sector-48518
Montoya,  L.A.  and  M.  Buti  (2019),  “The  euro:  From  monetary  independence  to  monetary
sovereignty”, voxeu, 1 February. 
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
voxeu.org/article/euro-monetary-independence-monetary-sovereignty
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  Interview  for  the  Sunday  edition  of  “Kathimerini”  newspaper  and  Eirini
Chrysolora, 14 July.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=606&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2019), “The Greek economy 10 years after the crisis and lessons for the future
both for Greece and the Eurozone” Speech at the European Court of Auditors, Luxemburg, 28
June.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=604&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “A  Retrospective  on  Euro  Area  Monetary  Policy  during  and  after  the
Recent  Financial  Crisis”,  Speech  at  the  23rd  International  Conference  on  Macroeconomic
Analysis and International Finance, University of Crete, Department of Economics, Rethymno, 31
May. 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=596&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “Climate  Change:  Threats,  Challenges,  Solutions  for  Greece”,  keynote
address  at  the  Symposium  on  “Climate  Change:  Threats,  Challenges”,  Solutions  for  Greece,
April. 
(www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=589&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b)
Stournaras, Y. (2019), “Lessons from the Greek Crisis: Past, present, future”, speech at the 87th
International 
28
M a
. www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=583&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Conference, 
Economic 
Atlantic 
Athens 
h
c
r
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “International  economic  developments  and  prospects  of  the  Greek
economy”, speech at an event of the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki,
15 March. 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=582&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2019), “Addressing reversal of ﬁnancial integration”, Article published in the 100th
edition of The Bulletin (OMFIF). 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=560&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2019), New Year Speech to the Bank of Greece staff, Athens, 9 January. 
https://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=559&List_ID
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2018),  “Investment  Opportunities  in  Greece  −Investment  opportunities  in
Greece”, 
17
December. https://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=556&
“Repositioning  Greece” 
of  Ekali  Club, 
speech 
event 
the 
at 
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2018), “What lies in store for the eurozone? An assessment of the Greek bailout
programmes:  Has  the  EU  become  wiser?”,  speech  at  the  Economist’s  event:  Southeast
Europe–Germany Business and Investment Summit: Reassessing Europe’s priorities, Berlin, 3
December. 
https://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=553&List_ID
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
World  Bank  (2018),  Doing  Business  2019:  A  Year  of  Record  Reforms,  Rising  Influence,  31
October. www.worldbank.org/en/news/immersive-story/2018/10/31/doing-business-2019-a-year-
of-record-reforms-rising-influence
World Economic Forum (2018), The Global Competitiveness Report 2018. 
reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2018/?
doing_wp_cron=1553010986.3554461002349853515625
1
        A similar picture in terms of weak government efficiency is painted by IMD’s 2019 World Competitiveness
Ranking, where out of 63 countries Greece ranks 60th in public finance and tax policy, 57th in institutional
framework, 52nd in business legislation and 51st in societal framework.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
