Workshop on “Monetary Policy in the New Normal: Strategy, 
Instruments and Transmission”
Welcome address
by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Fabio Panetta
Rome, 11 October 2019
It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to Banca d’Italia for this workshop on 
“Monetary policy in the New Normal: Strategy, Instruments and Transmission”. 
This  event,  which  is  organized  by  the  Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy 
Directorate, has by now become an annual tradition, and brings together academics 
and central bankers to discuss relevant topics in the policy debate. The focus of 
this year’s edition is on monetary policy in the so-called “New Normal”. 
What  is  the  New  Normal?  Its  meaning  has  changed  somewhat  over  time. 
When the term was first used, it indicated generically the context in which monetary 
policy would have been operating after its “normalization”, following a decade of 
extremely accommodative monetary conditions.
By now, the meaning of the term New Normal has become narrower, as it tends 
to refer specifically to the monetary policy framework that is appropriate to deal 
with a macroeconomic scenario in which low interest rates, low potential output 
growth and low inflation last for quite some time. A “low-for-long” environment, 
in a nutshell.
Indeed, since the early 1980s, real interest rates in the advanced economies 
have been following a declining trend. The estimated natural rates of interest also 
decreased. These estimates are surrounded by a large degree of uncertainty, but 
there is by now ample consensus on natural rates being currently lower than they 
used to be. Several reasons account for this widespread trend, such as demographic 
changes,  productivity  developments,  the  global  saving  glut  and  the  increased 
appetite for scarce safe assets. Banca d’Italia economists have tackled this issue in 
the last couple of years.
As we all know, in this low interest rate environment, monetary policy has 
less space for addressing economic slowdowns, recessions and low inflation. The 
times of the so-called Great Moderation, when interest rate changes sufficed to 
steer  the  economy  around,  are  now  over.  Monetary  policy  had  to  adapt,  and  it 
did, in a profound and at times even spectacular and creative way. Central banks 
have shown great determination and inventiveness in responding first to the global 
financial crisis and, more recently in the euro area, to risks of deflationary spirals. 
After more than a decade since the outbreak of the crisis, the time has come to 
reflect upon how the “art” of central banking has evolved and to draw some lessons 
for a framework that can serve us well in the future. Having, and communicating 
to the public, a well-defined framework, as opposed to what Ben Bernanke called 
the Marcel Marceau communication strategy – that is: watch what I do, not what 
I say – is particularly helpful whenever one sails into uncharted waters, i.e., when 
the public does not have enough examples of the central bank’s past behaviour 
and  hence  the  information  vacuum  looms  unusually  large.  A  review  of  central 
banks’ monetary policy strategies could serve this purpose; many central banks are 
currently involved in doing precisely that.
I  am  sure  that  this  workshop  will  provide  important  insights  on  all  these 
issues. Among the many ways in which the term “New Normal” may be analysed, 
I am happy to see that today’s papers tackle three questions that are of the utmost 
relevance in my view. 
The first concerns the optimal inflation target in a low rates environment. 
I am sure that the keynote speech by Professor Galí as well as the papers that 
will be presented in the opening session will help us deepen our understanding 
of  the  implications  of  a  low  interest  rates  and  low  inflation  environment  for 
monetary policy.
A  second  issue  is  about  the  strategies  that  central  banks  should  follow: 
should bygones be bygones? Or should policymakers seek instead to undo past 
deviations of inflation from the target, adopting what are known as “make-up” 
strategies? This is one of the most momentous questions that is being discussed 
within the broad ongoing review of the monetary policy strategy by the Federal 
Reserve. I am delighted to have with us, as keynote speaker, Paolo Pesenti from 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and I am eager to hear his insight on 
these questions. 
The final issue is the new tools used after the outbreak of the global financial 
and  sovereign  debt  crises.  How  do  they  influence  the  real  economy?  Are  there 
limits  to  their  effectiveness?  Although  the  literature  is  flourishing  with  studies 
on  unconventional  monetary  policies,  little  is  known  about  the  transmission 
mechanism of these tools to the economy. The papers that will be presented in this 
afternoon’s session will shed further light on these issues.
Let me conclude by saying that the New Normal is already with us: returning 
to the pre-crisis status quo is not only unlikely, it is probably unfeasible. To deal 
successfully with this New Normal, central banks must keep developing analytical 
4
tools and robust models. A continuous interaction between academics and central 
bankers is the best way to prepare for the challenges ahead. Therefore, I would 
very  much  like  to  thank  all  the  speakers  and  discussants  for  taking  part  in  the 
workshop. I wish you all a fruitful and very productive day.
5
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
