Yandraduth  Googoolye:  The  need  for  banking  and  finance  to
evolve through technology and innovation
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion of the
celebration of the centenary of the presence of Barclays in Mauritius, Port Louis, 15 November
2019.
 The Chairman and Board Members of Barclays Bank Mauritius Limited
Mr Ravin Dajee, Managing Director
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good Evening
th
I wish to thank Barclays Mauritius, which is now part of Absa, for inviting me on this auspicious
occasion  which  is  the  celebration  of  the  hundred  years  of  presence  of  Barclays  in  Mauritius.
Soon to be renamed Absa, Barclays Bank Mauritius Limited has itself been through a series of
changes of name such as Barclays Dominion, Colonial & Overseas, Barclays Bank International,
etc.
This event underlines the rich history of our banking industry. Barclays is the second oldest bank
in the country, though Mauritius has been an international trade and financial centre as far back
as the 17  century. If you want to know more about our financial history, there is very interesting
book entitled “From Piastre to Polymer” which was issued in 2018 in the context of the Golden
Jubilee of the Bank of Mauritius. Some of the banknotes and coins used in those days are in our
currency museum, which I invite you to visit.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  history  shows  how  players  succeed  when  they  know  how  to  adapt  to
evolution and when they respond adequately to the needs of customers and clients. Institutions
also thrive in a competitive environment when they do not fear to embrace change and when they
come forward with innovative products and services.
Barclays Bank has an enviable track record in Mauritius, which goes much beyond the anecdotal
dimension. It is a bank that can pride itself of having narrowly missed the First World War, of
having gone through the Second World War, and sailed through economic crises.  Barclays is
now fighting on all fronts across the global banking sector.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  over  and  above  being  the  owner  of  the  building  with  the  first  lift  in
Mauritius,  Barclays  has  a  rich  history  filled  with  many  firsts.  I  would  like  to  highlight  some
milestones:
First foreign bank to start operations in Mauritius that is still going strong…
First  bank  to  employ  ladies  in  Mauritius…  with  the  ratio  of  female  employees  currently
standing at 56 per cent
First bank to employ people with disabilities…
First bank to obtain an offshore banking licence…
I remember this very well as I was closely associated with the issue of the licence itself. The
banking law was revised in 1988 and proclaimed in 1989.  The first licence was subsequently
issued to Barclays in May 1989.
Further,  Barclays  was  the  first  bank  to  set  up  a  branch  in  Rodrigues.  This  fact  must  be
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
underlined as it shows Barclays’ willingness to be at the forefront of serving all the citizens of
Mauritius, irrespective of the geographical boundaries. And, as we speak of Rodrigues, I would
like to thank  Barclays for having carried out operations there for and on behalf of the  Bank of
Mauritius until we opened our office in 1999 on the island. Were it not for this invitation, I would
have been in Rodrigues tonight in the context of the Interclub Youth Championship. This is an
event sponsored by banks and spearheaded by the Bank of Mauritius.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a fitting moment to pay tribute to someone who has played a critical
role in the success of Barclays in Mauritius. Mr Jacques de Navacelle, the first non-British CEO,
must be thanked for having believed in the potential of  Mauritius and for having persevered to
grow the business instead of closing it down. Were it not for his efforts and those of the staff he
led,  Barclays  would  not  be  celebrating  100  years  in  Mauritius.  My  thoughts  also  go  to  some
former British MDs of Barclays whom I have known personally, including Mr Ian Knapman, Mr P.
H. Noble and Mr Andrew Fair. I also vividly recall Mr Dajee joining Barclays as Corporate Director
and his appointment as Managing Director of Barclays Mauritius.
Barclays  must  be  congratulated  for  its  pioneering  stance  on  the  social  front  and  for  its
contribution towards building a better, healthier and more inclusive society.   Barclays has not
forgotten that a bank is not only a key driver of economic growth but also an enabler of positive
change in the community. This is a role that banks must always bear in mind in their business
strategies so that they always put customers and citizens at the centre of everything they do.
The social mission of banks is something about which the Bank of Mauritius regularly reminds
stakeholders. Since its establishment in 1967, the Bank of Mauritius has been actively working
for  the  socio-economic  development  of  the  country.  As  regulator  and  facilitator,  the  Bank  of
Mauritius  has  been  accompanying  banks  in  their  transformative  journey.    Though  the  oldest
banks in Mauritius have had a longer journey than the other banks and even the central bank,
there is still a very long way to go!
Though  Barclays  is  licensed  primarily  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  it  is  also  regulated  by  the
Financial  Services  Commission  for  some  of  its  activities.  Its  business  is  thriving  and  its
contribution to the financial sector is expected to grow further over time. Banks should invest to
tap  the  local  as  well  as  the  regional  market  further  to  expand  the  contribution  of  the  financial
sector to GDP, from its current level of around 12 per cent.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Bank of Mauritius makes forecasts but it can’t predict the future. Yet,
the only certainty which can shape our steps is that there is an urgent need for the banking and
finance industry to reinvent itself if it wants to stay relevant in an increasingly competitive global
environment and with rapid digitalisation of banking business.
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  wants  to  give  an  even  greater  dimension  to  our
competitiveness  and  resilience  through  technology,  discipline  and  innovation.  Barclays,  from
what I understand, has been very busy lately in the area of Fintech and blockchain. Barclays has
a  Tech  Forum  consisting  of  leading  Fintech  and  IT  professionals.  Last  year,  it  has  filed  two
patents on Secure Digital Data Operations and Data Validation and Storage system with the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office.
I therefore invite the Management of Barclays Mauritius to support the Bank of Mauritius’ vision for
the banking industry by contributing in terms of expertise and technology.
The Bank of Mauritius has focused on modernising the banking infrastructure. Just a few months
ago, we launched MauCAS, our Mauritius Central Automated Switch. Barclays will be joining the
Instant Payment System next month and the Card Payment System early next year. MauCAS is
a game changer that will open up new possibilities for banks, businesses and entrepreneurs.
The  new  payments  ecosystem  will  also  allow  for  the  participation  of  banks  and  non-bank
operators.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am pleased to share that we are working on several ground-breaking projects that will propel
our financial jurisdiction in a  new  era.  I  shall  be  sharing  the  details  in  two  weeks’  time  at  our
Annual  Dinner  with  Major  Economic  Stakeholders.  Do  bear  with  me  as  I  want  to  keep  some
surprises in store for that day…
Ladies and gentlemen, the celebration of the 100 years of presence of Barclays in Mauritius is an
opportunity for me to congratulate Barclays for its journey and to make the same wish for other
younger banks and financial institutions.
On behalf of the Board and staff of the Bank of Mauritius and in my own name, I wish a happy
centenary to Barclays and I congratulate the Board Directors, the bank’s management and its
employees for steering the venerable institution in a new century. I wish the very best to Barclays
and Absa in their new Pan-African adventure.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
