Big Data & Machine Learning Applications for Central Banks
Closing Remarks by Daniele Franco  
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, 22 October 2019
The workshop on ‘Big Data & Machine Learning Applications for Central Banks’ is 
coming to an end. Let me begin by thanking the speakers, discussants and participants. 
This is the third workshop organized by Banca d’Italia on these issues. And it will not 
be the last. Why are we so interested in these topics? 
A few days ago, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, noted that 
monetary policy is data dependent. It is adjusted over time in response to new information 
about the state of the economy. Monetary policy must be based on timely and accurate 
data. 
This is why central banks have always made great efforts when it comes to collecting 
and analysing data. 
Throughout its history, Banca d’Italia has drawn extensively on data published by 
the  National  Statistical  Institute  and  other  national  and  international  agencies.  But  it 
has also been an active producer of statistics, not only on banking, financial and fiscal 
variables, but also on firms and households. 
Banca d’Italia has collected micro-level statistical information on companies since 
the early 1950s. Back then only a few aggregate statistics were available. We began by 
surveying the balance sheets of a small group of firms, an activity that was progressively 
expanded until it became what is now the Survey on Industrial and Service Firms. These 
days, we collect detailed data on about 5,000 firms. 
In the early 1960s, the Bank started the survey on household finance. This survey 
allows  us  to  study  the  distribution  of  income  and  wealth  at  the  micro  level  in  order 
to analyse the preferences of individuals and the determinants of their economic and 
financial decisions. In recent years, we have interviewed about 8,000 households in each 
survey.
The  digitalization  of  the  economy  is  changing  our  lives,  the  organization  of 
production  and  our  jobs.  It  also  poses  new  challenges,  requiring  changes  in  the  way 
central banks collect and analyse data. 
The  typical  indicators  used  by  central  banks  to  measure  inflation,  investment  or 
economic activity may not fully capture the changes determined by digitalization. 
For example, online shopping has caused a disruption in the retail sector around 
the globe along with changes in pricing behaviour. When measuring inflation we should 
take account of the prices of online stores such as Amazon or eBay.
Gross domestic product is one of the pillars of macroeconomic statistics. It is still 
the most important measure of economic activity and wellbeing. However, the growth 
of  the  digital  economy,  whose  output  is  usually  immaterial,  limits  the  role  of  GDP  in 
measuring economic activity and wellbeing. 
Digitalization  has  dramatically  changed  how  businesses  are  conducted  and 
goods and services purchased. This brings us to the productivity paradox: productivity 
in  industrialized  countries  is  growing  less  than  in  past  decades  while  economies  are 
experiencing  rapid  digitalization.  Jerome  Powell  noted  that  current  statistics  may 
understate productivity growth because they miss the value that we increasingly derive 
from new technologies, such as internet connections and smartphones. 
The  measurement  of  the  digital  economy  is  now  an  important  challenge  for 
statisticians and economists. We need new methodological insights.
To  answer  some  of  these  questions,  in  2016  Banca  d’Italia  put  together  a  team 
to assess the potential benefits and hidden risks of Big Data, Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning. 
Despite  controversies  about  privacy  issues,  despite  password  hacking  and  other 
worrisome  aspects  of  online  life,  the  world  continues  to  embrace  the  internet  and 
social media. It is estimated that more than 5.1 billion people (two thirds of the world’s 
population) use a mobile phone and 4.4 billion people take advantage of internet services. 
In 2018 the number of internet users recorded 9 per cent growth (see the We Are Social 
blog).
So we have plenty of new data which can be mined to improve our knowledge of 
economic developments. 
To understand and exploit these data we need to bring together different skillsets: 
those of economists, statisticians, engineers and computer scientists. 
What are the advantages of these data? In his lecture on ‘Big Data and Measurement: 
From Inflation to Discrimination’, the MIT Professor Roberto Rigobon said that the biggest 
advantages of organic data (i.e. Big data) as against designed data (such as administrative 
data) are that: (i) they reduce the cost of collecting and providing information and (ii) 
they  do  not  introduce  distortions  arising  from  the  behaviour  of  respondents.  People 
don’t lie to their GPS or to Google. 
The banking and financial industries have also been profoundly affected by these 
developments. Central banks must react in a timely manner and develop new tools to 
2
carry  out  their  missions:  monetary  policy,  banking  supervision  and  payment  system 
oversight. 
In these two days you have seen many applications which can improve central bank 
activities. 
Some papers focused on the extraction of quantitative information from texts and 
images: this can be useful for forecasting financial market variables, predicting headline 
inflation, and analysing the real estate market.1 
We have seen the utility of machine learning algorithms for combating illicit financial 
activities and increasing the statistical accuracy of micro- and macro-economic indicators 
(for example, forecasts of the Index of Industrial Production).2 
Some indicators have moved rapidly from the experimental to the production stage. 
For example, at Banca d’Italia we have developed and now regularly use an indicator of 
the situation of the main banks obtained using selected tweets.3 
We have improved our estimates of Foreign Direct Investment for the Balance of 
Payments by introducing Machine Learning classifiers.4
We  are  also  working  on  other  sources  of  information,  such  as  credit  and  debit 
card payment data, which should help us to assess consumption, retail sales and other 
macroeconomic variables.5
These developments present significant challenges. I will mention three.
First,  there  is  a  risk  of  biased  statistical  inference.  Big  data  and,  in  particular, 
unstructured data collected from social media may reflect only a part of the population. 
2
1  See M. Loberto, ‘The rental market in Italian cities’, Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working 
Papers), 1228, 2019. See M. Loberto, A. Luciani, and M. Pangallo, ‘The potential of big housing 
data:  an  application  to  the  Italian  real-estate  market’,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di  Discussione 
(Working Papers) ’,1171, 2018. See also M. Bernardini, P. Cariello, M. De Leonardis, J. Marcucci, 
F. Quarta, and A. Tagliabracci, ‘Deriving Indicators from a Large Corpus of Italian Documents’,
Bank  of  Italy  Workshop  on  Big  data  &  Machine  Learning  Applications  for  Central  banks,
October 2019; V. Astuti, G. Bruno, S. Marchetti, and J. Marcucci, ‘News and Banks’ Equities:
Do Words Have Predictive Power?’, Bank of Italy Workshop on Big data & Machine Learning
Applications for Central banks, October 2019.
See  V.  Aprigliano,  G.  Bruno,  S.  Emiliozzi,  S.  Marchetti,  J.  Marcucci,  and  D.  Nicoletti,  ‘Neural 
Networks for Macroeconomic Forecasting’, Bank of Italy Workshop on Big data & Machine 
Learning Applications for Central banks, October 2019.
See M. Accornero and M. Moscatelli, ‘Listening to the buzz: social media sentiment and retail 
depositors’ trust’, Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), 1165, 2018. 
A. Carboni and A. Moro, ‘Imputation techniques for the nationality of foreign shareholders
in  Italian  firms’,  External  sector  statistics:  current  issues  and  new  challenges.  Irving  Fisher 
Committee on Central Bank Statistics, 2018.
See G. Ardizzi, S. Emiliozzi, J. Marcucci and L. Monteforte, ‘News and consumer card payments’, 
Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), 1233, 2019; V. Aprigliano, G. Ardizzi and  
L. Monteforte, ‘Using the payment system data to forecast the Italian GDP’, Banca d’Italia, Temi
di Discussione (Working Papers), 1098, 2017.
3
4
5
3
Increasing the sample does not improve the accuracy of the estimates if the source of 
the bias is not understood and dealt with. The use of massive amounts of rough data 
may result in an exceptionally good in-sample fit but may perform poorly out-of-sample  
(the curse of overfitting). 
Moreover, when using Big data, special attention should be paid to the robustness 
and stability of the estimates over time.
The  second  challenge  is  privacy.  Protecting  the  integrity  and  confidentiality  of 
personal  data  is  of  paramount  importance  to  our  societies.  Storing  personal  data  in 
digital repositories belonging to public and private institutions can be risky. We should 
avoid  any  use  for  illegitimate  purposes  such  as  the  second-hand  trading  of  personal 
information.
At  Banca  d’Italia,  we  are  exploring  new  avenues  for  utilizing  microdata  without 
jeopardizing  their  confidentiality.  In  this  way  data  from  different  institutions  can  be 
combined to produce aggregate statistics that are important for understanding economic, 
financial  and  welfare  issues.  We  have  started  experimenting  some  privacy-preserving 
algorithms with Istat. We are also discussing these issues with Eurostat and the National 
Authority for Personal Data Protection.
The third challenge concerns the preservation of data over time. While we keep 
producing a huge amount of data, we have not yet agreed on a shared set of criteria for 
making these data accessible in the future. It is crucial that technology-neutral standards 
be established to ensure data availability for future generations. Coordination between 
statistical agencies, governments, academia and private companies is equally crucial. 
Timely and accurate information derived from non-traditional data sources, as well 
as new analytical techniques can help central banks to improve their knowledge of the 
economy and society, allowing them to make better-informed data-driven decisions.
Banca d’Italia is firmly committed to carrying out further research on these issues 
and to cooperating with other institutions to strengthen methodologies and applications. 
Future events will certainly be organized to share the results of our research activity. 
4
