December  5,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Oita 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Oita Branch. 
 The Bank has implemented quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- or QQE for short 
-- since April 2013 and introduced various additional measures such as the negative interest 
rate  policy,  yield  curve  control,  strengthening  the  framework  for  continuous  monetary 
easing, and clarification of forward guidance for policy rates, all with the aim of achieving 
the inflation target of 2 percent. 
 As  a  result  of  these  measures,  Japan's  economy  has  been  improving.  It  is  true  that  the 
economic expansion has not exactly been robust, reflecting such events as the consumption 
tax hike in fiscal 2014 from 5 percent to 8 percent, the latest hike in October 2019 from 8 
percent  to  10  percent,  the  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  observed  from  mid-2015 
through early 2016 and from the second half of 2018  to the present, and the downtrend in 
the  working-age  population.  Nevertheless,  the  economy  has  managed  to  continue  its 
expansion so far. 
 Today, I would like to explain monetary policy measures conducted by the Bank and what 
they have achieved. First and foremost, the achievements are obvious. The unemployment 
rate  has  declined  to  its  lowest  level  in  nearly  three  decades  and  productivity  has  been 
increasing. The challenge lies elsewhere; namely, in the fact that prices have not been rising. 
It is increasingly being argued that interest rates consequently have remained low, eroding 
banks' profitability. However, I believe that the deterioration in banks' profitability is caused 
by  the  structural  problem  that  banks  are  accumulating  more  deposits  than  they  can  lend. 
Banks therefore need to deal with this problem. Moreover, if interest rates were raised, this 
would lead to a decrease in the demand for loans, a decline in prices, an appreciation of the 
yen, an economic downturn, an increase in bankruptcies (raising banks' credit costs), and so 
forth.  Therefore,  raising  interest  rates  would  not  solve  the  problem.  Considering  that  the 
current  low  interest  rates  are  partly  attributable  to  the  deflationary  monetary  policies 
 1 
 pursued  in  the  past,  as  I  will  describe  later,  the  only  way  out  is  to  maintain  the  current 
accommodative  monetary  policy  in  order  to  achieve  sustained  expansion  of  economic 
activity until we see increases in prices and interest rates. 
 I. Monetary Easing Measures 
Table 1 presents an  outline of the monetary policy  measures conducted by the Bank since 
April 2013, when it introduced bold monetary policy. 
 Table 1 Timeline of the Bank's Monetary Policy Measures 
                       2 
 As  a  result  of  these  measures,  real  interest  rates  --  nominal  interest  rates  minus  expected 
inflation rates -- have greatly declined due to the decrease in nominal interest rates and the 
rise in inflation expectations. 
 The decline in real interest rates has stimulated investment, boosted stock prices in Japan, 
and  led to  a  depreciation of  the  yen.  Rising  stock  prices  further  raise investment and  lead 
households  that  have  become  wealthier  to  increase  their  consumption  expenditure.  It  is 
through these channels that economic activity started to improve. 
 Next, I would like to explain my stance on the new forward guidance introduced in October 
2019, which is shown in Table 1. The forward guidance in April 2019 stated that the Bank 
"intends to maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates 
for an extended period of time, at least through around spring 2020." While I  thought that 
clarifying  the  forward  guidance  was  desirable,  I  opposed  the  policy  proposal  on  the  basis 
that  the  Bank  should  indicate  data-dependent  guidance  to  further  clarify  its  link  with  the 
price  stability  target.1  Under  the  new  guidance,  the  Bank  "expects  short-  and  long-term 
interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels as long as it is necessary to pay close 
attention  to  the  possibility  that  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target 
will  be  lost."  Although  it  is  somewhat  ambiguous,  I  voted  for  this  proposal  because  the 
guidance  became  more  akin  to  data-dependent  guidance,  in  which  the  link  to  the  price 
stability target is clearer, and allowed for the possibility of a future interest rate reduction. 
However,  I  continued  to  oppose  allowing  long-term  yields  to  move  in  a  more  flexible 
manner. Since I already have elaborated on my reasons for this in the past, let me move on 
to the next topic.2 
 II. Achievements of Bold Monetary Easing 
Improvement in economic activity can be seen in various fields. There are a lot of indicators 
that  show  improvement,  such  as  employment,  productivity,  fiscal  conditions,  investment, 
exports, corporate profits, and wages; moreover, perceptions that the economy is recovering, 
                                                 
1  For  my  opinion  regarding  data-dependent  forward  guidance,  see  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic 
Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan:  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with  Business  Leaders  in 
Yamanashi," Bank of Japan, March 2019. 
2  See the reference cited in footnote 1. 
 3 
 the  suicide  rate,  the  income  distribution, and  women's  entry  into  the  labor market  provide 
further  indications  of  improvement.3  Of  these  indicators,  I  would  like  to  talk  today  about 
the improvements in employment, productivity, and fiscal conditions. 
 Improvement in Employment 
The 
improvement 
in  employment 
is  clear 
from 
the 
rise 
in 
the  active 
job 
openings-to-applicants  ratio,  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate,  the  increase  in  the 
number of employees, and other indicators. The increase in the number of employees is due 
to  the  rise  in  the  employment  rates  of  women  and  the  elderly  in  particular.  While  there 
remains  the  issue  that many  of  the  women and  the  elderly  are  not  regular but  non-regular 
employees  and  only  work  short  hours,  the  situation  certainly  is  an  improvement  from  the 
past. In an aging society, the fact that the employment rate of the elderly actually  has risen 
holds great importance. The problem with an aging population is that the number of people 
who  cannot  work  because  of  old  age  is  increasing  relative  to  the  number  of  working-age 
people. It is worrying that it seems the ratio of the elderly (those aged 65 and over) to the 
working-age population (those aged 15-64) will rise from 47 percent in 2018 to 70 percent 
in  2045  (and  then  further  rise  moderately  to  75  percent  in  2065).  However,  if  we  assume 
that  the  working-age  population  comprises  those  aged  15-69  and  the  elderly  population 
consists  of  those  aged  70  and  over,  the  ratio  of  the  elderly  to  the  working-age  population 
will reach only 49 percent in 2045 and 55 percent in 2065. Looked at this way, the increase 
in the employment rate of the elderly brought about by monetary easing can be regarded as 
good news for Japan's aging society. 
 Next,  I  would  like  to  look  at  the  employment  situation,  focusing  on  the  employment 
environment for the young. Chart 1 shows the unemployment rate, the youth unemployment 
rate, and the job offer rates for university students as of October and December of the year 
before  they  graduate  and  as  of  February  and  April  of  the  year  of  graduation. 4,5  As 
                                                 
3  Regarding improvements in these indicators, also see Yutaka Harada, "Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Fukushima," Bank of 
Japan,  November  2017,  and  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in 
Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Yamanashi," Bank of Japan, March 2019. 
4  The job offer rate is the ratio of students who have received job offers among applicants. 
5  The academic term in Japan starts in April and ends in March. 
 4 
 mentioned earlier, the overall unemployment rate has declined almost consistently, marking 
2.4  percent  in  October  2019.  While  the  youth  unemployment  rate  usually  is  higher  and 
tends to be more volatile than the overall unemployment rate, this also  has been declining 
steadily.  In  addition,  the  job  offer  rates  for  the  respective  months  have  registered  record 
highs. While figures for the job offer rates are only available from 1997, the rates must have 
been high during the bubble period and lower after the burst of the bubble, given that they 
are negatively correlated with the youth unemployment  rate. The shaded areas in the chart 
represent the so-called "employment ice age."6  If the unemployment rate had been lowered 
through monetary policy, there might not have been such an employment ice age, or at least 
it might have been mitigated. 
 Chart 1 Unemployment Rates and Job Offer Rates 
                                                              
6  Per  its  support  plan  for  the  employment  ice  age  generation,  released  on  May  29,  2019,  the 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare defined people who graduated from university from around 
1993 to 2004 as the "employment ice age generation." The period of a few years from the outbreak 
of the global financial crisis in 2008 is also regarded as a reemergence of the employment ice age, 
according to the following report. Genda Yuji et al., Shūshoku hyōgaki sedai no keizai, shakai e no 
eikyō  to  taisaku ni  kansuru kenkyū  iinkai  hōkokusho  (Tokyo:  Japanese Trade  Union  Confederation 
Research Institute for Advancement of Living Standards, November 2016). Regarding the impacts of 
the  employment  ice  age,  see  Saeko  Maeda  et  al.,  "How  does  the  first  job  at  graduation  matter  for 
female workers in Japan?" ESRI Discussion Paper Series, no. 234, March 2010. 
 5 
 The  Bank  started  QQE  in  April  2013,  but  if  it  had  been  introduced  earlier,  the 
unemployment  rate  in  Japan  without  doubt  would  have  remained  in  the  range  of  2.0-3.0 
percent  throughout.  Since  the  unemployment  rate  from  the  mid-1990s  to  2012  on  average 
was  roughly  4.5  percent,  the  current  unemployment  rate  of  2.4  percent  means  that  the 
unemployment  rate  has  almost  halved.  This  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  also  has 
helped to raise productivity, which I will touch on next. 
 Productivity Growth 
Productivity also  has been rising in tandem with the improvement in employment. Since I 
have talked about this in the past, here I only would like to note that it has been rising.7  Let 
me  just  briefly  summarize  the  reason  behind  this  occurrence.  When  an  economy  is  in 
recession,  firms  curtail  investment  in  physical  assets,  human  resources,  and  research  and 
development. Young people caught up in the employment ice age missed out on on-the-job 
training opportunities. Although it is impossible to make up all the lost ground, some of it 
can be slowly gained over time, helping to gradually raise the productivity of the economy. 
 Improvement in Fiscal Conditions 
Bold  monetary  easing  has  stimulated  economic  activity,  increased  tax  revenues,  and 
improved  fiscal  conditions.  Chart  2  presents  the  ratios  relative  to  nominal  GDP  of  the 
general government fiscal balance, gross government debt outstanding, and net government 
debt  outstanding.  The  GDP  ratio  of  the  general  government  deficit  has  decreased  by  5.6 
percentage points from 8.3 percent in fiscal 2012 to 2.7 percent in fiscal 2017, and the GDP 
ratio of net government debt, which had been increasing sharply, is more or less unchanged 
at around 121 percent since fiscal 2012.8   
                                                  
7  See Harada Yutaka, "Nihon keizai to seisansei: Special Lecture at a Conference Commemorating 
Daiwa Institute of  Research's 200th Release of Japan's  Economic Outlook," Bank of Japan, March 
2019. 
8  Of the improvement in the GDP ratio of the general government fiscal balance of 5.6 percentage 
points, 1.5 percentage points were brought about by the consumption tax hike  from 5 percent to 8 
percent. 
 6 
 Let me explain the importance of net government debt.9  Net government debt is calculated 
by  subtracting  government  financial  assets  from  gross  government  debt.  It  used  to  be 
argued that, although Japan's gross government debt was substantial, this was not a problem 
because net government debt was not that large. However, at present, net government debt 
is actually also  fairly large. Net government debt matters when considering the possibility 
of government debt default. While some argue that, given the large amount of government 
debt, even a small increase in interest rates could cause serious problems, it is important to 
think  about  the  impact  in  terms  of  net  debt.  The  reason  is  that  when  interest  rates  rise, 
interest receipts on financial assets held by the government also increase, partly cancelling 
out the impact on gross government debt. 
 Chart  2  General  Government  Fiscal  Balance,  Gross  Government  Debt,  and  Net 
Government Debt (Ratios Relative to Nominal GDP) 
                                                                
9  The  following  articles  also  note  the  importance  of  net  debt.  Tomoyuki  Nakajima  and  Shuhei 
Takahashi,  "The  optimum  quantity  of  debt  for  Japan,"  Journal  of  the  Japanese  and  International 
Economies,  vol.  46,  issue  C,  17-26,  December  2017.  Koji  Nakamura  and  Tomoyuki  Yagi,  "Fiscal 
Conditions  and  Long-term  Interest  Rates,"  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  vol.  35,  November 
2017. 
 7 
 III. Why Interest Rates Are Low 
Since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  employment  has  been  improving,  productivity  has  been 
rising, and fiscal conditions have been improving. What, then, is at the core of the problem 
of bold monetary policy? Simply put, prices have not been rising. Prior to the  introduction 
of QQE, the Bank decided that it would aim to achieve inflation of 2 percent. However, the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  excluding  fresh  food  for 
October  2019  is  0.4  percent,  a  long  way  off  the  target.10  You  might  think  that  it  is  not  a 
problem  that  prices  are  not  rising  if  employment  is  improving,  productivity  is  rising,  and 
fiscal  conditions  are  improving.  However,  if  prices  do  not  rise,  neither  will  interest  rates, 
which poses a problem for financial institutions.11 
 When asked "Why are interest rates in Japan low?" one might answer: "Because that is the 
Bank's  very  intention."  However,  this  is  not  necessarily  the  case.  From  a  theoretical 
perspective, maintaining interest rates at low levels will cause the economy to overheat and 
prices to rise, possibly resulting in inflation that significantly exceeds 2 percent. In order to 
avoid this, interest rates will need to be raised. Alternatively, they will rise over time in due 
course.  In  a  nutshell,  in the  long  term,  a  low interest  rate  policy  brings  about  increases  in 
prices and nominal interest rates. Looked at from a different angle, what this means is that 
Japan fell into deflation and a situation of low interest rates because interest rates were not 
                                                 
10  According  to  the  Statistics  Bureau,  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  and  Communications,  the  CPI 
figure becomes 0.2 percent when the effects of the consumption tax hike and the introduction of free 
preschool education are excluded. 
11  I have explained the importance of the 2 percent price stability target in the section titled "Why Is 
the  2  Percent  Inflation  Target  Important?"  in  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and 
Monetary Policy in Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Nagasaki," Bank of Japan, 
May 2019. 
 8 
 lowered  sufficiently  during  economic  downturns  in  the  past.12  Moreover,  this  decline  in 
interest rates is actually not unique to Japan, but rather a global phenomenon. 
 Chart 3 shows 10-year government bond yields for major countries. For visual clarity, each 
point  represents  a  five-year  average.  Interest  rates  have  been  declining  globally  and, 
although  not  visible  in  the  chart,  10-year  government  bond  yields  have  been  negative  in 
Japan, Germany, and France since around the middle of 2019. 
 Chart 3 10-Year Government Bond Yields for Major Countries 
                                                              
12  Harada Yutaka, "Naze nihon no kinri wa hikui no ka," Keiki to saikuru, no. 62, Japan Association 
of  Business  Cycle  Studies,  November  2016.  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and 
Monetary Policy in Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Ishikawa," Bank of Japan, 
July  2018.  Hibiki  Ichiue  and  Yuhei  Shimizu,  "Determinants  of  long-term  yields:  A  panel  data 
analysis of  major countries,"  Japan and the World Economy 34-35 (2015) 44-55. While this paper 
argues that declines in long-term  interest rates can be explained by decreases in expected inflation 
rates  and  expected  labor  productivity  growth  rates,  the  same  can  be  said  of  declines  in  observed 
inflation  rates  and  labor  productivity  growth  rates  as  these  are  also  capable  of  pushing  down  the 
expected rates. Ben S. Bernanke, "Why are interest rates so low?" Brookings Institution, March 30, 
2015, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2015/03/30/why-are-interest-rates-so-low/. 
 9 
 Low interest rates reflect low rates of both real economic growth and inflation. Let us look 
at  the  nominal  GDP  growth  rate,  which  is  the  sum  of  these  two  rates.  As  can  be  seen  in 
Chart 4, nominal GDP growth rates of major countries have been declining on the whole. 
 Chart 4 Nominal GDP Growth Rates of Major Countries 
              While  nominal  GDP  growth  rates  have  indeed  been  declining,  this  alone  cannot  fully 
explain  the  decline  in  interest  rates.  In  Chart  5,  the  vertical  axis  represents  10-year 
government bond yields, while the horizontal axis represents the nominal GDP growth rates 
of major countries. Each dot in the chart depicts the five-year average for each country from 
1990  to  the  present.  Up  until  the  2000s,  interest  rates  moved  in  sync  with  nominal  GDP 
growth  rates  and  were  around  2  percentage  points  higher  than  them.  However,  looking  at 
the trend  since  the  second  half  of  the  2010s, interest  rates  have  fallen  2  percentage  points 
below nominal GDP growth rates and have failed to rise substantially when nominal GDP 
growth rates increased to some extent. However,  because it is only since the start of 2010 
that interest rates  have been below nominal GDP growth rates, the situation might change 
quickly and interest rates may rise swiftly if nominal GDP growth rates increase. Therefore, 
we might not have to expect the situation of the past five to ten years to last forever. 
  10 
 Chart 5 Nominal Interest Rates and Nominal GDP Growth Rates 
                Why did interest rates fall more than the nominal GDP growth rate? Proposed explanations 
for  the  decline  in  interest  rates, in  addition  to  the decline in  the  rates  of  inflation  and real 
GDP growth, include changes in the saving-investment balance.13  Various factors are said 
to  be  responsible  for  such  changes:  demographic  forces;  higher  inequality;  the  glut  of 
precautionary  saving  by  emerging  markets;  the  decline  in  the  relative  price  of  capital;  the 
high  profitability  of  large  IT  firms  and  their  large  cash  reserves;  lower  public  investment; 
the shortage of safe assets; and the improvement in fiscal conditions.14  Some argue that the 
recent  decline  in  interest  rates  is  cyclical  and  changes  in  the  saving-investment  balance 
might be due to the decline in investment and increase in savings, and that this has led to the 
decline in interest rates. 
                                                 
13  See  Lukasz  Rachel  and  Thomas  D.  Smith,  "Are  Low  Real  Interest  Rates  Here  to  Stay?" 
International  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  vol.  13  (3),  1-42,  September  2017,  and  other  articles 
through page 117 in this volume of the journal. 
14  With  regard  to  the  shortage  of  safe  assets,  see  Ricardo  J.  Caballero,  Emmanuel  Farhi,  and 
Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas,  "The  Safe  Assets  Shortage  Conundrum,"  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, vol. 31 (3), 29-46, Summer 2017. 
 11 
 Among the reasons behind the decline in interest rates mentioned earlier, I will focus on the 
effects  of  the  improvement  in  fiscal  conditions  in  Japan.  First,  let  us  assume  that  interest 
rates  in  Japan  are  determined  by  the  saving-investment  balance  in  Japan.  Another 
assumption is that a change in fiscal conditions does not affect private-sector decisions with 
regard to saving and investment. 
 In  fiscal  2012,  long-term  interest  rates  in  Japan  were  0.8  percent,  while  gross  national 
savings,  which  equal  total  investment  --  the  sum  of  domestic  and  foreign  investment  -- 
amounted  to  115  trillion  yen.  The  general  government  deficit  declined  by  26  trillion  yen 
from  fiscal  2012  to  fiscal  2017.  Due  to  this  decline,  gross  national  savings  should  have 
increased by 26 trillion yen. Chart 6 shows the relationship between interest rates and gross 
national savings, which equal total investment. As the interest elasticity of savings is said to 
be small, the supply curve of savings is almost vertical. Meanwhile, the investment demand 
curve is drawn assuming that the interest elasticity of investment is one. The chart indicates 
that  interest  rates  declined  by  0.18  percentage  points  due  to  the  decline  in  the  general 
government deficit by 26 trillion yen.15 
 Chart 6 Fiscal Balance and Interest Rates 
                                                           
15  Nakamura  and  Yagi  ibid.  (see  footnote  9)  estimates  that,  in  the  case  where  the  ratio  of  net 
government  debt  to  GDP  exceeds  90  percent,  a  1  percentage  point  increase  in  the  ratio  of  fiscal 
deficit  to  GDP  would  push  up  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  by  0.26  percentage  points.  This 
estimate is around 8 times as much as the one presented in my speech today. 
 12 
 While it is difficult to judge whether this decline in interest rates is large or small, what is 
clear is that, if the government deficit led to a rise in interest rates, this would pose a major 
problem,  as  it  would  reduce  important  investment  and  damage  Japan's  economy  in  the 
future; on the other hand, if the government deficit does not lead to a rise in interest rates, it 
also does not reduce important investment, and would not be a major problem. 
 Arguments That Low Interest Rates Cause Problems 
In addition to the debate surrounding low interest rates mentioned earlier, it has been argued 
that the  low interest  rate policy  allows  inefficient  firms  to  survive,  leading  to  a  decline  in 
productivity and, consequently, a decline in the natural rate of interest. This could be called 
the "zombie firm argument" -- that is, the argument that low interest rates artificially  keep 
inefficient firms alive.16  Yet another argument is that the current low interest rates are due 
to low interest rates in the past that brought about a "frontloading" of demand and resulted 
in a further decline in interest rates.17 
 First  of  all,  it  needs  to  be  noted  that  these  arguments  focus  on  real,  not  nominal,  interest 
rates. Thus, as for the first argument that the low interest rate policy allows inefficient firms 
to  survive,  leading  to  a  decline  in  productivity,  this  is  implausible  given  that  productivity 
has been rising as a result of QQE. In addition, if inefficient firms were forced to exit the 
market because of higher interest rates, this would lead to employment issues. In contrast, 
Japan's  economy  is  currently  facing  labor  shortages  due  to  monetary  easing.  If  inefficient 
firms  are  to  be  forced  to  exit  the  market,  it  is  much  better  if  this  occurs  through  labor 
shortages and upward wage pressures. 
 With regard to the second argument that the current low interest rates are merely the result 
of  a  "frontloading"  of  future  demand,  both  production  and  people's  incomes  have  been 
                                                 
16  There  had  been  claims  that,  due  to  low  interest  rates,  inefficient  firms  are  able  to  survive.  For 
example,  see  "Zonbi  kigyō  to  wa  hatan  jōtai  'oi  kashi'  de  enmei,"  Nikkei,  February  9,  2019  and 
Kamei  Katsuji,  "Zonbi  o  amayakasu  nichigin,"  Nikkei,  October  4,  2019.  These  referred  to  the 
following analysis indicating that the increase in the number of zombie firms is linked to the effects 
of  lower  interest  rates:  Ryan  Banerjee  and  Boris  Hofmann,  "The  rise  of  zombie  firms:  causes  and 
consequences," BIS Quarterly Review, Bank for International Settlements, September 2018. 
17  See, for example, Okina Kunio, Kinri to Keizai (Tokyo: Diamond, Inc, 2017), 174-177. 
 13 
 rising. I assume that when people have higher incomes, they are likely to demand a higher 
standard  of  living  in  the  future  as  well.  Owing  to  the  stable  exchange  rate  environment 
brought  about  by  QQE,  more  foreign  visitors  have  been  coming  to  Japan.  I  feel  that  it  is 
rather strange to think that Japan has merely attracted visitors that were expected to come in 
the  future  and  that,  since  these  visitors  will  not  come  in  the  future,  this  would  lead  to  a 
decline of the economy in the future. 
 When the Bank introduced QQE, I assumed that achieving the inflation target of 2 percent 
would not take much time. If the inflation rate were to approach 2 percent, the Bank would 
have  to  raise  interest  rates.  I  therefore  did  not  expect  interest  rates  to  stay  at  around  0 
percent  or  in  negative  territory  for  such  a  long  period  of  time.  It  seems  that  many 
economists had similar expectations.18 
 Let me go back to the discussion regarding the factors underlying low interest rates. Given 
that  interest  rates  have  fallen  2  percentage  points  below  nominal  GDP  growth  rates,  the 
decrease in the fiscal deficit mentioned earlier cannot fully explain the low interest rates. In 
fact,  the  reasons  why  interest  rates  have  fallen  so  much  are  not  yet  fully  understood. 
However,  given  that  interest  rates  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States  --  where 
inflation  rates  of  around  2  percent  had  been  successfully  maintained  --  have  remained 
higher than interest rates in Japan, it is clear that Japan's past deflationary monetary policy 
has led to the decline in interest rates. In addition, it is only for the last five or ten years that 
interest  rates  have  been  2  percentage  points  below  nominal  GDP  growth  rates.  Therefore, 
we might not have to expect this situation to last forever. 
                                                 
18  For  example,  Hayakawa  argues  that  private  banks  currently  hold  huge  amounts  of  government 
bonds.  In  terms  of  quantity,  major  banks  have  substantial  amounts  of  government  bonds,  but  the 
duration of their bonds is little more than two years. Meanwhile, the duration of the bonds held by 
regional financial institutions is around four years -- longer than that of bonds held by major banks. 
Since  there  is  little  demand  for  credit  from  regional  financial  institutions,  such  institutions'  only 
option  is  to  buy  bonds,  which  extends  the  duration  of  their  bonds.  If  prices  of  government  bonds 
were  to  fall,  it  is  regional  financial  institutions  that  would  incur  the  greatest  losses,  not  the  major 
banks. For details, see Hayakawa Hideo, "Waga kuni kin'yūgyō no kadai," Shin kokusaku, Research 
Institute  for  National  Policy,  November  2012.  This  argument  is  based  on  the  assumption  that 
monetary  easing  eventually  increases  interest  rates.  Also,  the  idea  that  government  bonds  with  a 
duration of four years entail risks reflects the assumption that, in about four years, prices will rise, 
thereby leading to an increase in interest rates. 
 14 
 IV. Low Interest Rates and Banks' Profitability 
Although it is not clear why, interest rates have fallen globally and are negative, not only in 
Japan  but also  in many  European countries.  Banks  are  dissatisfied  with low  interest  rates. 
While  these  have  improved  the  employment  situation  and  boosted  productivity,  it 
frequently is argued that they undermine banks' profitability.19 
 Functions of Banks 
Before  considering  the  relationship  between  low  interest  rates  and  banks'  profitability,  I 
would like to explain banks' functions. How do banks make profits? Textbooks on finance 
define  the  functions  of  banks  as  consisting  of  information  production  and  asset 
transformation and explain banks' profits as the result of performing these two functions.20 
 As  for  information  production,  banks,  on  behalf  of  depositors,  examine  borrowers'  future 
profits  from  investments  and  the  quality  of  their  assets,  assess  whether  the  projected 
outcome  has  been  achieved  after  a  loan  was  made,  and  check  whether  borrowers' 
accounting information is correct. Banks demand collateral and/or personal guarantees from 
borrowers.  Sufficient  collateral  and  personal  guarantees  alleviate  banks'  burdens  of 
monitoring  firms'  accounting  information  and  therefore  reduce  the  cost  of  information 
production. Since depositors cannot demand collateral or personal guarantees, the function 
of  information  production  falls  on  banks.  If  firms  provided  more  detailed  accounting 
information, given that they are sufficiently large, they could obtain funding through capital 
markets and would not have to rely on bank lending. The reason that in practice most large 
firms in Japan borrow from banks is that banks provide inexpensive lending to them. This 
means that lending to large firms is less profitable for banks. 
 While it is very difficult to project future profits to begin with, there are certain firms other 
than banks that can project the future profits of another firm more accurately. For instance, 
a  large  assembler  to  a  certain  extent  knows  the  sales  figures  of  its  suppliers.  The  simple 
reason is that the assembler procures orders from the supplier. Similarly, trading and other 
                                                 
19  See, for example, "Mienu 'deguchi,' fukusayō zōdai: ginkōkai ni takamaru fuman -- mainasu kinri 
3-nen," Jiji Press, Ltd., February 15, 2019, https://www.jiji.com/jc/article?k=2019021500887&g=eco. 
20  See, for example, Iwata Kikuo, "Kin'yū chūkai to kigyō kin'yū," chapter 4 in Kin'yū (Tokyo: Toyo 
Keizai Inc., 2000). 
 15 
 companies that take part in the management of particular firms may also be better placed to 
project  their  future  profits.  Banks  compete  with  such  firms  with  information  advantages. 
Even  if  the  firms  they  lend  to  are  very  successful,  the  margin  that  banks  can  earn  is  very 
small.  Since  banks  are  not  allowed  to  invest  depositors'  money,  they  cannot  invest  in 
venture firms and earn returns that are considerable multiples of their outlays. 
 If  banks  try  to  assess  the  future  profits  of  a  firm,  which  are  unknowable,  it  is  the  person 
with  the  greatest  authority  that  ultimately  makes  the  assessment.  If  a  firm  is  not  managed 
properly,  it  likely  would  face  a  situation  illustrated  in  the  world  of  novels  --  that  is,  the 
credit  examination  division  would  stop  functioning  and  the  human  resources  division, 
which is responsible for assessing personnel, would engage in internal power struggles.21  If 
banks  instead  provide  loans  based  only  on  observable  and  objective  criteria  such  as 
collateral, they could cut costs by substantially downsizing their credit examination division 
and/or  human  resources  division.  That  is,  banks  should  lend  based  on  observable  and 
objective  criteria  and  examine  future  profits  of  firms  only  in  exceptional  circumstances.22 
Even by focusing only on the examination of observable and objective criteria, banks would 
be doing something that depositors cannot. 
 Asset transformation -- banks' other function -- consists of two components. The first is the 
act  of  accumulating  short-term  deposits  and  transforming  them  into  long-term  lending. 
Since  borrowers  use  funds  to  buy  machinery  or  construct  buildings,  they  cannot  pay  back 
the  money  on  short  notice.  Banks  can  lend  over  the  long  term  by  accumulating  deposits 
from  a  large  number  of  depositors.  The  second  component  is  the  transformation  of  loan 
assets, which entail the possibility of default, into risk-free deposits. As a result, depositors 
can  rest  assured  that  their  funds  are  safe  when  entrusting  them  to  banks.  This  means  that 
                                                 
21  Although fiction, similar situations are vividly described in books focusing on banks written by 
Jun Ikeido, such as, Oretachi Baburu Nyūkōgumi, (Tokyo: Bungeishunju Ltd., 2004), Shairokku no 
Kodomotachi,  (Tokyo:  Bungeishunju  Ltd.,  2006),  and  Rosujene  no  Gyakushū,  (Tokyo: 
Bungeishunju  Ltd.,  2012). The  stories  are  exaggerated but  are  more  or  less  similar  to  fragmentary 
information that I gained personally. 
22  Observable and objective criteria include deposits and withdrawals from firms' accounts as well 
as deposits on housing rent. There also are cases where lenders, not banks, manage the accounts for 
deposits on housing rent. 
 16 
 banks transform assets that involve risks into safe assets through the function of information 
production. 
 To what extent can banks maintain the amount of loans by utilizing these functions? There 
are  some  landowners  that  only  have  a  small  amount  of  deposits,  but  their  deposits  would 
increase  if  they  succeed  in  their  business.  If  the  quality  of  people's  lives  improves,  the 
number of people who can let their assets lie idle over the long term would increase, leading 
to a narrowing of the spread between short- and long-term interest rates. As some borrow 
money even at high interest rates, banks might be able to make loans to them at such rates. 
However, these people do not represent the majority. 
 Banks  can  make  loans  even  without  sufficient  collateral.  If  a  borrower  makes  a  certain 
down  payment  to  start  up  a  shop,  banks  can  place  confidence  in  the  borrower's  diligence 
and  steadiness.  Even  if  the  amount  of  collateral  is  not  sufficient  for  banks,  the  borrower 
certainly should be considered serious enough, since all the efforts made over several years 
would be in vain upon failure. In the case of housing loans, a 10-20 percent down payment 
might be insufficient for banks. However, it seems that such a down payment level would 
not cause problems because borrowers would want to keep their houses at all costs. 
 Looking at banks' assets, as of end-September 2019, of the total loans made by domestically 
licensed  banks  of  509  trillion  yen,  324  trillion  yen  was  for  corporations  (including  206 
trillion  yen  for  small  enterprises)  and  144  trillion  yen  for  households.23  As  for  loans  to 
households,  as  of  end-September  2019,  the  amount  of  housing  loans  was  131  trillion  yen 
and that of consumer loans was 10 trillion yen.24  I assume that the total amount of loans -- 
those  to  small  enterprises  and households  combined  --  with  which  banks might  be  able  to 
gain  profits  is  around  350  trillion  yen.  Though  based  on  different  statistics,  as  of 
end-August 2019, of the total loans of 485 trillion yen, the amount of loans made at interest 
rates of 5 percent or more only stood at 5.9 trillion yen.25 
                                                  
23  Bank of Japan, Deposits, Vault Cash, and Loans and Bill Discounted. 
24  Bank of Japan, Loans to Households. 
25  Bank of Japan, Loans and Discounts Outstanding by Interest Rate. 
 17 
 Increase in Deposits in Excess of the Increase in Loans at Japanese Banks 
An increase in deposits in excess of the increase in loans at banks also is a problem. Chart 7 
shows the loan-to-deposit ratios (calculated by dividing loans by deposits) of banks in Japan, 
the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  Germany,  and  France.  In  Japan,  the  ratio,  which 
had  been  at  around  100  percent  through  the  end  of  the  1990s,  declined  sharply  thereafter 
and  is  hovering  at  around  60  percent  at  present.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ratios  in  the  other 
countries, albeit declining, have remained at around 100 percent except in the United States. 
Banks  in  those  countries  accumulate  deposits  only  to  the  extent  necessary  to  make  loans. 
Even  then,  banks  in  Europe  have  had  difficulties  maintaining  profitability.  For  banks  in 
Japan  that  have  been  accumulating  an  excessive  amount  of  deposits,  the  situation  should 
become even more severe. 
 Chart 7 Loan-to-Deposit Ratios of Banks in Major Countries 
             From the time of the introduction of QQE up until September 2019, loans by domestically 
licensed  banks,  which  had  been  on  a  declining  trend,  increased  by  79  trillion  yen  while 
deposits  increased  by  as  much  as  161  trillion  yen.26
  In  this  context,  news  reports  suggest 
that  financial  institutions  are  struggling  to  attract  personnel  and  that  staff  members  are 
                                                 
26  Bank of Japan, Financial Institutions Accounts. 
 18 
 retiring  early.27
  While  this  is  reported  as  though  it  is  troublesome,  it  consequently  could 
lead  to  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  personnel  contributing  to  the  collection  of  more 
deposits  than  needed  and  in  that  of  branches.  I  think  that  this  would  increase  the 
productivity of the banking sector, and thus of Japan's economy as a whole. 
 There  are  concerns  that,  facing  difficulties  in  expanding  lending  while  accumulating  too 
much deposits, banks in Japan do not seem to  be trying to reduce deposits, but instead are 
relying  on  riskier  lending  or  investment  and  recommending  that  their  customers  buy 
investment  trusts  rather  than  make  deposits.  Estimates  by  the  Financial  Services  Agency 
(FSA) of customers' total return on investment trusts (after fees and commissions) suggest 
that, as of end-March 2019, 34 percent of customers of all investment trust distributors face 
negative total returns.28  Given that the average holding period of such  funds is thought to 
be around three years and that stock prices in major countries have risen during that period, 
including in Japan, where the Nikkei 225 Stock Average has risen by around 25 percent, the 
return on most funds should be positive. This means that the negative returns must be due to 
high  fees  and  commissions.  As  highlighted  by  the  FSA,  some  of  the  distributors  of 
investment  trusts  seem  to  be  encouraging  their  customers  to  churn  between  funds  in  the 
short term to gain profits from transaction fees.29  Moreover, looking at the costs and returns 
of  investment  trust  funds  by  type  of  distributor,  I  find  that  banks  and  securities  firms 
engaged  in  face-to-face  sales  tend  to  sell  trusts  involving  high  costs  and  low  returns.  In 
contrast, independent investment trust firms and securities firms specializing in sales via the 
internet tend to sell trusts at a lower cost and that offer higher returns.30 
                                                  
27  See,  for  example,  the  2-day  series,  Minami  Takero  and  Nakatani  Shogo,  "Chigin  haran  jinzai 
kokatsu no kiki," Nikkei, February 20 and 21, 2019. 
28  For  details,  see  Financial  Services  Agency,  "Publication  of  the  monitoring  results  pertaining  to  the 
implementation status of customer-oriented business conduct taken by financial institutions" (the full text is 
available only in Japanese), November 2019, https://www.fsa.go.jp/en/newsletter/weekly2019/367.html. In 
fact, this situation where customers are making losses in their investment trusts has even made it into 
works of fiction, such as Shairokku no Kodomotachi (p.16) by Jun Ikeido, mentioned earlier. 
29  Toshihide  Endo,  "To  turn  challenges  into  opportunities,"  Speech  at  the  34th  Annual  General 
Meeting and Reception of the International Bankers Association of Japan, Financial Services Agency, 
November 2018. 
30  See footnote 28 for the reference. 
 19 
 Some financial institutions in Europe, where interest rates also are low, are in the process of 
significantly  enhancing  their  business  efficiency  due  to  the  prolonged  sluggishness  of 
profits. Since drastic employment adjustments in Europe seem to be difficult due to factors 
such as labor practices, some financial institutions are revising their organizational structure 
globally,  including  in  Japan.  Given  that  Japan  is  facing  labor  shortages  due  to  bold 
monetary easing, such revisions should be easier than in Europe. If banks successfully can 
downsize their number or their asset holdings, they would become profitable. In capitalism 
and a market economy, firms need to switch from unprofitable to profitable business areas. 
If  banks  release  human  resources  and  capital  while  making  this  shift,  this  will  have  a 
positive  impact  on  Japan's  economy  as  a  whole.  Although  I  recognize  the  difficulty  of 
giving  up  business  in  Japan,  if  banks  --  which  should  form  the core  of  capitalism and  the 
market  economy  --  understand  this  point,  I  believe  productivity  of  the  economy  will 
improve greatly.31 
 Concluding Remarks 
Nearly seven years have passed since the introduction of bold monetary easing in 2013, and 
almost five years have passed since I was appointed as a Member of the Policy Board of the 
Bank.  Even  now,  achieving  the  inflation  target  of  2  percent  seems  to  be  a  long  way  off. 
Interest rates have not been rising due to low inflation. However, owing to bold monetary 
easing, economic activity clearly has improved. Employment, especially youth employment, 
has  improved.  Had  the  Bank  implemented  bold  monetary  easing  since  the  1990s,  the 
employment ice age could have been avoided. There also have been various other positive 
developments, as I mentioned earlier. 
 However, since interest rates have not been rising, banks, which believe their profits would 
increase  with  higher  interest  rates,  express  growing  dissatisfaction.  In  my  opinion,  banks' 
low  profitability  is  caused  by  the  structural  problem  that  they  are  accumulating  more 
deposits than they can lend and the banking sector as a whole therefore will not be able to 
maintain its current size. As shown in Chart 5, it is only over the past ten years or so that 
                                                 
31  The  solution  of  shrinking  the  size  of  banks  is  not  considered  at  all  in  the  novels  by  Jun  Ikeido 
mentioned earlier. I fully understand that it is difficult to implement in practice what is difficult even 
in the world of fiction. 
 20 
 interest rates have failed to rise to any meaningful extent, and thus it might be premature to 
conclude that it is not possible to  see a return to the  former situation. If the Bank were to 
raise interest rates now, this would revive the deflationary mindset and consequently further 
delay increases in prices and interest rates. This would not benefit the banking sector either. 
Some argue that the Bank should raise interest rates soon because Japan's economy is in a 
good  state  given  the  demographic  trends.  However,  it  was  only  after  the  introduction  of 
QQE  that  real  GDP  per  working-age  person  started  to  increase;  therefore,  raising  interest 
rates would just throw us back. That is, raising interest rates would lead to the following: an 
appreciation  of  the  yen;  falling  stock  prices;  declines  in  exports,  investment,  consumption 
and employment; and the reemergence of the employment ice age. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
   21 
