  31.10.2019 
Opening address 
Decarbonising the Economy Forum/El Confidencial 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor  
 
    Good morning. Let me thank the digital daily newspaper El Confidencial  and Acciona for its 
kind invitation to me to open this forum on decarbonising the economy.  
Introduction  
Evidently, the consequences arising from climate change, associated with global warming, 
have in recent years come to the forefront of society’s main concerns. It is a transversal 
concern  that  is  translating  into  initiatives  ranging  from  the  most  supranational  scope 
possible down to the most local level.  
To offer a specific example, we can see every day in the newspaper headlines how matters 
such as the quality of the air we breathe in cities are polarising much of the political debate, 
mainly at the municipal level but also regionally and even nationwide.  
If we raise our sights a little it is clear that these air quality policies are also in response to 
various European regulations, at least since 1996.1 In turn, the European regulations are part 
of  a  more  global  response  to  pollution,  which  is  reflected  in  various  international 
agreements.  
The general public also share this concern. Testifying to this is a recent survey by the Real 
Instituto Elcano2 in which 97% of Spaniards agree that climate change is a reality and 92% 
believe that humans are chiefly responsible.  
This  movement  is  underpinned  by  a  wealth  of  scientific  evidence.  It  shows  that  global 
warming is associated with economic (and therefore human) activity and, more specifically, 
with  the  emission  of  greenhouse  gases.  Such  emissions  are  chiefly  responsible  for  the 
polluted air we breathe.  
Apart from its effect on pulmonary diseases and people’s quality of life, pollution correlates 
with  a  rise  in  the  planet’s  average  temperature.  That  may  severely  affect  the  economy, 
tourism and agriculture, prompting potential humanitarian or migratory crises we can hardly 
evaluate at present.  
I believe we will all agree that climate change is the most global  matter we can imagine, 
both in its consequences and its causes. Clearly, a potential rise in temperatures affects the 
entire  planet.  And  evidently,  too,  atmospheric  pollution  does  not  stop when  it  reaches  a 
border.  
Fortunately, most countries are adopting strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as 
a way to mitigate the associated risks. Let us not forget that, despite this being a global 
problem, the rise in temperatures would have different effects from one country to another,3 
hence the importance of international agreements being reached.  
                                                                                              
1 Among the key pieces of legislation setting ceilings on pollutants in Europe are the 2008 Directive on ambient air quality 
(2008/50/EC) and the 1996 Framework Directive on ambient air quality assessment and management (96/62/EC). See 
https://www.eea.europa.eu/  
2http://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/wps/portal/rielcano_es/contenido?WCM_GLOBAL_CONTEXT=/elcano/elcano_es/z
onas_es/encuesta-espanoles-ante-cambio-climatico-sep-2019  
3 Some studies indicate that global warming may be proving economically and socially beneficial for the rich countries, 
in particular the coldest  ones such as Sweden and Norway, while adversely affecting poorer countries. See  Noah S. 
Diffenbaugh and Marshall Burke, “Global warming has increased global economic inequality”.  
2/9 
 In  Europe,  the  European  Commission  has  set  the  target  of  having  a  “climate-neutral” 
economy by the year 2050. In short, the aim would be to bring about the decarbonisation 
of the economy, as our Forum here today is called. 
According to Eurostat data, Spain emitted 285 million tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere 
in 2017. That  is 7.5% of total European Union emissions, placing Spain sixth among EU 
members.  
Logically,  in  step  with  their  economic  and  demographic  weight,  the  country  with  most 
emissions was Germany (858 million tonnes; 22.8%), while Malta emitted the least (3 tonnes; 
0.1%).  Since  2012,  emissions  per  unit  of  value  added  have  fallen  by  14%  in  Spain, 
practically the same as in the European Union as a whole.  
However, emissions should also be analysed in relation to the size of the economy and to 
population. Spain emitted 0.25 kg of CO2 for each euro of (2010) GDP produced, slightly 
less  than  the  0.26  kg  average.  In  terms  of  population,  in  2017  our  emissions  totalled 
6.1 tonnes per capita, clearly below the European Union average of 7.3 tonnes per person.  
A fair transition 
Despite  enjoying  this  slight  initial  advantage,  the  challenge  of  achieving  a  decarbonised 
country is a major one.  
On  paper,  I  believe  nobody  is  against  achieving  this  objective.  However,  we  should  be 
mindful that moving to a decarbonised economy entails a change in our production model. 
Practically  by  definition,  such  a  change  has  systemic  implications,  particularly  affecting 
specific  economic  sectors.  Accordingly,  we  should  conduct  this  process  carefully  and 
gradually if we wish to minimise any undesirable economic and social consequences.  
The goal is to achieve what has been dubbed “a fair transition”, affording due attention and 
support to those groups and  geographical areas most severely affected by this process. 
Naturally, we should stress that the change of production model will also entail opportunities 
for economic agents.  
In  any  event,  we  should  consider  how  banks  may  contribute  to  bringing  about  a 
decarbonised economy; ultimately, when we think about climate change we see particularly 
pollutant activities, from which banking is naturally missing.  
I shall try to explain today why, despite being a “low emissions” sector, banks have a major 
role to play as facilitators of change. If I manage to do this I hope that I will also, at the same 
time,  dispel  another  doubt  that  many  of  you  will  have  entertained:  what  is  the  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España  doing opening a  forum on the  decarbonisation of the 
economy? 
     3/9 
 Combating climate change internationally  
As  you  know,  combating  climate  change  has  been  a  recurrent  goal  of  international 
institutions, at least since the United Nations Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.  
Traditionally, the companies dependent on oil products have been those most affected by 
the environmental regulations resulting from these international agreements. Conversely, we 
should admit that the financial sector’s involvement in this battle has been rather limited. 
When referring to the financial sector I include both credit institutions and central banks and 
supervisors. Until very recently, combating climate change was seen as something outside 
our remit. 
Following the 2015 Paris Agreement, the fight against climate change has taken on a more 
specific  form  and  greater  momentum,  with  a  term  being  set  for  fulfilment  of  the  2030 
Agenda. Coinciding with the signing of the Paris Agreement, the role of finance in combating 
climate change has moved onto the agenda of international financial organisations.  
This change has come about exponentially. New initiatives emerge almost daily, under the 
aegis of the G20, the United Nations, the Financial Stability Board or the OECD.  
At  central  banks,  I  would  highlight  the  work  of  the  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial 
System (NGFS), a network of supervisors and central banks created in December 2017. In 
a short space of time, the number of members has increased from eight to 46, along with 
eight observers. 
We might wonder what exactly has changed since 2015 to warrant this sudden interest on 
the part of banking regulators and supervisors in climate risks.  
This  may  be  summed  up  in  two  conclusions,  expressed  in  the  form  of  two  international 
initiatives:  
  First, in 2015, the Paris Agreement stressed for the first time the importance of the 
financial  system  in  efficiently  channelling  the  resources  needed  to  transform  the 
economy towards a sustainable model.  
  Second, the first NGFS report, published in 2018, stated that climate-related risks 
were a source of financial risk, and that supervisors and central banks should shore 
up the system’s solvency in the face of these risks. 
Risk measurement  
It  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  you  that,  as  a  supervisor,  I  will  begin  by  talking  about  the 
second of these elements, namely risks. The process of transition will entail two types of 
risks to the financial system:  
  On the one hand, the physical risks caused by the direct effects of climate change, 
for example as a result of the gradual increase in temperature, or more frequent or 
more severe climate events such as storms, flooding or natural disasters.  
  On the other, the transition risks. These refer to the potential effect on specific bank 
borrowers  of  the  regulatory  measures  aimed  at  sustainably  transforming  the 
4/9 
 economy,  technological  changes,  and  changes  in  customer  behaviour  and 
preferences driven by greater environmental awareness. 
The  two  types  of  risk  are  related:  the  more  ambitious  the  regulations  combating  climate 
change, the greater the transition risk and the lower the physical risk, and vice versa.  
Environmental  risk  is  a  risk  in  its  own  right,  although  its  impact  materialises  through 
“traditional”  banking  risks.  To  cite  some  examples,  insolvency  caused  by  a  regulatory 
change,  or  by  customer  behaviour  regarding  the  use  of  a  specific  pollutant  technology, 
would be treated as credit risk; loss of image by a bank, associated with the financing of a 
specific pollutant economic activity, would be analysed as reputational or business risk; a 
significant loss in the market value of specific collateral or of a certain commodity, such as 
oil, would be considered market risk; and lastly, losses at a branch caused by flooding would 
be deemed operational risk. 
In any event, when measuring and quantifying these risks, we encounter methodological 
difficulties. Clearly, the horizon in which the effects of physical – and possibly transition –
risks are observed may be far greater than that generally used for risk assessment in the in-
house models that banks use to measure credit risk, let alone market risk.  
The modelling of the environmental transition poses a difficulty in that it did not take place 
in the past; accordingly, this risk cannot be estimated and validated on the basis of past 
experience.  
Nonetheless, in our recent past there have been clear examples of other “transitions”, even 
though  they  cannot  be  classed  as  environmental  ones.  We  can  readily  find  examples  of 
solvent, strong companies that have lost their leadership position, or even disappeared, in 
just a few short years, having been unable to adapt to  technological change or changing 
consumer behaviour. In short, because they did not adapt to a change in the environment.  
I would highlight two points. Firstly, that the analysis of potential changes in setting that can 
affect  business  solvency is  an  essential  part of  risk  assessment  and  management  in  the 
financial system, irrespective of whether this change in setting is caused by technological, 
customer behaviour-related, regulatory or environmental factors.  
Secondly, we should not lose sight of the fact that the environmental transition has indeed 
been planned and announced. I have already pointed out that the European Commission’s 
goal is to achieve a fully decarbonised economy by 2050. This is a reasonably long term, 
but  achieving  this  goal  will  necessarily  entail  regulatory  and  structural  changes  in  the 
economy, which will particularly affect specific sectors of activity.  So we cannot say that 
this transition has come as a surprise or that we were not warned.  
In  addition,  we  should  not  forget  that  transition  risk  may  also  materialise  as  a  result  of 
changes  in  people’s  behaviour,  which  in  practice  may  foreshadow  future  regulatory 
changes.  
One clear conclusion would be that when it comes to assessing transition risk, we should 
not focus on our past but should look to the future. Indeed, if we analyse the information 
available  in  the  Banco  de  España’s  Central  Credit  Register,  we  can  see  that  after  the 
 5/9 
 outbreak of the crisis, credit exposures financing polluting activities had lower default rates 
than other exposures.  
If we eliminate the bias in these findings resulting from the inclusion of construction and real 
estate  activity,  which  should  not  be  included  under  either  polluting  (“brown”)  or  “green” 
activities, polluting activities continue to have a lower default rate, although the gap between 
the two is much narrower. 
In any event, I believe the findings are unsurprising. Many companies labelled as “brown” 
have high profit margins and their ability to generate profit is partly a result of their being 
regulated activities and having, in many cases, a dominant market position. Moreover, to 
date these companies have not had to assume the cost of the pollution they cause, so in an 
energy transition scenario their advantage in terms of profit margin could be affected.     
The banking sector as a facilitator of change in the production model 
I should like to refer briefly to the second point I mentioned above. As indicated in the 2015 
Paris Agreement, the banking sector has an essential part to play to facilitate change in the 
production model.  Indeed  this  second  goal  is  related  to  the  first,  as  correctly  measuring 
environmental  risk  should  assist  in  the  transition  towards  a  more  sustainable  model  and 
would, therefore, be a logical consequence of the first goal.  
As I have said previously, one essential feature of any viable business model is that banks 
identify and quantify all the costs and risks involved and pass them through to prices and 
capital. Accordingly, if banks incorporate climate-related risks into costs and capital, they 
indirectly become “facilitators” of change, by reducing the cost of financing of activities that 
contribute most to the sustainable transformation of the economy, while at the same time 
discouraging more contaminating activities. 
The role of investors 
I  also  wish  to  refer  to  the  role  that  investors  should  likewise  play  as  facilitators  of  this 
transition. Interestingly, the emergence of “green bonds”, which was not in response to any 
official initiative, came well before the Paris Agreement, which could be considered to mark 
the beginning of the involvement of the banking sector. 
In  fact  the  history  of  green  bonds  began  in  2007  with  the  first  issue  by  the  European 
Investment Bank. As you know, green bonds must be used to fund projects that are directly 
linked to sustainability, preservation of the natural environment and transition towards a low-
carbon  economy.  To  achieve  the  green  bond  certificate,  issues  must  satisfy  certain 
principles,  such  as  the  Green  Bond  Principles  (GBP)  issued  by  the  ICMA  in  2014,  to  be 
verified by external appraisal.  
In general, green bonds are placed among investors with higher demand and lower costs 
than equivalent standard issues. The market has been particularly active in recent years, 
especially since the GBP were published in 2014. At June 2019, green bonds outstanding 
amounted to an estimated USD630 billion. 
I believe it is highly significant that this market has developed aside of official initiatives, 
based  entirely  on  private  standards  such  as  the  GBP.  Investor  demand  for  green  bond 
6/9 
issues is a clear sign of the growing concern about the effects of climate change, but it may 
also reflect a lower underlying risk. In any event, this change in attitude by investors should 
also serve as a catalyst for change towards more sustainable activities. 
 Taxonomy  
I should, however, also mention a general problem that may be holding these markets back. 
Although  the  establishment  of  various  green  principles,  such  as  the  GBP,  facilitated  the 
launch of the green bond market, the lack of a commonly accepted taxonomy4 could be 
hampering its subsequent development.  
A shared taxonomy is essential to be able to make a coherent analysis of the green/brown 
bond yield spread. It is also important for the supervisor, as it permits aggregate risk and 
default analysis, consistent stress testing and the development of macroeconomic models, 
all of which are required to assess medium and long-term effects on the economy.  
Lastly,  a  common  taxonomy  is  needed  to  provide  clear  and  consistent  information  to 
investors  and the general  public,  as  will  be  required  of  all listed  companies in  the  future 
Spanish legislation on environmental transition. 
In this setting, the European Commission’s action plan, presented in March 2018, is crucial. 
The plan includes three sustainable finance regulations, including one on the creation of a 
“common taxonomy”. I trust this regulation will be approved shortly, in accordance with the 
objectives set by the new European Commission, and that this taxonomy will finally provide 
us with a common definition of what may be considered “environmental” or “sustainable”.  
The role of supervisors – external initiatives 
As supervisors, we clearly have responsibility for urging on these changes. We need to be 
proactive; in particular, we need to enter into a dialogue with banks to analyse how they are 
incorporating environmental risk. At the Banco de España we are intent on pressing ahead 
with this dialogue.  
Let me mention just a few examples of recent steps taken. To assess the level of preparation 
for environmental risk, we conducted a survey among the 12 banks directly supervised by 
the SSM and several other smaller banks. Subsequently we discussed the survey findings 
with  the  participating  banks,  conveying  to  them  the  importance  of  this  issue  and  the 
supervisory expectations.  
According  to  the  survey  findings,  many  banks  that  were  already  explicitly  considering 
environmental risk have included it in their social responsibility areas. Almost all have a team 
dedicated  exclusively  to  Sustainable  Finance  and  some  also  indicate  that  they  have 
established specific committees, reporting in some cases to the Area General Manager or 
Corporate Secretary and in others directly to the Board of Directors.  
                                                                                              
4  In  general,  the  Green  Bond  Principles  are  updated  once  a  year,  to  reflect  the  latest  market  developments.  Other 
standards  established  by  the  Climate  Bond  Initiative  and  the  credit  rating  agencies  have  also  defined  criteria  for 
assessing the degree of “greenness” of issues earmarked for certain projects. Some jurisdictions, such as China, have 
set their own standards.  
 7/9 
 All  the  banks  are  working  with  ESG  sustainability  factors,5  with  the  lack  of  a  common 
taxonomy being one of the main challenges for defining these factors. But very few banks 
have processes and tools allowing them to identify, measure and manage environmental 
risk. 
The supervisory expectation in the short and medium term would be for all banks to include 
the  environmental  dimension  in  their  strategic  approach  and  in  their  risk  analysis  and 
monitoring.  They  should  keep  the  Board  informed  and  should  compile  all  relevant 
information, at least for new operations.  
From  a  methodological  standpoint,  banks  are  at  least  expected  to  understand  the 
implications of environmental risk and how it may affect their business models, including it 
in their risk appetite frameworks. In all cases, in a way that is proportionate to their size and 
complexity. 
As this is a new development, we have also started work on a document that will reflect all 
these supervisory expectations. We hope to publish it for consultation shortly.  
In addition to directly interacting with banks, we have entered into a dialogue with other 
agents, such as the big auditing firms, and we are also organising sessions and workshops 
to  discuss  methodological  developments,  for  example  relating  to  risk  measurement  in 
investment portfolios.  
The role of supervisors – in-house initiatives 
As well as these initiatives, which may be considered external, we are also working in the 
Banco de España to adapt to this new reality. Firstly, we have created an internal function 
entrusted with assessing the impact we as an institution have on the environment. The aim 
is to articulate and coordinate the necessary measures to reduce that impact. 
Secondly,  as  a  macroprudential  supervisor,  we  clearly  need  to  be  able  to  assess  and 
quantify the risks that the transition towards a more sustainable economy poses, both for 
individual banks and the financial sector as a whole.  
Among  other  functions,  we  need  to  be  able  to  assess  the  level  of  financial  institutions’ 
exposure to high-carbon emission activities, perform stress tests for the financial system 
overall and define scenarios and methodologies to be applied by banks individually.  
In  consequence,  we  are  designing  internal  governance  structures  and  methodologies, 
actively participating in the cultural shift in the SSM supervisory model. Naturally, we are 
also evaluating the information and data requirements needed to address this challenge.  
Nor should we forget that central banks are also important investors in the debt markets, 
both in the area of monetary policy and reserve management. Although we have not yet 
included environmental risk assessment in our credit analysis, we are working to remedy 
this.  
                                                                                              
5 ESG - Environmental, Social and Governance. 
8/9 
 In the framework of the Eurosystem, an in-depth review of risk assessment processes is 
under way, aiming to ensure that all relevant factors  – such as environmental ones – are 
taken into account for prudent central bank portfolio management. 
Consideration and application of these criteria is without doubt a new development, and 
also for central banks. In September, for instance, the Banco de España made its first green 
investment, participating in a fund launched by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
that invests entirely in green bonds.  
With this type of initiative the Banco de España aims to include environmental sustainability 
goals in its reserve management. This is consistent with its membership of the NGFS, which 
less than two weeks ago published a Sustainable and Responsible Investment Guide for 
Central Banks’ Portfolio Management.  
Conclusions 
I wish to conclude by emphasising, once more, how important it is that the financial sector 
contribute  to  the  collective  effort  that  meeting  the  goals  set  in  the  Paris  Agreement 
represents.  
The decarbonisation goals set by the Commission for 2050 pose a major challenge. 2050 
may seem a long way off, but if we wish to meet these goals it is clear that the public at 
large, firms, banks, governments and public authorities will all have to start addressing the 
challenge today, with a sufficiently ambitious but also realistic approach.  
The path ahead, to incorporate environmental risk into internal control and management, is 
a considerable one and we, as supervisors, also have much work before us. Yet we set out 
on this path only very recently and I must say that the progress made has been surprisingly 
fast. 
For all our sakes, we trust that we will be up to the challenge. 
Thank you. 
  9/9 
