Kevin Stiroh: Emerging issues for risk managers
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the GARP Global Risk Forum,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 7 November 2019.
  Prepared for delivery
Introduction
Good morning and welcome to the GARP Global Risk Forum. The Federal Reserve Bank of New
York has been collaborating with GARP on this forum for a decade and it is always a pleasure to
participate.  This  discussion  provides  real-time  insight  into  critical  issues  at  the  center  of  the
practice of risk management.
A quick scan of today’s agenda highlights a number of topics of obvious importance—operational
resilience,  cyclical  aspects  of  risk  management,  technology  and  big  data.  We  are  all  thinking
about these issues, and I look forward to your insights.
I’d  like  to  briefly  discuss  two  topics  where  I  expect  risk  managers  will  increase  their  focus  in
coming years—climate change and the cultural aspects  of  digital  transformation.  Both  issues
reflect potentially transformative trends for the economy and the financial system, and I believe
they will take an increasing share of your bandwidth over the next decade. In both cases, the
relevant questions from a supervisors’ perspective are: what new risks are introduced? How do
firms manage them? And how do supervisors view them?
Before  proceeding,  I  will  emphasize  that  I  am  speaking  for  myself  and  these  views  do  not
necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  or  the  Federal  Reserve
System.
Climate
1
The  U.S.  economy  has  experienced  more  than  $500  billion  in  direct  losses  over  the  last  five
years  due  to  climate  and  weather-related  events.   In  addition,  climate  change  has  significant
consequences for the  U.S. economy and financial sector through slowing productivity growth,
2
asset revaluations and sectoral reallocations of business activity.
For  these  climate-related  risks,  a  new  lexicon  has  emerged. Physical risk  is  the  potential  for
losses  as  climate-related  changes  disrupt  business  operations,  destroy  capital  and  interrupt
economic activity. Transition risk is the potential for losses resulting from a shift toward a lower-
carbon economy as policy, consumer sentiment and technological innovations impact the value
of  certain  assets  and  liabilities.  These  effects  will  be  felt  across  business  sectors  and  asset
classes, and on the strategies, operations and balance sheets of financial firms.
Risk managers must be aware of these risks and develop the tools needed to identify, monitor
and manage them appropriately. Physical and transition risks may manifest through traditional
risk stripes such as credit, market, operational, legal and reputational risk, but today’s tools are
not  necessarily  well-suited  for  the  unique  challenges  associated  with  climate  change.  Let  me
mention three of these challenges.
First, climate change is a long-term issue where actions today are likely to have an impact over
many  decades.  This  exceeds  the  typical  life  span  of  a  bank  exposure,  as  well  as  the  typical
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
control  and  planning  horizon  of  a  financial  institution.  Risk  management  tools,  models  and
3
scenarios  are  not  designed  to  capture  the  long-term  nature  of  climate-related  risks.
Nonetheless, real impacts are already being felt and we must develop the tools to assess and
manage them.
Second, climate change is complex—the impacts are uncertain, non-linear and hard-to-predict.
Trusted  credit  models,  for  example,  may  prove  less  useful  if  the  historical  patterns  of  the
frequency  and  severity  of  weather-related  shocks  become  a  poor  guide  to  the  distribution  of
future losses. Asset prices may move sharply, and unpredictably, as consensus views change
and  future  impacts  are  priced  today.  Moreover,  transition  risks  may  stem  from  second-order,
indirect effects like the impact on supply chains, sectoral shifts or worker productivity, which are
inherently difficult to model and predict.
Third, we face significant data gaps. Climate change is a global phenomenon, but risks should
be  assessed  locally,  which  requires  new  data  such  as  asset-specific,  geo-spatial  data.
Borrower-specific analysis requires data, for example, on asset utilization and climate effects for
particular industries at particular locations. Such granular data is currently limited and requires
significant  resources  to  acquire  and  process,  but  greater  transparency  about  the  physical
location  of  assets  will  allow  institutions  to  better  assess  exposures  to  at-risk  borrowers  or  to
specific geographic risks.
As  supervisors,  we  can  consider  climate-related  risks  in  terms  of  both  microprudential  and
macroprudential objectives. To be clear, in my view, supervisors should take a risk management
perspective,  not  a  social  engineering  one.  It  is  beyond  our  mandate  to  advocate  or  provide
incentives  for  a  particular  transition  path.  Rather,  supervisors  should  focus  on  the  risks  that
emerge along the path decided by the public at large and their elected governments. Supervisors
can  use  our  tools  to  ensure  financial  institutions  are  prepared  for  and  resilient  to  all  types  of
relevant risks, including climate-related events.
To  do  this,  we  must  continue  to  invest  in  research  to  better  understand  the  economic  and
financial impact of climate-related events. For example, on Friday, the Federal Reserve Bank of
San  Francisco  will  host  a  conference  on  the  economics  of  climate  change.  We  can  also
continue to follow closely and learn from the approaches taken by other central banks, including
the  use  of  scenario  analysis,  stress  testing  and  supervisory  expectations  to  encourage
institutions to factor climate risk into their risk management practices. Finally, we can seek to
strengthen the data and modeling capabilities we need to assess climate-related risks as part of
our forward-looking, data-driven supervision.
Given the far-reaching impact of climate risk on the structure of the economy and the financial
sector,  I am confident that risk managers will respond appropriately and firms will continue to
build resilience to all risks. GARP, for example, is exploring this and has recently surveyed its
members  to  better  understand  professional  needs  for  “sustainability,  climate  risk,  and  ESG
integration.”  I am interested to hear from all of you about how your institutions are developing
tools and practices to integrate climate risk into your risk management frameworks.
Innovation and Culture
4
It is no surprise to this audience that technological innovation, big data, and advanced analytics
are transforming financial services. We can debate where we are on the maturity curve and what
innovations are most likely to be transformative, but the direction of travel seems clear. I expect
the  afternoon  session  on  “Technology,  Big  Data,  and  the  Practice  of  Risk  Management”  will
address  core  issues  such  as  new  approaches  for  model  risk  management  in  a  world  of
widespread  artificial  intelligence;  the  inherent  challenge  of  “explainability”  and  potential  bias  in
algorithms; the strategic risks from new entrants; and the impact on human capital strategies.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
I want to highlight a complementary, but different issue and focus on how firms manage these
changes. More broadly, what type of corporate culture is needed to support a successful digital
transformation?
Over the past five years, the New York Fed has emphasized the importance of a healthy culture
to reduce misconduct risk. In addition, I think there is likely a link between a firm’s culture and its
ability to adapt to a changing environment, whether it is technological innovation, demographic
change, new business models, or climate change. Firms need a culture that allows change and
is resilient to these trends.
In discussions of the impact of technology on financial services, for example, one extreme view
is that new fintech entrants—either smaller start-ups or big-tech firms—will leverage technology
and a customer-centric approach to disrupt the industry and outcompete stagnant incumbents,
fundamentally transforming the industrial organization of financial services. An alternative, equally
extreme  view,  is  that  incumbent  financial  firms  with  established  customer  bases,  scale,  vast
quantities of data, and experience working in a regulated environment will “disrupt themselves”
and maintain their central position in finance. The most likely outcome, as is typically the case, is
somewhere in the middle, but change seems inevitable.
If all firms face a strategic imperative to innovate and adapt, a relevant question is what types of
firm-specific factors will determine success? Clearly, things like business model, technological
expertise, and resources will matter. I think that firm culture will also matter.  And by culture, I
mean the values and shared norms within a group that influence individual behavior, collective
decision-making and outcomes.
As firms innovate and transform how financial services are provided, I expect we’ll see the value
of leadership from senior managers and boards as they outline the strategic case for change and
exhibit  the  critical  behaviors  that  promote  it.  I  expect  we’ll  see  the  value  of  innovative
environments where employees speak up, both raising new ideas and questioning assumptions.
I expect we’ll see the value of cognitive diversity as firms tackle complex problems like a digital
transformation from multiple perspectives.  I expect we’ll see the value of agility that facilitates
product  innovation,  reprioritization,  constructive  partnerships,  or  the  successful  integration  of
financial market specialists and technologists. Finally, I expect we’ll see the value of well-crafted
incentives where employees are rewarded based on both “what” they do and “how” they do it.
More broadly, I think firms with high levels of “cultural capital” will be more likely to successfully
implement a digital transformation in a sustainable, prudent and responsible manner.  This is a
central question for risk managers and supervisors because the evidence suggests that most
large-scale transformations fail.   Just like firms, investors and supervisors consider execution
risk when assessing bank mergers, I expect more attention will focus on culture and the change
management risks associated with innovation and digital transformation.
In  my  view,  the  official  sector  can  facilitate  this  transition.  The  2018  guidance  on  responsible
8
innovation  related  to  anti-money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  is  a  good  example.
Supervisors can also press on the governance and change management framework to promote
effective  internal  oversight.  From  our  perspective,  supervisors  also  need  to  be  nimble  and
develop the necessary skills to assess innovation as firms transform.
While a firm’s culture is not directly observable, I believe this will prove to be a critical part of any
change  initiative.  Technological  progress,  innovation,  and  new  models  of  competition  are
changing the financial industry and there will undoubtedly be winners and losers. Understanding
all  of  the  factors  that  drive  successful  transformations  will  be  a  critical  insight  for  both  risk
managers and supervisors.
Conclusions
6
7
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  financial  sector  is  large,  complex  and  constantly  evolving  due  to  a  wide  range  of
technological, business, and macro factors. Your job, and ours, is to be vigilant and open-minded
in our thinking, constantly questioning our traditional assumptions and scanning the horizon to
understand how the risk landscape is changing.
The topics covered at today’s conference are some of the most important risks that the industry
faces.  Climate change and digital transformation are two powerful trends with the potential to
fundamentally change financial services. We all need to be forward-looking and proactive in order
to promote our ultimate goal of a safe and sound financial system that supports the sustainable
provision of financial services and economic growth.
Thank you for your attention.
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
NOAA  National  Centers for  Environmental  Information (NCEI), Billion-Dollar  Weather and  Climate  Disasters
(2019), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The Impact of Higher Temperature on Economic Growth, Riccardo Colacito, Bridget Hoffmann, Toan Phan and
Tim  Sablik, Economic  Brief,  August  2018,  No.  18–08; Climate  Change  and  the  Federal  Reserve,  Glenn
Rudebusch, FRBSF Economic Letter, 2019–19, March 25 2019; Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume
II: Impacts, Risks and Adaptation in the United States, U.S. Global Change Research Program.
Mark  Carney, Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – Climate Change and Financial Stability, September 29,
2015.
Climate  Risk  Management at  Financial  Firms:  Challenges and  Opportunities,  GARP  Risk  Institute,  May  29,
2019; Climate Risk Management at Financial Firms: A Good Start, but More Work to Do, GARP Risk Institute,
May 29, 2019.
We’re Only Human: Culture and Change Management, James Hennessy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
September 2019.
Misconduct Risk, Culture, and Supervision, Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Lev Menand, Kevin Stiroh and
Joseph Tracy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2017.
Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts Fail, John P. Kotter, Harvard Business Review, January 2007 and
How to Beat the Transformation Odds, McKinsey and Company, Survey, April 2015.
Joint Statement on Innovative Efforts to Combat Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, SR 18–10, December 3, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
