Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  Sustainability  and  the  challenges
ahead
Speech by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  IFN  Green  and  Sustainable  Finance  Forum,  Kuala  Lumpur,  3
December 2019.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  once  again
inviting me to speak at their conference. I hope that I can further add to the valuable discourse
that undoubtedly takes place at such events.
We must now acknowledge, that the sustainability agenda has gained increasing importance and
a momentum of its own. Everywhere, there is a sense of urgency and call for action. Consumers
are making their purchasing decisions with the environment in mind. Investors and shareholders
are making demands for their companies and corporations to adopt environmental, social and
governance or ESG standards. Corporate managers, emboldened with such mandates by their
shareholders  are  reshaping  their  organisations  into  new  corporate  citizens,  responsible,
responsive and socially aware. Governments are certainly not left behind. Globally, societies are
seeking ways to create sustainable solutions for their communities.
Achieving  the  sustainability  goals  will  not  be  an  easy  journey.  The  global  environment  itself  is
more challenging than before with increasing volatilities and uncertainties arising from the global
trade war, geopolitical developments and a multitude of factors.  Many of these could derail or
delay our efforts. How do we then stay on course to keep sustainability and responsible finance a
prime focus of business in the financial sector?
In my view,  Islamic finance is primed to advance the sustainability agenda.  Islamic finance is
developed  with  a  higher  overarching  objective  that  emphasises  maximising  positive  value
creation and prevention of negative impact. The Maqasid Shariah first articulated by al-Ghazali in
the 12th century outlines the goals of preservation of religion, life, family, mind and property with
the ultimate aim of prevention of harm and attainment of benefits. Many scholars have developed
this  further,  describing  the  Maqasid  Shariah  as  the  attainment  of  good,  welfare,  advantage,
benefits  and  warding  off  evil,  injury,  loss.  Modern  scholars  have  also  weighed  in,  touching  on
nurturing righteousness and establishing justice. Contemporary scholarship in Islamic law also
recognises  human  development  to  be  a  prime  expression  of  maslahah  (public  interest)
pertaining to all economic activities.
These  guiding  principles  for  Islamic  finance  stands  in  contrast  to  the  secular  philosophy  of
utilitarianism,  which  has  been  deeply  influential  in  developing  the  modern  frameworks  for
economic  and  political  decision  making  today.  In  short,  utilitarianism,  developed  by  Jeremy
Bentham  and  John  Stuart  Mill  in  the  17th  and  18th  centuries,  proposed  a  measure  of  ethics
based on – ‘the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people’. On the surface, this is an
attractive  proposition,  that  is  the  goodness  of  an  action  is  determined  by  its  outcome  in
promoting common welfare. Both utilitarianism and the Islamic principle of al-Masalih al Mursalah
are rooted in the rational pursuit of public welfare. However, a major critique of utilitarian ethics is
that it ignores the interests of the minority in favour of the majority, downplays the importance of
family and society over individualism and strangers, and prioritises aggregate benefits over other
ethical principles such as justice or equality.  One could thus argue that the  Maqasid  Shariah,
which underpins the foundation of Islamic Finance and the Islamic Economy, has a more holistic
perspective on the pursuit of public interests, in that it aims to leave no one behind in pursuit of
prosperity while building a cohesive society.
In Malaysia, Islamic financial institutions are leading the sustainability agenda and spearheading
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sustainable finance through the adoption of value-based intermediation (VBI) initiatives. VBI is the
vehicle to transform the industry, from one focused on profits and shariah compliance to one that
is also focused on positive impact. Through VBI, Islamic finance will bring various stakeholders
together  to  advance  the  sustainability  agenda,  encouraging  Islamic  financial  institutions  to
assess how they create value and impact, particularly in response to changing economic, social
and  environmental  conditions.  This  will  support  the  socioeconomic  development  in  line  with
Malaysia’s long-term agenda of economic growth and shared prosperity for all.
The commitment by the Islamic finacial institutions has been encouraging. The formation of the
VBI Community of Practitioners manifests the leadership by Islamic banks in this area with some
of  its  members  also  being  part  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Climate  Change  (JCC)  that  was
recently formed in September and chaired by the Bank and Securities Commission. The JCC
aims to look at and create greater synergy in development of climate-related solutioning for the
capital and financial markets.  It should be noted that many  VBI offerings of  Islamic banks are
already meeting contemporary sustainability themes but more will be forthcoming. Those already
on  offer  include  green  and  specialised  financial  products  and  services  for  retail  and  SME
markets,  financial  solutions  for  lower  income  households,  custom  products  for  women
entrepreneur and SMEs, green solutions that promote environmental sustainability and innovative
solutions that promote physical and mental well-being. Takaful operators are also taking steps to
explore value-based protection for their customers. A dedicated task force has been formed by
the takaful industry to formulate a strategic roadmap to advance VBI in their business offerings
and practices. VBI also encourages Islamic financial institutions to play a greater nurturing role in
advocating  sustainable  practices  among  clients,  such  as  adoption  of  Malaysian  Sustainable
Palm Oil Certification, as well as providing necessary funding and technical advisory services.
Part  of  the  progress  in  advancing  VBI  as  a  driver  for  positive  change  in  the  Islamic  financial
services industry has been the Bank’s role in working collaboratively with the VBI Community of
Practitioners. In November 2019, the Bank issued the “Value-based Intermediation Financing and
Investment  Impact  Assessment  Framework  –  Guidance  Document”  (VBIAF).  This  provides
guidance on the assessment of financing applications and investment opportunities, taking into
consideration  economic,  social  and  environmental  impacts.  VBIAF  may  also  serve  as  a
reference for the wider industry that seeks to incorporate ESG risk considerations in their own
risk  management  system.  We  are  also  working  with  our  industry  partners  to  produce  three
sector-specific  guides  for  the  VBI  Impact  Assessment  Framework,  namely,  palm  oil,  energy
efficiency and renewable energy. These will be issued for consultation in 2020 to supplement the
VBIAF with technical and step-by-step procedures for industry players in those sectors.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The  sustainability  agenda,  carried  by  the  VBI  initiative  for  the  Islamic  Finance  sector,
complements directly to the national aspiration in this area. To date, the country is progressively
marching  towards  growth  with  sustainability  following  its  commitment  to  the  UN  Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and as a signatory to the Paris Agreement to tackle climate change.
Strategic plans involving various sectors such as green technology and renewable energy have
been and are being implemented to achieve the SDGs. In 2018, Malaysia ranked 55 out of 156
countries in terms of its overall SDG performance and is on track in increasing affordable and
clean energy to fulfill this particular SDG7.
Under  the  11th  Malaysia  Plan  (2016  –  2020),  green  growth  has  been  identified  as  the  game
changer in bringing  Malaysia towards a sustainable socio-economic, development path.  Since
2016, several new legislations, policies and action plans were introduced, while existing financing
mechanisms were strengthened to support the uptake of green initiatives. As 2020 approaches,
Malaysia is committed to continue implementing its strategic long-term plans and green friendly
policies. Budget 2020 is reflective of this commitment, with the allocation of a matching fund of
RM10 million towards a joint United Nations SDG-government fund to co-finance SDG initiatives
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in Malaysia.
While government funding is important to realise the SDGs, most of the investments would need
to be sourced from the private sector. An annual target of RM350 billion from private investments
by 2020 was identified in the national roadmap for the SDGs, in line with achieving the targets of
the 11th Malaysia Plan. Thus, financial institutions are expected to embark on new financing and
investment opportunities towards sustainable projects and practices.
There is a large financing gap needed to be filled to realise the SDGs in developing countries,
which is estimated to be between USD 2.5 – 3 trillion annually. One major sector to drive a green
economy  is  renewable  energy.  Projections  provided  by  the  Sustainable  Energy  Development
Authority (SEDA) estimates that RM 33.5 billion is needed by private sector financing to achieve
the national target of 20% installed capacity of renewable energy by 2025 in Malaysia. Beyond
that,  financing  is  needed  for  other  important  sectors  such  as  education,  healthcare,  social
entrepreneurship  and  food  production  to  galvanize  sustainable  development.  There  is  also  a
more  prominent  role  for  financial  institutions  to  advocate  for  or  provide  advisory  services  to
businesses in sustainability areas. For Islamic finance, green sukuk issuances have served as a
bridge  between  Islamic  finance  and  sustainable  investment.  However,  more  is  required  for
Islamic  finance  to  have  greater  impact  and  this  pursuit  can  be  further  enhanced  with  the  VBI
initiative. With this Islamic financial institutions will be able to play an important role in supporting
the 2030 Government’s Shared Prosperity Agenda.
Nevertheless this will not be without its challenges. Balancing different priorities on the social,
economic and environmental fronts is a delicate act, as these may seemingly pull in different
directions. It is inevitable there will be issues and challenges that need to be addressed on the
path to attaining sustainability goals. I would like to touch on three key challenges and share the
Bank’s views and strategies in responding to these and to further accelerate our journey.
First, is the low level of awareness, understanding and appreciation of sustainability practices
and what it entails among stakeholders. This has led to limited integration of sustainability-related
consideration  in  individual  and  institutional  practices.  Knowledge  gaps  among  financiers  in
technical  areas  of  the  sectors  relating  to  sustainable  or  green  financing  such  as  renewable
energy,  sustainable  agro-production  and  manufacturing,  and  social  entreprenuership  has
naturally  contributed  to  apprehension  in  financing  new  and  relatively  unknown  sectors.  A
necessity in achieving scale will be to inculcate awareness on the need for and benefits of a
green and sustainable economy. This requires a significant shift in perspective towards how we
value social and ecological factors.  These should be viewed as inter-linked with the economy
and economic well-being and not as silos. Neither as a zero sum game, or polar opposites.
Beyond this and given the multidimensional nature of the SDGs, knowledge and capacity building
across sectors is crucial. In this regard, the Bank views climate resilience as a significant part of
achieving  the  SDGs.  Understanding  and  managing  climate-related  risks  enhance  the  financial
sector’s role in enabling an orderly transition to a low-carbon and sustainable economy. Over the
past 20 years, more than 50 natural disaster events occurred in Malaysia, accounting for RM8
billion losses. As climate-related events intensify, the economic costs arising from physical risk,
transition  risk  and  liability  risk  will  escalate  and  may  have  persistent  system-wide  impacts  on
financial stability and adversely affect macroeconomic conditions. Viewed from this perspective,
climate change developments therefore are crucially relevant to the Bank’s mandate.
With  this  in  mind,  the  Bank,  as  a  member  of  the  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  of
Greening  the  Financial  System  or  NGFS  is  committed  towards  building  a  comprehensive
understanding  of  the  impact  of  climate-related  risks  to  the  Malaysian  financial  system  and
economy. In September of this year, a Regional Conference on Climate Change was organised
to  raise  awareness  and  call  for  action  in  managing  climate  change  risks  and  opportunities,
attracting  more  than  500  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  of  financial  institutions,
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
regional central banks and supervisory authorities. A technical workshop had also been hosted
earlier  by  the  Bank  with  strategic  partners  to  evaluate  and  manage  environmental  and  social
risks in the energy and primary commodity sectors for VBI CoP members and risk managers of
financial institutions.
Another  focus  area  of  the  Bank  is  in  developing  greater  standardisation  of  understanding  and
definition of green finance for the domestic financial industry. The development of a principles-
based taxonomy aims to achieve this, which would support informed decisions and analysis of
exposures to climate change in fund raising, lending and investment activities.  Ultimately, this
can potentially increase financing to green projects. The first draft of the taxonomy is targetted
before the end of this month and we would welcome feedback from the industry on this.
The  Joint  Committee  on  Climate  Change  is  also  there  to  build  industry  capacity,  by  sharing
knowledge, expertise and best practices in assessing and managing climate-related risk.  The
four  sub-committees  formed  under  the  Joint  Committee  are  in  the  midst  of  developing  their
action  plans,  including  strategies  and  initiatives  to  upskill  financial  institutions  in  managing
climate-related risks and transition to a low carbon economy.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The second challenge is in forging strong collaboration and cooperation among key stakeholders
and overcoming the collective action problem. When it comes to costly and difficult action, we
always prefer others to do it. Ministries, government agencies, policymakers and regulators must
therefore  set  aside  their  differences  and  work  for  the  greater  good,  consolidate  their  strength
based  on  their  shared  values  and  work  collaboratively  to  develop  and  bring  creative  ideas  for
sustainable development into fruition. Initiatives need to be driven beyond personal motivation and
belief. Strategies need clear milestones with clear accountability by stakeholders. Sector-specific
approaches need to converge to limit risks of a disorderly transition.
The journey of sustainability is therefore one that is best navigated collectively. We have to come
together to support joint and coordinated responses to mitigate unsustainable practices. For the
Malaysian  financial  sector,  the  formation  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Climate  Change  was  an
important  milestone  in  pursuing  collaborative  actions  for  building  climate  resilience.  A  key
mandate  of  the  Joint  Committee  is  to  facilitate  collaboration  between  key  stakeholders  in
advancing coordinated solutions to address arising challenges and issues. This is in addition to
building  industry  capacity,  and  identifying  issues,  challenges  and  priorities  facing  the  financial
sector in managing the transition towards a low carbon economy.
The  third  challenge  that  we  face  as  a  developing  nation  is  in  balancing  sustainability  and
competing  socio-economic  priorities,  given  our  limited  resources  for  transition  to  low-carbon
economy. For example, reduction in fossil fuel use may lead to significant trade-offs with growth
and poverty reduction objectives, particularly in the short to medium-term. Targetting sustainable
growth and development amidst capacity and funding constraints can thus present significant
challenges for political leadership, economic priorities and social outcomes. In this context, given
the  higher  cost  of  transition,  the  country  may  need  a  longer  time  to  transition  towards  more
sustainable growth policies. This may however result in delayed actions which would heighten
physical risks. For the Bank, given the importance of financial inclusion, this could also involve
placing different priorities on the impact of climate change in different community segments and
to tailor interventions that are appropriate and relevant to provide effective financial protection,
particularly to vulnerable segments.
A  corollary  of  our  pursuit  towards  a  more  sustainable,  greener  economy,  would  also  be  that
some segments of the economy may face declining demand, big shifts in asset values or higher
costs of doing business. “Brown assets” or non-sustainable assets such as fossil fuel reserves
for example would potentially become “stranded assets”, which has implications on the value of
investments in energy companies, particularly those dealing with oil, gas and coal. Globally, it is
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
estimated that more than 80% of the known coal deposits, 50% of gas, and one third of the oil
reserves  cannot  be  used  for  energy  production  if  global  warming  is  to  be  kept  below  2°C  .
Transition  towards  lower-carbon  economy,  through  transformation  of  the  current  modes  of
production and consumption may come at a cost. Some have argued that on a macro level, this
could lead to a positive ‘green growth’ effect. Climate policies associated with structural reforms,
including mandatory climate-related financial disclosure could increase investment and benefit
the  global  economy  in  the  medium  term.  Investment  in  research  and  energy  efficiency  could
have a positive impact on innovation and knowledge spillovers, while creating opportunities for
economic  growth,  job  creation,  and  financial  innovation.  An  example  of  a  new  business
opportunity that could arise is the upcycle of waste materials into new products. Nevertheless, as
in many policy shifts of this nature, there will be winners and losers and public policy must strive
to  strike  an  acceptable  balance  to  all  the  communities  and  sectors  that  have  been  adversely
impacted.
Ladies and gentlemen,
To conclude, the journey towards sustainability requires careful and well-informed assessments,
policy  planning,  coordination,  execution  and  communication.  Long-term  planning  is  crucial  to
remain focused on the end goal. With a long lag between present actions and the impacts, as
well as the prominence and visibility of the short-term outcomes, perseverance is key. We may
have  to  overcome  “sustainability  fatigue”  that  may  arise  in  the  the  efforts  and  resources  that
must be invested in pursuing sustainability. Failing to do so would lead us to fall into a pattern of
disregard and laissez-faire, thus derailing us from achieving sustainability.
Ultimately, in striving for sustainability, we are endearing into each and every one of us our role
as  custodians  and  stewards  of  this  planet  and  its  resources.  We  all  have  a  role  to  play  in
achieving the 2030 SDGs, including the financial sector which can be a significant contributor in
this journey. This will be among the key themes in the next Financial Sector Blueprint 2021–2025
that  is  currently  being  developed.  For  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  the  larger  aspiration  is  the
adoption of VBI to bring about continued, sustained, sustainable positive impacts to the economy
and society. A long view is required to value social and environmental gains, and to recognise
returns beyond financial profits. Being cognisant of the limited window of time that we have at
present, our actions from now would lessen the potential losses and enhance the prospects of
our future.
On that note, I wish you a productive forum ahead.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
