Luis de Guindos: Closing remarks - VIII High-level Policy Dialogue
between Eurosystem and Latin American central banks
Closing remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the VIII
High-level Policy Dialogue between Eurosystem and Latin American central banks, Cartagena,
29 November 2019.
 After two days of fruitful discussions, I would like to thank you for a lively and honest exchange of
views. I am grateful for your openness in sharing experiences and for the positive discussions on
topics that are highly relevant for policymakers everywhere.
Let me briefly summarise the key topics we addressed and give you my main takeaways from
this meeting:
1
We looked at fostering growth and trade. Protracted weakness and the persistence of
prominent downside risks are not only common factors in many of our economies, but
are  also  global  phenomena.  The  weakness  in  global  trade  growth  –  which  has
decelerated sharply in recent quarters  – is particularly pronounced. Trade tensions and
increased protectionism are key drivers of the observed weakness in trade and can also
explain part of the subdued momentum in global activity. While some countries might
have benefited from positive trade diversion effects, such benefits may have been more
than offset by elevated trade policy uncertainty.
Current  subdued  GDP  growth  rates  are,  however,  also  homemade.  Not  sufficiently
addressed  fiscal  and  structural  weaknesses  and  low  levels  of  investment  typically
explain subdued growth figures. In addition, political events – and sometimes tensions –
aggravate the situation. Still, the specific country experiences with policy mixes targeted
towards increasing potential growth, productivity and investment, while also addressing
inequality, are among the most interesting takeaways for me. And the important role of
institutions in the reform process has once again come to the fore.
On the positive side, there are pockets of opportunity. There are, for example, efforts in
both the euro area and Latin America to open up further and to facilitate trade, though
the situation differs significantly across countries. There are clear benefits of opening up
and  facilitating  trade  and  integration  –  which  seem  too  often  forgotten  in  the  public
domain these days. However, it is also evident that the most sustainable overall welfare
gains  are  only  seen  when  sufficient  attention  is  given  to  redistribution.  Inequality  is  a
cause for concern, not just in many Latin American countries but also in the euro area.
We  also  reflected  on  global  financial  governance  and  the  Eminent  Persons  Group
(EPG) report. The EPG recommendations are comprehensive and far-reaching. Reform
proposals cover many issues:
Development
Capital flows and financial stability
Risk surveillance
Enhancing the Global Financial Safety Net and
Governance.
The proposals have varying degrees of ambition and detail, and the same is true for the
follow-up work in the G20 and in other fora.
We reviewed the proposals on the table, most notably on strengthening global financial
resilience  through  increased  surveillance,  particularly  of  risks,  and  through  better
integrated advice on monetary policy, macroprudential policy and capital flow measures.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
flows.  Driving 
topics  discussed  are 
While we acknowledged that all of the topics covered in the report are clearly relevant,
approaches to address them are at times controversial.
We  also  discussed  the  role  of  central  banks,  which  is  limited  given  their  domestic
mandates. Still, there is recognition that, for example, capital-sending countries have a
stake in global financial stability. Major central banks, including the ECB, are therefore
analysing the impact of monetary policy spillovers on financial markets and international
capital 
forces  behind  many 
international
organisations, often cooperating with each other.
There were also some concerns on the process and the fact that it is mostly driven by
the G20. Given the large number of topics, there was also some discussion on whether
some prioritisation is desirable. More generally, in some areas further work and analysis
is needed to strengthen our understanding of underlying issues, before the right reforms
can be formulated.
But don’t get me wrong: more analysis cannot be a pretext for inaction. In fact, there
was a general consensus that progress is needed on many issues mentioned in the
EPG report. The discussion also highlighted that cooperation and multilateralism are key
to  finding  solutions,  even  if  many  of  the  problems  also  need  to  be  addressed  at  the
domestic level.
Turning to global financial stability, its environment is challenging. Risks are increasing
and economic growth in many countries is slowing.
We  identified  some  of  the  major  vulnerabilities,  many  of  which,  common  to  most
countries around the table, such as high indebtedness, signs of mispricing of financial
assets and increased risk-taking in the non-bank financial sector. Risks differ in some
cases and include political instability, capital flow volatility, high levels of non-performing
loans or low bank profitability.
It  is  crucial  for  us  to  not  only  directly  address  the  visible  vulnerabilities,  but  also  to
prepare for the unpredictable events by strengthening resilience in the financial sector.
Important actions in this regard are:
the full and timely implementation of international bank regulation standards;
countercyclical macroprudential policies for banks;
appropriate  regulatory  and  macroprudential  frameworks  in  the  non-banking
sector.
We  finally  also  widened  the  concept  to  include  not  only  financial  but  also  economic
resilience  to  promote  economic  and  financial  stability.  There  is  no  one-size-fits-all
solution,  but  any  policy  mix  requires  adequate  macroprudential,  fiscal  and  structural
elements. Finding the right policy mix is a complex exercise, but the real obstacles are
usually institutional, i.e. getting political approval and ensuring implementation.
We also reflected on the role of central banks and international organisations in helping
to  strengthen  resilience.  While  acting  within  their  mandate  central  bank  tasks  have
generally  widened  and  expectations  for  action  on  a  wide  range  of  issues  have
increased.
Our discussions were not only pleasant but insightful. The meeting also confirmed that
Latin  America  is  an  important  partner  for  us  in  Europe  in  this  changing  world  and
demonstrated the value of our bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
1
Bobasu, A., Manu, S. and Quaglietti, L. (2019) “What is behind the decoupling of global activity and trade?”
Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
