Yaron Amir:  Setting  goals  and  embracing  innovation  to  meet  the
challenges of a changing environment
Remarks  by  Mr  Yaron  Amir,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  opening  of  the  Globes
newspaper’s “Governors’ Conference”, Tel Aviv, 1 September 2019.
Good evening.
 I am very happy to have the opportunity to sit here today with three of my predecessors and to
discuss core central banking issues—I cannot think of a more appropriate group with whom to
hold  such  a  discussion.  There  is  no  need  for  me  to  introduce  the  previous  governors,  but
nonetheless, it is important not to take for granted their achievements, which placed the
Bank of Israel at the forefront of economic activity in Israel and in central banking worldwide, and
strengthened the Israeli economy, its stability and its robustness. They led us to the situation in
which we can today take the steps necessary to prepare the economy for the challenges of the
future.
Prof.  Jacob  Frenkel  was  the  stabilizing  Governor,  who  drove  forward  the  foreign
exchange market liberalization. When he took office, there were those who thought that after
we had succeeded in eliminating the hyperinflation of the 1980s, a further decline from the level
of 20 percent to a lower level was not worth the cost involved. Jacob led an extended, persistent
and  committed  process,  at  the  end  of  which  Israel  reached  low  inflation,  and  the  economy
benefited  from  stability  and  certainty  for  many  years  in  that  area. As  you  know,  today  we  are
dealing with inflation that is slightly lower than the target (perhaps it would have been better to
work just a drop less, Jacob). Today it is clear to all that this effort was worth it in the long run.
Jacob conducted the liberalization process in the foreign exchange market and in the balance of
payments,  and  thanks  to  him,  the  overall  economy  benefits  from  full  openness  of  the  foreign
exchange market and from the free flow of funds between the domestic economy and abroad.
Prof. Stanley Fischer is the Governor who successfully withstood the global crisis. Under
his  leadership,  and  while  the  global  economy  trembled,  the  Bank  of  Israel  was  an  island  of
stability,  judgment,  original  thinking,  and  brave  actions,  which  instilled  confidence  in  market
participants, companies, and the general public, and was one of the factors in Israel’s economy
being among those that suffered less from the global crisis. Stan determinedly led the legislation
of the new Bank of Israel Law, in the framework of which, in contrast to human nature, he led the
process of cutting the powers of the Governor, who until that change was almost all-powerful.
Due to him, monetary policy decisions today are reached by a committee, which enhances the
public legitimacy and the independence of the Bank of Israel in reaching decisions. The Bank
also operates, from an administrative perspective, under the watchful eye and guidance of the
Supervisory  Council.  These  and  other  changes  did  not  make  the  lives  of  the  Governors  who
succeeded  him  easier  (and  I’m  not  complaining,  Stanley—not  yet),  but  they  improved  and
strengthened the functioning of the Bank of Israel.
Prof. Karnit Flug was the Governor who grabbed the bull by the horns and dealt with the
fundamental problems of the Israeli economy. Karnit put on the table, clearly, the problem of the
Israeli  economy’s  low  productivity—maybe  the  factor  that  will  have  the  most  impact  on  the
welfare  of  Israel’s  citizens  in  the  coming  decades.  Due  to  a  series  of  research  studies  and
analyses carried out during her term in office, today everyone is able to point to the problem.
Karnit’s  term  was  characterized  by  a  significant  reform  in  the  financial  system.  Under  her
leadership,  the  Bank  took  on  itself  the  establishment  of  the  Credit  Data  System,  which  we
launched five months ago; the Bank collaborated with the Ministry of Finance and other entities in
designing, legislating, and carrying out the reform to enhance the competition in banking. With
the  clear  recognition  of  the  importance  of  financial  stability,  Karnit  insisted  on  promoting  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
legislation of the Financial Stability Committee, which is an important infrastructure in reducing
risks if and when a crisis occurs.
So immense thanks to you, my predecessors, and of course thank you as well to Globes for the
distinguished platform you have gathered here. I will take this opportunity to tell my predecessors,
and the public, about what has been going on at the Bank of Israel since I took office, and about
our plans for the future.
The economic world as we knew it is undergoing great changes. In order to continue to
function in a changing environment, and to know how to optimally advance in the face of
potential  crises,  we  have  to  speak,  think,  and  breathe  technological,  financial,  and
research-related innovation.
In  the  first  months  of  my  term,  we  completed  several  processes  that  had  begun  in  previous
years. As I noted, we went live with the Credit Data System, which is operating satisfactorily. A
large number of financial entities, including those not obligated by law, joined the system and
began reporting to it and receiving data from it. We also set out the separation of two credit card
companies, while ensuring that the parameters of the separation support the goals of the reform.
I am also happy to update that the Financial Stability Committee has already met several times
and is making progress with the formulation of its tools and work procedures. We presented to
the government an extensive and clear analysis on the need to carry out fiscal adjustments. In
parallel, we presented a plan to improve the standard of living and productivity in the economy—
with an emphasis on operative policy proposals.
We are not blind to the housing issue, and its impact on the young generation. Therefore, I asked
the Research Department to begin formulating operative recommendations in the housing area,
in order to help the new government identify the order of priorities and to act to remove obstacles
that weigh on increasing the supply of homes.
In a joint initiative with the IMF, we are developing a new macroeconomic model, which takes into
account two sectors that to date have not been included in the common models—the housing
market and the financial system. Recall that these two were among the main factors in the 2008
crisis. The model will serve us in macro assessments but will also contribute to the work of the
Financial  Stability  Committee.  In  another  joint  initiative  with  the  IMF,  we  are  working  on  an
international conference on cyber risk in the financial and banking system, with the understanding
that looking forward, this is one of the main risks to financial stability.
Given  the  changes  in  the  global  economy,  and  with  eyes  to  the  future,  I  initiated a  strategic
process to define the Bank’s goals for the coming years. The entire management has been
enlisted in this process, which is being conducted by the Director General of the Bank, Hezi Kalo.
It  is  not  straightforward  to  carry  out  such  a  process  in  the  midst  of  the  ongoing  work  that  is
always very intensive, but it was clear to me that we must look beyond the immediate issues.
Therefore, we added a slogan to the process—“Working today, thinking about tomorrow”. I asked
the  members  of  management  to  think  outside  the  box,  and  to  try  to  identify  the  important
challenges that the Bank of Israel and the Israeli economy will deal with in the coming years. To
that end, we set up several teams, with the participation of tens of staff and managers, in all the
relevant areas:
The first deals with monetary policy in the modern era, and asks the big questions. In view
of the changes in the global and domestic economies, and in view of the changes that are
likely to occur in the structure of money in the modern age, it is crucial to understand how
monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  and  what  is  the  toolbox  required  to  do  so.  Thus,
already in the coming year we intend to carry out a process of rethinking the monetary policy
framework, and we have already invited senior officials from central banks around the world
to come to Israel and participate in a conference we plan to hold on the issue. It is certainly
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
possible that at the end of the process we will reach the conclusion that the current regime
is the correct one and there is no need to change it, but we must challenge that thinking from
all sides before reaching that conclusion.
Another team is dealing with the financial system of the future, and how to prepare for the
changes expected in it. The team is formulating a strategy, the goal of which is to maintain
financial  stability  while  aligning  the  financial  and  regulatory  system  to  the  changing
environment,  enhancing  competition,  and  implementing  innovation.  The  technological
developments that are changing the financial system were at the core of the team’s work, as
were the challenges deriving from the growth in the number of type of participants in the
system, alongside questions raised regarding the role of the Bank of Israel as a main factor
in the financial system and in the capital market overall.
The third team is having a ball. It is focused on advanced technologies in the digital era.
The  team  thought  about  the  effects  of  the  digital  era  on  financial  infrastructures—open
banking, blockchain, digital currencies, and the need to update the payment systems in the
economy to an immediate and fast payment system—an area in which Israel lags behind
the  global  frontier.  They  discussed  the  contribution  of  the  fintech  industry  to  the  Israeli
economy,  how  innovation  can  be  promoted  in  the  financial  system  and  in  the  economy
overall, as well as how to change the Bank itself into a digital and innovative organization.
Anyone who knows me knows that I live and breathe research and data. The fourth team
that we established deals with that. I’m afraid that since I took office I have caused more than
a few white hairs among the excellent people in the Bank’s Research Department and the
Information and Statistics Department, with the requirements and requests I set for them.
The statistical data are among the main building blocks in a central bank’s work. Looking
ahead, there will be a need to collect new data of various types from new sources. Big data,
visual data, audio-visual, geographic data, artificial intelligence—these are all areas that are
being  developed  at  a  rapid  pace  and  the  Bank  will  have  to  examine  how  to  derive  the
maximum  from  them  in  order  to  fulfill  its  various  functions,  and  how  to  make  the  data
accessible to the public in the most efficient and convenient manner.
We are also looking inward—to the human resource—the most important asset a central
bank  has.  We  are  comprehensively  examining  our  operational  setup,  what  strategy  will
ensure  the  adequate  inputs  for  carrying  out  the  Bank’s  functions  over  time;  and  our
communication with the public—whether, and how, to adjust how we explain ourselves to
the public in view of the sharp changes occurring in the world in communication in general,
and in how central banks communicate with the public in particular.
This process is complex and comprehensive. Our goal is to question every convention, and
to leave no stone unturned. And obviously, our test will be in the implementation. In view of how
the entire bank was enlisted into this process, I am sure that ultimately the Bank will be better
prepared to fulfill its objectives optimally, in view of our upcoming challenges over the coming
years.
And from these lofty ideas, let’s move for a moment to some current issues.
As you know, last week the Monetary Committee decided to keep the interest rate unchanged,
though  it  conveyed  a  different  message  than  the  one  we  conveyed  in  recent  months.  The
message was changed because the data changed—in central banking jargon that is called data
dependency. Within a relatively short period of time, we saw a decline in inflation, a change in the
direction of monetary policy worldwide, a worsening of the risks to the global economy, and a
relatively sharp appreciation of the shekel. We noted with satisfaction that the domestic economy
is in a good situation—and indeed, when looking beyond the technical volatility, we see that the
economy is growing at a solid pace, the labor market remains tight, and it appears that to date
the  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  is  not  trickling  down  to  the  Israeli  economy,  not  even  to
exports, which continue to grow, particularly due to services exports.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
If the economy is in a good state, why did we note that if necessary we will take steps to make
monetary policy more accommodative?  First,  because  the  trend  of  inflation  changed.  It  is  not
clear  to  us  at  this  point  if  it  is  noise  in  the  data—loud  noise,  to  be  sure,  but  noise—or  a
fundamental decline in inflation. However, it is clear to us that we have to continue to strive and
raise the inflation rate toward the midpoint of the target range. Second, the risks have intensified.
Should the risks be realized, we will want to act in a timely manner, in order to prevent to the
extent possible a slowdown in economic activity. How will we do that? We have a range of tools,
and they are all on the table. There are the standard tools, and we are refreshing the toolbox
regarding tools that have not been tried here, or have not been used for a very long time.
And one more comment on monetary tools—in recent weeks the issue of the foreign exchange
market has been in the headlines. Therefore, maybe this is the time to clarify—I did declare that
in principle I would prefer that the exchange rate would be set by market equilibrium, and that
was the also the Bank’s approach before I took office. Practically, there is a window of exchange
rates that we view as consistent with price stability and economic activity, when we take into
account all the factors and variables in the economy. The window is dynamic, and depends on
parameters that change all the time, which naturally should not be disclosed.
From  this  perspective,  the  Bank  of  Israel  policy  on  this  issue  could  be  called  “constructive
ambiguity", which is the appropriate policy for a small economy such as Israel; and therefore, if
and when the Bank of Israel will assess that the exchange rate has materially deviated from the
window that we defined, we may very well intervene in the market—and no one will receive a
warning letter from us beforehand.
Thank you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
