Yaron Amir:  Bank  of  Israel's  recommendations  for  increasing  the
standard of living while maintaining fiscal discipline
Remarks by Mr Yaron Amir, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Calcalist conference, Tel Aviv,
2 September 2019.
Good morning.
 I greatly appreciate the opportunity to speak here today. This is a very important time, with the
election campaign drawing to a close, while millions of children are returning to school to further
their  education  and  obtain  the  tools  necessary  to  lead  the  country  into  the  future.    I  would
therefore  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  discussion  issues  that  involve  each  one  of  us  as
individuals,  and  all  of  us,  particularly  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  societal  level:  the  future  of  our
children  and  further  generations,  and  the  standard  of  living  that  we  want  to  improve  for  their
benefit, and also of course for our benefit as a country.
A  few  days  ago,  the  Bank  of  Israel  Research  Department  published  a  document  that  dealt
entirely with the measures necessary to increase the standard of living in Israel.  At the Bank of
Israel, we asked ourselves how to do this, and the answer is that the focus must be on improving
worker productivity in Israel.  This is the “roadmap” that we created.  These recommendations
illustrate the Bank of Israel’s commitment to deal with the most pressing macroeconomic issues
for  the  economy  as  part  of  my  job  as  economic  advisor  to  the  government,  and  based  on  a
professional in-depth analysis.  I will expand on this in a few moments.
But before that, I would like to briefly discuss the vision that I and the Bank have in dealing with,
and guiding policymakers in dealing with, the issue even now.  The informed decisions made by
policymakers in our country from its founding until today established and strengthened the Israeli
economy, its stability, and its power, and led us to a situation in which we are now ready to begin
taking the necessary steps to prepare the economy for the coming decades.  Israel must, and
can, implement these recommendations.  Implementing the Bank of Israel’s recommendations
will  help  take  Israel  into  the  future  with  a  higher  standard  of  living.    I  say  this  with  complete
certainty.
This obviously requires considerable investment.  The cost of the measures that appear in the
report, when fully implemented a few years from now, is not low—close to 3 percent of GDP,
which is about NIS 44 billion per year in current GDP terms.  The cost is high due to the large
gaps that have developed in various areas over recent decades.  However, the investment will be
very well worth it.  Our assessment of the additional GDP in the long-term from implementing the
recommendations is much higher—about 20 percent of GDP per year.  Or, to put it more simply,
about  NIS  270  billion  shekels  more,  in  current  GDP  terms,  for  our  children  and  future
generations.
I emphasize that the implementation of this program will not come at the expense of the need to
deal  decisively  with  fiscal  issues  and  the  growing  deficit.    I  have  previously  enumerated  the
measures that the government and the Knesset will have to take in order to deal with the fiscal
necessities: reducing inefficient expenditures to start, cancelling tax exemptions, and apparently
also  raising  tax  rates.    This  does  not  contradict  the  need  or  the  possibilities  of  starting  to
implement  the  recommendations  right  now.    First  and  foremost,  the  stage  of  planning  and
building  the  tools  to  implement  the  reforms,  which  is  an  essential  part  of  adopting  the
recommendations, will take time, and its cost is relatively negligible. In addition, there are many
recommendations that can be implemented even today, since they deal with diverting existing
sources, and with administrative processes.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  will  now  briefly  discuss  the  main  points  of  the  recommendations  and  the  background  of  the
report.  Output per work hour in Israel, what we economists define as “labor productivity", is 24
percent lower than the OECD average, and this gap has not declined in recent decades.  This
gap  has  large  implications  for  the  standard  of  living  in  Israel.    The  low  level  of  productivity
compared with other advanced economies is reflected in lower wages and standard of living in
Israel  than  in  other  western  countries.  We  found  that  the  labor  productivity  gap  to  Israel’s
disadvantage  is  mainly  due  to  a  number  of  factors:  the  relatively  low  quality  of  education  and
teaching in Israel; the lag in the level of infrastructure and the quantity of business capital; and
public sector regulations and bureaucracy.
In the field of education: In recent years, there is a greater recognition that despite the fact that
Israel is the Startup Nation that gave us the flash drive, WAZE, Mobileye, and a wealth of complex
cyber solutions, most Israeli workers lack the ability to solve more basic problems.  In addition to
our  marked  lag  in  average  skills,  Israel  also  feature  a  high  level  of  inequality  in  scholastic
achievements, with large differences in basic labor skills among workers, large wage gaps, and
large differences in productivity levels between the various industries. While the strong workers
in  Israel  are  similar  in  output  and  skills  to  the  strong  workers  in  other  countries,  the  weaker
workers in Israel are far weaker than their peers abroad.
So how can we strengthen the “weaker” workers and raise the output per worker in Israel?
There  is  a  direct—and  causal—connection  between  a  labor  force’s  quality  of  education  and
productivity, with an emphasis on the importance of basic cognitive skills that enable a change in
profession during one’s lifetime. Eric Hanushek of Stanford University shows this in a series of
studies he conducted in recent years.
It is important to state that the gaps in the quality of education in Israel exist in almost all age
groups and education groups, and are not the purview of a certain segment of Israeli society. 
Therefore, the treatment of the problem must encompass all levels of education, and begin in
preschool.    In  his  research,  Nobel  prize  winner  James  Heckman  found  how  important  the
preschool starting point is for economic success during life, particularly for children from lower
socioeconomic  backgrounds.    It  is  therefore  important  that  daycare  centers  for  children  from
weaker backgrounds begin the educational process at very young ages.  At the same time, it is
important  that  subsidies  for  the  cost  of  daycare  for  weaker  population  groups  be  adjusted  to
increase the incentives to work for both parents.  Such steps lead to a double benefit.  They can
materially contribute to future growth, and can contribute to reducing gaps and increase equality
of opportunity.
As economists, we avoid dealing with pedagogical issues. We focus on incentives that will help
improvement in an area, and recommend adjusting the payment structure for teachers to the
urgent  needs  of  the  system:  improvement  payment  for  those  with  training  in  subjects  where
there is a lag in achievements and a lack of teachers (mathematics, sciences, and English), and
improving  salaries  for  teachers  to  teach  in  schools  that  cater  to  students  with  weaker
backgrounds.  This is all on condition that there are continuous evaluations of the success of the
teachers and of the schools in creating scholastic, educational, and social improvements.
In addition to the investment required at young ages, there are also measures that are necessary
for the older population.  In Israel, too little is invested in developing human capital at older ages
through  professional  training  programs.  The  increasing  flexibility  of  the  labor  market,  and  the
extension of a person’s working life as life expectancy and the effective retirement age increase
require significant reforms in this area, both in improving the output of technological colleges, and
in adapting the content of the courses. The reform that the government recently adopted in the
technological colleges is an important step in the right direction, and the recommendations that
appear in this field in the draft report of the 2030 Committee appointed by the government point to
additional important measures that will help Israel to better deal with the issue of professional
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
training.
In  the  field  of  business  capital:  The  high  level  of  variance  in  the  Israeli  economy  is  also
reflected in the extent of innovation and the volume of investment in physical capital in different
industries.    In  this  area,  the  situation  is  good  in  exporting  industries,  particularly  in  software
industries, but it requires improvement in the rest of the economy, compared to parallel areas in
other countries.  Why is this happening?  First, it is reasonable to assume that some of it is a
natural result of market forces.  Israel developed a relative advantage in the field of high-tech,
which  makes  successful  investments  and  attracts  select  software  and  hardware  people. 
However, the government’s involvement encourages these successful areas of activity directly
and almost exclusively, thereby raising the costs of human and physical means of production for
the  other  industries,  which  employ  most  of  the  workers  in  the  economy.    Over  time,  the
productivity of export companies will have difficulty continuing to grow, as companies that provide
them with raw materials and services remain so far behind.
Therefore, a gradual change is required that will make support of the principle industries based
on incentivizing the various areas of activity and industries by economic criteria that will lead the
economy to higher returns on investment and government support—among exports, which can
continue  to  benefit  from  it,  and  among  domestic  manufacturers.    It  is  important  to  focus  on
running  programs  that  support  the  removal  of  market  failures  that  delay  production  and  the
implementation of unique knowledge, innovation, and management methods that can spill over to
other  companies.    Such  a  policy,  alongside  the  effect  of  streamlining  and  the  reduction  of
regulation, which I will discuss later, may contribute significantly to increased stock of capital in
exporting industries and in domestic industries as one.
In the field of infrastructure:  The  rate  of  investment  in  transport  infrastructure  in  Israel  has
been similar in recent years to the average rate of investment in OECD countries, but is far from
what is necessary to reduce the gap in transit efficiency compared with the leading countries. 
This is due both to the accumulated gap and to the rapid population increase in Israel.  Improving
the  transport  system,  particularly  public  transit,  will  shorten  the  time  wasted  in  traffic.    An
example that I heard, and which illustrates the issue well is that a plumber in Gush Dan manages
to get to half the amount of homes that a plumber who works in areas without large traffic jams
can service.  This is a situation that, obviously, creates lower output for that plumber, and raises
the cost of his service to the consumer.
Regulation and the business environment: Israel is ranked 29  out of the 34 OECD countries
in terms of the regulatory ease of doing business.  Despite the government’s recognition of the
importance of the issue, actual improvement is confused and very slow.  It is therefore important
to accelerate the process of adopting regulations from other advanced economies, unless there
are significant reasons to avoid this in individual cases.  This will help to both ease the regulatory
burden  and  to  increase  international  competition  in  the  economy.    In  addition,  in  order  to
streamline  bureaucratic  processes,  we  suggest  setting  targets  in  public  sector  wage
agreements for the adoption of digital processes in government services to the business sector.
th
The current fiscal situation is weighing down on the ability to finance the required investment. The
government’s structural deficit has increased in recent years to more than 3.5 percent of GDP,
and without a significant correction, it is expected to continue growing in 2021 and onward.  The
implementation  of  this  program  will  not  come  at  the  expense  of  the  need  to  deal  with  fiscal
issues and the growing deficit.  On the contrary: the required investments make it necessary to
rapidly and decisively deal with the existing deficit.
Since the large expenses due to the programs presented are expected only in a few years’ time,
after the initial steps have been implemented and the plans for advancing infrastructure are fully
prepared, it is important that the government prepare for early implementation in terms of the
fiscal  frameworks  that  will  allow  those  investments  that  have  the  capability  of  significantly
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
improving the standard of living in Israel.  Such preparation is important, first and foremost to
ensure the continued stability of the economy, but also to ensure greater ability of sources for
financing the required investments.  This means the early convergence of the deficit, which will
ensure at least the stabilization of the public debt to GDP ratio, and maintaining this level in the
coming  years  alongside  the  gradual  implementation  of  the  growth-supporting  measures
proposed in this program.
I would like to emphasize that we do not intend to recommend financing the investments—even
though their expected return will be high—through deficit spending and the accumulation of public
debt to be repaid in the future.  In general, there is some logic to this argument, but the question
is what level of deficit is sustainable.  The current deficit level is, in our assessment, too high to
allow  for  further  increase,  due  to  the  short-term  marcoeconomic  risks  it  entails.    In  addition,
deficit  financing  creates  risks  to  the  quality  of  project  selection  and  of  a  loss  of  control  over
costs.  When public projects are financed without effective short-term budgetary restrictions that
show the public and decision makers in real time what the cost of the sources required for the
investment is, the risk of inefficient allocation of investments and excessive costs increases.
In conclusion, these recommendations illustrate the material possibilities that we are presenting
to policy makers to increase the standard of living in Israel.  I believe that their strength is in their
interconnectedness and in their being sufficiently detailed in terms of the cost of realizing each
item in the report.  Their concurrent implementation will maximize the chances of success of the
project.  The report is available for viewing, and was already presented to the various government
ministries as it was being formulated.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
