For release on delivery 
1:00 p.m. EST 
November 26, 2019 
 
          Federal Reserve Review of  
Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications:   
Some Preliminary Views 
Remarks by 
Lael Brainard 
Member 
at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Presentation of the 2019 William F. Butler Award 
New York Association for Business Economics 
New York, New York 
November 26, 2019 
 It is a pleasure to be here with you.  It is an honor to join the 45 outstanding 
economic researchers and practitioners who are past recipients of the William F. Butler 
Award.  I want to express my deep appreciation to the New York Association for 
Business Economics (NYABE) and NYABE President Julia Coronado.   
I will offer my preliminary views on the Federal Reserve’s review of its monetary 
policy strategy, tools, and communications after first touching briefly on the economic 
outlook.  These remarks represent my own views.  The framework review is ongoing and 
will extend into 2020, and no conclusions have been reached at this time.1   
Outlook and Policy 
There are good reasons to expect the economy to grow at a pace modestly above 
potential over the next year or so, supported by strong consumers and a healthy job 
market, despite persistent uncertainty about trade conflict and disappointing foreign 
growth.  Recent data provide some reassurance that consumer spending continues to 
expand at a healthy pace despite some slowing in retail sales.  Consumer sentiment 
remains solid, and the employment picture is positive.  Housing seems to have turned a 
corner and is poised for growth following several weak quarters.   
Business investment remains downbeat, restrained by weak growth abroad and 
trade conflict.  But there is little sign so far that the softness in trade, manufacturing, and 
business investment is affecting consumer spending, and the effect on services has been 
limited. 
                                                 
1 I am grateful to Ivan Vidangos of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.  These 
remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or 
the Federal Open Market Committee. 
 - 2 - 
Employment remains strong.  The employment-to-population ratio for prime-age 
adults has moved up to its pre-recession peak, and the three-month moving average of the 
unemployment rate is near a 50-year low.2  Monthly job gains remain above the pace 
needed to absorb new entrants into the labor force despite some slowing since last year.  
And initial claims for unemployment insurance—a useful real-time indicator 
historically—remain very low despite some modest increases. 
Data on inflation have come in about as I expected, on balance, in recent months.  
Inflation remains below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent symmetric objective, which has 
been true for most of the past seven years.  The price index for core personal 
consumption expenditures (PCE), which excludes food and energy prices and is a better 
indicator of future inflation than overall PCE prices, increased 1.7 percent over the 
12 months through September. 
Foreign growth remains subdued.  While there are signs that the decline in euro-
area manufacturing is stabilizing, the latest indicators on economic activity in China 
remain sluggish, and the news in Japan and in many emerging markets has been 
disappointing.  Overall, it appears third-quarter foreign growth was weak, and the latest 
indicators point to little improvement in the fourth quarter. 
More broadly, the balance of risks remains to the downside, although there has 
been some improvement in risk sentiment in recent weeks.  The risk of a disorderly 
Brexit in the near future has declined significantly, and there is some hope that a U.S.–
                                                 
2 Claudia Sahm shows that a 1/2 percentage point increase in the three-month moving average of the 
unemployment rate relative to the previous year’s low is a good real-time recession indicator.  See Claudia 
Sahm (2019), “Direct Stimulus Payments to Individuals,” Policy Proposal, The Hamilton Project at the 
Brookings Institution (Washington:  THP, May 16), 
https://www.hamiltonproject.org/assets/files/Sahm_web_20190506.pdf.   
 - 3 - 
China trade truce could avert additional tariffs.  While risks remain, financial market 
indicators suggest market participants see a diminution in such risks, and probabilities of 
recessions from models using market data have declined. 
 The baseline is for continued moderate expansion, a strong labor market, and 
inflation moving gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.  The Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) has taken significant action to provide insurance against the 
risks associated with trade conflict and weak foreign growth against a backdrop of muted 
inflation.  Since July, the Committee has lowered the target range for the federal funds 
rate by 3/4 percentage point, to the current range of 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent.  It will take 
some time for the full effect of this accommodation to work its way through economic 
activity, the labor market, and inflation.  I will be watching the data carefully for signs of 
a material change to the outlook that could prompt me to reassess the appropriate path of 
policy. 
Review 
The Federal Reserve is conducting a review of our monetary policy strategy, 
tools, and communications to make sure we are well positioned to advance our statutory 
goals of maximum employment and price stability.3  Three key features of today’s new 
normal call for a reassessment of our monetary policy strategy:  the neutral rate is very 
                                                 
3 Information about the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications is available on the 
Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-
tools-and-communications.htm.  Also see Richard H. Clarida (2019), “The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its 
Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices,” speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. 
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth 
School of Business, New York, February 22, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20190222a.htm; and Jerome H. Powell (2019), 
“Monetary Policy:  Normalization and the Road Ahead,” speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic 
Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., March 8, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20190308a.htm.  
 - 4 - 
low here and abroad, trend inflation is running below target, and the sensitivity of price 
inflation to resource utilization is very low.4   
First, trend inflation is below target.5  Underlying trend inflation appears to be 
running a few tenths below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective, according to 
various statistical filters.  This raises the risk that households and businesses could come 
to expect inflation to run persistently below our target and change their behavior in a way 
that reinforces that expectation.  Indeed, with inflation having fallen short of 2 percent for 
most of the past seven years, inflation expectations may have declined, as suggested by 
some survey-based measures of long-run inflation expectations and by market-based 
measures of inflation compensation. 
Second, the sensitivity of price inflation to resource utilization is very low.  This 
is what economists mean when they say that the Phillips curve is flat.  A flat Phillips 
curve has the important advantage of allowing employment to continue expanding for 
longer without generating inflationary pressures, thereby providing greater opportunities 
to more people.  But it also makes it harder to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on 
a sustained basis when inflation expectations have drifted below 2 percent. 
Third, the long-run neutral rate of interest is very low, which means that we are 
likely to see more frequent and prolonged episodes when the federal funds rate is stuck at 
                                                 
4 See Lael Brainard (2016), “The ‘New Normal’ and What It Means for Monetary Policy,” speech delivered 
at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20160912a.htm. 
5 See Lael Brainard (2017), "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low 
Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, September 5, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20170905a.htm ; and James H. Stock and 
Mark W. Watson (2007), “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, vol. 39 (s1, February), pp. 3–33; this paper is also available at 
https://scholar.harvard.edu/stock/publications/why-has-inflation-become-harder-forecast. 
 - 5 - 
its effective lower bound (ELB).6  The neutral rate is the level of the federal funds rate 
that would keep the economy at full employment and 2 percent inflation if no tailwinds 
or headwinds were buffeting the economy.  A variety of forces have likely contributed to 
a decline in the neutral rate, including demographic trends in many large economies, 
some slowing in the rate of productivity growth, and increases in the demand for safe 
assets.  When looking at the Federal Reserve’s Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), 
it is striking that the Committee’s median projection of the longer-run federal funds rate 
has moved down from 4-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent over the past seven years.7  A 
similar decline can be seen among private forecasts.8  This decline means the 
conventional policy buffer is likely to be only about half of the 4-1/2 to 5 percentage 
points by which the FOMC has typically cut the federal funds rate to counter recessionary 
pressures over the past five decades. 
This large loss of policy space will tend to increase the frequency or length of 
periods when the policy rate is pinned at the ELB, unemployment is elevated, and 
inflation is below target.9  In turn, the experience of frequent or extended periods of low 
                                                 
6 See Lael Brainard (2015), “Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low,” speech 
delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20151201a.htm. 
7 The projection materials for the Federal Reserve’s SEP are available on the Board’s website at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. 
8 For example, the Blue Chip Consensus long-run projection for the three-month Treasury bill has declined 
from 3.6 percent in October 2012 to 2.4 percent in October 2019.  See Wolters Kluwer (2019), Blue Chip 
Economic Indicators, vol. 44 (October 10); and Wolters Kluwer (2012), Blue Chip Economic Indicators, 
vol. 37 (October 10). 
9 See Michael Kiley and John Roberts (2017), “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World,” Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317–72, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2017/08/kileytextsp17bpea.pdf; Eric Swanson (2018), “The Federal Reserve Is Not Very 
Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper Series 25123 
(Cambridge, Mass.:  National Bureau of Economic Research, October), 
https://www.nber.org/papers/w25123; and Hess Chung, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias 
Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019), “Monetary Policy Options 
at the Effective Lower Bound:  Assessing the Federal Reserve’s Current Policy Toolkit,” Finance and 
 - 6 - 
inflation at the ELB risks eroding inflation expectations and further compressing the 
conventional policy space.  The risk is a downward spiral where conventional policy 
space gets compressed even further, the ELB binds even more frequently, and it becomes 
increasingly difficult to move inflation expectations and inflation back up to target.  
While consumers and businesses might see very low inflation as having benefits at the 
individual level, at the aggregate level, inflation that is too low can make it very 
challenging for monetary policy to cut the short-term nominal interest rate sufficiently to 
cushion the economy effectively.10  
The experience of Japan and of the euro area more recently suggests that this risk 
is real.  Indeed, the fact that Japan and the euro area are struggling with this challenging 
triad further complicates our task, because there are important potential spillovers from 
monetary policy in other major economies to our own economy through exchange rate 
and yield curve channels.11 
In light of the likelihood of more frequent episodes at the ELB, our monetary 
policy review should advance two goals.  First, monetary policy should achieve average 
inflation outcomes of 2 percent over time to re-anchor inflation expectations at our target.  
Second, we need to expand policy space to buffer the economy from adverse 
developments at the ELB.  
                                                 
Economics Discussion Series 2019-003 (Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
January), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.003. 
10 The important observation that some consumers and businesses see low inflation as having benefits  
emerged from listening to a diverse range of perspectives, including representatives of consumer, labor, 
business, community, and other groups during the Fed Listens events; for details, see 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-
communications-fed-listens-events.htm. 
11 See Lael Brainard (2017), “Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization,” speech delivered 
at the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., 
July 13, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20170713a.htm. 
 - 7 - 
Achieving the Inflation Target 
The apparent slippage in trend inflation below our target calls for some 
adjustments to our monetary policy strategy and communications.  In this context and as 
part of our review, my colleagues and I have been discussing how to better anchor 
inflation expectations firmly at our objective.  In particular, it may be helpful to specify 
that policy aims to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time or over 
the cycle.  Given the persistent shortfall of inflation from its target over recent years, this 
would imply supporting inflation a bit above 2 percent for some time to compensate for 
the period of underperformance. 
One class of strategies that has been proposed to address this issue are formal 
“makeup” rules that seek to compensate for past inflation deviations from target.  For 
instance, under price-level targeting, policy seeks to stabilize the price level around a 
constant growth path that is consistent with the inflation objective.12  Under average 
inflation targeting, policy seeks to return the average of inflation to the target over some 
specified period.13 
To be successful, formal makeup strategies require that financial market 
participants, households, and businesses understand in advance and believe, to some 
degree, that policy will compensate for past misses.  I suspect policymakers would find 
communications to be quite challenging with rigid forms of makeup strategies, because 
                                                 
12 See, for example, James Bullard (2018), “A Primer on Price Level Targeting in the U.S.,” a presentation 
before the CFA Society of St. Louis, St. Louis, Mo., January 10, 
https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/files/pdfs/bullard/remarks/2018/bullard_cfa_stlouis_10_january_2018.
pdf?la=en. 
13 See, for example, Lars Svensson (2019), “Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve,” presented 
at “Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools and Communication Practices,” sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, June 5, 
https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/others/events/2019/monetary-policy-conference/monetary-policy-
strategies-svensson-pdf.pdf?la=en.  
 - 8 - 
of what have been called time-inconsistency problems.  For example, if inflation has been 
running well below—or above—target for a sustained period, when the time arrives to 
maintain inflation commensurately above—or below—2 percent for the same amount of 
time, economic conditions will typically be inconsistent with implementing the promised 
action.  Analysis also suggests it could take many years with a formal average inflation 
targeting framework to return inflation to target following an ELB episode, although this 
depends on difficult-to-assess modeling assumptions and the particulars of the strategy.14   
Thus, while formal average inflation targeting rules have some attractive 
properties in theory, they could be challenging to implement in practice.  I prefer a more 
flexible approach that would anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent by achieving 
inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time or over the cycle.  For instance, 
following five years when the public has observed inflation outcomes in the range of 1-
1/2 to 2 percent, to avoid a decline in expectations, the Committee would target inflation 
outcomes in a range of, say, 2 to 2-1/2 percent for the subsequent five years to achieve 
inflation outcomes of 2 percent on average overall.  Flexible inflation averaging could 
bring some of the benefits of a formal average inflation targeting rule, but it would be 
simpler to communicate.  By committing to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 
percent over time, the Committee would make clear in advance that it would 
                                                 
14 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market 
Committee, September 17–18, 2019,” press release, October 9, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191009a.htm; and David 
Reifschneider and David Wilcox (2019), “Average Inflation Targeting Would Be a Weak Tool for the Fed 
to Deal with Recession and Chronic Low Inflation,” Policy Brief PB19-16 (Washington:  Peterson Institute 
for International Economics, November), https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/pb19-16.pdf.  
 - 9 - 
accommodate rather than offset modest upward pressures to inflation in what could be 
described as a process of opportunistic reflation.15 
Policy at the ELB 
Second, the Committee is examining what monetary policy tools are likely to be 
effective in providing accommodation when the federal funds rate is at the ELB.16  In my 
view, the review should make clear that the Committee will actively employ its full 
toolkit so that the ELB is not an impediment to providing accommodation in the face of 
significant economic disruptions.   
The importance and challenge of providing accommodation when the policy rate 
reaches the ELB should not be understated.  In my own experience on the international 
response to the financial crisis, I was struck that the ELB proved to be a severe 
impediment to the provision of policy accommodation initially.  Once conventional 
policy reached the ELB, the long delays necessitated for policymakers in nearly every 
jurisdiction to develop consensus and take action on unconventional policy sapped 
confidence, tightened financial conditions, and weakened recovery.  Economic conditions 
in the euro area and elsewhere suffered for longer than necessary in part because of the 
lengthy process of building agreement to act decisively with a broader set of tools. 
                                                 
15 See Janice C. Eberly, James H. Stock, and Jonathan H. Wright (2019), “The Federal Reserve’s Current 
Framework for Monetary Policy:  A Review and Assessment,” paper presented at “Conference on 
Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools and Communication Practices,” sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, Chicago, June 4, https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/others/events/2019/monetary-policy-
conference/review-current-framework-eberly-stock-wright-pdf. 
16 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market 
Committee, July 31–August 1, 2018,” press release, August 1, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20180801.htm; and Board of Governors 
(2019), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 29–30, 2019,” press release, October 30, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20191030.htm. 
 - 10 - 
Despite delays and uncertainties, the balance of evidence suggests forward 
guidance and balance sheet policies were effective in easing financial conditions and 
providing accommodation following the global financial crisis.17  Accordingly, these 
tools should remain part of the Committee’s toolkit.  However, the quantitative asset 
purchase policies that were used following the crisis proved to be lumpy both to initiate 
at the ELB and to calibrate over the course of the recovery.  This lumpiness tends to 
create discontinuities in the provision of accommodation that can be costly.  To the extent 
that the public is uncertain about the conditions that might trigger asset purchases and 
how long the purchases would be sustained, it undercuts the efficacy of the policy.  
Similarly, significant frictions associated with the normalization process can arise as the 
end of the asset purchase program approaches. 
For these reasons, I have been interested in exploring approaches that expand the 
space for targeting interest rates in a more continuous fashion as an extension of our 
conventional policy space and in a way that reinforces forward guidance on the policy 
rate.18  In particular, there may be advantages to an approach that caps interest rates on 
                                                 
17 For details on purchases of securities by the Federal Reserve, see 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/timeline-balance-sheet-policies.htm. For a discussion of 
forward guidance, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/what-is-forward-guidance-how-is-it-used-in-
the-federal-reserve-monetary-policy.htm.  See, for example, Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajšek (2013), 
“The Impact of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs on Corporate Credit Risk,” 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 45, (s2, December), pp. 29–57; Simon Gilchrist, David López-
Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek (2015), “Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower 
Bound,” American Economic Journal:  Macroeconomics, vol. 7 (January), pp. 77–109; Jing Cynthia Wu 
and Fan Dora Xia (2016), “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower 
Bound,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 48 (March–April), pp. 253–91; and Stefania D’Amico 
and Iryna Kaminska (2019), “Credit Easing versus Quantitative Easing:  Evidence from Corporate and 
Government Bond Purchase Programs,” Bank of England Staff Working Paper Series 825 (London:  Bank 
of England, September), https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2019/credit-easing-versus-
quantitative-easing-evidence-from-corporate-and-government-bond-purchase.   
18 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), “Strategies for Targeting Interest Rates 
Out the Yield Curve,” memorandum to the Federal Open Market Committee, October 13, available at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc-memos.htm#m2010; and Ben Bernanke (2016), 
 - 11 - 
Treasury securities at the short-to-medium range of the maturity spectrum—yield curve 
caps—in tandem with forward guidance that conditions liftoff from the ELB on 
employment and inflation outcomes. 
To be specific, once the policy rate declines to the ELB, this approach would 
smoothly move to capping interest rates on the short-to-medium segment of the yield 
curve.  The yield curve ceilings would transmit additional accommodation through the 
longer rates that are relevant for households and businesses in a manner that is more 
continuous than quantitative asset purchases.  Moreover, if the horizon on the interest rate 
caps is set so as to reinforce forward guidance on the policy rate, doing so would 
augment the credibility of the yield curve caps and thereby diminish concerns about an 
open-ended balance sheet commitment.  In addition, once the targeted outcome is 
achieved, and the caps expire, any securities that were acquired under the program would 
roll off organically, unwinding the policy smoothly and predictably.  This is important, as 
it could potentially avoid some of the tantrum dynamics that have led to premature 
steepening at the long end of the yield curve in several jurisdictions. 
Forward guidance on the policy rate will also be important in providing 
accommodation at the ELB.  As we saw in the United States at the end of 2015 and again 
toward the second half of 2016, there tends to be strong pressure to “normalize” or lift off 
from the ELB preemptively based on historical relationships between inflation and 
employment.  A better alternative would have been to delay liftoff until we had achieved 
our targets.  Indeed, recent research suggests that forward guidance that commits to delay 
                                                 
“What Tools Does The Fed Have Left?  Part 2:  Targeting Longer-Term Interest Rates,” blog post, 
Brookings Institution, March 24, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2016/03/24/what-tools-
does-the-fed-have-left-part-2-targeting-longer-term-interest-rates. 
 - 12 - 
the liftoff from the ELB until full employment and 2 percent inflation have been achieved 
on a sustained basis—say over the course of a year—could improve performance on our 
dual-mandate goals.19 
To reinforce this commitment, the forward guidance on the policy rate could be 
implemented in tandem with yield curve caps.  For example, as the federal funds rate 
approaches the ELB, the Committee could commit to refrain from lifting off the ELB 
until full employment and 2 percent inflation are sustained for a year.  Based on its 
assessment of how long this is likely take, the Committee would then commit to capping 
rates out the yield curve for a period consistent with the expected horizon of the outcome-
based forward guidance.  If the outlook shifts materially, the Committee could reassess 
how long it will take to get inflation back to 2 percent and adjust policy accordingly.  One 
benefit of this approach is that the forward guidance and the yield curve ceilings would 
reinforce each other.   
The combination of a commitment to condition liftoff on the sustained 
achievement of our employment and inflation objectives with yield curve caps targeted at 
the same horizon has the potential to work well in many circumstances.  For very severe 
recessions, such as the financial crisis, such an approach could be augmented with 
purchases of 10-year Treasury securities to provide further accommodation at the long 
end of the yield curve.  Presumably, the requisite scale of such purchases—when 
combined with medium-term yield curve ceilings and forward guidance on the policy 
                                                 
19 See Ben Bernanke, Michael Kiley, and John Roberts (2019), “Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate 
Environment,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington:  Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System), https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.009; and Chung and others, “Monetary 
Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound,” in note 9. 
 - 13 - 
rate—would be relatively smaller than if the longer-term asset purchases were used 
alone.  
Monetary Policy and Financial Stability 
Before closing, it is important to recall another important lesson of the financial 
crisis:  The stability of the financial system is important to the achievement of the 
statutory goals of full employment and 2 percent inflation.  In that regard, the changes in 
the macroeconomic environment that underlie our monetary policy review may have 
some implications for financial stability.  Historically, when the Phillips curve was 
steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which prompted the Federal 
Reserve to raise interest rates.  In turn, the interest rate increases would have the effect of 
tightening financial conditions more broadly.  With a flat Phillips curve, inflation does 
not rise as much as resource utilization tightens, and interest rates are less likely to rise to 
restrictive levels.  The resulting lower-for-longer interest rates, along with sustained high 
rates of resource utilization, are conducive to increasing risk appetite, which could 
prompt reach-for-yield behavior and incentives to take on additional debt, leading to 
financial imbalances as an expansion extends.    
To the extent that the combination of a low neutral rate, a flat Phillips curve, and 
low underlying inflation may lead financial stability risks to become more tightly linked 
to the business cycle, it would be preferable to use tools other than tightening monetary 
policy to temper the financial cycle.  In particular, active use of macroprudential tools 
such as the countercyclical buffer is vital to enable monetary policy to stay focused on 
achieving maximum employment and average inflation of 2 percent on a sustained basis.   
 Conclusion  
- 14 - 
The Federal Reserve’s commitment to adapt our monetary policy strategy to 
changing circumstances has enabled us to support the U.S. economy throughout the 
expansion, which is now in its 11th year.  In light of the decline in the neutral rate, low 
trend inflation, and low sensitivity of inflation to slack as well as the consequent greater 
frequency of the policy rate being at the effective lower bound, this is an important time 
to review our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications in order to improve 
the achievement of our statutory goals.  I have offered some preliminary thoughts on how 
we could bolster inflation expectations by achieving inflation outcomes of 2 percent on 
average over time and, when policy is constrained by the ELB, how we could combine 
forward guidance on the policy rate with caps on the short-to-medium segment of the 
yield curve to buffer the economy against adverse developments.  
