Cleviston  Haynes:  Strategic  human  resource  management  in  the
age of technology
Remarks by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the XXII Annual
Conference  of  HR  Managers  of  Central  Banks  in  the  Caribbean  Region,  Bridgetown,  26
September 2019.
Good morning.
 On  behalf  of  the  management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  I  welcome  you  to
Barbados, and to the XXII Annual Conference of Human Resources Managers of Central Banks
in the Caribbean Region, which is being held under the theme, “HR 4.0: A Perfect Vision – 2020
and Beyond.”
Your  theme  is  forward  looking,  encapsulating  the  technological  thrust  that  envelops  the
operations of the modern-day financial services industry. This is truly appropriate because we
live  in  an  era  of  technological  disruption,  what  many  are  calling  the  4   Industrial  Revolution.
Concepts that in our youth were unthought of, or at best relegated to the realm of science fiction,
now not only exist, but are also commonplace. Terms such as artificial intelligence, Big Data,
and blockchain are now a part of our vernacular.
th
We in the central banking community cannot ignore the emergence of these new technologies.
Central banks in the region, including the Central Bank of Barbados, are adapting to the changed
environment  by  examining  our  processes  for  the  delivery  of  our  services  and  assessing  the
adequacy of our resources to cope with the transformation that new technology can engender.
Those of you who are somewhat cynical will point out that we are no strangers to technological
advances. We’ve had to deal with changes in technology for decades and we have adapted. I
recall that when I first joined the Central Bank of Barbados, we used large charts that had to be
updated  manually  by  staff  adding  pieces  of  tape  to  update  the  monthly  changes.  It  was  a
painstaking  exercise,  assigned  to  an  officer  blessed  with  patience  and  the  skill  of  attention  to
detail. Now, I can sit at my desk and have Excel create a chart for me in a matter of seconds.
Developments  such  as  this  contribute  to  the  digital  transformation  that  we  face  across  our
economies. The pace at which technology is evolving is much faster than what we have seen
before, but we cannot treat this digital transformation as if it is simply the latest buzzword.
If we limit ourselves to thinking of digital transformation as simply adopting the latest technology,
to  digitising  or  automating  processes,  we  ignore  a  central  tenet  of  the  transformation,  i.e.
rethinking the way we do things. It entails changes at a fundamental, foundational level, which
means that it requires organisations to evolve.
Three  examples  of  how  technology  is  transforming  how  we  do  business  come  to  mind
immediately. The first is payment systems. In recent years, we’ve seen the emergence of mobile
wallets  and  crypto  assets,  offered  in  many  cases  by  entities  that  fall  outside  the  rubric  of
traditional  prudential  regulation.  These  developments  can  influence  how  the  financial  sector
landscape evolves. We must determine if and how to regulate them, and we must develop the
capacity to do so. In Barbados, we envisage that new payments system regulation will seek to
address this gap in our regulatory framework.
The second is data. More than ever, both the public and private sector rely on accurate, timely,
and specific data for analysis and forecasting, and they look to central banks to provide much of
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that data. We need to ensure we are able to offer the breadth and depth of statistics they require.
In this regard, we recently relaunched our online statistics to make access easier for users.
The third is communication. When the Central Bank of Barbados was established 47 years ago,
we undertook the task of educating and sensitizing the public on economic matters, using, inter
alia, quarterly press conferences and physical documents for our Economic Review and Annual
Reports.  Now,  our  audiences  are  more  fragmented  than  ever,  and  consume  information  in
different  ways.  We  have  to  retool  our  communications  to  meet  their  needs.  Most  of  what  we
produce  is  now  available  online,  our  press  conferences  are  streamed,  and  our  information  is
disseminated on social media platforms.
HR’s Role in Digital Transformation
All three examples demonstrate how technology is altering how we function as a central bank.
But the transformation that we are witnessing is not about technology only. If it was, it would fall
exclusively under the ambit of our IT departments. But at its core, this transformation is really
about people.  This is why HR is critical to its success.
You will have to guide your organisation and its employees through this dramatic change.  This is
always a difficult feat, but one compounded by the potential anxiety about the new technologies
that will form part of this shift. For while in our private lives we readily embrace technology and
the conveniences it facilitates – smartphones, Alexa, the myriad social media platforms, and if
we travel, Uber and Airbnb – professionally, we are wary of it, perhaps feeling, as Karl Marx did
that “machinery does not just act as a superior competitor to the worker, always on the point of
making him superfluous.”
Such  fears  can  lead  to  resistance  or,  in  extreme  cases,  obstruction,  to  your  efforts.  Merely
offering statistics that show that adopting new technology can lead to increased job creation and
higher productivity will not be sufficient to prevent this.
HR managers and their teams need to counsel staff about the impending changes, offer a vision
of what the transformed organisation will look like, and then shepherd them through the process.
This means that you, too, must embrace the idea and all that it encompasses. Indeed, for you to
be truly effective, you must also demonstrate your own ability to adapt your systems.
One  aspect  of  this  is  reskilling.  While  greater  utilisation  of  technology  might  not  lead  to  a
significant reduction in an organisation’s staff complement, it will inevitably lead to a shift in where
and how staff members are deployed.
An  employee  who  previously  performed  a  job  that  can  now  be  made  more  efficient  through
automation,  could  find  himself  transferred  within  the  organisations  to  perform  a  new  function.
 For many employees, especially those who have spent their entire tenure in one department,
and potentially in the same post, this can be a tremendous shock. As HR professionals, you will
be tasked with making that transition smoother, including by identifying the training they will need.
Even when employees maintain their current position, they will need to broaden the scope of their
abilities. Consider our colleagues in our Bank Supervision departments: how many of them even
10 years ago would have contemplated the regulatory challenges posed by FinTech or by new
entrants  from  outside  the  traditional  financial  sector  into  the  market?  How  many  would  have
known how to even approach regulating it?
The  education  and  training  employees  get  before  entering  the  workforce  is  now  just  the
beginning. They will need to commit to lifelong learning, to continually upgrading their expertise.
Indeed,  Deloitte  estimates  that  the  time  it  takes  for  the  skills  you  currently  have  to  become
obsolete is a mere two and a half to five years.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moving Beyond “That’s the Way We’ve Always Done It”
For us as central banks to effectively fulfil our mandate, we must be able to identify the gaps in
employees’ competencies and support them as they work to fill them. Be mindful, however, that
as we look to embrace this transformation, we will be asking employees to change not only their
skillsets, but also their mind-sets.
While the focus is often on the word “digital”, the truly challenging part, budgets notwithstanding,
is  the  “transformation”.  We  can  purchase  and  deploy  the  latest  technology,  but  if  we  simply
automate existing processes, we will accomplish nothing.
I am sure that many of us are guilty of typing a letter, printing it so we can sign it, then scanning
and emailing it.  How many steps could we save simply by using an electronic signature?
What I just described might seem like a harmless quirk, but let me give you another example.
About 15 years ago, our Bank purchased a banknote processing machine that could count and
authenticate hundreds of banknotes per minute, separate the clean notes from mutilated ones
and package or destroy them accordingly. Previously, the process was done manually, with our
Currency  staff  hand-counting  the  banknotes,  but  this  machine  automated  the  process  and
produced reports that our internal audit team vetted and approved.
Having  that  machine  should  have  drastically  improved  both  efficiency  and  productivity,  but
initially, it did not. Why? Because one member of staff was not comfortable signing the reports
until she had verified, by hand-counting, that the stacks of clean notes were the same number
the machine had recorded. That was clearly an example of parallel testing!
That might sound like an extreme case, but the two examples reveal the same thing: we, often to
our detriment, hold on to outmoded thinking because “that’s the way we’ve always done it.” This
means that our employees will need to be coached into moving away from traditional modes of
thinking as more efficient methods become available.
Both examples I cited were focused on processes, but there is another area where changing
mind-sets is critical, and more challenging. Culture.
Here’s a quote from Roland Berger’s report, “Central Banking HR of the Future: Driving Strategic
Change,” that describes central banks.
“Central  banks  are  often  traditional  companies  with  a  rather  hierarchical,  historically  grown
organisational  structure.  They  are  often  divided  into  “suborganisations”  or  divisions,  each
performing a specific function. Targets are then defined on the level of the separate departments
– often without considering the organisation as a whole.”
I think we can agree that much of this sounds familiar.
The Central Bank of the Future
The report details the changes that are essential for central banks to survive and thrive in the
modern era. Much of it reiterates what the literature has been telling us. We need to re-engineer
our organisations, so that decisions are made and actioned more quickly, and so that innovative
ideas  are  not  lost  as  they  make  their  way  up  the  chain  of  command.  We  need  to  focus  on
collaboration, so that we can draw on expertise from wherever it is available, and so that projects
are  approached  from  the  perspective  of  what  is  best  for  the  organisation  and  not  just  the
department or unit. Building alliances through cross departmental project teams is an effective
tool for increased productivity and efficiency.   I recently shared with my staff some of our key
achievements for the year, and in almost each case the result was based on cross-departmental
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
collaboration. We need to become transparent so staff have a clear sense of our direction. And
we need to be more flexible, so that we can keep apace with a dynamic world.   
Such a radical shift will not come easy for those who are comfortable with how the organisations
has  functioned  traditionally,  so  HR  will  need  to  carefully  manage  the  change  process  so  that
change is accepted, embraced and implemented by all within the organisations. It is necessary,
for,  as  the  report  notes,  “the  central  bank  of  the  future  is  designed  for  speed,  agility  and
adaptability.”
All that I have mentioned thus far is only part of HR’s role in this era of transformation. Even as
central banks work to create a conducive culture and to equip employees with the skills to make
it successful, HR must also focus on the future. That means attracting talent that fits the new
culture and has the right skillset.
Central banks will need to re-evaluate the nature and scope of the tasks our staff will be asked to
undertake, and then as we recruit new employees, we will need to cast our nets to find people
who have not just the right qualifications, but also the right competencies.
The World Economic Forum identifies creativity as one of the top three competencies workers
will need in 2020.  We will need to determine how heavily to weigh this and other softer skills the
forum identifies – collaboration, judgment and decision-making, cognitive flexibility – against the
credentials we have traditionally sought.  Then we need to find a way to evaluate these attributes
in applicants.
Finding  the  right  mix  in  prospective  employees  may  require  us  to  work  with  educational
institutions to make sure that curricula reflect our current and future needs.
Beyond  this,  attracting  the  right  employees  will  necessitate  changing  what  we  have  to  offer
potential  employees  to  make  working  at  a  central  bank  an  attractive  proposition.  Studies  are
showing us that younger workers are not motivated by the prospect of long-term job security and
want more out of a job than a pay cheque alone.  We will need to figure out what we can offer
that will appeal to the calibre of worker we want.
This  will  mean  re-examining  our  job  descriptions,  work  programmes,  appraisal  systems,  and
rewards packages. And even then, we must accept that we are unlikely to find workers who will
stay with the organisation for 20, 30, or even 40 years, and plan accordingly.
Finally, central banks may also look beyond formal hiring and make it a practice to seek outside
expertise, who can offer a different perspective. Think of a man who wears the same cologne
every  day.  While  the  people  around  him  can  smell  it,  he  eventually  becomes  immune  to  the
scent and so uses more. Developing a cadre of subject matter experts in various areas to whom
we can turn for clear-eyed critique of our initiatives and actions can help reveal our blind spots
and prevent us from becoming that man. Our role is too important to the economic stability of our
countries for us to fall short because of tunnel vision.
The world is changing, rapidly and constantly. And we, central banks, are not immune. We must
meet the challenge head on, however far outside of our comfort zone it takes us.
You, as HR professionals, will be charged with doing much of the heavy lifting. But you must
prepare yourself for the task. By theming this year’s conference as you have, it is clear that you
recognise this and are committed to arming yourselves to meet the challenge. You are, as I have
stressed throughout my remarks, updating, upgrading, and honing your skills to meet the new
demands of the world of work. Your theme suggests that you recognize the time for action is
now.   I commend you for leading by example, and wish you an enjoyable and educational two
days.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
