 
   BANK of ZAMBIA 
  KEYNOTE SPEECH 
LAUNCH OF THE 2019 WORLD SAVINGS DAY 
BY 
DR DENNY H. KALYALYA, 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF ZAMBIA 
         InterContinental Hotel, Lusaka 
31st October 2019, Lusaka, Zambia
KEYNOTE SPEECH BY DR DENNY KALYALYA, GOVERNOR, BANK OF ZAMBIA AT THE 2019 WORLD 
SAVINGS DAY EVENT ON  31ST OCTOBER 2019 AT THE INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL, LUSAKA 
          The Chief Executive - Securities and Exchange Commission 
The Registrar and CEO – Pensions and Insurance Authority 
The Chairperson – Bankers Association of Zambia 
Senior Government Officials here present 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Chief Executive Officers and Senior Private Sector Representatives 
Representatives from education institutions 
Members of the Media here present 
Pupils and students here present, and  
May I just say, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
I am delighted to officiate at this official launch of the 2019 World Savings Day under 
the theme: ‘Be Money Smart: Savings Give Life a Lift!’.  As you may be aware, the 
World  Savings  Day  is  a  global  event  celebrated  to  promote  awareness  on  the 
importance of savings. In line with the National Strategy on Financial Education of 
2012, Zambia has observed the World Savings Day since 2014.    
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, this year’s World Savings Day commemoration 
presents yet another opportunity for consumers to learn about financial products as 
well as how to  select and assess  appropriate financial products  to maximise  their 
usage for key life events.  
Following  the  launch  of  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  in  2017,  new 
informal financial service providers have emerged, such as, village banks and savings 
groups  in  both  the  rural  and  urban  areas.  As  both  formal  and  informal  financial 
service  providers  are  agents  of  financial  inclusion  it  is  important  for  us,  the 
regulators, to seek effective ways  of linking the two types of players with a view to 
reducing informality as we expand financial inclusion.  
Distinguished Guests, in recognition of the importance of formal financial inclusion 
in supporting economic growth, the Bank of Zambia is collaborating with SaveNet, to 
 1 
KEYNOTE SPEECH BY DR DENNY KALYALYA, GOVERNOR, BANK OF ZAMBIA AT THE 2019 WORLD 
SAVINGS DAY EVENT ON  31ST OCTOBER 2019 AT THE INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL, LUSAKA 
 
develop  channels  to  link  informal  savings  groups  to  formal  financial  services 
providers. According to SaveNet data, at the end of 2018 there were 15,700 savings 
groups in Zambia, with cumulative savings amounting to K53.1 million. This  points 
to a good  opportunity for the formal financial service providers to mobilise deposits. 
In  this  regard,  it  has  been  observed  that  a  number  of  regulated  financial  service 
providers  and  mobile  money  operators  have  already  started  designing  products 
aimed  at  tapping  into  this  market.  It  is  hoped  that  this  move  will  expedite  the 
transition  of  informal  groupings  into  the  formal  financial  sector  and  enable  more 
people  gain access to a wider range of quality and affordable financial services. I 
want to stress here, as one of our colleagues noted last year’s commemoration that 
financial service providers have to provide the products and services that the people 
want and not what providers think they want.  
Distinguished Guests, recognising that financial exclusion is more prevalent in rural 
areas, the Bank of Zambia has adopted various initiatives to improve rural financial 
inclusion in line with the national Rural Finance Policy and Strategy of 2012. These 
initiatives include:  
1.  leveraging digital financial services for general financial transactions; and  
2.  facilitating  expansion  of  general  services  access  points  network  of  health, 
education, and agricultural organisations into financial access points through 
partnership and Government support.  
In line with this year’s World Savings Day theme: ‘Be Money Smart: Savings Give Life 
a  Lift!’,  I  urge  members  of  the  public  to  select  and  demand  appropriate  formal 
financial products for their key life events, such as, births, education and health, and 
to be aware of the obligations and responsibilities associated with the products. I 
encourage financial service providers to take time to explain clearly and simply the 
terms and conditions of financial products so that consumers can understand their 
rights and obligations.   
 2 
KEYNOTE SPEECH BY DR DENNY KALYALYA, GOVERNOR, BANK OF ZAMBIA AT THE 2019 WORLD 
SAVINGS DAY EVENT ON  31ST OCTOBER 2019 AT THE INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL, LUSAKA 
 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, may I take this opportunity to congratulate all 
the individuals and institutions that will receive Financial Literacy Awards for making 
a difference in the Financial Literacy Campaigns nation-wide.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  end  by  acknowledging  all  the 
institutions  and  individuals  that  have  joined  in  the  commemoration  of  this  year’s 
World  Savings  Day.  In  particular,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Pensions  and  Insurance 
Authority; Securities and Exchange Commission; Bankers Association of Zambia; the 
Ministry of Finance; Rural Finance Expansion Programme; the German Savings Banks 
Foundation for International Cooperation; Financial Sector Deepening Zambia; NGOs 
and  all  the  public  as  well  as  private  sector  organisations  that  have  continued  to 
support the stepped up national financial literacy campaigns since 2012. 
I THANK YOU  AND GOD BLESS US ALL! 
 3 
