Benjamin E Diokno: The Philippine economy - moving the financial
services  industry  forward  through  inclusive  technology,  green
initiatives
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  The Asian  Banker’s  Finance  Philippines  2019,  Manila,  10  October
2019.
 Officials from The Asian Banker, fellow speakers, representatives from the banking and finance
industry, members of the business community, friends from the media, ladies and gentlemen,
good morning.
I would like to thank The Asian Banker for inviting me today. I am delighted to be here not only
because this is a venue to address key stakeholders of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)
but also because the  theme  “Embarking  on  Sustainable  Innovation  in  the  Digital  Economy”  is
very close to the heart of the BSP as we aim to bring Central Banking closer to the people.
But  before  I  go  into  our  efforts  toward  “sustainable  innovation,”  allow  me  to  first  give  a  brief
overview  of  the  Philippines’  macroeconomic  environment,  under  which  our  financial  services
industry is operating in.
As  recognized  by  relevant  observers  here  and  abroad,  the  Philippines  is  among  the  fastest
growing and most resilient economies in the world today. The Philippines is in a very ‘nice’ place
right now. 
First, economic growth is robust, hitting 6.2 percent last year and expected by the government to
remain in the 6-percent territory this year before accelerating further over the next three years.
Second, inflation is manageable, settling at 0.9 percent in September—the lowest in over three
years. It is projected to remain well within the BSP’s official target range of 2 to 4 percent up to
2021.
Third,  external  payments  position  is  comfortable,  serving  as  a  solid  buffer  for  the  economy
against external headwinds.
The  gross  international  reserves  (GIR)  as  of  September  2019  stood  at  $86.2  billion,  which  is
equivalent to 7.5 months of imports and payments for services and primary income.
Fourth,  fiscal  position  is  healthy,  supporting  the  government’s  ambitious  infrastructure
development agenda and rising investments in human capital development.
The budget deficit is programmed to stay at a comfortable 3.2 percent of GDP up to 2022.
Government debt, which stood at 43.7 percent of GDP as of end-June 2019, is seen to continue
its downward trend as growth of the economy outpaces the increase in the debt stock.  
Fifth, the banking sector is sound and stable, helping fuel growth of the economy through credit
and other financial services.
Capitalization  is  more  than  sufficient,  with  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  of  universal  and
commercial banks staying at 15.9 percent in June 2019. This is higher than the BSP’s minimum
regulatory requirement of 10 percent and the internationally prescribed floor of 8 percent.
Exposure to bad debts is minimal, with the non-performing loans (NPL) ratio staying at a mere
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1.7 percent in August 2019. Total assets of the banking sector continue to grow, rising by 9.0
percent to ₱17.4 trillion year-on-year as of end-August 2019.
Topping all these is a demographic advantage, with the median age of the population at 24 years
old.
In  an  ageing  world,  the  Philippines’  young,  educated,  and  vibrant  workforce  is  helping  propel
robust, sustainable, and more inclusive economic growth for the country.
Amid this favorable backdrop, the BSP has served as a pillar of strength for the economy over
the years by fulfilling its mandate of price and financial stability. 
Moving  forward,  the  BSP  is  committed  to  playing  an  even  more  active  role  in  maintaining
economic stability and in helping achieve the economy’s long-term development goals, among
which is to reach high-income status by 2040.
We will do so by maximizing the provisions of our newly amended Charter, which enhances the
BSP’s ability to manage liquidity and supervise the financial sector together with other financial
regulators,  as  well  as  of  the  recently  signed  National  Payment  Systems Act,  which  formally
recognizes the BSP as supervisor of the country’s payments and settlements system.  
Now, allow me to focus on “sustainable innovation” in the country’s financial services sector and
the BSP’s role in enabling it.
When I say the BSP is committed to playing a more active role in helping achieve the economy’s
development  goals,  what  I  mean  is  we  are  doing  tasks  outside  the  traditional  central  banking
function of maintaining price and financial stability.
We  want  to  contribute  more  to  poverty  reduction.  This  will  make  the  BSP  more  relevant  and
closer to the Filipino people—something I consider to be my personal mission.
We are doing this through our financial inclusion agenda and ensuring greater access to financial
products and services.
What better way can we accelerate financial inclusion than by promoting a more extensive use of
financial technologies or fintech.
With the high penetration rate of mobile phones in the country, where even low-income earners
own cell phones—the ability of fintech to accelerate financial inclusion is well recognized.
While we are leveraging on fintech, a lot of work still needs to be done before the Philippines
becomes a truly financially inclusive economy. Many Filipinos still do not own bank accounts, and
so are unable to access loans and other financial services from formal channels. 
Nevertheless, we are working our way there.
First,  internet  and  mobile  phone  banking.  Banks  that  offer  internet  and  mobile  phone  banking
have increased over the years.
This  has  allowed  more  people  to  do  online  transactions,  not  only  to  pay  bills  and  purchase
merchandise  goods,  but  also  to  avail  themselves  of  savings,  investments,  and  insurance
products.
As of end-2018, there were 48 banks that have already made their financial services accessible
through  the  internet,  and  26  banks  that  have  made  their  services  accessible  through  mobile
phones. 
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, interoperable payment systems. In the past, transferring funds from an account in one
bank to another account in a different bank required physical movement of cash.
Now,  following  the  launch  of  interoperable  payments  systems,  funds  can  be  transferred
electronically  through  InstaPay,  for  low-value  and  real-time  fund  transfers,  and  PESONet,  for
bigger-value fund transfers confirmed within the same banking day.
As  of  end-July  2019,  there  were  43  financial  institutions  participating  in  InstaPay  and  51
participating in PESONet, with more to come.
Third,  the  Philippine  ID  system.  Following  the  signing  into  law  of  the  Philippine  Identification
System Act  (PhilSys)  in August  last  year,  the  country  will  soon  have  a  national  identification
system.
The objective is for all Filipinos to be properly identified using a unified system that gathers basic
identification and biometrics information.
The BSP has assumed the task of printing the IDs. We are doing this because we don’t want We
expect the Philippine ID system to significantly hasten financial inclusion, as this addresses the
problem of lack of formal IDs—which are required to open a bank account.
Fourth, non-bank electronic money issuers. A recent phenomenon that is significantly boosting
financial inclusion in the country is the emergence of non-bank e-money issuers.
These are entities other than banks that also allow people to create electronic accounts in their
platforms where people can store value in these electronic accounts, and make payments or do
a remittance.
As of 27 August 2019, there were 14 non-bank e-money issuers supervised by the BSP.
Fifth, quick response codes or QR codes. The use of QR codes for payments has started to
gain traction. In fact, last month, I was able to buy McDonalds through QR Payment option by
PayMaya.
We hope to see more of this in the future; we hope that even market vendors, cab drivers, and
sari-sari store owners will be able to use QR codes as a means to accept payments. To help
move this along, the BSP is working with industry players to put in place a National QR Code
Standard that will enable interoperability of QR Code-based payment facilities.
Other ongoing initiatives to advance e-payments are digitalization of government collections and
disbursement, and the assessment and monitoring of the country’s transition to a more cash-
light economy with National Payments Diagnostics.
With  these  updates,  we  expect  to  have  at  least  20  percent  of  all  financial  transactions  in  the
country done electronically by 2020.
Nevertheless,  the  BSP  is  mindful  that  with  innovations  come  risks. As  such,  we  are  keen  to
make sure the regulatory environment is dynamic and attuned to industry developments. As our
regulated entities adopt innovations to enhance delivery of their services to customers, the BSP
is likewise embracing technology to improve consumer protection.
For  instance,  the  BSP  is  working  to  provide  an  alternative  channel  for  the  public  to  elevate
banking-related complaints through an automated Chatbot system, which is targeted to go live by
mid-2020.
The Chatbot, using artificial intelligence (AI) and natural language processing (NLP), will be able
to  adequately  and  efficiently  handle  consumer  concerns  coursed  through  channels  including
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
SMS and social media.
In addition, the BSP has developed a prototype that allows machine-to-machine link between the
BSP’s  system  and  those  of  its  supervised  entities  for  streamlined  transmission,  processing,
warehousing, and analysis of banks’ prudential reports. Targeted to go live by the latter part of
2020, this innovation will significantly improve timeliness, ease, and integrity of data submission.
Because of these initiatives, I am proud to report that BSP won the “Artificial Intelligence Initiative”
award  and  the  “Data  Management  Initiative”  award  by  Central  Banking  Publications  during  its
Fintech and Regtech Global Awards held in Singapore last month.
In any case, the BSP observes the following principles in its regulatory approach to innovations in
the financial services sector: (i) risk-based supervision, (ii) active stakeholder engagement; and
(iii) consumer protection.
“Risk-based”  means  BSP-regulated  entities  are  enjoined  to  put  up  the  necessary  risk
management  systems  and  sufficient  capital  to  cover  their  respective  levels  of  exposure  to
technological risks.
“Active  stakeholder  engagement”  means  the  BSP  is  actively  engaging  supervised  entities  to
constantly get updates from them on innovation trends that the regulatory environment should
capture.
“Consumer protection” means financial institutions offering fintech-enabled services are required
to have the necessary safeguards to ensure the protection of financial consumers against IT-
related fraud and data compromise. 
I’ve talked a lot about “innovations” but let me also go into the sustainable aspect in all these.
Needless  to  say  that  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  the  entire  world  to  more  vigorously  address
climate change. I’m sure that by now, we are all familiar with a young environmentalist—a 16-
year-old  girl  from  Sweden  named  Greta  Thunberg  who  addressed  the  United  Nations  and
challenged policymakers worldwide to squarely address the issue. 
What does this have to do with us in the Philippines’ financial services industry? Well, the BSP
recognizes the crucial role it plays in driving investments that promote climate-resilient, green,
and sustainable growth.
In  fact,  the  BSP  has  a  two-pronged  approach  to  promoting  sustainable  finance:  1)  capacity
building and awareness campaigns, and 2) enabling regulations.
In  capacity  building,  the  BSP  takes  part  in  several  domestic  and  international  fora  on
sustainability.  One  of  which  is  the  ASEAN  Task  Force  on  the  Roles  of  Central  Banks  in
Addressing Climate and Environment-Related Risks. The task force will conduct a study on the
roles of central banks in addressing climate and environment-related risk to monetary, financial,
and broader macroeconomic stability.
The BSP is also a member of the International Finance Corporation (IFC)-supported Sustainable
Banking  Network.  The  BSP,  together  with  IFC,  conducted  a  scoping  research  to  better
understand  how  to  best  embed  environmental  and  social  risk  management  as  well  as
sustainable finance principles in the business decisions of financial institutions.
The BSP is also coordinating with the British Embassy in Manila on the possible capacity building
initiatives under the Low Carbon Energy Programme (LCEP) of the UK Prosperity Fund. LCEP
can  provide  support  in  terms  of  policy,  capacity  building,  technical  assistance  and  market
development.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In enabling regulations, the BSP has come up with a proposed policy framework for sustainable
finance,  and  we  are  currently  in  the  process  of  consolidating  and  evaluating  comments  from
industry players.
Some of the highlights of the proposed regulatory framework are as follows:
(1)  Banks  are  expected  to  integrate  environmental  and  social  governance  (ESG),  and
sustainability principles in their strategic direction, as well as in their corporate governance and
risk management frameworks.
(2)  Banks  shall  conduct  scenario  analysis  and  stress  testing  of  its  business  exposures  to
assess their vulnerabilities over several ESG scenarios. Results shall be taken into account in
their capital planning and business strategies.
(3) Banks will be required to disclose their sustainability agenda in their annual reports, including
risk appetites in the ESG field.
The policy framework will be embodied in a circular that we will issue soon—the first of a series
of circulars on sustainable finance.
In a related development, the BSP, together with the Department of Finance (DOF), co-chairs a
newly  formed  inter-agency  task  force  that  is  mandated  to  facilitate  green  finance  initiatives.
Members  include  the  National  Economic  and  Development  Authority  (NEDA),  Bureau  of  the
Treasury (BTR), Bases Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA), Department of Energy
(DOE), and Climate Change Commission (CCC).
The  interagency  committee  is  working  on  a  draft  executive  order  –  for  the  signature  of  the
President– that will spell out deliverables and targets in relation to green finance initiatives of the
country.
Meantime, some banks are already embarking on green finance while regulations on these are
under  way.  In  particular,  a  number  of  banks  have  put  up  Sustainable  Energy  Finance  Desks,
which  serve  as  a  point  of  contact  in  evaluating  and  monitoring  sustainable  energy  projects.
These encourage enterprises to engage in renewable energy projects.
In addition, some banks recently issued green bonds and sustainability bonds. Also, government-
owned  Land  Bank  has  implemented  the  Climate  SMART  (Synergistic,  Mitigation,  Adaptation,
Resiliency,  and  Transformation)  Financing  Program,  which  offers  various  lending  facilities
related to environment and sustainable financing.
While  all  these  developments  in  sustainable  financing  are  encouraging,  the  world  is  at  the
beginning of mass extinction due to climate change, and so much more needs to be done.
And  so  I  challenge  everyone  in  the  financial  services  industry,  including  us  regulators,  to  do
more.
We have to be even more proactive in green financing, especially so that the Philippines is cited
as among the highly vulnerable countries to the effects of climate change.
In closing, the financial services sector is at an interesting time. Technological innovations in the
delivery  of  financial  services  are  contributing  significantly  to  the  Philippine  economy’s
transformation. But at the same time, with climate related risks threatening not only economic
growth but life itself, industry members are also facing a great challenge.
Rest assured that we at the BSP will be working together with our supervised entities in stepping
up efforts toward sustainable innovations in the financial services industry. We hope that you can
also help us in stepping up and speeding up our sustainable innovations—not just for the Filipino
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
people but with the future of our world in mind.
Thank you very much and mabuhay!
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
