Gent Sejko: A brave new world? The future of banking in emerging
Europe
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, to the Annual Conference
of the Bank of Albania 2019, Tirana, 10 October 2019.
 Your Excellency Mr President,
Honourable Madam Minister and Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee,
Dear representatives of the banking system, ladies and gentlemen, dear guests,
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you on behalf of the Bank of Albania to our Annual
Conference. This year the conference is co-organised again with the London School of
Economics and Political Science (LSE), namely its Institute of Global Affairs – internationally
renowned for its leading expertise across the social sciences.
The Conference this year will seek to address the latest trends in the banking industry in Albania,
in the region and the rest of the world, focusing on challenges and opportunities that lie ahead of
us.
Naturally, these issues are of great interest not only to actors in the banking market but also to
central banks and other regulators of the financial market. As we share experiences and engage
in open discussions, we will be able to identify far-reaching approaches that are best fitted to
meet the challenges ahead. We have invited distinguished speakers and experts from renowned
international institutions as well as other actors and regulators from Albania and the region.
I am confident the conference will live up to its reputation.
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,
The financial system and the banking sector at the heart of it play a unique role for economic
development and welfare in Albania.
This system provides payment instruments, contributing to the free circulation of products and
services. It also offers savings and credit instruments for households and enterprises, promoting
therefore development and enhancing welfare. The financial system helps households,
enterprises and the economy to withstand shocks, by undertaking risks on its balance sheets
and offering products to insure life, business activities and against natural disasters.
Therefore, the efficiency, stability and sophistication of the financial system are essential
preconditions for rapid, stable and comprehensive growth. The development level of an economy
is inter-related and inter-dependent on the development level of its financial system. This has
been extensively illustrated by the Albanian experience over the last three decades.
The progress marked in the first decade of transition was conditioned by, among other things,
embryonic developments in the banking and financial sectors. In the second decade, the activity
of the banking sector expanded and competitiveness in this sector increased, setting the stage
for crediting and economic growth to gather speed. This performance was disrupted by the
global financial crisis effects spilled over to Albanian economy. However, unlike in many
countries of the region, the crisis did not trigger recession or a proper financial crisis in Albania.
Yet, indirect effects were present both in the economy and in the financial system.
As a monetary, supervisory and regulatory authority of the banking sector, in recent years, the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bank of Albania has focused on addressing challenges introduced by the crisis. 
Let me present a brief overview.
First, due to aggregate demand slowdown and exchange rate depreciation, the financial situation
of households and enterprises worsened; hence non-performing loans rose rapidly and credit
supply contracted. Among other things, the rise in non-performing loans pointed to the need for
comprehensive improvement of the legal and regulatory environment, especially with regard to
the execution of collateral. Against this backdrop, in cooperation with other public agencies, the
Bank of Albania compiled and implemented a detailed programme of measures, which
addressed thoroughly the identified inadequacies. As a result, the level of non-performing loans
dropped rapidly and credit supply improved. This action also created adequate conditions for its
growth to gradually pick up the pace. 
Second, following the introduction of stricter regulatory requirements on banking activity in the
European Union, foreign banks reduced their exposure to both regional economies and Albania.
Known also as deleveraging, this effect showed that higher integration of the banking sector
exposes us to monetary policies and regulatory requirements applied in home countries. In
response, the Bank of Albania has worked towards aligning our domestic supervisory and
regulatory framework with European Union standards. We have implemented, in this regard, a
new macro-prudential strategy, after the model of the European System of Central Banks. We
have also carried out a comprehensive review of the supervisory and regulatory frameworks, to
better address the risks to the banking sector: operational risk, market risk, credit risk and
liquidity risk. Finally, we have actively participated in an international forum for addressing this
phenomenon, known as the Vienna Initiative, and have enhanced our communication with
international partners and home-country regulatory agencies.
Third, we have spent a lot of time and energy administering a consolidation process in the
banking sector. As a result of this process, which may now be considered as finalised, the
number of banks has now been reduced to 12. This has created the premises for the banking
sector to be more motivated to lend, innovative in terms of products, and more competitive in
terms of cost.
From a broader perspective, the Bank of Albania has worked on improving the regulatory
architecture of the financial system in Albania and strengthening financial safety nets. Together
with other public agencies, we have, established the Financial Stability Advisory Group; improved
the legal framework for the functioning of the Deposit Insurance Agency; approved the Resolution
Law; drafted a sub-legal and regulatory framework; and, established the necessary structures for
them to function.
In parallel, we have adopted a modern framework for formulating and implementing the monetary
policy, and steadily maintained an accommodative stance. Monetary stimulus has enabled the
financial environment in Albania to be transparent, and have low interest rates, ample liquidity and
moderate exchange rate fluctuations. This has boosted consumption and private investments,
reduced credit price, and eased debt servicing costs for all segments of the economy.
Reflecting these actions, the Albanian economy has made notable progress towards steady and
long-term growth. The progress has been characterised by gradual acceleration of the pace of
growth, expansion of employment and decline in unemployment, as well as improvement of
private sector balance sheets. In particular, the banking sector appears liquid, well capitalised,
with good profitability indicators. Regulatory capital hovers around 18%, notably above the
minimum requirement, whereas the ratio of non-performing loans has dropped to 11% against
the 25% maximum level recorded in 2014.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The ultimate objective of our work has been and remains promoting sustainable development for
the  country.  The  philosophy  of  our  work  is  built  on  four  main  pillars:  professionalism,
responsibility, accountability, and transparency.
This philosophy has been tested and enriched with some valuable lessons learned during the
last decade:
First, monetary, supervisory and regulatory authorities should adopt a proactive approach to
the country’s monetary and financial stability. This requires adequate institutional capacities
and  adopting  a  counter-cyclical  approach,  both  toward  monetary  policy  and  macro-
prudential  policy.  It  also  requires  constantly  identifying  current  and  potential  challenges  in
order to address them in due time.
Second, long-term economic growth should be anchored in continuous structural reforms.
Public  authorities  may  find  it  virtually  impossible  to  predict  or  avoid  shocks  completely;
however, both public authorities and the private sector may minimise the effects of these
shocks through structural reforms aimed at creating productive and flexible structures, and
preserving balance sheet stability. Public authorities and the private sector should be aware
of the fact that long-term benefits from reforms exceed their short-term costs.
Third,  financial  integration  provides  an  additional  channel  of  exposures  to  foreign  shocks,
whether in the form of global financial crisis or volatility in the regulatory framework. Overall,
financial integration has been and remains a positive factor for development. In the case of
Albania,  it  brings  in  financial  capital  and  managerial  know-how,  with  a  series  of  positive
effects on the Albanian economy, spearheading the economic and political integration of the
country. Yet, integration requires fostering cooperation and exchanging information with our
international partners and counterpart institutions.
Lastly, the monetary and financial stability of the country should not be seen as an exclusive
responsibility  of  the  central  bank,  notwithstanding  its  primary  role  in  it.  It  requires  the
contribution and cooperation of all state authorities.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
The Albanian  economy  has  solid  premises  for  continuing  and  even  accelerating  the  pace  of
growth. Strengthened financial stability, coupled with prudent monetary policies, offers additional
guarantees for its sustainability.
However, let me point out that many challenges lie ahead of us.
From a broader perspective, the financial industry, both in our region and globally, is under
pressure from four powerful currents:
Rapid development of information technology, which has created opportunities for financial
innovation  and  has  challenged  classical  banking  models.  New  payment  and  credit
instruments,  new  financial  market  actors,  and  new  business  models,  such  as  digital  and
electronic  banking  and  payments,  boost  the  penetration  of  financial  services.  Conversely,
they challenge not only classical actors of the financial sector but also its regulators.
Globalisation,  which  has  expanded  the  scope  of  market  actors  and  regulators.  This
phenomenon  significantly  exposes  emerging  economies  to  volatility  in  the  regulatory
framework or in the risk appetite in advanced economies.
Re-regulation,  currently  underway  in  the  financial  system  in  Europe  and  globally.  This
process  is  aimed  at  enhancing  security  in  the  banking  sector,  lowering  the  probability  of
systemic crisis, and enhancing the capacities of authorities for managing them. However, it
imposes  additional  costs  on  the  banking  sector  and  places  it  under  less  favourable
conditions vis-à-vis other market participants.
Very  low  interest  rates  that  characterise  many  segments  of  the  global  financial  market.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  rates  reflect  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  adopted  by  major  central
banks,  the  decline  in  global  productivity  and  unfavourable  demographic  developments  in
advanced economies. These have a toll on the balance sheets of broader segments of the
financial market such as banking sector, pension funds and insurance companies.
From a nearer-term perspective, Albania needs to improve financial literacy, across the board.
Among other things, financial education would help both individuals and firms establish sounder
financial situations and reduce financial risks such as unnecessary exposure to exchange rate
volatility. The Bank of Albania has been on the vanguard of financial education in Albania and will
continue to spearhead such efforts.
Albania needs also to develop further payment systems and improve access to finance for
various segments of the society, such as small and medium-sized enterprises or the rural
sector. The Bank of Albania has responsibly exercised its duties in the area of payment system
development. In this regard, we:
Established, in 2015, the National Payments System Committee, to coordinate the work of
all relevant public and private sector agencies;
Compiled  the  draft  law  “On  payments  services”,  which  approximates  the  respective  EU
directive and paves the way for developing new payment products; and,
Improved the technological infrastructure for payments, reducing therefore their costs.
However, our work may not be considered as completely finished.
Lastly, Albania should pay attention to the development of new financial market segments, such
as capital markets and pension and investment funds. In this context, alignment of the legal and
regulatory framework is of primary importance with a view to preventing the potential emergence
of systemic risks or the possibility of regulatory arbitrage.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 Our agenda for the work that lies ahead of us is as complex as ambitious. Its successful
realisation will enable our economy to grow at a fast and steady pace, and will mark a step
forward in our journey towards EU integration.
On behalf of the Bank of Albania, let me affirm our readiness to rise to the challenge. I am also
confident that today’s conference will provide a significant contribution to finding optimal
solutions.
Hoping that you will find the Conference and your stay in Tirana both valuable and
enjoyable, I wish the conference a great success! Thank you for your attention!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
