Benjamin  E  Diokno:  The  Philippines  –  structural  reforms,
macroeconomic performance, moving forward
Opening statement by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Meet & Greet Session with the Philippine Embassy and the
US-Philippines Society, Washington DC, 16 October 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
 Let me extend a warm Filipino welcome to all our guests for joining us in today’s Meet and Greet
session with the Philippine Embassy and the US-Philippines Society.
During  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)-World  Bank  (WB)  Annual  Meetings  in  2016,  I
addressed  this  audience  as  the  Philippine  Budget  Secretary.  I  am  pleased  to  represent  the
Philippines, this time, as head of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas —a hat I’ve been wearing for
nearly seven months now.
Despite this change of roles and mandates for policy formulation, at least two things remain as
necessary. First, conversation with and inputs from stakeholders form an important part of the
policy making process.
As we are all aware, the threat of slowing global economic growth looms larger than ever on the
horizon as protectionist policies and geopolitical tensions continue to dominate the global growth
narrative. Nonetheless, the Philippines remains on a very sound footing because: (i) economic
growth is solid and sustainable; (ii) inflation is low and manageable; (iii) the external payments
position is strong; and (iv) the banking system is strong and stable.  I will describe briefly each of
these four points shortly.
MEANINGFUL STRUCTURAL REFORMS
The Philippines has come a long way from being the “Sick man” of Asia. In fact, the Philippines is
now recognized globally as among the fastest growing and most resilient economies in the world
that  enjoys  brighter  prospects  ahead.  The  transformation,  however,  did  not  happen  overnight.
The gradual transformation was a product of a long list of structural reforms that started way
back in, the 1990s. It did not happen overnight.
I remember in the 1990s when a group of economists headed by Paul Krugman came to the
Philippines to assess the economy. Their verdict then on the long-term growth of the Philippines
was,  at  best,  3.0  percent.  We’ve  come  a  long  way  from  that  dismal  assessment. A  recent
assessment confirm that the Philippine Economy can sustain a long-term growth of 6.5%.
We have deregulated the oil industry, liberalized the power sector, privatized the water services,
and acceded to the World Trade Organization. These are just some of the reforms implemented
in the 1990s that have been followed through in the succeeding decades and—if I may stress—
more aggressively so in the last three (3) years under the Duterte Administration.
Key  reforms  from  2016  onwards  are  expected  to  unleash  more  growth  potentials  for  the
Philippines. Among these positive game changers have involved tax reforms, liberalization of rice
importation,  the  national  ID  system,  Universal  Healthcare,  Universal  Access  to  Tertiary
Education,  Ease  of  Doing  Business  law,  relaxation  of  the  Foreign  Investments  Negative  List
(FINL), and the revised Corporation Code—just to name a few.
The newly amended BSP Charter in 2019 has also strengthened the BSP’s capacity to better
safeguard  price  and  financial  stability,  and  to  promote  an  efficient  payments  and  settlements
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
system amidst a growing economy and the increasing sophistication of the financial system.
All these reforms should support and sustain the currently favorable conditions of the economy,
summarized by the four key observations I mentioned earlier. Let me expound of these at this
point.
PHILIPPINE MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
First, solid and sustainable economic growth. The Philippines recorded its 82nd consecutive
quarter  or  roughly  more  than  twenty  years  of  uninterrupted  economic  growth  in  the  second
quarter  of  2019.  This  shows  that  we  have  managed  to  sail  through  the  toughest  external
challenges from the Asian financial crisis to the Global financial crisis.
On the production side, economic growth was propelled mainly by the robust performance of the
services sector. Meanwhile, broad-based expansion in household consumption and government
spending reinforced growth on the demand side.
The  Build,  Build,  Build  program  ushers  in  the  country’s  Golden  Age  of  Infrastructure,  giving
additional solid push for the economy’s productive capacity to expand further.
Second,  domestic  inflation  is  within-target. After  posting  successive  multi-year  highs  that
culminated  in  a  6.7  percent  nine-year  peak  in  September  and  October,  inflation  has  slowed
considerably and reverted to within the target range of 2.0 to 4.0 percent. This is credited to a
series of monetary actions by the BSP that addressed brewing second-round effects combined
with and non-monetary actions by the government that addressed bottlenecks to food supply.
The  decelerating  trend  in  inflation,  which  fell  to  0.9  percent  in  September,  has  allowed  us  to
reduce the interest rate on the BSP’s overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) facility by 75 basis
points so far this year to 4.0 percent. The rate cuts were aimed at helping inflation move towards
the middle of the target range, in line with the BSP’s flexible approach to inflation targeting.
In  terms  of  the  BSP’s  outlook  for  inflation,  our  latest  baseline  projections  in  September  show
inflation settling within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point for both 2019 and
2020.
Third,  the  country’s  external  position  is  reflective  of  an  economy  driven  by  solid
macroeconomic fundamentals and firm growth prospects. Based on the latest estimates,
the country’s balance of payments (BOP) position for the first eight (8) months of the year posted
a  surplus  of  US$5.5  billion,  a  turnaround  from  the  US$2.4  billion  deficit  recorded  in  the  same
period last year.
For Q2 2019, the current account registered a deficit of US$145 million, a 95.6 percent reduction
from the US$3.3 billion deficit registered in the same quarter in 2018. This developed on account
mainly of the lower deficit in the trade-in-goods account. Increased net receipts trade-in-services,
and  secondary  and  in  the  primary  income  also  contributed  to  the  improvement  of  the  current
account in the second quarter of the year.
Driving this surplus includes reliable inflows from Overseas Filipinos’ (OF) remittances and net
inflows of portfolio investments during the first half of the year.
Foreign direct investments (FDIs) in the last two (2) years have also lent support to the country’s
external account along with rising investor confidence.
Meanwhile, after falling by 1.8 percent, year-on-year in 2018 exports begun to recover slightly,
edging up to $40.391 billion in the first seven (7) months in 2019.  July itself marked the fourth
straight month of export growth at 3.5 percent.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
These steady inflows of foreign exchange helped raise gross international reserves (GIR) to an
all-time high of US$86.2 billion in September 2019, providing ample external liquidity buffer.
At this level, the GIR can cover up to 7.5 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of
services and primary income. The rule of thumb is that a sufficient GIR level can cover three (3)
months’ worth of imports of goods and payments.
My fourth and last point – a strong and stable banking system – also offers a sound basis
for  optimism.  Our  financial  system  remains  sound  and  continues  to  effectively  intermediate
funds  to  productive  sectors,  thus  promoting  economic  growth.  The  continued  strong  credit
activities demonstrate the effectiveness of Philippine banks in their role as intermediator of funds
in the economy.
Banks remain sufficiently capitalized and past due ratios have also consistently declined over the
years, giving banks greater ability to intermediate funds, manage risk, and maintain profitability.
The stability and soundness of the banking system is being supported as well by the financial
sector reform agenda of the BSP focusing on areas such as banking supervision; cybersecurity
and technology risk management; anti-money laundering; counter-terrorist financing; and capital
market development.
Our financial system remains sound and continues to effectively intermediate funds to productive
sectors, thus promoting economic growth.
The  banking  system  likewise  exhibits  robust  financial  intermediation  activity  as  its  double-digit
growth  in  bank  lending  helps  support  not  only  household  consumption  but  also  business
activities,  such  as  those  in  real  estate,  trade,  manufacturing,  and  construction,  among  other
sectors.
MOVING FORWARD
the  country  has  been  making  considerable  progress 
In  sum, 
its
macroeconomic goals. Looking ahead, prospects for the domestic economy continue to remain
favorable as domestic growth fundamentals are expected to remain intact. GDP expansion is
expected to continue to pick up in 2019 due to the robust growth in the services and industry
sectors.    Private  demand  is  expected  to  remain  firm,  aided  mainly  by  sustained  remittance
inflows  and  stable  inflation.  As  more  government  infrastructure  programs  get  underway,  the
positive spillover effects on private capital formation would also contribute to economic growth.
towards  achieving 
From this position of strength, the BSP remains committed to continually upholding the highest
standard of excellence in crafting policies, and thereby achieve our mandates.
Going  forward,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  monitor  price  and  output  conditions  to  ensure  that
monetary policy remains appropriately supportive of sustained non-inflationary economic growth
over the medium term. We will be even more proactive in promoting a regulatory environment
that enables growth and innovation among banks and, at the same time, enhancing their ability to
manage risks.
Admittedly, the Philippine economy is not immune from risks arising from external factors. The
global  economic  slowdown  brought  about  largely  by  US-China  trade  tension  and  growing
protection affect us all. But we are confident that the Philippines will be one of the least affected
economies because its growth is based on strong domestic demand and the economy is not
export-oriented.
Many studies support this view that the Philippines will be one of the most resilient economies in
this slowing and turbulent global economy.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Having said all these, I am looking forward to a productive and stimulating discussion with you
and will be receptive to your insights.
Thank you and mabuhay!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
