Caroline Abel: Counterfeit banknote detection
Remarks  by  Ms  Caroline  Abel,  Governor  of  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles,  at  the  Counterfeit
Banknote Detection Seminar, Mahe, 7 October 2019.
Esteemed facilitators from De La Rue,
Seminar participants representing various stakeholder organisations,
 Central Bank Colleagues,
Good Afternoon,
On behalf of the Central Bank of Seychelles, it is a pleasure for me to welcome you to this four-
day seminar on counterfeit banknote detection. I would like to take this opportunity to thank our
partners from De La Rue, a company having extensive knowledge and expertise on the subject
matter, for joining us in this endeavour. I am equally delighted that our local stakeholders have
responded positively to be part of this knowledge sharing experience.
Currency  counterfeiting  is  a  long-standing  and  global  phenomenon,  and  Seychelles  has  also
recorded its share of reports on the circulation of forged banknotes over the years.
As the sole authority that issues banknotes in Seychelles, the Central Bank has taken steps to
prevent counterfeiting and maintain public confidence in our local currency. As recently as 2016,
we issued a new family of banknotes into circulation, embedded with new and improved security
features.
Nevertheless,  we  are  mindful  that  there  is  a  need  to  be  more  vigilant  and  proactive,  as
counterfeiters are also keeping pace with new technologies for their criminal activities. It is for
this reason that I commend the initiative of the
Banking  Services  Division,  through  its  Currency  function,  for  putting  together  this  multi-
stakeholder  seminar  to  stimulate  discussion  and  engagement  on  this  important  subject.  The
issue  of  counterfeiting  should  be  a  matter  of  concern  not  only  for  us  as  the  currency  issuing
agent, but also for the commercial banks, other financial institutions, as well as other partners,
such as the law enforcement and regulatory authorities, and the public at large.
The ability for criminals to gain access to equipment that can produce counterfeit banknotes –
including the ability to replicate the security features, as well as difficulties relating to investigation
of counterfeiting activities, are but some of the challenges with which we are currently faced. I
am hopeful that the seminar will not only highlight the extent of the counterfeiting problem globally
and in Seychelles, but also create a platform for the sharing of ideas and expertise on how to
tackle such challenges.
While  it  is  important  to  keep  abreast  of  developments  with  regards  to  enhancing  the  security
features of banknotes and attempts by criminals to forge currencies, it is equally essential that
we enhance public awareness and education.
From  this  workshop,  let  us  individually  and  collectively  find  ways  to  relay  the  message  to  the
population. Each and every individual can play a role in maintaining confidence in our currency by
being encouraged to ‘know our money’. Having a population that is knowledgeable and familiar
with the security features of genuine banknotes can surely contribute towards efforts to prevent
the introduction of fake money into our financial system, as well as minimising economic losses.
On this note, I wish you all a fruitful seminar and look forward to the outcomes on how we can
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
move forward and join the global efforts to combat counterfeiting and uphold domestic financial
system integrity.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
