Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Empowering financial consumers in the
digital age
Welcoming  remarks  by  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the BNM-OECD Conference on “Financial Education and
Financial Consumer Protection in Asia-Pacific”, Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2019.
 As I made my way in to work this morning, I glanced through my smartphone to check on my
monthly bills, how much pocket money my sons had spent over the week and on what. I also
browsed for money changers offering the best exchange rates for my next trip. Having all this
information  available  to  me  literally  at  my  fingertips  would  have  been  unthinkable  years  ago.
Today, I can organise my financial matters quickly and conveniently over a 20-minute car ride to
work!
It is my great pleasure to extend a warm welcome to all delegates to Kuala Lumpur and to the
Conference on Financial Education and Financial Consumer Protection in Asia-Pacific. We are
delighted to co-host this event in collaboration with the OECD.
At risk of repeating what many others have already acknowledged, let me say at the outset that
financial education and financial consumer protection have never been more important, or more
confounding,  than  in  the  digital  age  that  is  upon  us. At  stake  is  our  ability  to  preserve  public
confidence  in  the  financial  system,  and  seize  an  unprecedented  opportunity  to  come  within
striking distance of at least six of the Sustainable Development Goals: no poverty, zero hunger,
good  health  and  well-being,  quality  education,  gender  equality  and  reducing  inequality.  This
Conference,  themed  “Empowering  financial  consumers  in  the  digital  age”,  aims  to  help  us
untangle  and  develop  sensible  responses  to  the  myriad  of  issues  associated  with  the  rapid
digitalisation of financial services.
Digital financial services adoption in Asia-Pacific
The financial services industry has long been at the forefront of the digital revolution, benefitting
from efficiency gains, cost savings and wider outreach. For traditional financial institutions, it has
also been a matter of survival against an onslaught of highly innovative and nimbler competitors.
In recent years, industry players – both traditional and non-traditional – have rapidly scaled up
their use of technology to create better customer experiences by making financial products and
services more accessible, flexible and competitive.
As adoption rates rise, online banking, e-insurance and e-payments are quickly approaching a
tipping  point  at  which  they  will  eclipse  physical  branches,  ATMs  and  cash  as  conduits  for
financial transactions. In some markets, this is already a reality. It has been reported that nearly
two-thirds of consumers in the Asia-Pacific region are active fintech users. The adoption rates
are even higher in trailblazer markets such as China and India, where the share of active fintech
users is estimated to be about 87%. The region as a whole is an active hive of experimentation in
digital  financial  services,  supported  by  favourable  consumer  demographics,  particularly  the
digitally savvy youth.
In  Southeast  Asia,  digital  financial  services  is  estimated  to  contribute  about  5%  of  the  total
revenue for the financial sector this year. This share is expected to more than double to 11%
within  the  next  five  years,  driven  among  others  by  digital  lending,  investment,  remittance  and
insurance products. Here in Malaysia, the most recent demand side survey on financial capability
and inclusion indicated that four in ten Malaysians utilise internet banking services, up from just
one  in  ten  as  recently  as  three  years  before.  This  trend  is  expected  to  intensify,  with  the
expansion in digital product offerings and growing acceptance of online financial services.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Building trust and confidence
that 
framework 
through  digital  solutions.  Second, 
is  appropriate  and  proportionate,  a  secure  digital 
Digitalisation can also be a powerful force for sustainable financial inclusion. By lowering costs
and  increasing  scale  and  reach,  it  has  become  a  means  for  providing  access  to  essential
financial  services  such  as  e-payments,  micro-insurance  and  online  remittance  to  previously
underserved segments. Other innovations such as banking and insurance aggregators are also
helping consumers make better financial decisions, in turn, increasing their confidence in using
financial services.
For a region where socioeconomic disparities are wide, where the rural-urban divide is pervasive
and  considerable  segments  of  society  are  still  excluded  from  the  economic  and  social
mainstream, these developments have enormous potential to transform the current state to one
where the financial needs of all segments of society are catered to.
Several pre-conditions however must exist to realise this potential, and they all have to do with
securing the trust and confidence of consumers in the digital financial system. This includes a
regulatory 
financial
infrastructure and incentive systems that are aligned with providers that are both responsive and
responsible.
In Malaysia, efforts that are underway to enact a new Consumer Credit Act will further strengthen
the  foundations  for  the  development  of  consumer  finance  in  the  digital  age.  The  proposed
legislation is important on several levels. First, it will reinforce fundamental protections provided
to  consumers  in  the  provision  of  credit,  including  that  provided  by  a  growing  number  of  non-
traditional  entities 
inter-agency
arrangements  between  authorities  responsible  for  regulating  consumer  credit  activities  to
promote consistent minimum protections and fair treatment of borrowers. And third, it will provide
stronger assurance of more responsive and coordinated consumer protection arrangements to
take into account the fast-evolving financial services landscape going forward.
Equally  important  is  a  strong  focus  on  financial  education  to  promote  financially  and  digitally
literate consumers. Safeguarding the interests of consumers without stifling innovation remains
one of the most difficult balances to achieve for regulators. Regulators are constantly trading off
considerations of privacy against efficiency; fragmentation against competition; access against
risks of abuse.
In  the  digital  age,  these  trade-offs  become  impossible  without  equipping  consumers  with  the
information, knowledge and tools that they need to protect themselves and make decisions that
are  in  their  own  best  interests.  It  is  only  through  a  complementary  mix  of  appropriate  but  not
excessive  regulation,  and  enlightened  and  confident  consumers,  that  we  will  find  the  right
balance of guiding the development of digital financial services so that it is neither hurried nor
hampered,  and  remains  sustainable  and  well-functioning  to  promote  financial  stability  and
inclusive growth.
For  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  our  regulatory  agenda  is  supported  by  a  long-standing  focus  on
financial education. This year, I am pleased to share that this has been elevated to a national-
level priority with the launch of Malaysia’s first five-year National Strategy for Financial Literacy. A
key focus of the strategy is helping consumers protect themselves against fraud and exploitation,
and embrace innovation more confidently in the digital era. This needs to start with the young, but
without neglecting those for whom the digital world is both unfamiliar and daunting.
Specific challenges in a digital era
institutionalise 
it  will 
Let me just mention a few of the specific challenges that financial services authorities will have to
contend with in the digital era.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Increasing  incidents  of  data  abuse  on  social  media  platforms,  security  breaches  and
cybersecurity  threats  can  sow  mistrust  and  confidence  deficits  in  digital  systems.  In  our
respective  markets,  these  incidents  are  likely  to  reveal  gaps  in  existing  data  protection  and
consumer protection regimes and the need to explicitly address ownership rights and permitted
uses of personal customer information.
Prospects of digital profiling, and decisions driven by the use of complex algorithms can also
result in financial consumers being unfairly discriminated against or targeted by unsolicited and
unscrupulous  marketing  campaigns.  Rather  than  delivering  on  its  vast  promise,  digitalisation
could instead become a polarising and divisive instrument. Take the provision of online credit, for
example,  the  use  of  algorithm-based  online  credit  scoring  tools  have  led  in  some  cases  to
assessments that are gender-biased, with female candidates consistently assigned lower credit
scores compared to male counterparts of equal financial standing. Behaviourally, there is in fact
evidence in Malaysia and likely elsewhere, to suggest that the opposite is true.
We can and must do better.
Proportionate  laws  and  regulations  must  be  in  place  to  hold  financial  service  providers
accountable for establishing effective safeguards against the theft or abuse of personal data, and
discrimination  or  unfair  practices.  The  focus  on  consumer  protection  needs  to  shift  from  just
addressing customer touchpoints, to the consideration of consumer needs much earlier in the
product design process, in the formulation of distribution strategies or in the setting of risk limits.
Predictive  models  used  for  decision-making  must  be  subject  to  regular  reviews  against
consumer  outcomes  and  redress  channels  need  to  be  aligned  with  the  digital  experience.
Indeed,  we  should  be  concerned  that  while  the  delivery  of  financial  products  and  services  is
taking  on  increasingly  digital  dimensions,  when  something  goes  wrong,  processes  for
consumers to seek redress are still heavily manual in nature.
As  for  financial  education,  I  am  reminded  of  the  old  adage  by  Sir  Francis  Bacon:  “Reading
maketh a full man, conference a ready man, writing an exact man”. Today’s digital consumer – at
least many of them – has neither the patience nor time to read, confer or write. In fact, this is
almost  the  entire  premise  of  digital  financial  solutions  –  brevity,  speed  and  convenience.  The
short  attention  spans  of  financial  consumers  are  further  constrained  by  an  overload  of
information and misinformation.
Digital  solutions  that  can  efficiently  deliver  financial  education  to  masses  of  people,  while
simultaneously  providing  capabilities  to  tailor  knowledge  and  information  to  one’s  personal
circumstances (such as through loan affordability calculators), have gained increasing traction.
However, the fact that digital interventions are more cost-efficient, accessible and scalable, do
not automatically make them any more effective than more traditional interventions in the past
that have failed to achieve a consistent and lasting impact in changing behaviour.
We  need  to  develop  reliable  insights  into  behavioural  influences  that  may  help  or  prevent
consumers  from  making  good  financial  decisions.  This  sounds  simple  in  theory,  but  is  as
complex  as  an  understanding  of  human  psychology  itself. As  our  understanding  evolves,  the
solutions that work best are likely to be a messy blend of digital and traditional, as well as mass-
market and bespoke, approaches.
In navigating these challenges, there is much that we can learn from each other. No one has it all
figured out. We each have successes and failures, and by sharing them, we can help each other
move forward with greater confidence in a world that is constantly unfolding before our eyes with
every new digital experience. We are therefore privileged and grateful to be able to gather such a
diverse  and  distinguished  group  of  speakers  and  participants  to  add  to  our  collective  body  of
knowledge and experience. On that note, let me thank you all again for being a part of this event
here and I wish you rich and productive discussions ahead.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
