Mario Draghi: Farewell remarks
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the farewell event in his
honour, Frankfurt am Main, 28 October 2019.
 This  year  marks  two  decades  of  monetary  union,  which  is  by  any  measure  a  momentous
anniversary. Not so long ago, the euro area economy was scarred by a level of unemployment
probably  unseen  since  the  Great  Depression,  and  fundamental  questions  were  being  asked
about whether the euro would survive. Today 11 million more people are in work. Public trust in
the euro has risen to its highest level ever. Across the euro area, policymakers are reaffirming
that the euro is irreversible.
But I see today more as an occasion to reflect than to celebrate.
The euro is an eminently political project, a fundamental step towards the goal of greater political
integration, which found its economic justification in the parlous state of European economies in
the mid-1980s. Unemployment had risen from 2.6% in 1973 to 9.2% in 1985 and growth had
slowed significantly in the 12 countries that would go on to form the euro area.
What the visionary leaders of that era saw, however, was that Europe had a powerful tool at its
disposal  to  raise  growth:  to  transform  its  common  market  into  a  single  market.  Removing
existing  barriers  to  trade  and  investment  could  reverse  the  decline  in  economic  potential  and
bring more people back into work.
Yet the Single Market was always about more than just this. It also aimed to protect people from
some  of  the  costs  of  the  changes  that  would  inevitably  arise.  Unlike  the  wider  process  of
globalisation, it allowed Europe to impose its values on economic integration – to build a market
that,  to  the  extent  possible,  was  free  and  just.  Common  rules  would  create  trust  between
countries, give the weak recourse against the strong and provide safeguards for workers.
The Single Market, in this sense, was a bold attempt at “managed globalisation”. It combined
competition with levels of consumer and social protection unseen in the rest of the world.
But there was one type of unfair practice that the Single Market could not prohibit: competitive
devaluations.  That  prospect  would  undermine  the  mutual  trust  that  was  critical  for  the  Single
Market to survive and for the project of greater political integration to progress.
Freely floating currencies were therefore not an option, and fixed exchange rates would not work
as capital became more mobile within Europe, as the ERM crisis in 1992–3 proved.
The answer was to create a single currency: one market with one money.
This  construct  has  been  largely  successful:  incomes  across  the  continent  have  materially
increased, integration and value chains have developed to an extent unimaginable 20 years ago,
1
and the Single Market has survived intact through the worst crisis since the 1930s.
But the past 20 years have taught us two vital lessons for a successful monetary union.
The first concerns monetary policy.
When the ECB was established, its dominant concern was to keep inflation down. The ECB was
a new central bank with no track record, so its policy framework was expressly designed to build
strong anti-inflationary credibility. It achieved this quickly, and it is to the tremendous credit of the
ECB’s early leaders that its first decade went so smoothly.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But no one could have foreseen that the environment facing monetary policy globally was soon to
abruptly reverse: that inflationary forces would turn into deflationary ones.
In all advanced economies, this called for a new paradigm for central banking, which comprised
two  elements:  the  determination  to  fight  deflation  as  strongly  as  inflation,  and  flexibility  in  the
choice of instruments to do so.
In our case, the ECB has proven that it will not accept threats to monetary stability caused by
unfounded fears about the future of the euro. It has shown that it will fight risks to price stability on
the downside as vigorously as those on the upside. And it has established that it will use all the
tools within its mandate to secure its mandate – without ever exceeding the limits of the law.
The European Court of Justice has affirmed the legality of the measures we have taken, and it
has  confirmed  the  ECB’s  broad  discretion  in  using  all  its  instruments  in  a  necessary  and
proportionate way to achieve its objective.
This judgement was crucial, because at stake was the essence of the central bank that the ECB
has become, and that most people in Europe want to see: a modern central bank able to deploy
all its instruments commensurate with the challenges it faces, and a truly federal institution that
2
acts in the interests of the whole euro area.
The second lesson concerns the institutional construction of EMU.
The euro area is built on the principle of “monetary dominance”, which requires monetary policy
to be single-minded in its focus on price stability and never to be subordinate to fiscal policy.
“Monetary dominance” does not preclude communicating with governments when it is clear that
mutually aligned policies would deliver a faster return to price stability. It means that alignment
between policies, where needed, must serve the objective of monetary stability and should not
3
work to the detriment of it.
Today,  we  are  in  a  situation  where  low  interest  rates  are  not  delivering  the  same  degree  of
stimulus  as  in  the  past,  because  the  rate  of  return  on  investment  in  the  economy  has  fallen.
Monetary policy can still achieve its objective, but it can do so faster and with fewer side effects if
fiscal policies are aligned with it.
This is why, since 2014, the ECB has gradually placed more emphasis on the macroeconomic
policy mix in the euro area.  A more active fiscal policy in the euro area would make it possible to
adjust our policies more quickly and lead to higher interest rates.
4
In our monetary union, national policies play the main role in fiscal stabilisation – much more so
than state-level policies in the US. But national policies cannot always guarantee the right fiscal
stance  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Coordinating  decentralised  fiscal  policies  is  inherently
complex. And uncoordinated policies are not enough, because the spillovers between countries
from fiscal expansions are relatively low.
This is why we need a euro area fiscal capacity of adequate size and design: large enough to
stabilise the monetary union, but designed not to create excessive moral hazard.
There will be no perfect solution. When risks are shared, moral hazard can never be reduced to
zero,  though  it  can  be  greatly  contained  by  proper  design. At  the  same  time,  we  should  also
recognise that sharing risks can help reduce risks.
The building of a capital markets union, which would lead to greater risk-sharing in the private
sector, would considerably reduce the fraction of risks that need to be managed by a central
fiscal capacity. And a central fiscal capacity would in turn reduce risks for the whole union when
national policies are unable to play their role.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In other regions where fiscal policy has played a greater role since the crisis, we have seen that
the recovery began sooner and the return to price stability has been faster. The US had a deficit
5
of 3.6% on average from 2009 to 2018, while the euro area had a surplus of 0.5%.
In other words, the US has had both a capital markets union and a counter-cyclical fiscal policy.
The euro area had no capital markets union and a pro-cyclical fiscal policy.
The road towards a fiscal capacity will most likely be a long one. History shows that budgets
have rarely been created for the general purpose of stabilisation, but rather to deliver specific
goals in the public interest. In the US, it was the need to overcome the Great Depression that led
to the expansion of the federal budget in the 1930s. Perhaps, for Europe, it will require an urgent
cause such as mitigating climate change to bring about such collective focus.
Whichever path is taken, it is plain to see that now is the time for more Europe, not less. I mean
this not in an axiomatic way, but in the truest traditions of federalism. Where results can best be
delivered by national policies, let it stay that way. But where we can only deliver on the legitimate
concerns of the public by working together, we need Europe to be stronger.
For  us  Europeans,  in  a  globalised  world,  a  true  sovereignty  that  meets  people’s  needs  for
security and prosperity can be achieved only by  working  together.  As  Chancellor  Merkel  has
said,  “we  Europeans  have  to  take  our  destiny  into  our  own  hands  if  we  want  to  survive  as  a
7
community”.
6
Working together allows us to protect our interests in the world economy, to resist the pressures
of foreign powers, to influence global rules to reflect our standards, and to enforce our values on
global  corporations.  None  of  these  can  be  achieved  to  the  same  degree  by  countries  acting
alone. In a globalised world, sharing sovereignty is a way to regain sovereignty.
But  recognising  that  we  need  to  exercise  what  President  Macron  has  termed  “European
sovereignty”  to be effective does not mean that we already have the political infrastructures to
do so today. Awareness of their necessity is growing quickly, however.
8
We saw this emerging in the most recent European Parliament election, which was perhaps the
first such election fought mainly on European questions. Even those who were seeking to slow
down  European  integration  did  so  by  contesting  the  EU  institutions  rather  than  rejecting  their
legitimacy outright.
This is only a start, but it suggests our union is moving in the right direction. I am confident that it
will continue to do so, because it is ultimately the self-interest of individual countries that lays out
our future path towards a European sovereign.
The actions of many committed Europeans, at both the national and EU levels, have helped us to
reach this point. There are three groups whose contributions I would like to single out.
The first is the staff of the ECB and the national central banks.
There  were  many  occasions  during  the  crisis  where  the  ECB  found  itself  in  truly  uncharted
waters.  We  faced,  by  any  measure,  an  incredibly  complex  economic  situation,  with  new
challenges appearing the moment old ones were resolved.
Those  years  were  intense  for  you  and  your  families.  But  your  dedication,  the  success  of  the
measures  you  designed,  and  the  competence  you  displayed  across  the  Eurosystem  in
implementing those measures, will make those years worth remembering.
These policies are now available to all future policymakers to meet similar challenges. This is a
legacy of which all Eurosystem staff can be proud. So, let me express my gratitude for all your
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
remarkable efforts, which have  truly  served  the  ECB  through  this  unprecedented  time,  and  in
doing so the people of Europe.
The  second  group  I  would  like  to  highlight  are  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  and
Governing Council – both past and present. You have enacted a series of measures over the
past eight years in extraordinary circumstances. The bedrock of those decisions has been your
consistent and unconditional commitment to our mandate.
You have been unwavering in your determination both to deliver our mandate and to stay within
its confines – to never accept failure. You can look back with satisfaction on what you achieved in
extremely testing conditions, and in the knowledge that you have improved the welfare of many
people.
What unites the Governing Council has always been – and will always be – much greater than
anything  that  might  divide  it.  We  all  share  the  same  devotion  to  our  mandate  and  the  same
passion for Europe. I trust that this shared conviction will continue to serve the ECB and Europe
in the years to come.
The third group is Europe’s leaders.
We had to take measures that sometimes appeared controversial at first and whose benefits
were only revealed slowly. Our determination never wavered as it was founded on the solid work
of our staff, nourished by empathy for the people who were suffering, and strengthened by the
conviction that the policies would improve their situation.
But  in  such  times  –  and  especially  in  a  multi-country  currency  union  –  political  leaders  who
transcended national perspectives when assessing our monetary policy, and who acknowledged
the  euro  area  perspective  and  explained  it  to  their  domestic  audience,  provided  an  essential
bulwark for our independence.
I  am  grateful  that  we  have  had  such  leaders  in  Europe,  and  for  your  steadfast  support  and
encouragement throughout the crisis.
President Macron, President Mattarella, Chancellor Merkel: you have stood beside us unfailingly
in the European Council and in global forums, at a time when other major central banks have
faced increasingly vocal political pressure. You have pushed back strongly against illiberal voices
that would see us turn our back on European integration.
And, at critical moments, you have taken the steps needed to safeguard the euro and protect the
heritage that was left to us: a united, peaceful and prosperous Europe.
The time has come for me to hand over to Christine Lagarde. I have every confidence that you
will be a superb leader of the ECB.
My goal has always been to comply with the mandate enshrined in the Treaty, pursued in total
independence, and carried out through an institution that has developed into a modern central
bank capable of managing any challenge.
It has been a privilege and an honour to have the opportunity to do so.
Thank you.
1
2
3
See speech by Mario Draghi entitled “Europe and the euro 20 years on” on accepting the Laurea Honoris Causa
in economics from the University of Sant’Anna, Pisa, 15 December 2018.
See speech by Mario Draghi entitled “Twenty Years of the ECB’s monetary policy” at the ECB Forum on Central
Banking, Sintra, 18 June 2019.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
Speech by Mario Draghi entitled “Policymaking, responsibility and uncertainty” on accepting the Laurea Honoris
Causa from the Università Cattolica, 11 October 2019.
See speech by Mario Draghi entitled “Unemployment in the euro area” at the Annual central bank symposium in
Jackson Hole, 22 August 2014.
Average cyclically adjusted primary balance as a percentage of potential GDP.
See speech by Mario Draghi entitled “Sovereignty in a globalised world”, on accepting the Laurea Honoris
Causa in law from Università degli Studi di Bologna, Bologna, 22 February 2019.
Speech by Chancellor Angela Merkel to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 13 November 2018.
Speech by President Emmanuel Macron to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 17 April 2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
