Jerome H Powell: Brief remarks
Brief remarks by Mr Jerome H Powell, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, at the premiere of "Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve," Salt Lake
City, Utah, 7 October 2019.
 Thank you, Randy, for the kind introduction. It is a great pleasure to join you all this morning for
the premiere of KUED’s documentary Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve. It
is also a great pleasure to be in Utah. It has been a long time since a Fed Chair made an official
visit to Utah. Alan Greenspan spoke in Salt Lake City 22 years ago. All of the Utahns here know
about the Eccles family’s enormous contributions to building the economies of the state and the
region. The documentary will remind us of Marriner’s immense contribution not just to the region,
but also to our nation during the Great Depression, World War II, and thereafter.
Many  Eccles  family  members  are  present  here  today.  I  would  like  to  especially  recognize
Marriner’s grandson, Chip Eccles; Marriner’s nephew, Spencer Eccles; and Spencer’s daughter,
Hope  Eccles.  Randy  was  fortunate  to  marry  Hope,  and  he  has  a  second  Federal  Reserve
connection. He is our Vice Chair for Supervision.
In a way, I feel that I know Marriner, too. I work in a building named after him. I sit in the office
where he sat as Chair. And his portrait hangs in a room where I frequently meet with guests,
Board  colleagues,  and  staff.  When  I  sit  in  my  usual  seat,  he  stands,  looking  over  my  left
shoulder, an enigmatic expression—neither approving nor disapproving—on his face. Talk about
pressure!
More seriously, his legacy endures in much more than a name on a building and a portrait on a
wall. As the Depression deepened, he presciently recognized that the federal government should
act forcefully to put people back to work and stimulate business. In a speech delivered here in
Utah in 1932, Marriner asked what was the purpose of an economic system if not to allow those
willing  and  able  to  work  the  opportunity  to  do  so,  to  “guarantee  to  them  sustenance  for  their
families and protection against want and destitution."  His ideas helped form the basis of Franklin
D. Roosevelt’s New Deal and anticipated the not-yet-published tenets of British economist John
Maynard  Keynes. After  World  War  II,  he  recognized,  again  presciently,  that  high  inflation,  not
contraction, posed the principal threat to the U.S. economy.
1
And, perhaps most importantly from my perspective as Fed Chair, he is responsible more than
any other person for the fact that the United States today has an independent central bank—a
central bank able to make decisions in the long-term best interest of the economy, without regard
to the political pressures of the moment. During his years on the Fed Board, Marriner played a
crucial role in two landmark accomplishments that established the modern Federal Reserve—
the  Banking Act  of  1935,  near  the  start  of  his  tenure  at  the  Fed,  and  the  Federal  Reserve-
Treasury Accord of 1951, at the end.
FDR  nominated  Marriner  to  lead  the  Fed  Board  in  1934.  He  accepted  on  the  condition  that
Roosevelt support a restructuring of the Fed, which had failed to counter the contraction gripping
the nation’s economy. The result was the Banking Act of 1935, which significantly strengthened
the structural independence of the Federal Reserve. And, symbolically important, it authorized
the Board to move its meetings from the Treasury Department to a new building—the building
that now bears Marriner’s name—on Constitution Avenue, across from the Lincoln Memorial.
During  World  War  II,  the  Fed  effectively  ceded  control  of  monetary  policy  to  the  Treasury
Department by agreeing to maintain a low interest rate peg on government bonds. The low rates
helped the government finance the war, but after the war ended, inflation soared. It subsided for a
time  but,  with  the  Korean  War,  spiked  again.  In  1951,  Marriner  led  other  Board  members  in
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
precipitating a clean break with the peg arrangement, laying the foundation for the modern Fed.
The  Federal  Reserve-Treasury Accord  of  that  year  separated  government  debt  management
from monetary policy and freed the Fed to combat high inflation and set short-term interest rates
based on what was best for the economy.
Those are just the highlights of Marriner’s Fed career. You will learn much more in the film we
are about to see. In closing, I leave you with this statement from Marriner, inscribed on a plaque
in the Eccles Building: “The management of the central bank must be absolutely free from the
1
dangers of control by politics and by private interests, singly or combined."
1
See Marriner S. Eccles (1932), “Depression: Its Causes, Effects and Suggested Remedies,” speech delivered
at the Utah State Bankers Convention, June 17, Marriner S. Eccles Papers, FRASER, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, pp. 6–7.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
