Benjamin E Diokno: Financial inclusion - a social mandate
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 2019 FINEX Conference, Manila, 11 October 2019.
 Esteemed members of the financial community, it is my pleasure to give this keynote address at
your 2019 Conference.
Your theme “Riding on the Opportunities of the Next Digital Wave” is very timely as we are in fact
in this wave.
It  is  also  very  relevant  to  the  topic  of  this  keynote  address  which  is  “Financial  Inclusion  as A
Social Mandate.”
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is upon us. This advent of “cyber-physical systems” represents
new ways in which technology has embedded itself within societies and even our human bodies.
It affects many aspects of business, society, and even day-to-day life in a significant way.
In fact, technology is now in the hands of everyone. Who among you remember the car-based
mobile phone service of PLDT in the mid-80s? This technology, which was available to only a
few in the 80s, has now grown to 124.2 million mobile connections in the Philippines. 
Today—because of digitalization—anyone with a smartphone and internet connection can easily
access information about almost anything under the sun in a matter of seconds.
Many of these technological advancements are now part of our day-to-day reality such as online
streaming, electric vehicles, EMV chip cards, and social media.
However, despite favorable developments due to technology, many challenges persist. There is
uneven access and the people who should benefit the most from new technologies are the ones
who are still left behind.
We see a similar gap in terms of the state of financial inclusion in the country. Those who are in
most  need  of  financial  products  and  services  are  the  ones  who  are  mainly  unserved  and
underserved.
Based on the 2017 Financial Inclusion Survey, only 23% of Filipino adults have a formal account.
Only 48% of adults save, but 7 in 10 savers keep their savings at home. Of the 22% of Filipino
adults who avail loans, 4 in 10 do so through informal sources.
As such, it is necessary to bring the unserved and underserved into the national economy.
The signing into law of Republic Act (RA) No. 11211 of 2019 amending the BSP charter elevates
financial inclusion and its complementary objectives of financial literacy and consumer protection
from advocacies to an institutional imperative. Section 3 states:
“In  the  attainment  of  its  objectives,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  shall  promote  broad  and
convenient  access  to  high  quality  financial  services  and  consider  the  interest  of  the  general
public.”
In the Philippine Development Plan 2017–2022 (PDP), financial inclusion indicators, such as the
level  of  account  penetration,  have  been  incorporated  as  part  of  the  impact  measurement
framework.   
Meanwhile,  in  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development  adopted  by  the  United  General
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Assembly,  financial  inclusion  is  recognized  as  a  key  enabler  in  achieving  13  of  the  17
Sustainable Development Goals or SDGs.
The  SDGs  are  17  goals  endorsed  by  193  nations  to  end  poverty  in  all  its  forms,  promote
prosperity and people’s well-being, reduce inequality, and protect the environment.  
This brings us to the importance of financial inclusion as a social mandate as it plays a critical
role in ensuring that the fruits of prosperity are felt by everyone through increased opportunities
and better quality of life. 
Financial inclusion lays the groundwork for sustainable and equitable national development.  The
goal of financial inclusion does not end in providing universal access to financial services but in
ensuring that these services truly enhance the well-being of their users. 
Rather  than  being  a  mere  end  in  itself,  financial  inclusion  is  a  means  to  achieve  broader
aspirations.  When people are financially included and realize their stake in national prosperity,
they are empowered to make better, informed choices when it comes to their financial welfare
and  future.  In  turn,  they  are  able  to  make  sound  decisions  that  raise  their  productivity  and
standard of living.
The pursuit of financial inclusion requires an openness to all possible transformative solutions
and impactful innovations, such as digital technology, new business models, and cross-sector
collaboration. 
But the pursuit of financial inclusion is not a walk in the park. It requires a concerted and holistic
effort.  It  requires  the  participation  of  all  key  decision  makers  and  stakeholders,  from  the  bank
executives  to  the  officers  who  go  out  in  the  field—including  those  in  the  expanding  fintech
industry.
Given the promise of emerging technologies and models, we also consider financial inclusion as
one of the biggest potential winners of technological advancement and digitalization. 
Technology can increase the breadth and depth of financial inclusion. It can facilitate massive
efficiencies that make it possible – and even strategic – for financial service providers to serve
low-income and rural clients viably.
For this reason, we are optimizing the applications of technology by directing focus on sectors
such as agriculture, as well as countryside development.
These sectors encounter the most difficulty in terms of access; these sectors experience the
highest poverty incidence in the country.
In brief, our goal by 2023, is to ensure that at least 70% of adult Filipinos will have access to
formal financial services.
Needless to say that digital technology can massively help our financial inclusion agenda.
But we need to deliberately and purposefully harness this potential by ensuring that anyone can
readily open and use an account through digital channels for various financial transaction.
The paradigm is that without a transaction account that can be used for digital payments, an
individual will not be able to effectively and fully participate in the gains of digital finance. 
Thus, in 2016, the BSP has issued a series of policy issuances centered on three imperatives:
first  was  to  ensure  availability  of  a  transaction  account  that  is  tailored  specifically  for  the
unbanked;
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
second, was to enable those with an account to use it to affordably and conveniently send and
receive  money  from  any  account  through  their  mobile  phone;  and  third  was  to  expand  the
network of access points.
Accordingly, we issued the guidelines and incentives for banks to offer basic deposit accounts
that have no maintaining balance and an opening deposit not exceeding P100.
We also issued the National Retail Payment System framework which anchored the launch of
the PESONet and Instapay to enable faster, safer, and more convenient electronic fund transfers
between any accounts held in any participating bank or e-money issuer.  To date, there are 53
participating institutions for PESONet and 44 for InstaPay.
Lastly, we issued the cash agent regulation which enables banks to use convenience stores,
pharmacies, pawnshops, and other retail outlets as low-cost and non-intimidating service points
where  clients  can  open  an  account,  make  deposits  and  withdrawals,  pay  bills  and  other
transactions.
For  these  regulations  and  other  related  policy  initiatives,  the  Economic  Intelligence  Unit  in  its
2018 Global Microscope Report cited the BSP for its focus to create an inclusive digital finance
ecosystem and the regulatory enablers for financial inclusion. 
In  fact,  for  several  years  now,  the  Philippines  has  been  recognized  as  one  of  the  top  five
countries that have a conducive regulatory environment for financial inclusion.
Yet,  despite  these  developments,  financial  exclusion  remains  significantly  high—emphasizing
that enabling regulations alone are not sufficient to drive financial inclusion.  
To truly unlock the potential of digital innovations for inclusive finance, we need to build pillars that
enable and promote the use of digital finance.
The first pillar is the digital infrastructure. Indeed, digital connectivity is a pre-requisite for digital
finance. Yet, speed, affordability, and availability of internet connectivity are important factors that
determine adoption of digital finance, particularly in the rural areas.
Overcoming  the  barriers  to  digital  connectivity  will  not  only  promote  accessibility  to  digital
financial products, but will allow innovators to improve the design, enhance security features, and
drive down the cost of financial services.
Another important infrastructure is the digital ID system which is why the BSP is looking forward
to the implementation of the Philippine ID System or the Philsys.
Beyond its ability to address the lack of identity documents commonly cited as a barrier by the
unbanked,  the  PhilSys  through  its  electronic  KYC  feature  can  significantly  reduce  the  cost  of
onboarding  new  clients  by  as  much  as  80%  based  on  a  study  commissioned  by  the Asian
Development Bank. Such a digital ID system can also enable the delivery of innovative end-to-
end financial services.
The second pillar would be the digital payments use cases.  It is not enough that people are able
to easily open a transaction account. People should see the necessity of an account and be able
to use that account for various payment transactions on a regular basis.
What can compel people to open a transaction account?
For the wage earners and informal workers, receiving wages and social benefits is one.
Being  able  to  use  a  mobile  phone  to  pay  market  vendors,  jeepney  drivers,  utilities  and  online
purchases is another.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The regular use of transaction accounts will not only catalyze digital payments but also enable
the account holder to build a richer digital footprint for his credit profile. This is the focus of our
intensified  coordination  efforts  with  the  Department  of  Social  Welfare  and  Development,  the
Department of Labor and Employment, and the Department of Transportation.
To  provide  the  public  with  digital  payment  options  for  transactions  with  government,  we  are
working closely with the payments industry and the Department of Finance and the Department
of Budget Management on the development of a bills payment platform and on possible policies
to address implementation barriers.
The third pillar is user trust and readiness. If people do not trust, understand or know how to use
digital  financial  services,  people  will  not  use  these  products  even  if  they  are  affordable  and
convenient.
To  this  end,  we  are  committed  to  our  partnership  with  various  public  and  private  entities  to
promote  financial  and  digital  literacy  in  the  country.  We  also  continue  to  engage  the  fintech
industry, the Department of Information and Communication Technology and the National Privacy
Commission to promote cyber-resilience and data privacy in digital finance.
It is also necessary to provide an accessible venue for consumers to engage the regulators for
concerns regarding their use of financial services as a way to build confidence in these products.
And  this  is  why  we  have  undertaken  a  chatbot  project  for  consumer  complaints  and  issues
handling. I am happy to share that this project, and our regtech project on prudential reporting,
have earned the BSP two innovation awards from the Central Banking Publications in Singapore
last September 4. 
Indeed,  the  imperatives  of  financial  inclusion  go  beyond  enabling  regulations  and  require
coordinated programs across the government and private sector.
I hope that by explaining these pillars, I was able to give you a sense of the breadth of the work
that we need to do and support. I hope that in understanding why financial inclusion matters, you
will leave this conference with a genuine interest to find ways on how you and your companies
can contribute to financial inclusion.
Allow me therefore, before I close, to throw in some ideas. Consider this my call to action for this
body.
As  businesses,  you  may  be  operating  in  a  value  or  supply  chain  over  which  you  can  exert
influence. Examine the actors in these chains; you may have as suppliers or buyers the small
businesses, microentrepreneurs and farmer groups. Think of how you can leverage your role in
the chain so they can access better credit terms from the banks and other lenders.
For  companies  that  collect  customer  data,  you  can  explore  ways  on  how  you  can  empower
these  customers  to  use  their  data  for  their  credit  profile  so  they  can  access  better  financing.
Empower your customers to use their data for welfare-enhancing pursuits.
If there are workers in your supply chain who are paid cash, perhaps you can ensure that they be
given a transaction account where they can receive their wages.
Another way that your company or even this body as a collective can support financial inclusion
is to advocate with legislators for policies and infrastructure that can help promote access to
finance of the SMEs and farmers.
For  instance,  the  warehouse  receipts  system  bill  can  support  farmers  by  providing  them  the
tools to manage commodity price risks and to access financing using warehouse receipts as
collateral.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There’s also the financial consumer protection bill that provide all financial sector regulators with
the necessary powers to ensure responsible and consumer-friendly conduct of financial service
providers.  This  is  critical  especially  as  more  and  more  products  and  services  are  accessed
digitally.
Lastly, and I know Finex is already doing this, we all can help improve financial literacy in this
country through various means.
Maybe  you  can  organize  financial  literacy  training  for  your  employees  and  clients.  Based  on
BSP’s  2017  survey,  only  18%  and  3%  of  adult  Filipinos  have  an  insurance  and  financial
investment, respectively.
Another  way  to  support  financial  literacy  is  to  help  develop  content  and  materials  that  can  be
used by various government agencies in their finlit programs. You can even develop your own
finlit  programs  for  your  industry.  BSP  will  be  happy  to  assist  in  facilitating  dialogue  and
partnerships with various stakeholders within and outside government.
In closing, allow me to share this quote from Leonardo da Vinci: “I have been impressed with the
urgency of doing. Knowing is not enough. We must apply. Being willing is not enough. We must
do.”
Financial inclusion is our shared social mandate. And there is never a better time to act than
now. We all have a stake in the future of our country. May it be prosperous not only for a few but
for all. 
A good day to you all. Thank you and mabuhay! 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
