 29.10.2019 
 The Spanish economy: outlook and challenges 
Third Economic-Insurance Meeting: “Economic future and insurance industry 
trends” 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
I should like to start by thanking the president of the Lawyers’ Mutual Society, Enrique Sanz, 
for  his  kind  invitation  to  deliver  the  closing  address  to  this  third  economic-insurance 
meeting. It is an honour and a pleasure to participate in this event and to share with you 
some reflections on the economic outlook for the immediate future and, especially, on the 
main  medium  and  long-term  challenges  facing  the  Spanish  economy.  The  degree  of 
vulnerability of the Spanish economy to possible shocks and, ultimately, the well-being of 
the Spanish people will largely depend on how the economy’s main structural problems are 
addressed. 
The economic situation 
The global economic expansion in weakening against the background of the downturn in international trade… 
 The  international  economic  environment  in  which  the  Spanish  economy  operates  has 
become more unfavourable over the past year, with a slowdown in growth and, in particular, 
in international trade. Global GDP growth continued to moderate, to a rate of 2.8% year-on-
year in the second quarter of 2018, down more than one percentage point (pp) from a year 
earlier. In addition, growth projections have been revised downwards in most economies in 
recent quarters. Indeed, global GDP growth is projected this year to be at its lowest level 
since the international financial crisis. 
      2/18 
… and high geopolitical uncertainty  
  The  contraction  in  world  trade,  meanwhile,  appears  to  have  intensified,  against  a 
background  of  persistent  uncertainty  surrounding  US  and  Chinese  trade  policy  and 
intensifying  geopolitical  risks.  Although  the  deterioration  in  activity  has  been  particularly 
intense in manufacturing, the slowdown in recent months in the global services output PMI, 
which  remains  in  expansionary  territory,  is  indicative  of  an  increased  risk  of  a  steeper 
slowdown in global activity. 
Given its degree of openness, and the confluence of certain idiosyncratic elements, the euro 
area economy has been affected more than most by these international trade developments. 
Specifically, the euro area slowed significantly from the beginning of 2018, mainly due to 
the sharp moderation in exports. As a result, GDP grew at an average rate of 1.9% last year, 
down 0.7 pp from 2017, and year-on-year growth since end-2018 has fallen to around 1%.  
On the latest information available, euro area GDP growth was only 0.2% quarter-on-quarter 
in Q2, down from 0.4% in Q1, weighed down by weak exports and slack investment. By 
contrast,  private  consumption  continued  to  grow,  driven  by  the  relative  relatively  robust 
labour market. On the supply side, industrial activity contracted in this period, while services 
behaved more positively. By country, the decline in activity in the German economy and the 
stagnation in Italy were notable.  
Moreover, the indicators available suggest that euro area economic activity remained weak 
in  Q3.  Thus,  the  trade  and  industrial  activity  indicators  signalled  continuation  of  the 
deterioration. Also, some qualitative indicators of services activity and employment showed 
a decrease, which may indicate that the weakness is beginning to spread to these activities. 
The slowdown in employment, along with the gradual  decline in consumer confidence in 
Q3,  points  to  more  modest  growth  of  private  consumption,  until  now  the  main  driver  of 
growth. 
Against  this  background,  in  September,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  revised  its 
macroeconomic forecasts for the euro area as a whole. Expected GDP growth was revised 
downwards, especially for 2020. Specifically, growth of rates of 1.1% and 1.2% are now 
projected for 2019 and 2020, respectively, in both cases below the rates projected In June. 
 3/18 
In  the  medium  term,  activity  is  expected to  recover,  underpinned  by  favourable  financial 
conditions and a slightly expansionary fiscal policy, in the event of a gradual disappearance 
of political and trade uncertainty.  
Despite this downward revision to macroeconomic forecasts, the ECB’s Governing Council 
emphasised  the  existence  of  significant  downside  risks  to  the  baseline  scenario,  arising 
mainly from a possible escalation of trade tensions. It should be taken into account, as I 
have just stressed, that the baseline scenario of the ECB’s macroeconomic projections, like 
those of the Banco de España, which I will refer to below, are based on the assumption that 
there will be a Brexit agreement and trade tensions will dissipate. 
Inflation  in  the  euro  area,  meanwhile,  remains  low.  In  Q3,  inflation  developments  were 
marked by the downward dynamic of energy prices and the persistence of moderate rates 
for  services.  The  12-month  rate  of  change  of  the  harmonised  index  of  consumer  prices 
(HICP) fell by 0.8% in September, and underlying inflation, which excludes energy and food 
prices, stood at 1%. In fact, since 2013, average euro area inflation has also been 1%, less 
than half the rate observed during the first 10 years of EMU (2.1%). 
This  absence  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  weakness  of  demand,  along  with  the 
deteriorating  global  environment,  led  to  a  further  downward  revision  to  the  Eurosystem 
inflation projections, to 1.2% in 2019 and 1% in 2020. In 2021, inflation is forecast to stand 
at  1.5%,  clearly  below  the  monetary  policy  objective.  In  turn,  the  long-term  inflation 
expectations derived from financial markets are at historic lows.  
In short, the euro area macroeconomic setting is characterised, first, by a downward revision 
to growth forecasts that were already relatively weak and remain subject to downside risks, 
owing  to  the  persistence  of  trade  tensions  and  other  geopolitical  uncertainties,  such  as 
those relating to the final Brexit outcome, and which in some countries of the area, such as 
Germany, even point to a risk of imminent recession; and, second, by medium-term inflation 
projections that have also been revised downwards and are well below levels that could be 
considered compatible with the ECB’s price stability mandate.  
This is the background to the measures adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB at its 
September  meeting.  In  particular,  and  in  accordance  with  previous  communications,  the 
Governing  Council  acted  –  with  a  package  of  expansionary  measures  –  in  response  to 
inflation  rates,  both  observed  and  projected  for  the  next  few  years,  that  have  remained 
persistently below the ECB’s objective, in line with its commitment to symmetry in relation 
to this aim. In this context, symmetry means that the ECB undertakes to act with the same 
determination whether inflation is persistently above or below 2%.1  
In particular, the Governing Council of the ECB took the decision to decrease the interest 
rate  on  the  deposit  facility  by  10  basis  points  (bp)  to  -0.50%  and  reinforced  its  forward 
guidance on interest rates by indicating that they will remain at their present or lower levels 
until the inflation outlook is seen to be robustly converging on a level sufficiently close to, 
but below, 2%. Such convergence should also be consistently reflected in the observed 
behaviour of inflation. 
                                                                                              
1  See  the  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España’s  closing  address  of  the  La  Granda  Courses  on  31  August  2019,  “The 
European economic policy response to a scenario of lower growth and inflation”. 
4/18 
 The ECB also agreed to restart net purchases under its asset purchase programme (APP) 
at a monthly pace of €20 billion as from 1 November and without a defined time limit. In 
order to preserve favourable bank lending conditions, the modalities of the new series of 
quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  III)  were  also  changed, 
eliminating the 10 bp spread established on the interest rates applied to them and extending 
their  maturity  from  two  to  three  years.  Finally,  in  order  to  support  the  bank-based 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  a  two-tier  system  for  reserve  remuneration  was 
announced, such that part of banks’ holdings of excess liquidity will be exempt from the 
negative deposit facility rate. 
These decisions aim to counter the worsening growth and inflation outlook by means of a 
package  of  measures  that  complement  one  another,  easing  financial  conditions  by  a 
different route. The resumption of net purchases, without a defined time limit, also has an 
important signalling effect with respect to the Governing Council’s commitment to meet its 
inflation aim, which is particularly relevant in the current context of inflation expectations at 
risk of becoming de-anchored.  
In addition, the period of time over which the net asset purchases and the reinvestment of 
existing  assets  will  continue  is  anchored  to  the  normalisation  of  interest  rates,  thus 
enhancing  the  consistency  and  complementarity  of  the  different  measures  and  their 
dynamic  adjustment  to  inflation.  In  a  setting  of  heightened  uncertainty,  this  automatic 
adjustment  of  the  expectations  about  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of 
potential changes in the macroeconomic environment is particularly desirable. 
Monetary policy measures have contributed to the increase in activity and in inflation  
 Economic research shows that these measures have been effective in the recent past, in 
terms of easing financial conditions and encouraging lending. Bearing this in mind, the new 
package of measures will boost economic activity in the euro area against a background of 
high uncertainty and will help to bring about the convergence of inflation to levels in line with 
the ECB's mandate. 
As regards negative interest rates, although there is no conclusive evidence to date that 
they have adversely affected the supply of bank credit, we cannot rule out that maintaining 
 5/18 
rates  at  very  low  levels  for  an  additional,  potentially  extended,  period  of  time,  could 
ultimately have some negative consequences for the bank-based transmission of monetary 
policy. In this regard, the mitigating measures adopted by the ECB, consisting of a tiered 
system  for  remunerating  excess  liquidity  holdings,  are  intended  to  soften  the  negative 
impact on bank profitability of the new reduction in reserve remuneration, and thus ensure 
the expansionary effect on activity and inflation of the interest rate cuts in the current setting.  
Prolongation of the current expansionary cycle, albeit at a more moderate rate than in previous years  
 In relation to the Spanish economy, the latest economic data point to a gradual weakening 
of activity. First, the indicators that measure agents’ confidence have tended to gradually 
deteriorate since the beginning of 2018, albeit less so than in the euro area as a whole. 
In  Spain,  as  in  the  euro  area,  the  deterioration  in  these  qualitative  indicators  has  been 
comparatively more pronounced in the case of manufacturing than in that of services. The 
quantitative indicators, which in principle tend to be more closely related to activity, have 
also tended to show less favourable behaviour in manufacturing than in services.  
This mixed behaviour across sectors, and developments coinciding with the timing of the 
global trade tensions between the United States and China are consistent with the shocks 
observed since the beginning of 2018, which appear to have had a more pronounced impact 
on manufacturing, being external in origin; from the viewpoint of demand, manufactures are 
typically more closely linked to exports than are services. 
In addition, the regulatory changes in the car industry sector, which came into force after 
the summer of 2018, have also contributed to explaining the weakness of exports and of 
manufacturing as a whole, while services, a much smaller proportion of whose value-added 
is exported, have shown greater resilience.  
One area in which the slowdown in activity has made itself plain is the labour market. This 
is a reason for concern, given that the rate of unemployment in the Spanish economy is still 
high,  something  that  I  shall  refer  to  later  in  greater  detail.  In  particular,  Social  Security 
registrations have lost significant  momentum since the beginning of the year, growing in 
September at a year-on-year rate of 2.4%, as against 3.1% at the end of 2018. A similar 
6/18 
 conclusion is drawn from the Labour Force Survey data for 2019 Q3 published last week, 
which also imply a moderation in the rate of generation of employment, to 1.8% year-on-
year,  down  0.6  pp  from  Q2  and  1.4  pp  lower  than  at  the  end  of  2018.  Moreover,  the 
magnitude of the fall in the rate of unemployment in Q3 – to 13.9% of the labour force – was 
more modest than has been typical since the start of the recovery. 
Against this background, the latest macroeconomic projections of the Banco de España, 
published on 24 September, foresee a moderation in the Spanish economy’s growth rate 
over the next two years, in response to the loss of momentum of domestic demand, which 
has already begun to be observed, in the latest period, and which has affected both private 
consumption and private investment. As I have mentioned already, this behaviour appears 
to have been fundamentally influenced by the deterioration in the external environment, as 
well as by the uncertainty regarding the future outlook.  
In any event, under the baseline scenario, which assumes that export markets will gradually 
recover (following their recent weakness) and that budgetary policy will acquire a neutral 
stance over the projection horizon, the accommodative stance of monetary policy and the 
improvement in the financial position of firms and households over the last few years, should 
allow the economy to continue to grow at slightly above its potential rate (which according 
to our estimates is somewhat less than 1.5%).  
However,  as  in  the  euro  area,  this  baseline  scenario  for  economic  activity  is  subject  to 
significant downside risks. In fact, the projected recovery in world trade and activity could 
be hampered by factors such as the possible adoption of further protectionist measures, 
the worsening of geopolitical tensions and the high level of indebtedness of certain agents 
in  particular  regions  of  the  world.  A  source  of  further  uncertainty,  which  has  still  to  be 
clarified  and  has  been  highly  unpredictable,  is  the  process  of  the  United  Kingdom’s 
departure from the European Union and the subsequent negotiation of the future UK/EU 
trading relationship. 
Lastly,  we  cannot  rule  out  that  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  course  of  some 
domestic economic policies (such as budgetary policy and the structural reform agenda), 
arising from the difficulty in recent years of forming solid parliamentary majorities, or the 
recent events in Catalonia, may also, if they persist, have an adverse effect on the spending 
decisions of private agents. 
Transformations and vulnerabilities of the Spanish economy 
In this context, the Spanish economy, despite the improvements made during the recovery, 
continues to suffer from significant vulnerabilities. Progress in correcting these is urgently 
required, in order to enhance the economy’s resilience to possible adverse shocks.  
In  fact,  some  positive  elements  stand out  from  the  evolution of  the  Spanish  economy  in 
recent years, such as, for example, the ability to continue to run external surpluses during 
the  upswing,  something  that  was  not  normal  in  previous  recoveries,  and  which  would 
indicate that at least part of the correction of the external imbalance is structural in nature, 
and is associated with cumulative improvements in competitiveness and the increase in the 
geographical diversification of exports and in the number of firms that regularly export to 
the rest of the world. This growing internationalisation of Spanish companies has served, in 
 7/18 
turn, to stimulate business investment and employment. Indeed, more than 2.5 million jobs 
have been created since the beginning of the recovery. 
Also  notable  in  recent  years  has  been  the  deleveraging  carried  out  by  the  non-financial 
private sector. This has reached a very advanced stage, both in the case of non-financial 
firms and households. For example, the debt to GDP ratio of Spanish companies has been 
reduced by more than 40 pp from its peak and it is now below the average level in the euro 
area.  
In  the  same  vein,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  intense  process  of  banking  industry 
rationalisation, recapitalisation and restructuring. This has led to a more efficient allocation 
of  capital  across  firms  and  sectors,  which,  as  we  will  see  later,  has  contributed  to 
productivity growth. In particular, the non-performing loan ratio for lending to the resident 
private sector, in business in Spain, stood at 5.3% in June 2019, down 8.7 pp from the high 
levels recorded in December 2013. Foreclosed assets, meanwhile, have fallen continuously 
during  the  years  of  recovery;  a  total  cumulative  reduction  of  50%  from  the  peak  levels 
recorded in 2011 had brought them down to below €40 billion by June 2019. 
As I was saying, this progress should not cause us to forget that the Spanish economy has 
significant imbalances, among which the still high levels of unemployment, government debt 
and external debt stand out. Since the start of the recovery progress (of varying intensity) 
has been seen on these fronts, but the magnitude of the imbalances built up in terms of the 
stocks of  these  variables  means  that  they  still  amount  to  vulnerabilities  (to turbulence  in 
international  markets,  for  example).  At  the  same  time,  the  Spanish  economy’s  growth 
capacity  continues  to  be  constrained  by  its  very  poor  productivity  dynamics,  which  is 
particularly worrying insofar as it will also be adversely affected by the impact of population 
ageing. 
Main challenges facing the Spanish economy  
 Turning  to  focus  on  the  labour  market,  as  you  all  know,  the  Spanish  economy’s  rate  of 
unemployment remains very high, at around 14%. Also, around 45% of the unemployed 
have been seeking work for a year or more, a factor that reduces their likelihood of success. 
8/18 
 There thus seems to be a need to improve the employability of this more vulnerable group 
notable for the presence of  very young and very old workers, as well as individuals with 
fewer skills. To do this, it would be desirable to increase the human capital of these workers, 
a  task  which,  in  particular,  would  need  training  tailored  to  employers’  requirements. 
Furthermore,  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that  the  higher  inequality  in  household  income 
emerging in the crisis was, above all, a consequence of job destruction, which underscores 
the need to ensure that these people can get a job as soon as possible.  
In addition, the incidence of temporary employment remains very high (nearly 27% in the 
third quarter of 2019), which, among other things, makes for high employment volatility and 
reduces worker productivity. 
Main vulnerabilities of the Spanish economy 
 A second source of vulnerability originating as a legacy of the crisis is the high government 
debt, which in the second quarter of 2019 stood at around 99% of GDP, more than 60 pp 
above that in 2007. It is in this terrain where headway has been less satisfactory in the last 
few years, as evidenced by the fact that the budget deficit continues to have a high structural 
component, estimated by the European Commission at above 2.5 pp of GDP. This figure is 
still  far  from  the  medium-term  structural  budgetary  balance,  convergence  to  which  is 
required by the so-called “preventive arm” of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) applicable 
in Spain since July. 
It is therefore a priority to make headway in cleaning up the public finances so as to reduce 
this source of vulnerability of the economy and to be able to make full use of national fiscal 
policy  as  an  effective  macroeconomic  stabilisation  instrument  in  the  event  of  a  sharper 
economic slowdown in the future. In addition, this improvement in the budgetary situation 
must  be  compatible  with  other  challenges  which  the  public  finances  will  have  to  face  in 
coming years, including most notably the consequences of population ageing, which I will 
discuss later. 
A third and final area of vulnerability of the economy to which I would like to refer is the 
external  debt.  Despite  the  correction  achieved  to  date  in  the  form  of  current-account 
surpluses, much work still remains to be done, as shown by the negative net international 
 9/18 
investment  position  and  the  gross  debt,  which  stood,  respectively,  at  around  80%  and 
170% of GDP in the second quarter of 2019. 
To  continue  correcting  these  two  magnitudes,  the  external  surpluses  will  have  to  be 
sustained  over  time,  which  in  turn  will  require  further  headway  in  the  gains  in 
competitiveness achieved in the last few years. Having said that, while these gains have so 
far been based mainly on the moderation of labour and financial costs, in the future they will 
have to come increasingly from genuine increases in productivity.  
Long-term growth of the Spanish economy: the challenge of productivity  
The productivity challenge 
 The timid gains in productivity seen in the past recession and subsequent recovery proved 
to  be  insufficient  to  close  the  gap  separating  us  from  the  core  European  countries.  The 
limited  headway  in  productivity  by  the  Spanish  economy  should  be  a  cause  for  great 
concern, since productivity gains are the only mechanism which can generate sustained, 
stable  growth  of  per  capita  income  in  the  long  term.  The  consensus  in  this  respect  in 
economic  circles  is  practically  unanimous,  and  the  repute  of  the  studies  in  this  area  is 
attested to by the Nobel prizes in economics awarded to Robert Solow and Paul Romer in 
1987 and 2018, respectively, for their contributions in the fields of productivity and long-
term economic growth.  
A few figures will suffice to illustrate how improvements in a community’s standard of living 
over the long term depend almost entirely on productivity gains. Thus, for example, 80% of 
the increase in US per capita income since 1948 can be attributed to the growth of total 
factor  productivity  (TFP).2  In  other  words,  increases  in  TFP  of  around  2%  per  year  have 
allowed the average US citizen to enjoy inflation-adjusted annual income which in 2015 was 
about US$ 30,000 higher than in 1948. 
In Spain, the recent growth of TFP has been notably lower, and was even negative for a 
good part of the first decade of the 21st century. Thus, in the past 25 years, TFP in Spain 
                                                                                              
2 See C. Jones (2015), The facts of economic growth, NBER Working Papers 21142. 
10/18 
 has grown by approximately 0.2% per year, 0.3 pp below the euro area average, according 
to European Commission estimates. 
A  simple  calculation  suggests  that,  if  in  that  period  the  Spanish  TFP  had  performed  the 
same as in the euro area, Spain’s per capita income would now be nearly 92% of the euro 
area average, instead of 87%. Expressed in euro, Spain’s per capita income would now be 
€28,000 per year, or €2,000 more than the observed value (8% in percentage terms). And if 
the TFP had grown at a rate of 2%, in line with the world technological frontier, the annual 
income of the average Spanish citizen would be nearly €40,000, or more than €1,000 extra 
each month. 
There are two intimately related factors which would at least partly explain why productivity 
has behaved less dynamically in Spain than in other euro area economies in the past two 
decades. The first is that the Spanish business sector consists to a larger extent of small, 
less  productive  firms;  the  second  is  that  the  inefficiency  of  the  resource  allocation 
mechanisms facilitates the survival and growth of less productive firms. 
The determinants of these two factors are many and diverse. Allow me to focus on three 
particularly important ones in which the Spanish economy is in a worryingly poorer position 
than  our  European  partners:  human  capital,  technological  capital  and  the  financing  of 
innovation. 
According  to  the  available  evidence,  the  presence  of  human  and  technological  capital 
shortfalls is the main reason for the low productivity of Spanish firms.3 And the difficulty in 
obtaining  finance  for  highly  productive  business  projects  has  shown  itself  to  be  a 
determinant of the inefficient allocation of resources to firms.4 
The  need  to  correct  the  human  and  technological  capital  shortfalls  is  particularly  urgent 
when viewed in the current context of technological change. The advances in digitalisation, 
automation  and  technological  development  are  altering  certain  crucial  aspects  of  the 
economy, such as consumption patterns, production processes or the provision of public 
and private services. 
Thus,  for  example,  the  spread  of  new  technologies  has  allowed  the  financial  sector  to 
provide services in more flexible ways not requiring customers to be physically present. As 
an  example,  the  percentage  of  Internet  users  in  Spain  reporting  that  they  use  electronic 
banking  services  has  increased  by  30  pp  from  2003  to  2018.5  However,  all  sectors  to  a 
greater or lesser extent are caught up in the so-called “digital revolution”. 
                                                                                                 
3 See F. Schivardi and T. Schmitz (2019), “The IT Revolution and Southern Europe’s Two Lost Decades”, Journal of the 
European Economic Association, forthcoming. 
4  See  Chapter  4,  “Business dynamics  in  Spain:  characteristics, determinants  and  implications”,  Informe  Anual  2015, 
Banco de España. 
5 Encuesta sobre Equipamiento y Uso de Tecnologías de Información y Comunicación en los Hogares, Instituto Nacional 
de Estadística. 
 11/18 
Human capital  
Human capital 
 Educational policies at all levels are crucially important for fostering innovation and adapting 
the labour force to new occupations and, in general, enabling individuals to acquire and 
preserve  the  skills  needed  to  work  in  an  environment  characterised  by  digitalisation, 
robotisation and artificial intelligence. Specifically, these phenomena will foreseeably affect 
the  future  labour  market,  which  will  be  characterised  by  increased  demand  for  qualified 
workers  with  high  technical  skills,  at  the  expense  of  demand  for  lower  skilled  workers 
engaged in routine tasks.6 
Having  said  that,  Spain’s  starting  point  to  address  this  challenge  of  accelerated 
technological innovation is not the most favourable one. The low performance of Spanish 
students  in  standard  international  exams  indicates  that  the  quality  of  the  Spanish 
educational  system  leaves  room  for  improvement  in  comparison  with  other  developed 
countries. What is more, Spain’s educational system is characterised by high rates of early 
school  leaving:  18.3%  in  the  population  between  the  age  of  18  and  24,  compared  with 
10.6% in the European Union as a whole. 
These  shortfalls  are  also  apparent  in  the  adult  population  as  a  whole.  Thus,  in  the 
qualifications  obtained  in  the  Programme  for  the  International  Assessment  of  Adult 
Competences (PIAAC) for the working age population, relating to mathematical reasoning 
and reading comprehension, Spain was ranked last and second last, respectively, among 
the OECD countries.  
The  disadvantageous  levels  of  human  capital  compared  with  those  in  other  developed 
economies are apparent in both workers and employers. On Eurostat data, in Spain 40.5% 
of the self-employed, 35.1% of employers and 32.6% of employees have a low educational 
level, compared with much smaller percentages (24.8%, 20.1% and 19.8%, respectively) in 
the euro area as a whole. 
                                                                                              
6  See,  for  example,  D.  Acemoglu  and  P.  Restrepo  (2018),  “The  Race  between  Man  and  Machine:  Implications  of 
Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment”, American Economic Review, vol. 108, pp. 1488-1542. 
12/18 
 Spain also has a shortfall in terms of the proportion of the population with profiles related in 
some way to disciplines such as engineering or mathematics. For example, 9% of university 
graduates in Spain have qualifications in mathematics, science or IT, compared with 14% 
in Germany or 11% in the European Union as a whole.  
It  is  also  foreseeable  that  the  massive  eruption of new  technologies will  result in  greater 
importance being afforded to non-cognitive skills (such as a desire to innovate, self-control, 
ability  to  concentrate,  or  adaptability  to  a  changing  environment),7  in  which  Spain  also 
performs poorly in the international comparison. 
It therefore seems advisable to rethink the institutional design of the educational system, 
the content of the curriculum and the learning system itself. In this respect, it is crucial to 
treat this project of improving human capital as a collective task. The government will play 
a leadership role, evaluating and adjusting the educational system on an ongoing basis at 
all levels to attune it to the needs of the business world, but, at the same time, firms must 
become involved in the training of their employees, particularly young workers in their first 
job.  
Technological capital  
Technological capital  
 In the field of technological capital, there is a broad consensus on the positive effect which 
research and development and innovation (R&D&I) have on the productivity of firms.8 In this 
respect, the available indicators of the degree of intensity of these activities suggest that 
Spain ranks poorly in the international comparison. Specifically, according to Eurostat, the 
proportion of innovative firms is 33.6% in Spain, compared with 53.4%, 56.1% and 66.9% 
in France, Italy and Germany, respectively. 
                                                                                              
7 See G. Zamarro, C. Hitt and I. Méndez (2016), When Students Don't Care: Reexamining International Differences in 
Achievement and Non-Cognitive Skills, EDRE Working Paper No. 2016-18. 
8See,  for  example,  U.  Doraszelski  and  J.  Jaumandreu  (2013),  “R&D  and  productivity:  estimating  endogenous 
productivity”, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 80, pp. 1338–1383. 
 13/18 
Similarly, the investment in research and development activities in Spain is, in aggregate 
terms, still very low in both the public sector (0.54% of GDP in 2017) and the private sector 
(0.66%  of  GDP  in  2017),  which  makes  Spain’s  R&D  spending  26%  and  54%  lower, 
respectively, than the European average. It is therefore no surprise that the lack of innovation 
and the scant accumulation of technological capital of Spanish firms is a determining factor 
in explaining why Spanish firms are less productive than their European counterparts.  
This technological capital gap between Spain and its European partners is at least partly 
due to structural characteristics which limit firms’ innovative capacity, such as the lack of 
available human capital referred to above, or a productive structure skewed towards sectors 
with a low technological content.  
Another basic determinant requiring special attention and which poses major challenges in 
the current context of technological change, is the access to finance  – whether public or 
private – for business projects with a high innovative content. 
Financing of innovation  
In  general,  the  growth  of  firms  is  conditioned  by  the  availability  of  external  finance  to 
undertake new investment projects. But external finance also plays a particularly vital role 
in the success of the innovative projects of small new firms whose characteristics make it 
more difficult for them to obtain funds.9  
These greater  difficulties  have  their  origin in  information  asymmetries  between  firms  and 
financiers and in the comparatively higher inherent risk than that for established companies, 
all the more so when the returns will only be received in the long term. These characteristics 
contrast with the preferences of capital market financiers, who tend to seek more short-
term returns and have a certain aversion to risk.10  
Evidently  these  asymmetries  apply  to  any  investment  project.  But  they  are  particularly 
important in the case of innovative projects in Spain, where external finance comes mainly 
in the form of bank loans, due to the absence of sufficiently developed alternative capital 
markets, as evidenced by the fact that bond issues still represent barely 10% of the total 
finance received by Spanish non-financial corporations, compared with 40% in the USA. 
                                                                                                    
9  See  S.  Fazzari,  R.  Hubbard  and  B.  Petersen  (1988),  “Financing  Constraints  and  Corporate  Investment”,  Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1, pp. 141-206. 
10 See A. Goodare and I. Tonks (1995), “Finance and Technological Change”, in P. Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the 
Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 298-341. 
14/18 
Financing innovation 
  The most recent period has seen some growth of non-bank financing in Spain and a certain 
improvement  in  the  allocation  of  bank  financing  compared  with  the  period  immediately 
before  the  crisis,  during  which  the  firms  receiving  credit  were  characterised  by  their  low 
productivity and a high proportion of real estate assets on their balance sheets. This largely 
explains the low dynamism of aggregate productivity in that period.11 By contrast, in the 
recovery phase funds tended to go to firms with a comparatively more favourable economic 
and financial position and which were more productive.12  
In any event, this relative improvement in the allocation of bank credit cannot be allowed to 
hinder the development of specific financial products to facilitate the financing and growth 
of small and/or newly created innovative firms. This is particularly important in a country 
such as Spain where the business sector consists basically of small firms, since these firms 
generally  lack  collateral,  have  highly  uncertain  future  cash  flows  and  do  not  have  credit 
ratings allowing investors to get an idea of the risk associated with investing in them. 
Furthermore, the high uncertainty surrounding the return on investment in R&D&I and the 
long time horizon at which it materialises (above five years)13 are arguments for government 
involvement in their financing, particularly in the area of basic research. This is all the more 
so in view of the positive – and potentially disruptive – effects which certain investment in 
these areas may have on the population as a whole. It should be noted in this respect that 
the  seed  of  the  Internet  was  a  basic  research  project  for  military  use  undertaken  by  an 
agency of the US Department of Defence, an initiative which would have had little chance 
of obtaining finance from the private sector. Moreover, the range of possible government 
actions  go  beyond  providing  an  R&D&I  investment  budget.  For  example,  they  also 
encompass the introduction of changes to the researcher promotion and career system so 
as  to  stimulate  the  entry  and  development  of  promising  new  researchers,  or  the  overall 
                                                                                              
11  See  E.  Moral-Benito  (2018),  The  microeconomic  origins  of  the  Spanish  boom,  Occasional  Paper  1805,  Banco  de 
España. 
12  See  Chapter  2,  “Financing  and  investment decisions  of  Spanish non-financial corporations”,  Annual  Report  2016, 
Banco de España. 
13 I. Dierickx and K. Cool (1989), “Asset Stock Accumulation and Sustainability of Competitive Advantage”, Management 
Science, vol. 35, pp. 1504-1511. 
 15/18 
restructuring of government organisations engaging in innovation so as to exploit synergies 
between them. The government research assessment systems could also be redesigned to 
ensure that the allocation of funds to research centres reflects their academic excellence14 
and a public-private collaboration framework could be developed in which the private sector 
can efficiently channel government funds through the design of well-defined incentives. 
The demographic challenge: population ageing  
The  challenges  associated  with  slow  productivity  growth  and  with  the  transformations 
resulting from the technological progress I have just described above take on even greater 
importance  when  they  are  framed  in  the  context of  the  transition to  a  new  demographic 
paradigm  characterised  by  population  ageing  which,  although  present  in  many  Western 
economies, has a particularly strong impact on Spain.  
The ageing challenge 
 Indeed, the combination of a low birth rate, high longevity and the impending retirement of 
the generation known as the baby boomers makes Spain one of the countries where the 
dependency ratio, which measures the proportion of persons at least 65 years of age to 
those aged from 16 to 64, is increasing most sharply. Specifically, according to the latest 
projections by the Spanish National Statistics Institute, the dependency ratio will grow from 
29.9% in 2019 to 51.8% in 2050, i.e. it will practically double in three decades. This increase 
in the Spanish dependency ratio amply exceeds that projected for the European Union as a 
whole, where it will rise by a factor of 1.6 in the same period, according to Eurostat.  
This change in the age composition of the Spanish population will affect a very wide range 
of economic factors. The most obvious is perhaps the challenge it represents to Spain’s 
welfare state. The increasingly higher proportion of older people puts upward pressure on 
the expenditure of the pension, health and dependency system, which poses a challenge to 
its financial sustainability that must be faced soon.  
                                                                                              
14 See the 2014 report entitled ERAC Peer Review of the Spanish Research and Innovation System, commissioned by 
the European Commission. 
16/18 
 But  the  issues  associated  with  population  ageing  are  not  limited  just  to  the  public 
expenditure  of  the welfare  state.  Their  implications  encompass  many  more  facets  of  the 
economic arena and range from the potential growth of the economy to the management of 
economic policy.  
Firstly, I would like to point out the close connection between population ageing and the 
long-term growth of the economy. As we have seen, the latter is affected by changes in 
employment and in productivity, which in turn is inextricably linked to technical progress. 
Thus, it is important to extend people’s working life to stop the employment rate from falling 
and  thus  sustain Spain’s capacity for long-term growth. However, there  is evidence that 
older workers have fewer of the skills required to use new technologies because of their 
lesser human capital endowment, which moreover becomes depleted over time. Hence an 
older  population  may  also  pose  difficulties  for  productivity  growth  because  the  digital 
technologies  tend  to  complement  each  other  better  with  less  technologically  challenged 
workers, who are usually younger.15 
Moving on to the impact of ageing on the conduct of economic policy, it should be noted 
that, in the monetary policy arena, the central banks face a scenario which some have called 
“the  new  normal”,  characterised  by  low  interest  rates  and  balance  sheet  expansion. 
Although part of this situation is unquestionably a legacy of the financial crisis, there are 
other longer-term causes which prompt the persistence of a low interest rate environment. 
Key among these are demographic factors acting through the associated increase in the 
saving rate. This scenario reduces the ability of conventional monetary policy to react to 
future  crises  and  poses  the  advisability  of  a  wide-ranging  discussion  on  the  most 
appropriate strategy for the conduct of monetary policy in the future. 
Fiscal  policy,  or,  to  be  more  specific,  its  government  revenue  side,  is  also  affected  by 
population ageing. There is evidence that the composition of income or the consumption 
basket change over the life cycle of individuals, so a change in the composition of tax bases 
could give rise to substantial variations in tax revenue.   
Conclusion  
To sum up, in the last few quarters we have witnessed a deceleration of the global economy, 
particularly sharp in the euro area and affecting also the Spanish economy. As a result, the 
macroeconomic  projections  have  been  revised  downward  in  most  countries,  including 
Spain, and the diagnosis as to the balance of risks also remains on the downside, mainly as 
a result of the geopolitical uncertainty over developments in trade tensions and Brexit and, 
in the case of Spain, over the future course of economic policies.  
Against this background, the Spanish economy, despite the improvements achieved during 
the  recovery,  continues  to  face  significant  imbalances,  including  most  notably  the  high 
unemployment, government debt and external debt. In addition, Spain’s capacity for future 
growth is constrained by its very weak productivity dynamics and the foreseeable impact of 
population ageing.  
                                                                                              
15 See D. Acemoglu and D. Autor (2011), “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings”, 
Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, pp. 1043-1171. 
 17/18 
Given this setting, the government resulting from the coming elections must urgently take 
the  initiative  and  marshal  sufficient  support  to  push  through  reforms  to  resolve  the 
vulnerabilities still persisting in the Spanish economy and enhance its growth capacity. It is, 
therefore, time to put our headlights on high beam and forge a broad consensus to protect 
the well-being of the coming generations. 
Thank you.  
18/18 
