      PROGRESSING SAFELY IN A RISKIER WORLD 
ADDRESS BY DR MARIO VELLA 
GOVERNOR, CENTRAL BANK OF MALTA 
DELIVERED DURING THE IFS MALTA ANNUAL DINNER 
19 NOVEMBER 2019 
Dear  President  and  Members  of  the  Committee  of  the  Institute  of  Financial  Services  (IFS)  Malta, 
personally and on behalf of the Board of the Central Bank of Malta, I thank you for this opportunity 
to  address  this  distinguished  audience  and  through  them  the  financial  services  industry.  Dear 
Minister, distinguished guests, dear colleagues and friends. 
Last  year,  I  observed  that  the  external  environment  was  becoming  less  supportive  of  activity. 
Incoming  data  confirm  this  view.  Global  GDP  growth  has  continued  to  weaken.  According  to  the 
IMF’s  October 2019  World  Economic  Outlook,  global  growth  in 2019  is  projected  to  be  3.0%,  the 
lowest rate since 2009 and 0.5 percentage points less than its January 2019 projection. 
A number of factors are reflected in this state of affairs, a fluid state of affairs that is characterised 
by high volatility and uncertainty, a state of affairs that is anything but steady. Amongst these factors 
are simmering political tensions and flashpoints within and between states around the globe (some 
of which may eventually erupt as armed conflicts), uncertainty about future trade policies amongst 
which  are  (but certainly  not  the  only  ones  and  not the  ones  with the most  far  reaching  negative 
consequences)  those  related  to  Brexit,  and  the  impact  of  climate  change  and  related  policies 
including  and  especially  policies  that  deny  the  man-made  causes  of  climate  change.  The 
consequences of  these  factors on  investment and  trade  are  being  amplified  by  a  deterioration  in 
business confidence.  
Projections for 2020 also point to weak momentum, as most of the prevailing sources of uncertainty 
are expected to persist. While global GDP growth is expected to reach 3.4% next year according to 
the IMF, this is still below the 3.8% recorded in 2017 and the pick-up is largely driven by emerging 
and developing countries. By contrast, average GDP growth in advanced economies is expected at 
Page | 1 
1.7% this year and next, down from 2.3% in 2018. A lower rate is projected for the euro area, as 
growth in its larger economies with the exception of Spain is expected to stand far below 2.0%. 
Although  Malta  is  a  small  economy  with  a  relatively  high  exposure  to  the  international  business 
cycle,  it  has maintained  its  resilience.  In 2018,  GDP grew  by  6.8%,  the  second  highest  rate  in  the 
European  Union.  This  mainly  reflected  a  very  robust  expansion  in  domestic  demand.  Although 
smaller, the contribution of net exports was also positive, reflecting continued export growth. While 
GDP growth moderated in the first half of 2019, at 4.7% it remained comfortably above the euro 
area average of just above 1.0%. 
We expect the positive momentum in Malta to persist in both 2019 and 2020. Domestic demand is 
foreseen to remain the main driver of economic activity. Favourable labour market conditions, as 
reflected  in  a  further  decrease  in  unemployment  since  late 2018,  and  a  dynamic, albeit  gradually 
normalising  housing  market,  should  continue  to  support  household 
income  and  private 
consumption. Moreover, growth in government consumption will remain elevated, as Government 
is expected to use some of its fiscal space, while investment is expected to maintain a high share in 
GDP, reflecting the substantial upgrade to Malta’s infrastructure. 
Nevertheless, growth is set to moderate compared with 2018, reflecting two main factors. Firstly, 
given  the  less  favourable  external  environment,  we  foresee  lower  contributions  from  exports. 
Secondly, it is to be expected that an economy that has been growing very fast to gradually return to 
rates that are more in line with its long-term growth.  
The balance of risks is tilted to the downside. This mainly reflects the risk that economic conditions 
abroad  deteriorate  further,  in  which  case  the  recent  slowdown  in  some  of  our  closest  trading 
partners could develop into a more severe downturn, limiting the expansion in our exports. These 
risks are seen as more elevated than the upside risks associated with domestic factors. For example, 
the  labour  market’s  resilience  and  strong  liquidity  position  of  households  could  be  reflected  in 
higher  than  expected  private  consumption.  Government  expenditure  could  also  surprise  on  the 
upside. 
Indeed,  Malta  is  one  of  few  countries  in  the  euro  area  which  has  the  fiscal  space  necessary  to 
mitigate  the  effects  of  weaker  foreign  demand.  Ideally  Government  should  utilise  this  space  to 
enhance  the  economy’s  capital  stock  and  potential growth.  In  a  recently  published  study,  Central 
Bank  of  Malta  staff  analysed  in  detail  the  effects  of  increases  in  government  investment  on  the 
Maltese economy under different financing scenarios.  
Under  all  financing  scenarios  considered,  an  increase  in  government  investment  is  expansionary 
throughout. In the short run, the expansionary effects are limited to demand-side effects. However, 
as  government capital  stock  accumulates,  significant  supply-side  effects  begin to kick  in.  A  higher 
Page | 2 
government capital stock helps reduce marginal costs, boosting factor productivity and helping to 
crowd-in other private factors of production. The reduction in economy-wide marginal costs in turn 
should lower overall prices, boosting competitiveness and exports. 
In line with other analyses, the study also shows that even if not debt-neutral, using fiscal space to 
finance  government  investment  has  the  strongest  effects  on  real  activity  in  the  short-to-medium 
run.  A  debt-financed  1  percentage  point  increase  in  the  government  investment-to-GDP  ratio 
increases  real GDP  by  1.5 percentage  points  from  its  baseline  level  by  the  fifth  year.    Even  if  the 
investment ratio returns to its pre-shock level, GDP would still exceed its baseline level by around 1% 
by  the  tenth  year.  Thus,  an  expansion  in  public  GFCF  expenditure  can  help  mitigate  the  negative 
impact that weaker external demand might have on Malta’s economy. 
Further  investment  in  human  capital  is  also  necessary.  Malta’s  positive  economic  record  is  also 
partly reflected by a growing influx of foreign workers. These now account for around a fourth of all 
employment. Although foreigners, including non-EU nationals, are present in all sectors and at all 
levels, their employment has increased mainly in professional and administrative support services, 
and  not  as  is  sometimes  claimed,  in  sectors  characterised  by  lower  skill  levels.  The  increased 
employment of foreign nationals across occupations has enabled organisations to grow and venture 
in  new  areas.    A  sudden  reversal  of  this  pattern  could  stall  activity  in  several  sectors.  Efforts  to 
upgrade the country’s infrastructure should therefore be complemented by measures that prevent a 
disorderly depletion of foreign human resources and enhance the skills of Maltese nationals.  
 Favourable  economic  developments,  although  easing  somewhat,  are  expected  to  continue  to 
buttress financial stability. Lending volumes remain supportive of interest income but pressures on 
margins persist due to the low interest rate environment. Notwithstanding, profitability remains a 
challenge for traditional banking models such as those of our banks. In fact, though still comparing 
favourably  with  their  European  peers,  the  profitability  of  domestic  banks  has  been  slimming.  In 
addition to the limitations on their ability to generate more interest income, banks have to contend 
with ‘no-fee’ alternative products being developed by fintech players which operate with a lower 
cost base and hail from a less intrusive regulatory environment.  
Concurrently,  banks  are  facing  a  more  rigorous  and  intrusive  supervisory  approach  coupled  with 
more rigorous standards of Anti Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism. This 
is absolutely necessary and has our full and active support. Of course, this changing environment 
requires significant investment in technologies and human resources with added pressure on banks’ 
bottom line. Also it may potentially encourage more risk aversion, despite the ultra-accommodative 
monetary policy stance. It is critical, therefore, that regulators ensure a level playing field to avoid 
regulatory arbitrage and push banks to retrench, thus creating market gaps that can be exploited by 
Page | 3 
less regulated, or more importantly, by totally unregulated players. Today’s increasingly digitalised 
world enables these gaps to be filled with relative ease. 
Institutions must embrace innovation  while exploiting more effectively and smartly the prevailing 
benign economic conditions, to discover new investment opportunities and niche markets. It is also 
an  opportune  time  for  banks  to  keep  sight  of  their  longer-term  sustainability  and  maintain  their 
efforts to repair their balance sheet, reduce concentrations and improve asset quality. This is what 
ultimately strengthens prospective future cash flows and what supports profitability. Banks are also, 
of course, entitled to set their own risk appetite. In well-functioning markets, business opportunities 
shunned by one bank will be taken up by a competitor, if the latter feels more confident that it can 
manage the underlying risks more effectively.  
There  will  always  be  a  residual  sort  of  non-bankable  business,  and  we  must  accept  this  fact.  If, 
however, a business in search of a bank is especially risky but legitimate, there is no reason why we 
should  not  welcome  specialist  legitimate  players  capable  of  withstanding  the  most  rigorous 
standards of supervisor scrutiny. 
To  blame  all  on-boarding  failures  only  on  an  ultra-conservative  banking  sector  is  simplistic  and 
counterproductive.  Reality  is  more  complex  than  that  and  the  causes  might  vary  from  the  risk 
appetite of the European supervisory landscape that follows a common rule book, to problems of 
asymmetric information, complex corporate structures or business models.  
Unless  we  get  down  to  this  level,  we  can  never  really  pass  judgement  on  the  actions  of  banks 
regarding  who  they  on-board.  Banking  is  all  about  risk  management  and  banks  with  a  zero  risk 
appetite will eventually starve and be forced out of the market. Such risk aversion should not come 
at the expense of the right of all citizens to access basic banking services, as this will fuel financial 
and  social  exclusion.  Banks  should  therefore  be  encouraged  to  use  their  judgment  and  sense  of 
proportion when exercising due diligence, and to consider their responsibility given their pivotal role 
in the financing of the economy.  
Although certain AML/CFT vulnerabilities had already been identified at a national level and actions 
were  already  underway  and  although  the  Authorities  pledged  their  commitment  to  fully  address 
these  issues,  the  Moneyval  report  has  set  targets that  we must  reach.  Financial  systems  trade  in 
confidence and credibility and unless we address these shortcomings, we will be unable to develop 
our sector further. 
The most challenging recommendations found in the report are those requiring a change in mind-
set, such as the identified lack of awareness of AML risks in non-bank financial institutions and the 
wider  professional  community,  resulting  in  a  very  low  number  of  suspicious  transactions  reports 
Page | 4 
being filed by them. We all have a collective responsibility and nobody can procrastinate in getting 
our house in order.  
On a related note, our size will always present diseconomies of scale for large correspondent banks 
when evaluating their risk-adjusted returns from Maltese business. The risk aversion of these banks 
is  impacting  more  heavily  on  the  smaller  jurisdictions.  It  is  essentially  a  market  failure,  a  true 
manifestation  of  asymmetric  information.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  we  should  be 
complacent and fatalist. While banks and authorities continue to search for technical solutions, we 
are  all  duty-bound  to  endeavour  to  convince  these  banks  that  they  are  dealing  with  a  reputable 
jurisdiction and that our market players are fit-for-purpose in an age of increasing global financial 
transparency. These correspondent banks have neither the time nor the interest to understand risky 
business  models  or  the  overly-complex  structures  of  your  clients.  As  practitioners,  you  are  the 
system’s  first  line  of  defence.  The  more  layers  of  controls  in  the  system,  including  a  thorough 
understanding of clients and business models, and the less complex their corporate structure, the 
easier it is for banks to service them.  
There is indeed purpose in our cause to safeguard what we have achieved so far. This sector, which 
directly contributes to a significant 5.3% of gross value added and provides for the livelihood of over 
11,600 employees, is in good health. This is attested by the positive assessments from major rating 
agencies and the IMF as recently as last year. These conclusions are also corroborated by the results 
of the CBM’s stress tests which regularly feature in our publications. So let us all rise to the occasion, 
and work towards preserving the sustainability and reputation of our sector.  
 Inequalities  are  of two  broad  types:  legacy  inequalities  and  inequalities  that are  consequences of 
present social and economic developments. Gender inequalities have roots deep in the past. Today’s 
faster economic growth, however, does bring with its own risk of social shocks. The risk of higher 
inequality is a case in point. As already announced in my previous IFS address, the Bank has begun to 
develop a social research capability that focuses on studying inequalities of both types. This is a new 
experience for the Central Bank of Malta and we are striving, within the limits of available resources, 
to produce high quality empirically based results by the first quarter of next year.  
We  are,  however,  striving  to  go  beyond  producing  knowledge.  In  our  efforts  to  promote 
inclusiveness and diversity in the Bank itself, we have made modest but significant steps forward. 
Whereas in 2008 there were no women in the Central Bank’s Board of Directors, in 2013 there were 
two women Board directors, and in the current year, 2019, we continue to have two women Board 
Directors, that is half of the non-executive directors. In 2008, there were no female members of staff 
among the 31 employees in the top band, comprising the grades of senior executive, head and chief 
Page | 5 
officers. In 2013, there were 6 out of 38. Presently, in November 2019, there are 12 out of 45. Small 
steps forward indeed but not insignificant: a clear sign of progress is shown by the fact that if we 
take the key role of heads, whereas there was only one female head in 2014, there are now 6. The 
gender distribution of staff below the senior executive grade is predictably more equitable, with 56.7 
per  cent  of  all  staff  in  the  grades  concerned  being  women,  compared  to  47.3  per  cent  in  2008. 
Conversely at the very top level, that of the Deputy Governors and the Governor, we have to date no 
woman. That at the very top of the European Central Bank, in the Governing Council, the situation is 
even less balanced than ours, is certainly no consolation for us. However, that the new President is a 
woman, Christine Lagarde, is hugely significant. 
 As hinted during the launch of our Annual Report last May, the Bank is stepping up its involvement in 
sustainable  finance.  In  July,  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  joined  the  Network  of  Central  Banks  and 
Supervisors  for  Greening  the  Financial  System,  a  collaborative  structure  that  aims  to  green  the 
financial  system  and  strengthen  the  efforts  of  the  financial  sector  in  achieving  the  Paris  climate 
agreement  goals.  This  includes  mobilising  capital  for  green  and  low-carbon  investments.  Staff 
members  have  joined  work  streams  to  further  research  in  this  area  and  adopt  a  number  of 
proposals. Furthermore, the Central Bank of Malta is also represented in the Sustainable Advisory 
Committee  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  is  working  in  aligning  our  international 
portfolio towards holding more green bonds. 
Page | 6 
