Mahesh Kumar Jain: Rural and agriculture finance - critical input to
achieve inclusive and sustainable development
Speech by Mr Mahesh Kumar Jain, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 6th
World  Congress  on  "Rural  and  agricultural  finance",  jointly  hosted  by  Asia-Pacific  Rural  and
Agricultural Credit Association (APRACA), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) and Ministry of Agriculture Farmers Welfare and Cooperation, Government of India,
New Delhi, 13 November 2019.
 1.  Mr  Senarath  Bandara,  Chairman,  APRACA  (Asia  Pacific  Rural  and  Agricultural  Credit
Association),  Dr  Harsh  Kumar  Bhanwala,  Chairman  National  Bank  for Agriculture  and  Rural
Development  (NABARD)  and  Vice-Chairman,  APRACA,  Dr  Prasun  Kumar  Das,  Secretary
General, APRACA, all other dignitaries present here, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon!
2.  At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  thank  APRACA  and  NABARD  for  inviting  me  to  give  the
valedictory address to the participants visiting from different countries here at the 6th  World
Congress. I would like to congratulate the organisers for having chosen the theme, i.e., ‘Rural
and Agriculture Finance: Critical Input to Achieve Inclusive and Sustainable Development’ with
the aim of getting insights into the global best approaches to rural and agricultural finance. The
topics  of  the  business  sessions  are  befitting  the  overarching  objective  of  this  forum  for
deliberating on policy priorities in developing sustainable and viable financial services to support
and  help  in  achieving  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  of  the  United  Nations.
Needless  to  say,  all  the  topics  resonate  strongly  with  the  development  agenda  of  the
Government and financial inclusion strategy of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). We have been
pursuing the goal of financial inclusion for a long time to ensure that access to formal finance
becomes a greater enabler to achieve economic wellbeing of all sections of the economy. It is
indeed a great pleasure for me to share my views on this subject.
3. The RBI’s financial inclusion efforts can be traced back to the 1960s when the focus was on
channelizing  of  credit  to  the  neglected  sectors  of  the  economy  and  weaker  sections  of  the
population. While the Government of India nationalized banking operations of few commercial
banks  in  two  tranches  in  1969  and  1980;  RBI  took  initiatives  like  laying  down  priority  sector
lending  requirements  for  banks,  formulation  of  the  Lead  Bank  Scheme,  establishment  of
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs-1975-76), Service Area Approach (1989), Self-Help Group-Bank
Linkage  Programme  (1989-90),  setting  up  of  Local  Area  Banks  and  of  late,  Small  Finance
Banks  and  Payment  Banks,  all  aimed  at  making  available  banking  services  to  all. All  these
developments brought in a sea change in the flow of institutional credit to the rural population,
including population dependant on agriculture.  Gradually the country moved towards a multi-
agency approach to meet the credit needs of the rural areas including farmers.
4. I am sure all distinguished panellists, international and local participants and the organisers
have had fruitful discussions and deliberations during the last two days and have been able to
draw upon actionable points for formulating strategies and the way forward.
Sustainable Development Goals
5. The sustainable development framework, adopted by the global community consists of 17
SDGs and 169 targets, to be achieved by 2030. While Goal 2 of the SDGs includes targets on
agricultural productivity and sustainability, yet agriculture is also critical to achieve many other
SDGs  relating  to  hunger,  malnutrition,  climate  change,  gender  equality,  natural  resources
protection  and  jobs.  Hence,  to  attain  the  SDGs  of  ending  poverty  and  bringing  in  inclusive
growth,  policy  measures  related  to  agriculture  need  to  be  closely  integrated  with  the  SDG
targets.  Further,  the  policies  should  focus  on  a  combination  of  resource  efficient  methods,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
dynamic  cropping  patterns,  farming  that  is  adaptive  and  responsive  to  climate  change  and
intensive use of Information & Communication Technology (ICT). Against this backdrop, let me
dwell upon the  Indian agriculture sector and the existing institutional framework for providing
credit to the farming community.
A brief on Indian Agriculture
6
5
4
3
2
1
6.  Agriculture  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  Indian  economy  and  provides  employment  and
livelihood to a large section of the Indian population. Approximately 44% (as per ILO estimate of
2018)  of  the  working  population  is  employed  in  agriculture  and  allied  sector .  However,  the
contribution  of  agriculture  to  GDP  has  been  declining  from  52%  in  the  1950s  to  30%  in  the
1990s and further below 20% from 2010 onwards as per data from Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation (MoSPI) . In 2018-19, the share of Agriculture & Allied Gross Value
Added (GVA) in overall GVA was 16% (Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MoA&FW)
Annual Report 2018-19). Economic Survey 2018-19 suggests that the growth rate in GVA (at
2011-12 prices) over past five-six years has been higher for livestocks, fishing and aquaculture
as  compared  to  crops . Allied  activities  contribute  approximately  40%  to  agricultural  output,
whereas  only  6-7%  of  agricultural  credit  flows  towards  allied  activities .  One  important
characteristic of  Indian agriculture is that it is mainly small holders’ farming with an average
landholding size of 1.08 hectares . The small and marginal farmers account for 86 per cent of
all holdings and 47 percent of the operated area . They contribute more than 50% of the total
agricultural and allied output. In smallholder farming, it remains a challenge to raise agricultural
productivity and farmers’ incomes. It requires appropriate solutions starting with easy access to
modern inputs and then selling the produce in most remunerative markets. Institutional credit at
reasonable cost all along the value chain is one such catalytic instrument that can facilitate the
process by converting many subsistence farmers into vibrant commercial farmers. They can
then diversify their agricultural operations in growing high value crops like fruits and vegetables,
and  engage  in  allied  activities,  like  dairy,  poultry,  fishery,  honey,  beekeeping,  etc. Allied  has
huge potential, which can be capitalised by improving credit flow towards it and by encouraging
farmers to move towards allied activities.
7. From time to time, Government has given various policy thrusts, as a result of which, the
Indian agriculture sector has not only become self-sufficient but has emerged as a net exporter
of several commodities like rice, marine products, cotton, etc. Some of the important initiatives
taken by the Government include the implementation of Interest Subvention Scheme (ISS) for
providing  credit  for  crop  production  at  reduced  interest  rate,  Soil  Health  Cards  (SHC)  for
improving  agricultural  productivity,  Pradhan  Mantri  Krishi  Sinchai  Yojana  (PMKSY)  to  ensure
irrigation  facilities,  Pradhan  Mantri  Fasal  Bima  Yojana  (PMFBY),  for  providing  a  safety  net
against natural calamities and National Agriculture Market Scheme (e-NAM) for providing better
price discovery through transparent auction process. There is also a renewed focus on allied
activities to aid income of farmers.
8. Despite these initiatives, there are several challenges confronting Indian agriculture such as
diminishing  and  degrading  natural  resources,  rapidly  growing  demand  for  food  (not  just  for
quantity  but  also  for  quality),  stagnating  farm  incomes,  fragmented  land  holdings  and
unprecedented  climate  change,  which  need  to  be  tackled  for  long  term  sustainability  and
viability of Indian agriculture.
What has been the role of institutional credit in Indian agriculture?
9. Banks in India have made commendable progress in terms of scale and outreach of formal
credit  to  the  agriculture  sector.  From  ₹31.71  billion  in  1981,  the  outstanding  advances  to
agriculture and allied activities have grown significantly to ₹13694.56 billion in 2017-18 (16 per
cent of total bank credit). The long-term trend in institutional agricultural credit revealed that over
time,  significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in  terms  of  scale.  Agricultural  credit  as  a
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
percentage to Agriculture GDP increased from 10% in 1970s to 52% by 2018, which shows
that  banks  have  made  significant  progress  in  lending  to  agriculture.  In  India,  scheduled
commercial banks (79%) are the major players in supplying credit to agriculture sector followed
by rural cooperative banks (15%), regional rural banks (5%) and micro finance institutions (1%).
Small finance banks set up with the objective of deepening financial inclusion have started their
operations  recently.  They  would  be  catering  to  small  and  marginal  farmers,  low  income
households, small businesses and other unorganised entities.
Challenges in agriculture financing
10. Despite the impressive growth in formal agricultural credit, there are still several challenges
that need to be tackled. Data on the average loan taken by agricultural households, as per the
NABARD’s  Financial  Inclusion  Survey  Report  2016-17,  indicated  that  72%  of  the  credit
requirement was met from institutional sources and 28% from non-institutional sources. The
report further states that out of the total agricultural households, approximately 30 percent still
avail credit from non-institutional sources. The problem of financial exclusion gets aggravated
due to lack of legal framework for landless cultivators as the absence of documentary evidence
becomes  a  major  hindrance  for  extending  credit  to  this  segment  of  the  farming  community,
who take up cultivation work on oral lease. Further, the analysis of state wise flow of institutional
agricultural credit has revealed uneven distribution of credit amongst states compared to their
corresponding share in overall output. To a certain extent, such regional disparity is on account
of  variation  in  credit  absorption  capacity  of  these  regions.  Funds  like  Rural  Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) have been created out of priority sector lending shortfall of banks
and established with NABARD with the underlying philosophy of lending to state governments to
facilitate creation of enabling rural infrastructure to deepen the credit absorption capacity in rural
areas.
11. An analysis of sanctions from RIDF indicates that states with higher credit flow made higher
demands  for  resources  under  the  fund.  On  the  contrary,  states  with  lower  credit  flow  were
lagging  in  borrowing  funds  from  RIDF.  Thus,  the  least  developed  states  which  are  already
credit starved are getting lower share of funds from the RIDF. This highlights the need to break
this vicious cycle and think of certain measures by which funds can be earmarked to the most
backward/ credit starved regions to ensure speedier development of the most backward areas
in  the  country.  We  may  also  have  to  think  of  ways  to  incentivise  banks  to  lend  in  these
backward areas so that both demand and supply side issues are addressed. These issues and
challenges impinge on the efficiency, inclusiveness and sustainability of the agricultural credit
system, which is a matter of concern.
Internal Working Group set up by RBI
12.  Considering this,  RBI had set up an  Internal  Working  Group (IWG) in  February 2019,  to
understand  the  issues  and  recommend  workable  solutions  to  address  the  constraints.  The
IWG  based  on  extensive  data  analysis  and  research  held  extensive  consultations  and
deliberations with experts and practitioners in the field and submitted its report in September
2019.
13. The recommendations of the IWG include building up of an enabling ecosystem through
digitisation  of  land  records,  reforming  of  land  leasing  framework,  creation  of  a  national  level
agency to build consensus among the state governments and central government with regard
to agriculture-related policy reforms and innovative digital solutions to bridge the information gap
between  the  banks  and  farmers  for  expediting  the  credit  delivery  process.  Other  policy
interventions recommended are- suitable modifications in the Priority Sector Lending guidelines
applicable  to  all  banks  and  strengthening  of  credit  delivery  channels  through  Kisan  Credit
Cards,  Self-Help  Group  Bank  Linkage  Programme,  Farmer  Producers  Organisations,  in  a
manner to make them more effective and efficient in ensuring credit flow to the credit starved
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
regions of the country, as also to the excluded segments of the farming community. RBI would
be initiating necessary steps for implementing these recommendations as these would go a
long way in ensuring the long-term sustainability and viability of the Indian agriculture sector.
Financial Inclusion
14.  Financial  Inclusion  (FI)  is  a  policy  thrust  area  for  RBI  and  as  a  result  of  the  various
initiatives, tremendous progress has been made in the domain of financial inclusion since the
country set out in mission mode about 10 years ago. Further, with the launch of Pradhan Mantri
Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), almost every household has been brought under the fold of formal
financial  system.  Both  in  terms  of  deposit  accounts  and  credit  products  there  has  been  a
steady  improvement  over  the  years.  RBI  has  initiated  setting  up  a  National  Strategy  for
Financial  Inclusion  with  the  objective  of  making  financial  products  and  services  available,
accessible, and affordable to all citizens in a safe and transparent manner to support inclusive
and resilient multi-stakeholder led growth. The strategic pillars of the financial inclusion strategy
would  include  universal  access  to  financial  services,  providing  basic  bouquet  of  financial
services, access to livelihood and skill development, financial literacy and education, customer
protection and grievance redressal. The FI strategy aims for sustainable financial inclusion by
leveraging technology and adopting a multi-stakeholder approach.
15. The key highlights of the FI strategy is enhancing digital infrastructure in the country through
better  networking  of  bank  branches,  Business  Correspondent  agents,  Micro  ATMs,  PoS
terminals and Internet connectivity facilitating a move towards digital onboarding of customers.
This would encourage adoption and acceptance of digital payments and promote efficiency and
transparency  through  digital  transactions.  The  strategy  adopted  has  a  customer  centric
approach, accompanied by appropriate efforts towards financial literacy and awareness drive.
Finally, for building of trust and confidence of the new entrants to the formal financial system
the strategy focusses on customer grievance and protection framework. The implementation of
the national level financial inclusion strategy would be successful by effective coordination of all
the  stakeholders  and  encouraging  decentralized  approach  by  creating  a  forum  to  actively
involve Gram Panchayats/Civil Society/NGOs to accelerate financial Inclusion. We have come
a long way in delivering financial services to hitherto excluded sections and segments of our
vast country. Going forward, the FI strategy would focus on deepening the reach, usage and
sustainability of financial inclusion.
Technology - A key driver for sustainable agriculture
16. Technology has powered Indian agriculture time and again by helping overcome productivity
stagnation, strengthening market linkages, and enhancing farm management. Globally, it has
been established that technology adoption modernizes farmers’ production practices and leads
to uniform annual returns for farmers, reduced risk of crop failure, and increased yields. Hence,
at the macro level, the agricultural development policies should focus on leveraging technology
with the goals of (i) achieving high growth by raising productivity (ii) inclusiveness by improving
coverage  of  lagging  regions,  small  and  marginal  farmers,  landless/tenant/oral  lessee  and
women farmers, and (iii) sustainability of agriculture.
17. I feel that new age technological solutions in the form of product, service or application by
agri-start-ups can build up a smart agriculture value chain that will enhance the sustainability of
agriculture. Agri-start-ups may focus on some key areas such as supply chain, infrastructure
development, finance related solutions, farm data analytics  and  information  platforms.  In  my
opinion,  agri-start-ups  can  succeed  and  can  be  scaled  up  only  in  a  conducive  ecosystem,
which is possible if agri-business industry comes forward and deepens its engagement with
agri-start-ups.
Conclusion
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
18. I would like to summarise that in the past, Indian agriculture faced a formidable challenge to
grow more food. Today, we are a food surplus country and a net exporter of many agriculture
and allied products. This requires the government policies related to agriculture to be shifted
from that of managing food scarcity to managing food surplus. Today, agriculture in India faces
an  even  more  demanding  challenge:  to  grow  agri-produce  sustainably,  inclusively  and
responsibly.  This  can  be  achieved  when  all  the  stakeholders  align  their  policies  and  actions
towards the SDGs. As far as financing of agriculture is concerned, going forward, banks will
have to integrate ‘sustainability’ into their business strategy and decision-making processes in
order to support environmentally responsible and sustainable projects in the agriculture sector.
For  this,  banks  will  have  to  undertake  innovative  agricultural  financing  models  so  that
environment friendly and sustainable projects can be supported. With this, I conclude and wish
you all the best.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS
2 Various reports of MoSPI
3 Economic Survey 2018–19, Volume II, Chapter 7 ‘Agriculture and Food Management’
4 RBI Report of the Internal Working Group to Review Agricultural Credit, 2019
5 Agriculture Census 2015–16
6 Agriculture Census 2015–16
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
