Dimitar  Radev:  Spillovers 
decisions are fast and strong
Statement by Mr Dimitar Radev, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, for the IFLR Yearbook:
Global Banking & Financial Policy Review 2019/2020, published on 24 September 2019.
the  ECB’s  monetary  policy
from 
 There is much discussion these days about the course of monetary policy in the euro area. What
global  headlines  rarely  catch,  however,  is  how  such  policy  affects  the  European  economies
outside the euro area.
Bulgaria is an example where, due to the high openness of our economy and the strong financial
links with the euro area, spillovers from the ECB’s monetary policy decisions are fast and strong.
Around 50% of Bulgaria’s exports go to the euro area. Investors from the euro area account for
67% of our FDI stock. Our banking system is dominated by the presence of euro area owned
banks, which hold around 55% of the sector’s assets. The monetary policy regime in Bulgaria (a
currency board with the national currency fixed to the euro) is another factor enhancing the direct
transmission of ECB’s monetary policy. Therefore, even though Bulgaria is not a member of the
euro area yet, it is important to consider how our economy is affected by the ECB’s continued
accommodative stance.
Financial stability and its implications are issues to be potentially concerned about. The ECB’s
monetary policy in recent years has succeeded in sustaining the economic recovery in the EU
following the great financial crisis.  In the  EU countries that are not using the euro, the effects
from  monetary  conditions  in  the  euro  area  led  to  improving  macroeconomic  environment,
loosening financing conditions, and high bank liquidity. That stimulated lending and, in turn, the
increase  in  residential  property  prices.  However,  these  developments  also  increased  cyclical
risks.
The  Bulgarian  National  Bank  conducted  research  into  Bulgaria’s  financial  cycle.  Our  findings
showed  that  we  are  currently  in  an  upward  phase  of  cyclical  risk  accumulation.  Hence,  we
activated and then raised the rate of the countercyclical capital buffer.
We  have  so  far  taken  two  decisions.  In  2018,  we  set  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  rate
applicable to credit risk exposures in Bulgaria at 0.5%, with effect from October 1 2019. In early
2019 we raised the rate to 1.0%, with effect from April 1 2020. The rate is applied to the overall
credit stock of banks and not to the volume of newly issued loans. We announced that we could
increase the rate to a higher level earlier if credit growth significantly accelerates.
Our decisions were taken despite the fact that the standard metric of how the credit-to-GDP ratio
deviates from its long-term trend remained deep in negative territory.
Furthermore, we strengthened the macroprudential powers of the Bulgarian National Bank. The
key  element  here  was  the  introduction  into  Bulgarian  law  of  a  framework  of  borrower-based
measures – requirements such as loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) – in addition to
the existing capital-based measures.
As monetary easing in the euro area is likely to stay for quite some time, policymaking in the non-
euro area countries affected by the ECB’s monetary policy needs to remain attentive. From a
regulatory and a supervisory perspective, both positive and negative externalities from the euro
area to our economies will need to be properly managed.
The original text is published in English and can be read here.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
