 October  10,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Development of Asia's Capital Markets:   
Roles and Challenges 
Keynote Speech at the ASIFMA Annual Conference 2019                 
 Masayoshi Amamiya 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction 
Good morning everyone.  It is my  great pleasure to be here at the  Asia Securities Industry 
and  Financial  Markets  Association  (ASIFMA)  annual  conference  2019.  I  am  honored  to 
address  this  distinguished  audience  comprised  of  representatives  from  the  securities  and 
asset  management  industries,  institutional  investors,  policy  makers,  and  regulators  in  Asia 
and other important regions. 
 Asia's capital markets have experienced remarkable growth since the Asian financial crisis 
in the late 1990s. Asia's share of global stock market capitalization1  soared from 1 percent 
in  2000  to  15  percent  in  2017.  Notably,  the  amount  outstanding  in  local  currency  bond 
markets  in  Asia  as  a  share  of  GDP2  in  2018  increased  to  more  than  double  that  in  2000 
(Chart 1). Obviously, the rapid expansion of Asian economies has driven the growth of the 
capital markets in the region. At the same time, the collective efforts of market participants, 
policy  makers,  and  regulators  both  at  national  and  regional  levels  have  contributed  to 
market liberalization and enhancement of market infrastructures in Asia. 
 Typical  examples  of  such  regional  cooperation  include  the  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative 
(ABMI), launched by the ASEAN+3, as well as the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) initiative3  of 
the Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), which is a group of 
11  central  banks  and  monetary  authorities  in  the  region.  Financial  industry  associations, 
such as the ASIFMA, have also played a vital role by facilitating dialogue between market 
participants,  promoting  regional  coordination,  and  providing  necessary  recommendations 
                                                   
1  Based on figures for "East Asia & Pacific" (a country and region grouping employed in the World 
Bank's  World  Development  Indicators)  excluding  high-income  countries  and  regions  (Australia, 
Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand, and Singapore). 
2  Based on the aggregated amount outstanding in local currency bond markets in China, Hong Kong, 
India, South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
3  The  Asian  Bond  Fund  (ABF),  established  in  2003,  is  an  index  bond  fund  with  a  two-phase 
framework,  namely,  "ABF1,"  which  invested  in  U.S.  dollar  bonds,  and  "ABF2,"  which  invests  in 
local  currency  bonds  and  is  open  to  private  sector  investors.  In  2016,  because  the  EMEAP 
determined that ABF1 had achieved its original purpose, its proceeds were reinvested in ABF2. In 
July  2018,  some  selected  bonds  held  within ABF2  were  made  available  for  lending to  support  the 
development of local currency securities lending markets and to enhance the functioning of regional 
money markets. 
 1 
from a market perspective. Activities by  those market participants and relevant authorities 
have  been  indispensable  for  the  development  of  Asia's  capital  markets.  I  would  like  to 
recognize and praise all of those who have committed to these efforts. 
 Looking  to  the  future,  Asia  needs  to  further  accelerate  and  deepen  the  development  of  its 
financial  markets  more  than  ever  before. This  is  because the existence  of  more  developed 
capital markets both domestically and regionally will play a much more crucial role for the 
long-term stable economic growth of the region. 
 Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  economic  implications  of  the  conference  theme, 
"developing Asia's capital markets," from several perspectives. Then, I will briefly touch on 
interest rate benchmark reform, as a specific example of the challenges we are facing as we 
endeavor to further develop market infrastructures. 
 Economic Significance of Further Developments in Asia's Capital Markets 
 Financing Economic Growth through the Growing Middle-Income Class 
Let me begin with the importance of relying on the growing middle-income class to finance 
economic  growth.  The  middle-income  class  in  Asia  has  been  growing  to  a  remarkable 
extent. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) forecasts4 
that the middle-income population in Asia will constitute 66 percent of the world's share in 
2030, more than doubling that in 2009 (Chart 2). 
 The rise of Asia's middle-income class will be accompanied by growth and diversification 
of the financial needs of that class. Both domestic and regional markets in Asia must satisfy 
those evolving demands by providing various financial services, including investment trusts, 
pension funds, and insurance. 
 By doing so, Asia will receive benefits such as inflows of money from the middle-income 
class  into  infrastructure  projects,  which  require  a  significant  amount  of  funding.  In  other 
                                                   
4  Kharas, H. (2010),  "The Emerging Middle Class in Developing Countries,"  OECD Development 
Centre Working Paper, No. 285. 
 2 
words, meeting the financial demands of the growing middle-income class will contribute to 
utilization of Asian savings for Asian investments.   
 Strengthening Financial Stability with More Liquid Domestic Capital Markets 
Now, I would like to proceed to a perspective of financial stability. Since the Asian financial 
crisis, many countries in the region have  made wide-ranging efforts, including a reduction 
in  the  non-performing  loans  held  by  banks,  in  order  to  enhance  their  resilience  against 
capital flow dynamics.   
 However,  the  presence  of  domestic  bond  markets  in  the  Asian  financial  system  is  still 
limited,  compared  with  that  of  banking  sectors.  In  order  to  further  strengthen  financial 
stability  in  Asia,  it  is  important  to  diversify  funding  sources  for  firms  by  developing 
domestic bond markets.5  Recent empirical studies6  point out that domestic bond markets in 
East  Asia  provided  an  alternative  source  of  funding  for  firms  in  the  region  when  the 
liquidity of international debt markets vanished during the global financial crisis from 2008 
to  2009.  East  Asia  saw  greater  domestic  bond  issuance  during  the  crisis,  in  contrast  with 
lower  international  bond  issuance  and  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of  syndicated  loan 
origination  (Chart  3).  This  result  tells  us  how  important  it  is  to  develop  domestic  bond 
markets to make the Asian financial system more robust. 
 Enhancing the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy 
Lastly,  I  will  touch  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  For  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy, central banks buy and sell financial instruments from capital markets,  and they also 
receive  financial  instruments  as  collateral  for  the  provision  of  liquidity.  So,  the  degree  of 
market functioning and liquidity concerning those financial instruments is a critical element 
that impacts the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
                                                    
5  For  example,  see  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2016),  "A  Spare  Tire  for  Capital  Markets: 
Fostering Corporate Bond Markets in Asia," BIS papers, No. 85, which focuses on the importance of 
domestic bond markets among capital markets in times of crisis. 
6  Abraham, F., J. J. Cortina, and S. L. Schmukler (2019), "The Rise of Domestic Capital Markets for 
Corporate Financing: Lessons from East Asia," World Bank Group Policy Research Working Paper, 
No. 8844. 
 3 
In  this  regard,  repos  are  financial  instruments  that  are  frequently  used  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  because  repos  carry  a  low  credit  risk  and  they  are  suitable  for  inventory 
and liquidity management by market makers. In Asia, market participants have preferred to 
use  FX  swaps  and  uncollateralized  funding  because  of  their  accessibility  and  operational 
convenience, and the role of repo markets has been relatively limited overall. However, the 
situation is now changing. The EMEAP market survey7  suggests ongoing efforts to enhance 
the functioning and liquidity of money markets such as repos. These efforts are being driven 
by various initiatives, such as the promotion of non-bank participation and the enhancement 
of  industry  standards.  Accelerating  these  efforts  would  lead  to  greater  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy in Asia. 
 Interest Rate Benchmark Reform 
Before closing, I will comment on interest rate benchmark reform. It would be beneficial to 
share  some  key  points  of  interest  related  to  this  issue,  as  there  are  active  discussions  in 
various markets throughout the world. 
 In  the  wake  of  the  LIBOR  manipulation  scandal,  more  reliable  and  robust  interest  rate 
benchmarks  have  been  pursued.  In  addition,  LIBOR  will  most  likely  be  permanently 
discontinued  after  the  end  of  2021  judging  from  the  announcement  by  the  U.K.  Financial 
Conduct Authority in July 2017 that the survival of LIBOR cannot be guaranteed. 
 LIBOR  is  the  most  widely-used  benchmark  in  the  global  financial  system  and  its 
discontinuation  would  have  a  significant  impact  on  Asian  markets.  For  example,  the 
transition  from  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR  to  an  alternative  risk-free  rate  would  be  necessary  in 
cases where the U.S. dollar is funded via cross-currency swaps. Accordingly, the other leg 
of the swap could also be affected. 
 We should also bear in mind that  the discontinuation would  affect a wide range of  market 
                                                   
7  For details, see EMEAP Working Group on Financial Markets (2018), "EMEAP Money Markets: 
Survey Report." 
 4 
participants in  Asia. The latest EMEAP report8  on a survey among member central banks 
on this issue stresses the importance of raising awareness of the potential discontinuation of 
LIBOR among institutional investors and non-financial corporates in particular. 
 In Japan, initiatives to prepare for the possible discontinuation of Japanese yen LIBOR have 
been  taken  by  the  Cross-Industry  Committee  on  Japanese  Yen  Interest  Rate  Benchmarks. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  serves  as  Secretariat  on  the  committee,  which  is  composed  of  a  wide 
range  of  parties  including  financial  institutions,  institutional  investors,  and  non-financial 
corporates. The committee has also expanded its deliberations into a public consultation and 
a wide range of outreach activities, such as holding a forum for non-financial corporates and 
industry associations (Chart  4). As a result, market awareness has been  gradually growing 
and proactive initiatives towards interest rate benchmark reform, such as LIBOR exposure 
mapping, have been launched. 
 The  permanent  discontinuation  of  LIBOR  would  be  one  of  the  most  significant  events  in 
global financial history, and the deadline is unavoidable. It is therefore important for us all 
to  work  together  for  our  common  interest  --  a  smooth  transition  to  alternative  reference 
rates.  We  should  bring  together  our  cross-sectorial  wisdom  and  experience  towards 
establishing  more  reliable  and  robust  interest  rate  benchmarks,  and  make  interest  rate 
benchmark reform one of the great successes in global financial history. 
 Concluding Remarks 
This conference covers so many important topics related to financial developments in Asia. 
I hope that lively discussions and exchanges of viewpoints over the coming two days will 
further contribute to the development of Asia's capital markets. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                     
8  For details, see EMEAP Working Group on Financial Markets (2019), "Study on the Implications 
of Financial Benchmark Reforms." 
 5 
Development of Asia's Capital Markets:
Roles and Challenges
Keynote Speech at the ASIFMA Annual Conference 2019
October 10, 2019
Masayoshi Amamiya
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan
Asia's Capital Markets
Chart 1
Share of Global Stock Market 
Amount Outstanding of Local Currency 
Capitalization 
Bond Markets as a Share of GDP
Notes: 1. In the left-hand chart, "East Asia & Pacific (excluding High Income)" covers the "East Asia & Pacific"  (a country and region grouping employed 
in the World Bank's World Development Indicators) excluding high-income countries and regions (Australia, Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, 
New Zealand, and Singapore).
2. In the right-hand chart, the figures are based on the aggregated amount outstanding of local currency bond markets in China, Hong Kong, India, 
South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
Sources: Asian Bond Online; World Bank, "World Development Indicators."
1
Share of the World's Middle-Income Class
2009
2030 (Projection)
Chart 2
Note: The share of the number of people with daily per capita income of between 10 and 100 U.S. dollars in terms of purchasing power parity.
Source:  Kharas, H. (2010), "The Emerging Middle Class in Developing Countries," OECD Development Centre Working Paper, No. 285.
2
Issuance Activity in East Asia during the Global Financial Crisis
Chart 3
Note: Percent changes in aggregated total issuance volume of domestic and international bonds, and domestic and international syndicated loans in each sub-
period. The figures are calculated by referencing Abraham, F., J. J. Cortina, and S. L. Schmukler (2019), "The Rise of Domestic Capital Markets for 
Corporate Financing: Lessons from East Asia," World Bank Group Policy Research Working Paper, No. 8844. The top and bottom 10 percentile of the 
sample has been excluded in the aggregation of data for each sub-period.
3
Source: Dealogic.
Chart 4
Interest Rate Benchmark Reform
• Raising awareness is the key to success.
•
In Japan, the Cross-Industry Committee on Japanese Yen Interest Rate 
Benchmarks held the Interest Rate Benchmark Reform Forum on 
August 1, 2019. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2019/rel190830f.htm/
Participated widely by:
- Financial Institutions
- Non-financial Corporates  (e.g., 
TOYOTA)
- Institutional Investors (e.g., 
Insurance Companies)
- Relevant Industrial Groups
Photo: Shoichi Nose
4
