Christophe  Edmond:  Risk-based  supervision  for  digital  financial
services,  money  value  transfer  services,  money  remittances  and
bureau de change sectors
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Christophe  Edmond,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Seychelles, at the Regional Workshop on “Risk-Based Supervision for Digital Financial Services,
Money Value Transfer Services, Money Remittances and Bureau de Change Sectors”, Mahe, 30
May 2019.
 Governor
Representatives of the ESAAMLG Secretariat,
Distinguished speakers and participants,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good Afternoon.
I  address  you  at  the  end  of  what  has  been  four  days  of  insightful  and  knowledge-fuelled
interactions on risk-based supervision, particularly for the Digital Financial Services, Money Value
Transfer Services, Money Remittances and Bureau de Change Sectors.
We  leave  here  with  no  doubt  that  the  risk-based  approach  to  supervision  is  central  to  the
implementation  of  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force’s  International  Standards  on  Combating
Money Laundering, and the Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation.
The discussions and sharing of experiences that have taken place over the past few days have
helped us ascertain the level that has been reached by the different regulatory and supervisory
authorities in the region, as well as the global trends and expectations. We now have a broader
perspective of the effectiveness of such an approach to supervision, as well as the challenges it
brings.
Some  of  the  key  takeaways  include  the  need  to  have  well-designed  and  effective  AML/CFT
policies  and  supervisory  frameworks,  to  help  foster  greater  financial  inclusion,  and  the
importance of having a continuous risk assessment process.
Limitations  of  the  different  regulatory  and  supervisory  entities,  in  particular  the  cost,  the
availability and the allocation of resources, were also highlighted, with a specific focus on the
need for such challenges to be understood both at the institutional and national levels.
Increased awareness, collaboration, and cooperation between the different entities and the buy-in
of government, are all essential factors that will contribute towards sound policy formulation and
assist jurisdictions in understanding the cost of AML/CFT compliance.
While the supervisory challenges posed by the specific sectors of the financial system may vary,
devoting more time to sectors and activities perceived to be of highest risk should be prioritised.
Risk-based supervision provides a rigorous framework for assessing and addressing risks and
efficient  allocation  of  resources,  which  can  improve  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  all
supervision.
Although there are several important principles and approaches to risk-based supervision, it is
essential  to  be  mindful  that  there  can  be  no  fixed  template.  There  is  a  need  for  supervisory
bodies to design and understand structures and approaches that are best suited to their needs.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is my sincere hope that all of you, participants, will use the experiences gathered here to assist
your respective institutions and countries with the implementation of forward-looking and smart
risk-based supervision policies and frameworks.
At this juncture, I take the opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to the ESAAMLG for the
opportunity provided to the Central Bank of Seychelles to host this workshop, on a subject of
utmost importance.
I would also like to give a special mention to our facilitators who have done a wonderful job of
setting the scene and steering the discussions, allowing for a stimulating environment for rich
exchanges.
Last, but certainly not least, I would like to thank all the participants for your active participation;
the learning experiences and innovative ideas shared by all has contributed to the success of our
deliberations over the past four days.
This workshop has undoubtedly given more impetus to work already being done locally, as we
move towards adopting a more forward-looking approach to supervision.
I  would  recommend  that  such  workshops  be  replicated  in  our  respective  jurisdictions,  thus
providing more opportunities for professionals at the institutional and sectoral level to be exposed
to such learning experiences.
On this note, I would like to thank you for your attention and active participation. To our visiting
participants, I wish you all a safe trip back home.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
