  December  4,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Payments Innovations and the Role of Central Banks: 
Addressing Challenges Posed by Stablecoins 
  Speech at the Symposium for the 35th Anniversary of the 
Center for Financial Industry Information Systems 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  I. Introduction 
It is my privilege to be here today at the Symposium for the 35th Anniversary of the Center 
for Financial Industry Information Systems (FISC). Since its foundation in 1984, FISC has 
contributed  enormously  to  enhancing  financial  information  systems  and  to  improving  the 
efficiency of financial services in Japan. I would like to express my respect for FISC's many 
years of service and extend my heartfelt congratulations on the 35th Anniversary.           
 Today, I would like to talk about payments innovations and the roles of central banks.     
 Recently,  there  have  been  various  changes  in  Japanese  retail  payments:  person-to-person 
payments  and  merchant-to-person  payments.  For  example,  in  October  2018,  financial 
institutions  started  to  provide  their  customers  with  "24/7  fast  payment  services,"  which 
enables real-time fund transfers between deposit accounts on a 7-days-a-week, 365 days-a-
year basis, including nighttime and holidays. The providers of these services have aimed at 
responding to the demand for more convenient payment services arising from changes in the 
lifestyle  of  consumers  and  the  spread  of  e-commerce.  In  addition,  when  we  look  at  the 
payment interfaces between consumers, merchants, and payment service providers, a wide 
variety  of  devices,  such  as  smartphones  and  IC  cards,  have  become  available.  Not  only 
financial institutions but also various agents such as nonbank firms with strengths in IT -- so 
called  FinTech  firms  --  have  started  to  provide  cashless  payment  services.  This  is  also  a 
significant change surrounding payment services in recent years.   
 Since this  October, the Japanese  government  has introduced  the  point  reward  program  for 
consumers  using  cashless  payments.  It  aims  to  improve  the  productivity  of  relevant 
businesses and to increase the convenience of consumers through further dissemination of 
cashless payments. The Bank of Japan has received several comments from its nationwide 
branch offices that the government's program has helped increase cashless payments.     
 This  year,  we  have  never  run  short  of  news  on  payments,  but  the  one  that  attracted  most 
attention  was  Facebook's  stablecoin  initiative,  "Libra."  Stablecoins  have  emerged  as  an 
alternative to crypto-assets, whose severe price volatility has made them difficult to use as 
payment instruments. Numerous types of private digital money have emerged to date across 
1 
 the world, but Libra differs in some aspects. With its large customer base built by Facebook, 
Libra has the potential to find wide global use as a private currency denominated in its own 
unit  of  account.  Global  stablecoins  (GSCs),  such  as  Libra,  may  offer  convenient  payment 
services to many users, if legal certainty and technical stability are ensured. However, users 
cannot  continuously  appreciate  the  benefits  of  GSCs  unless  various  challenges  and  risks 
related  to  money-laundering,  cyber-security,  data  protection,  and  consumer  and  investor 
protection are properly addressed. The spread of GSCs could have significant implications 
on the financial system and the transmission of monetary policy. As pointed out in the G7 
working  group  report  on  GSCs,  no  GSC  project  should  begin  operation  until  the  legal, 
regulatory  and  oversight  challenges  as  well  as  associated  risks  that are  outlined  above  are 
adequately addressed.1  This view was also shared at the G20 Finance Ministers and Central 
Bank Governors Meeting. 
 Today,  I  would  firstly  like  to  discuss  the  public  authorities'  response  to  GSCs  in  terms  of 
"global governance" in ensuring the stability of the global financial system. To maintain the 
global  financial  stability  with  free  capital  mobility,  the  authorities  need  to  cooperate  to 
establish globally consistent rules and regulations and require issuers of GSCs to comply with 
these rules. It is important to understand what impact GSCs could have on a supply channel 
for a global public good, "financial stability."   
 I would then like to mention the challenges in improving the existing retail payment services. 
The emergence of private sector innovations, including GSCs, highlights shortcomings in the 
existing payment systems. For example, cross-border payments remain slow and expensive. 
The authorities  should  not  only  highlight  risks  and  issues  posed  by  the  emergence  of  new 
digital  money,  but  also  encourage  improvement  of  the  existing  payment  systems.  As 
mentioned earlier, while new means of payment have emerged and have demonstrated efforts 
to enhance customer convenience in Japan, there remain various challenges toward the wider 
use of cashless payments. In this regard, today, I would like to focus on the interoperability 
of payment services. 
                                                    
1  G7 Working Group on Stablecoins, "Investigating the impact of global stablecoins," October 2019. 
2 
 II. GSCs in terms of Global Governance 
Supervisory and regulatory authorities and central banks have recognized the need for close 
international  coordination  and  collaboration,  rather  than  individual  effort,  to  address  the 
issues of GSC initiatives, such as Libra. The idea of the "financial trilemma" could help us 
understand why the authorities agree on this view.2   
 Financial Trilemma 
The  financial trilemma  states that  the  following  are  incompatible:  (1)  financial integration 
under free capital mobility, (2) financial stability, and (3) national financial policies. Any two 
of the three objectives can be combined but not all three; one has to give. For example, let us 
take  the  case  where  each  jurisdiction  maintains  its  own  national  financial  policies  in  a 
financially integrated world. In a lightly regulated jurisdiction, financial institutions would 
tend to take on more risks and engage in risky business overseas. Firms and households in 
that  jurisdiction  would  increase  borrowing,  including  foreign  currency  denominated 
borrowing.  Such  increased  leverage  could  eventually  lead  to  financial  instability.  In  sum, 
when "financial integration" and "national financial policy" are chosen, "financial stability" 
must  be  sacrificed.  To  achieve  financial  stability  in  the  financially  integrated  world,  the 
authorities  need  to  give  away  their  national  financial  policies  and  cooperate  with  other 
countries to introduce globally consistent financial policy.     
 GSCs are digital tokens issued against funds collected from customers all over the world. The 
reserve  of  funds  would  be  invested  in  a  basket  of  major  fiat  currencies,  consisting  of 
government securities and bank deposits. Using GSCs as a means of cross-border payment 
would  further  facilitate  and  promote  cross-border  capital  flows.  Taking  these  points  into 
account,  GSCs  can  be  interpreted  as  a  scheme  that  would  deepen  financial  integration. 
Therefore, to maintain financial stability, which could be undermined by the emergence of 
GSCs,  globally  consistent  financial  policy  is  indispensable.  That  is  the  reason  why  the 
financial authorities and central banks have been coordinating and discussing how to address 
the issues raised by GSCs since this summer. 
                                                    
2  Schoenmaker, D, "The financial trilemma," Economics Letters, 2011 vol.111, 57-59. 
3 
 Given  the  enormous  benefits  derived  from  global  financial  activities,  the  private  sector 
entities  have  a  strong  incentive  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  Even  if  transactions  in  GSCs  are 
prohibited in some jurisdictions, they may expand in other lightly regulated jurisdictions. In 
times of stress, this could bring adverse effects on the global financial market as a whole. For 
example, even if GSCs are not widely used in advanced countries, an increase in transactions 
of GSCs in emerging markets could subsequently increase the  reserve assets, consisting of 
government securities and bank deposits issued in advanced countries. Once the credibility 
and  reputation  of  GSCs  are  significantly  undermined,  or  the  value  of  the  reserve  assets 
decreases, customers could rush to request redemption of GSCs for fiat currency. As a result, 
the issuers of GSCs would be forced to withdraw bank deposits or sell government securities, 
increasing the volatility and vulnerability of the financial markets in advanced countries.   
 To mitigate such risks, supervisory and regulatory frameworks of relevant jurisdictions need 
to be mutually consistent and discourage regulatory arbitrage of GSC issuers. Legitimate and 
sound  fund  transactions  are  the  basis  for  financial  stability  and  financial  integration,  and 
therefore, measures against money laundering and those to counter the financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT)  need  to  be  implemented  consistently  across  jurisdictions.  Furthermore,  an 
overarching  approach  to  global  coordination,  including  the  areas  of  cyber-security,  data 
protection, and consumer and investor protection would be necessary.       
 Financial Stability as a Public Good 
Financial stability is an essential "public good" for firms, individuals and financial institutions 
to  engage  in  economic  activities.  Public  goods  have  two  features.  One  feature  is  that 
consumption by an individual or a group of individuals does not reduce the good's availability 
to others.3  The other feature is that the good is available to all and cannot be withheld, even 
from  people  who  do  not  pay  for  the  goods.4  As  people  are  not  required  to  pay  for  public 
goods regardless of how much they consume, a free-rider problem could arise. Therefore, if 
the supply is left solely to the market, these goods will not be provided. Financial stability 
can  be  considered  to  have  such  features.  For  this  reason,  supervisory  and  regulatory 
authorities and central banks ensure that public goods (i.e. financial and monetary stability) 
                                                   
3  In traditional economics, this feature is referred to as "non-rivalry." 
4  This feature is referred to as "non-excludability." 
4 
 are  provided  through  monetary  policy  and  prudential  policy  by  establishing  adequate 
regulatory frameworks.     
 GSCs  aim  to  stabilize  their  value  by  linkage  to  a  basket  of  fiat  currencies  of  the  major 
countries.  In  other  words,  the  scheme  of  GSCs  utilize  a  global  public  good  (i.e.  global 
financial stability), which is made up of a basket of public goods of each jurisdiction. Global 
financial policy can be interpreted as constituting rules for the appropriate consumption of 
global  public  goods. Therefore,  GSC  issuers  need  to  comply  with  the  rules,  because  they 
provide payment services using global public goods. 
 If GSC issuers were to overconsume a public good (i.e. global financial stability) and expand 
business beyond their risk management capacity, it could cause stress in the global financial 
markets, such as rapid capital flight, when risks materialize. As a result, the public authorities 
would be forced to incur additional costs for providing a public good (i.e. financial stability). 
For  example,  the  central  bank,  as  a  lender  of  last  resort,  would  provide  liquidity,  or  the 
government would step in to take fiscal measures.     
 Looking back on the era of "Great Moderation" up until the mid-2000s, US and European 
banks rushed to take on excessive risks. Although they were subject to financial regulations 
at  that  time,  many  of  them  simultaneously  became  overconfident  about  future  financial 
stability and held optimistic views on risk. Such risk perception led to credit expansion and 
asset price increases in a synergetic manner. In the wake of the subsequent Great Financial 
Crisis,  financial  authorities  established  the  macro-prudential  regulatory  framework,  which 
put in place more stringent rules regarding the appropriate consumption of a public good (i.e. 
financial stability). 
 While regulations on banks were strengthened after the Great Financial Crisis, nonbanks such 
as investment funds expanded their presence in the market of "credit intermediation," mainly 
in  US  and  Europe.  Meanwhile,  Facebook's  GSC  initiative,  Libra,  could  be  an  example  of 
nonbank efforts to replace banks and  increase their presence in the market of "payments." 
Regardless of whether they carry the function of credit intermediation or payments, not only 
5 
 banks  but  also  nonbanks  need  to  comply  with  the  rule  of  the  appropriate  consumption  of 
public goods.                                                             
 GSCs and the Financial Version of the "Tragedy of the Commons"   
As I have mentioned earlier, one of the features of public goods is that consumption by an 
individual  or  a  group  of  individuals  does  not  reduce  the  good's  availability  to  others.  For 
example, no matter how much air (i.e. public good) I breathe in, it does not limit your air 
consumption. So, you may wonder why I am warning about the overconsumption of a public 
good (i.e. financial stability), by GSC issuers. Simply put, the reason is that a wide use of 
stablecoins in a global scale could transform financial stability from a "public good" into a 
"common-pool resource."   
 A common-pool resource has the same feature as public goods in that it is available to all and 
cannot  be  withheld,  even from  people  who  do  not pay  for  the  resource.  But  unlike  public 
goods,  consumption  by  an  individual  or  a  group  of  individuals  does  reduce  the  resource's 
availability  to  others. 5   A  typical  example  is  fishery  resources.  Overconsumption  of  a 
common-pool resource can lead to the complete and permanent destruction of the common-
pool resource. This problem is known as the "tragedy of the commons."6  When farmers put 
their cows on a common pasture, each individual farmer will put as many cows on the pasture 
as  possible,  acting  independently  according  to  his  own  self-interest.  This  will  eventually 
result in the over-exploitation and destruction of the pasture, and all farmers will be damaged.   
 GSCs could bring about a "tragedy of the commons." Central banks provide public goods (i.e. 
financial and monetary stability) through monetary and prudential policies. Meanwhile, GSC 
is  a  scheme  that  utilizes  public  goods  (i.e.  financial  and  monetary  stability),  provided  by 
central banks. If GSCs are widely used with over-exploitation of public goods in such a way 
that  GSCs  begin  to  substitute  for  fiat  currency  in  each  jurisdiction  and  GSC-denominated 
transactions  and  assets/liabilities  increase,  this  would  undermine  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  of  central  banks.  When  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  are  weakened,  the 
                                                   
5  While a public good satisfies both "non-rivalry" and "non-excludability," a common-pooled resource 
exhibits only "non-excludability." 
6  Hardin, G, "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science, 1968, vol.162, 1243–1248. 
6 
 provision of public goods (i.e. financial and monetary stability) will be disturbed, and this 
would destabilize not only the value of GSCs but also overall economic activities. This can 
be thought of as the financial version of a "tragedy of the commons." A wide use of stablecoin 
on a global scale could transform financial stability from a public good into a common-pool 
resource.         
 The risk of currency substitution to GSCs could be higher for countries with a weak economic 
base and lacking effective payment infrastructures. When the effects of monetary policy are 
undermined by the spread of currency  substitution across these countries, it would lead to 
instability  in  the  real economy,  the  impact  being  transmitted to  other  countries.  Given  the 
progress in economic globalization and stronger interdependencies among financial systems, 
there  is  a  risk  that  the  financial  markets  of  advanced  economies  would  also  be  subject  to 
instability. As a result, the provision of a global public good (i.e. global financial stability), 
would be reduced, and a tragedy of the commons could occur.   
 The public authorities, in coordination with other domestic and foreign authorities, need to 
address various challenges posed by GSCs, including the tragedy of the commons.   
 III. Reform of Retail Payment Systems 
As described above, GSCs could have significant implications for the international monetary 
system and settlement system. They should not begin operation until the various challenges 
and risks are adequately addressed. At the same time, I would like to assert that the Bank of 
Japan takes the position of promoting private sector innovations. The recent GSC initiative 
has  posed  us  challenging  questions:  What  are  the  shortcomings  of  the  existing  payment 
services?  What  are  the  remedies?  This  is  an  inevitably  important  issue  for  a  central  bank 
responsible for improving efficiency and safety of the payment and settlement systems. There 
are many issues in the current payment and settlement systems that must be dealt with, such 
as costly cross-border payments and financial inclusion. It is vital for us to understand that 
the  advent  of  private  sector  innovations  derives  from  issues  originating  in  the  existing 
payment and settlement systems. 
  7 
 Network Effects and Interoperability 
Costly cross-border payments and financial inclusion are not the only issues that need to be 
addressed.  While  major  advanced  countries  have  been  upgrading  their  domestic  retail 
payment  systems  by  adopting  24/7  fast  payment  services,  there  is  more  room  for 
improvement. This is obvious when we consider why GSCs have attracted so many people's 
attention. For example, Facebook has over two billion users, and they are all potential users 
of Libra. Benefits from payment services become more valuable when more people use them. 
This is known as "network effects." It is easy to predict that the Libra platform, with its huge 
customer base, will leverage network effects significantly.   
 Many  studies  have  attempted  to carry  out  quantitative  analyses  of  the  benefits  of  network 
effects, and one of the prevailing views is "Metcalfe's law." The law states that the value of a 
network is proportional to the square of the number of users participating in it. In fact, some 
studies have shown that Metcalfe's Law is a good quantitative explanation for the value of 
Facebook's  platform. 7   In  terms  of  network  effects,  it  seems  that  the  customer  bases  of 
existing payment service providers in each country are inferior to Libra's potential customer 
base.   
 However, while platforms with strong network effects can offer considerable benefits to users, 
platforms can create monopoly problems by locking in users. In other words, if the number 
of users and merchants participating in the network exceeds a certain size (critical mass), the 
scale of the payment platform will expand rapidly due to the network effect, which may lead 
to an oligopoly or monopoly of the market. If a particular provider becomes a dominant player 
in the retail payment services market, problems such as distortions in the pricing system and 
reduced incentives for innovation may eventually arise. Monopolies impede competition and 
innovation, and can ultimately have a negative impact on consumer benefits.   
 At first glance, it seems difficult to achieve both the benefits of network effects for users and 
the long-term benefits for society through competition and innovation. But it is not impossible. 
"Interoperability" between payment service providers and platforms can help achieve both 
                                                   
7  Zhang  XZ,  Liu  JJ,  Xu  ZW,  "Tencent  and  Facebook  data  validate  Metcalfe's  law,"  Journal  of 
Computer Science and Technology, 2015, vol.30 (2): 246–251. 
8 
 these goals. Interoperability across multiple platforms enables a customer participating in one 
platform  to  make  payments  to  customers  on  other  platforms.  This  greatly  improves  user 
benefits gained from network effects. The network effect based on interoperability arises from 
the collaboration among multiple payment service providers and multiple platforms, and it is 
not  provided  exclusively  by  a  single  payment  service  provider  or  platform.  By  ensuring 
interoperability, payment service providers such as banks and FinTech firms can expand the 
overall market size of cashless payments and achieve a win-win relationship among them. 
Also, the payment service providers can still compete by combining payment services with 
other financial and non-financial services and create their own unique added value. Payment 
service  providers  will  be  released  from  launching  endless  discount  campaigns  to  lock  in 
customers  and  will  instead  be  able  to  look  ahead  toward  the  creation  of  new  value.  Such 
competition  will  drive  innovation,  too.  In  this  way,  collaboration  among  payment  service 
providers by ensuring interoperability will promote both competition and innovation while 
avoiding monopoly problems.   
 Strategies of FinTech Firms 
Now,  let  us  look  at  interoperability  in  Japan's  retail  payment  systems.  What  are  the 
challenges? I would like to consider this topic from the perspective of the payment business 
strategies of FinTech firms and banks. 
 Firstly, the strategies of FinTech firms. There are a number of payment platforms operated by 
FinTech firms, and competition among them has become quite fierce. Several FinTech firms 
have already developed radical strategies to lock in customers, such as rebates and reduction 
of the merchant discount rate. These strategies are designed to scale up the platform as fast 
as possible and achieve a critical mass.   
 While such strategies are rational on their own, they could be risky when a strong rival exists, 
as they may not be as effective as expected and FinTech firms may be worn out. In Japan, the 
biggest  rival  of  cashless  payment  service  providers  is  banks'  branches  and  their  CD/ATM 
networks supporting cash payment. Japanese banks maintain geographically dense networks 
of branches and ATMs, enabling people to withdraw cash from their accounts very easily.8 
                                                   
8  Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Report (March 2019). 
9 
 What makes cash payment convenient is not only the number of bank branches and ATMs. 
The  interoperability  of  ATM  services  across  banks  also  contributes  to  this.  It  allows 
customers of one bank to withdraw cash from ATMs of another bank. 
 In Japan, it is undeniable that FinTech firms' payment platforms pale in comparison to cash 
networks  in  terms  of  interoperability.  Recently,  some  improvements  have  been  made  to 
FinTech firms' platforms, such as the standardization of QR codes and merchant sharing, but 
overall, there remains more room for improving the interoperability of their payment services. 
 Retail Payment Strategies of Banks 
Regarding retail payment strategies of banks, the following two common points have been 
observed.     
 Firstly,  banks  provide  FinTech  firms  with  access  to  their  customers'  deposit  accounts  and 
offer account transfer services. In order for customers to use FinTech firms' cashless payment 
services, they need to top up from their bank accounts or to use a bank account debit function. 
In  some  sense,  bank  accounts  and  payment  services  provided  by  FinTech  firms  can  be 
regarded as complements, like coffee and sugar. If  you compare coffee with sugar sachets 
attached and coffee without sugar sachets, the former is preferable. Similarly, between bank 
accounts linked to FinTech firms' payment services and bank accounts that are not, the former 
is preferable for customers. From the viewpoint of competition among banks, those providing 
account  transfer  services  to  FinTech  firms  have  an  advantage  in  attracting  new  customers 
and/or preventing existing customers from closing or deserting their accounts. 
 Secondly, banks participate in cashless payment platforms operated by the banking industry, 
competing with FinTech firms. As cashless payments through FinTech firms become more 
prevalent, the banks might face the greater risk that they will be a mere provider of deposit 
accounts and thus lose a close relationship with customers and merchants. If banks want to 
access  customers'  payment  information  and  merchants'  sales  information,  banks  need  to 
provide payment services to customers at the front end. This is the reason why banks have an 
incentive to participate in cashless payment platforms operated by the banking industry. In 
some sense, the payment services provided by banks and those provided by FinTech firms 
10 
 could be viewed as substitutes, like coffee and tea. 
 These two  strategies  are  rational  choices  for each  individual  bank in terms  of  competition 
with other banks and with FinTech firms respectively. However, if many banks follow the 
same strategies, the "fallacy of composition" could arise, and the combined effects of the two 
strategies may be lower than expected, namely, one plus one being less than two (1 + 1 < 2). 
While  banks  support  FinTech  firms'  payment  services  by  providing  them  with  real-time 
account transfer service, they act as acquirers themselves and seek out merchants who will 
join payment platforms operated by the banking industries. However, since FinTech firm and 
bank  payment  platforms  lack  interoperability,  none  of  these  platforms  is  likely  to  grow 
significantly, making it difficult for banks to recoup their investments.   
 Collaboration Among Payment Service Providers 
When multiple payment platforms exist but lack interoperability, payment service providers, 
both FinTech firms and banks, have a strong incentive to lock in customers in order to beat 
the competition. This may lead to fragmentation of payment services, undermining network 
effects and user convenience. As a result, banks and FinTech firms would end up wearing 
themselves  out  in  the  process.  Especially  in  Japan,  where  there  exist  very  efficient  cash 
services  supported  by  geographically  dense  networks  of  CD/ATMs  with  a  high-level  of 
interoperability, payment service providers must devote a significant amount of resources to 
expanding the market for cashless payment services. However, the expansion is unlikely to 
be achieved if FinTech firms and banks act separately in pursuing their own cashless payment 
services.   
 In such a situation, a desirable option is that payment service providers collaborate with each 
other – that is, make their services interoperable – in order to maximize the network effects 
of  digital  yen.  Collaboration  among  payment  service  providers  can  take  various  forms: 
between banks, between FinTech firms, and between banks and FinTech firms. At first glance, 
interoperability may seem like giving away the benefit to the other parties. That would be 
true if the market for cashless payment services does not scale up even with the introduction 
of  interoperability.  It  would  simply  escalate  the  competition  among  payment  service 
providers.  However,  if  interoperability  among  payment  service  providers  and  payment 
11 
 platforms  is  ensured,  benefits  to  users  will  increase,  leading  to  an  increase  in  the  use  of 
cashless payments, hence the expansion of the market for cashless payment services. As a 
result, a win-win relationship benefitting all the payment service providers can be established. 
 Many studies have indicated that network interoperability will bring a win-win relationship 
between related parties.9  In fact, this has also been proved by some examples that are quite 
familiar to us. One of them is the interconnection of transportation IC cards, such as PASMO 
and  Suica.  As  this  has  improved  convenience  for  users,  the  cumulative  number  of 
transportation IC cards issued has now surpassed 100 million. The advantage for users (riders) 
that  they  do  not  have  to  buy  a  ticket  each  time  they  travel  is  also  an  advantage  for 
transportation  companies,  since  they  do  not  have  to  sell  a  ticket  for  each  journey.  The 
interconnection  of  transportation  IC  cards  has  made  it  possible  for  each  transportation 
company to save labor costs in checking tickets, fares, and commuter passes. This has led to 
punctual operation (as the result of efficient boarding), reduction of the human workload, and 
optimization of human resources.   
 There  is  also  an  interesting  example  regarding  interoperability  in  the  banking  sector;  the 
CD/ATM network. In 1980, city banks divided themselves into two tiers, the upper tier and 
the middle and lower tier,  and initiated an  online  network alliance  separately  for  each  tier 
group. The  division  into  two  tiers  was  said  to  be  the  result  of  opposition  by  banks  in  the 
middle and lower tier. They were concerned that "if online networks are integrated into one 
alliance, customers will move their bank accounts to the upper tier banks, and the middle and 
lower tier banks will be left to serve only as providers of machines."10  However, the advent 
of a nationwide online network for postal savings, which was the banks' common and strong 
rival, eventually pushed these two tiers to integrate. In 1984, a new city bank cash service 
(BANCS) was launched by unifying the two tiers. After that, the multi integrated cash service 
(MICS)  was  launched  by  integrating  the  networks  of  city  banks  and  regional  banks.  The 
                                                   
9  Benson, C and S Loftesness, "Interoperability in Electronic Payments: Lessons and Opportunities," 
CGAP, 2012. 
Clark,  D  and  G  Camner,  "A2A  Interoperability  -  Making  Mobile  Money  Schemes  Interoperable," 
GSMA, February 2014. 
10  The Yomiuri Shimbun, "Jidou shiharai, dono togin demo" [Interoperation of CD/ATMs deployed 
among city banks], news article, February 19, 1986.     
12 
 interoperability of CD/ATM services across banks did not create any particular losers, and 
many banks found that the number of deposit accounts they provide increased, resulting in a 
win-win situation for everyone and more convenient services for users. This has led to the 
convenience of cash payments today.   
 These  examples  demonstrate  that  ensuring  interoperability  is  critical  for  improving  retail 
payment services in Japan. For the widespread use of cashless payments, payment should be 
stress-free  for  consumers  and  merchants,  and  interoperability  of  payment  networks  is  an 
essential  element.  Specifically,  there  are  various  options,  such  as  interconnection  among 
payment  platforms,  participation  of  payment  providers  on  a  common  platform, 
standardization of payment terminals, retail point of sale compatibility, and merchant sharing.   
 
When we look overseas, interoperability is the common feature of countries where cashless 
payments are widely used. For example, there are a number of payment platforms enabling 
customers to transfer money instantly on a 24/7 basis using mobile phone numbers.11  Banks 
participating  in  these  systems  share  a  common  database  linking  customers'  bank  account 
numbers  to  mobile  phone  numbers.  There  are  also  some  cases  where  nonbanks  such  as 
FinTech  firms  participate  with  banks  in  the  same  payment  system. 12  As  the  recent  GSC 
initiative  has  highlighted  the  necessity  for  more  convenient  services,  we  should  start  to 
seriously  discuss  and  consider  possible  solutions  in  the  Japanese  market.  I  would  like  to 
encourage relevant parties to put their proposals on the table.   
 IV. Concluding Remarks 
Today, I have discussed the challenges and risks posed by GSCs as well as the need for the 
reform of retail payment systems. 
 While GSCs have the potential to improve payment services, their widespread use and the 
increase in GSC-denominated transactions could undermine the effects of monetary policy 
transmission and financial system stability. Therefore, the public authorities, as providers of 
                                                   
11  Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Report, March 2019.   
12  For example, in Hong Kong, HKICL began operation of the "Faster Payment System" 24/7 real-
time payment service in 2018. Participants in the system are major banks and Stored Value Facilities 
(FinTech firms).   
13 
 a public good (i.e. financial stability), need to not only support private sector innovations but 
also promote the use of digital money denominated in a fiat currency in their jurisdictions.   
 This brings me to another important issue. Should central banks issue digital money, central 
bank digital currencies (CBDCs)? To date, many central banks around the world have already 
been engaged in research activities for CBDCs. In some European countries, central banks 
have  been  encouraged  to  accelerate  work  on  issues  surrounding  possible  public  digital 
currency solutions in order to counter private sector initiatives in stablecoins. In Japan, the 
amount of cash outstanding is still increasing, and it does not seem that there is a demand for 
CBDC  from  the  public  at  present.  Nevertheless,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  conducting 
technical and legal research on this matter in order to stand ready when the need for CBDC 
may arise in the future13. The Bank also needs to study the impact of CBDCs on financial 
intermediation.   
 Currently, there is a wide variety of private digital money denominated in Japanese yen. It is 
very important to promote the use of such private money by improving its functions to bring 
it closer to the expected functions of CBDC. In this regard, the network effect through the 
increase in the number of cashless payment users is a key to improving the convenience of 
private  digital  money.  It  is  more  desirable  to  gain  such  a  network  effect  through  the 
interoperability  among  multiple  payment  service  providers  and  platforms  rather  than  by  a 
single payment service provider or platform alone. If interoperability between private digital 
money increases, private money will approach more closely to central bank money in terms 
of general acceptability. In addition, the wide use of private digital money denominated in 
Japanese yen, which would be enhanced by competition and coordination among payment 
service providers, could help the Bank of Japan maintain the channels for providing public 
                                                   
13   In  technical  aspects,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  research  on  new  technologies,  including 
distributed ledger technology (DLT). For example, the joint research project with the European Central 
Bank, "Project Stella" is being carried out as part of our research. In legal aspects, the Bank has been 
working  to  explore  the  potential  legal  issues  and  implications  that  may  arise  from  the  issuance  of 
CBDC in Japan. For more information, see  "Report of the Study Group on Legal Issues regarding 
Central  Bank  Digital  Currency  (Abstract),"  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of 
Japan, September 2019. 
 14 
 goods (i.e. financial and monetary stability). This is desirable for the national economy as a 
whole.   
 The Bank of Japan, as the operator of the BOJ-Net and as a catalyst promoting dialogue in 
the  private  sector,  will  continue  our  efforts  toward  the  greater  efficiency  and  safety  of 
payment systems.           
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
  15 
