Joachim Wuermeling: Introduction to the book "Banking Business
in Germany"
Opening speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the occasion of the publication of the book "Banking Business in Germany" from
the Association of Foreign Banks in Germany, Frankfurt am Main, 16 October 2019.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you very much for the invitation. It is my pleasure to introduce the 6  edition of “Banking
Business in Germany”.
th
Previous editions have been a valuable guide, with clear and insightful descriptions of
The structure of the German banking sector,
the structure of banking supervision in Germany and the EU, and
the relevant legislation for banks and investment firms active in Germany.
These information are very helpful for foreign banks entering the German market, which is why it
has become something of a go-to guide.
As this book is about German Banking I would like to take this opportunity to make three remarks
on the sector.
First, I would like to make a brief assessment of the Brexit preparations.
Second, I would stake stock of the incoming financial institutions due to Brexit
Third, I will then talk about the strategic options post Brexit.
State of Brexit preparations
The book as well as the Association of Foreign Banks in Germany are as important as ever given
the developments we are seeing due to Brexit. This event has a major impact on the German
banking sector not only in the short, but also in the long term.
For  the  short  term,  I  may  say  that  banks  and  supervisors  have  more  or  less  completed
preparations for a hard Brexit. This is due to the hard word of the banks but also to the clear
stance  of  supervisors  and  –  last  but  not  least-  the  delay  from  March  to  October.  We  as
supervisors  have  been  very  strict;  we  saw  no  alternative  than  to  prepare  for  the  worst-case
scenario, which is a hard Brexit. That proved to be the right stance, despite of the promising
rumours ahead of this  week’s  European  Council  meeting  and  glowing  hopes  that  there  finally
may be a withdrawal agreement between the EU and the UK.
A  hard  Brexit  is  exactly  what  institutions  have  been  preparing  for  in  recent  months.  I  am  well
aware that this was a very challenging process for all firms, but I am convinced that these strict
measures are a valuable advantage in light of the current, difficult circumstances.
Moreover,  in  areas  where  banks  were  not  able  to  do  this  alone,  like  in  clearing,  contingency
measures are in place to contain key risks.
One  thing  needs  to  be  very  clear,  however.  Contingency  measures  are  –  quite  rightly  –
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
temporary; they do not relieve institutions for aligning with the new legal environment.
Yet,  the  uncertainty  of  how  Brexit  will  take  place  and  what  future  partnership  will  follow,  has
weighed on the banks’ preparations. It has also led to a withholding of the transfer of portfolios
until the last moment, until the final decision concerning Brexit is taken. This creates an additional
operational risk of course, when enormous sums (trillions) are to be shifted overnight.
The risk of the uncertainty remains though. There is no playbook and no experience for a thing
like Brexit. But as of today I do not expect a risk for financial stability even in the case of a hard
Brexit.
Thankfully, I can provide another reassurance here. We are unlikely to see a bottleneck in the
supply of financial services or even a credit crunch. The vast majority of financial services and
products should still be available on the continent even after Brexit.
Incoming financial institutions
Ladies and gentlemen,
Some  simple  numbers  on  business  coming  into  the  German  financial  market  reveal  the
extraordinary impact.
In a first wave, we expect roughly 2,000 employees to be transferred from Britain to or newly
recruited in Germany in the wake of Brexit.
There have been 22 Brexit-related licensing procedures for credit institutions in the SSM as a
whole,  of  which  eight  were  for  Germany.  Of  these,  seven  have  since  been  finalised,  and  the
remaining licence probably won’t be pursued.
A further ten credit institution procedures concerned an expansion of business activities in the
SSM under existing licences; three of these were in Germany.
41 licencing procedures concerned investment firms. Germany accounted for nine of them, all of
which have been finalised.
In addition, we have seen the Brexit-related establishment or expansion of seven branches of
third country firms, five branches of banks domiciled in the European Economic Area and two
financial holding companies in Germany.
At present, the target operating models (TOMs) available to us envisage an increase in asset
positions in the total amount (i.e. across credit institutions and investment firms) of around €637
billion, or about 300%. In the SSM, the 11 largest banks are set to transfer € 1.1 trillion of assets.
In my view, it is especially striking that the aggregate total assets of the securities trading banks
operating in Germany up to now (as a peer of investment firms) came to around €350 million;
now there will be individual institutions in this segment with total assets ranging from €100 billion
to  over  €400  billion.  Individual  investment  firms  therefore  account  for  many  times  the  existing
overall market in Germany.
Let me conclude here with a caveat: This is only a snapshot for day one and certainly not the end
of the story. The figures may further develop depending if a hard Brexit will happen or not and
how the future relationship between the UK und EU will be shaped. Much more business may be
transferred along the road – depending on individual decisions of the banks and their clients.
Strategic options post Brexit
That leads me to strategic options post Brexit.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
After all, the outcome of the Brexit negotiations and the future relationship between the UK and
the  EU27  will  obviously  influence  the  structures  in  which  institutions  are  able  to  operate  after
Brexit.
But whatever form Brexit takes, the consequences will shape financial markets for years, and
probably decades, to come.
What will Brexit – and the resultant changes in capital flows – mean for the future of the EU27
financial market?
Having said that, we have to assume that Brexit will transform financial markets. So the question
is what shape the EU27’s financial market will take in future – and which strategy the EU should
pursue for the future of its financial markets. Essentially, there are two options.
Option A:  We  aim  to  maintain  close  links  –  despite  the  UK  losing  its  passporting  rights,  we
attempt to preserve a special relationship and thus continue to rely heavily on London’s financial
hub.
Option  B:  We  rely  more  on  building  capacity  within  the  EU  –  whether  it’s  by  expanding  EU
capacity or increasing the number of independent subsidiaries of foreign institutions.
In my evaluation, option B might be the better strategy for the EU and for Germany. The reason
for this is that cross-border risk couldn’t be adequately controlled under option A; dependency on
London would then be especially problematic.
But what exactly does option B entail?
First off, it means rigorous implementation of the “no empty shells” policy, which is to say that the
risk  management  and  capital  of  institutions  operating  here  have  to  be  accessible  to  local
supervisors.
Second, 
for  London  beyond  existing  equivalency
arrangements; this could possibly be improved slightly, as currently planned by the Commission.
it  means  no  preferential 
treatment 
This brings us to my third point: some new capacity will have to be created in the EU, and at the
same time the internal market has to be deepened in terms of financial integration.
What  should  happen  is  that  national  and  regional  efforts  should  be  consolidated  under  the
umbrella  of  a  common  European  strategy  to  deepen  and  modernise  the  internal  market  for
financial services.
I firmly believe that digitalisation holds the key to our success. We are all familiar with examples
of how smart digital applications have helped to make buying and selling more transparent (e.g.
comparison websites), to break down language barriers (e.g. translation services), to overcome
information problems and to build trust (blockchain applications).
Ultimately, the continental financial centres need a strong digital market infrastructure that makes
full use of all new digital possibilities. Only then they can effectively overcome fragmentation.
To sum up, it is my firm view that deepening and modernising the European internal market is
the best economic strategy to counter the geopolitical challenges posed by Brexit.
Which  brings  us  to  the  new  European  Commission.  The  team  of  Ursula  von  der  Leyen  will
officially go to work in Brussels on 1 November 2019. They will shape how the EU approaches
our economy’s biggest challenges, and they can decisively shape the financial market strategy.
Von  der  Leyen  has  nominated  Valdis  Dombrovskis  for  the  important  role  of  Executive  Vice-
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
President for an ‘Economy that Works for People’. As such, he will lead the work on deepening
Economic and Monetary Union.
Von der Leyen has set the goal for Dombrovskis, namely that “Europe’s social market economy
helps ensure that social fairness and prosperity go hand in hand” (quote from Ursula von der
Leyen’s mission letter to Valdis Dombrovskis). It should also be climate-neutral and work within
the ecological boundaries of the planet.
The mission letter states the following goals: “to preserve and improve financial stability, protect
savers and investors and ensure the flow of capital to where it is needed.”
To achieve these goals she has identified eight crucial priorities. The new Commission aims:
To complete the Banking Union,
To speed up the work towards a Capital Markets Union to diversify sources of finance for
companies and tackle the barriers to the flow of capital,
To develop a new private-public fund specialising in initial public offerings for SMEs,
To  put  forward  a  FinTech  strategy  to  support  new  digital  technologies  in  our  financial
system,
To ensure a common approach with member states on cryptocurrencies, and
To develop a green financing strategy to ensure that we can direct investment and financing
to the transition to a climate-neutral economy.
I very much welcome this ambitious open and clear course.
The  financial  market  agenda  in  particular  provides  us  with  a  suitable  framework  for  thinking
strategically about the most important developments over the coming five years and the long-
term way ahead.
Moreover, I think we should be even bolder when it comes to the three principles of integrated
markets, digitisation and sustainable finance as a basis for our success.
In my view, we must come up not only with a FinTech strategy, but also with a bolder approach
to digitisation in finance and how this will transform the economy and international trade. Libra or
stable  coins  more  generally,  cyber-security  in  algorithmic  trading  and  elsewhere,  artificial
intelligence  and  its  ethical  as  well  as  labour  and  financing  implications,  open  banking  and  its
implications, BigTechs and how they will affect competition policies and financial stability – these
are only the tip of this strategic iceberg.
The ideas behind green finance are still relatively new, and most banks don’t have them on their
radar – neither the opportunities nor the risks that they entail.
Banks have to strengthen their management of climate-related risks substantially.
But when it comes to regulation, I do not think that we should try to further sustainability through
lowering risk weights – a green supporting factor would be the wrong instrument.
Integrated,  digital,  green  finance  can  be  a  huge  lever  for  achieving  the  goal  of  a  sustainable
economy that works for all.
Therefore, it is of vital importance that we, the EU27, pursue a resilient financial market strategy
that rests on three principles: integration, digitalisation, and sustainability.
Conclusion
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen,
let me conclude my remarks leaving Brexit and commenting a statement of the book. On page
97 it reads: “Progress to achieve greater stability has been made.”
I can confirm that suggestion. Looking back the last 12 month a lot has been done. Big banks are
undergoing deep restructuring. Small and mediums sized banks are adapting to the low interest
rate  environment,  as  our  LSI-stress  test  revealed.  Public-sector  banks  are  heading  for  new
horizons.  That  are  good  news  for  a  German,  even  though  vulnerabilities  and  big  challenges
remain.
Thank you very much for your Attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
