Business conduct supervision in the financial sector
FinCoNet Annual General Meeting
Introductory remarks by Daniele Franco 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, November 13, 2019
Good morning, I am happy to open the Annual General Meeting of FinCoNet, which 
is now an important player in promoting sound financial market conduct.
The  protection  of  financial  consumers  is  now  considered  essential  for  a  sound 
financial system. Its importance grew in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. But it 
is still a challenge to supervisors. 
Financial consumer protection was not a supervisory objective until recently. For a 
long time, it was assumed that an efficient capital market, effective competition among 
banks,  a  deposit  insurance  system,  together  with  prudential  supervision  and  financial 
market oversight were enough to provide all the protection actually needed. 
In  the  late  ‘70s,  the  relevance  of  information  asymmetries  in  financial  markets 
was eventually recognized. This induced a change in perspective and new initiatives at 
the  national  level,  at  the  supranational  level  (such  as  the  OECD  Recommendation  on 
consumer protection in consumer credit in 1977), and at the EU level (such as the first EU 
Directive on consumer credit in 1977). 
Financial regulation originally focused on the reduction of information asymmetries 
by imposing disclosure and mandatory formalities in order to enhance the comparability 
of  products  and  services.  However,  the  market  turmoil  of  2008  together  with  several 
studies in behavioral finance proved that this was not enough: disclosure and mandatory 
formalities do not ensure that consumers take a decision in their best interest. Hence, 
disclosure requirements have been complemented with business conduct requirements 
aimed at promoting fairness by financial intermediaries. 
Financial regulation in Europe now requires financial service providers to consider 
the interest of financial consumers even before their products are offered on the market. 
Product governance requirements impose that providers take explicitly into account the 
interest of consumers when designing new products, and test them to assess if they will 
really serve the interests and the needs of the consumers. 
This evolution poses a number of challenges to supervisors dealing with financial 
intermediaries’ market conduct. For instance, there are still differences in the range of 
tools and enforcement powers that conduct supervision authorities rely on in different 
countries. 
As in the case of prudential supervision, public enforcement typically relies on 
on-site and off-site monitoring powers; but challenges for conduct supervision come 
from the nature of the analyses required. While prudential supervision can typically 
rely on a quantitative approach, the protection of financial consumers may require a 
judgment-based analysis of the quality of customer relation arrangements. 
Sanctions are of course an essential deterrence tool, and (again, differently from 
prudential supervision) may be complemented by the power to impose the reimbursement 
of  sums  unduly  charged  (which  directly  favor  damaged  consumers,  differently  from 
sanctions). 
Product intervention powers may further enrich the supervisory toolbox, preventing 
harmful products from being distributed.
In addition to public enforcement, effective customer protection may also be based 
on private enforcement tools. Complaint management, and effective alternative dispute 
resolution (ADR) schemes enabling customers to seek redress, represent relevant tools. 
Public authorities may have a role in establishing, or at least promoting, ADR schemes 
for the financial system. 
Last  but  not  least,  financial  education  programs  may  obviously  complement 
regulation and enforcement in ensuring effective consumer protection.
Overall, the work of FinCoNet over these years has become extremely relevant in 
supporting the comparison and evaluation of supervisory instruments, the dissemination 
of good practices, the analyses of critical issues, the formulation of policy proposals. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  has  also  devoted  a  great  effort  to  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive consumer protection framework in the Italian banking system. In 2009 we 
established a Banking Ombudsman. In 2014, we established a new Directorate responsible 
for business conduct supervision and in charge of financial education initiatives.  
Since  then,  we  have  issued  several  Guidelines  for  financial  intermediaries;  the 
Ombudsman scheme has given solutions to a very large number of complaints filed by 
customers;  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  reimbursed  over  €  300  million  to 
customers; our financial education activities reach more than 100.000 students every year.
However, despite the steps taken so far, we are aware that we are still in the “early 
age” of business conduct supervision. That is why FinCoNet meetings are important: we 
believe that comparing practices, sharing knowledge and experiences are essential to 
ensure financial consumer protection. 
The agenda of this two days meeting is very rich. You will be able to analyze and 
exchange views on several relevant issues: the tools available and their effectiveness, the 
2
evolving context in your respective jurisdictions, the use of new technology in market 
conduct supervision. 
New technologies in the financial system challenge regulators and supervisors, they 
open up new streams of products and services in a fast-changing market. The rise of 
“open banking” and the increased accessibility of bank accounts by third parties represent 
the most visible innovations in this field and are already contributing to reshaping the 
financial landscape. Conduct supervisors must intensify the use of data and algorithms 
to increase the efficiency and scope of supervisory actions.  
On Friday, the International Seminar jointly organized by FinCoNet and the Bank 
of Italy will provide useful insights on behavioral finance, shedding a light on how this 
approach can be embedded in supervisory activity. 
3
