Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Shaping  the  new  banking  landscape  -
defining the priorities and leveraging new technology to propel the
Mauritian financial system forward
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Annual Dinner for
Major Economic Stakeholders, hosted by the Bank of Mauritius, Flic en Flac, 29 November 2019.
 Your Excellencies
Former Governor D. Maraye
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association Limited
Chairmen and Chief Executives
Distinguished Guests
Members of the Press
Ladies and Gentlemen
It is an honour for  me  to  welcome  you  tonight  to  this  customary  annual  event  of  the  Bank  of
Mauritius.
This year, I will depart from the way I made my speech last year. I will not go over the Bank’s
achievements, as these have been amply reported in the media. For those who want to refresh
their  minds,  they  may  wish  to  visit  the  website  of  the  Bank.  Our  accomplishments  will  also
feature prominently in the Bank’s Annual Report which will be released shortly. We shall send
you an electronic copy of the Report once it is released.
I am pretty sure you are looking forward to hear my message tonight. Please feel free to share
with me directly your comments and criticisms later. This space is too often filled by the media. It
would be good, for a change, to hear about what stakeholders think.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let  me  start  with  a  statement  that  will  be  the  weft  of  my  discourse:  ‘Much  IS  happening  and
much WILL happen!’
A look at what is happening in the world reminds me of Charles Dickens, whom I quote from his
book ‘A Tale of Two Cities’:
I quote: ‘It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the
age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity’. End of quote.
You will agree with me that it befits our times, especially in the light of conflicting messages that
we get all the time from all sides…
High Inflation is worrying; too low an inflation is upsetting!
Excess liquidity is dangerous, but lack of liquidity is as troubling;
The exchange rate is never favourable, whether for exporters or for importers;
The policy rate, when it is high, is not helping businesses and borrowers and, when it is low,
it goes against those who want to save…
I could go on and on with the never-ending dichotomy of views and criticisms.
Indeed, it is a tale of two cities!
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  some  facts  which  are  true  cause  for  concern  for  us  as
policymakers.  The  global  economic  uncertainty  has  worsened.  The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank
have revised down their global growth forecasts for 2019 and 2020. The economic environment
is becoming more challenging.
Monetary  policy  is  becoming  more  and  more  accommodative,  as  many  central  banks—both
from advanced and emerging market economies—have been cutting policy rates aggressively to
nearly  all-time  lows  while  others  have  embarked  on  quantitative  easing  to  support  their
economies.  To  complicate  matters,  debt  levels  in  many  countries  are  constraining  fiscal
manoeuvres. The fact is that there is lesser and lesser room for dodging the bullet in case of a
global recession. Some are concerned that our policy rate, currently at 3.35 per cent, is at its all-
time low. We are not alone in this low policy rate environment.
This  being  said,  there  IS  hope,  ladies  and  gentlemen!  Amid  the  global  uncertainty  and  the
materiality of downside risks, the Mauritian economy has remained resilient. Mauritius stands as
a buoyant jurisdiction and is progressively growing into a leading international financial centre.
In  today’s  unforgiving  competitive  environment,  success  is  achievable  only  if  the  highest
standards are maintained. On that front, I am blunt: There is NO compromise from our side!
At the outset, let me reiterate that the Bank is pursuing its mission of preserving monetary and
financial stability, whilst supporting Mauritius’ transition towards becoming a digital economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, as a prelude to the second part of my speech, allow me to set a few
elements in perspective…
First, inflation. It reached a low of 0.7 per cent in October 2019 and is expected to remain below 1
per cent in the coming months, before rising to an estimated 1.5 per cent in 2020.
Second, the excess rupee liquidity has dropped to tolerable levels thanks to the Bank’s costly
open market operations.
Third,  monetary  policy  is  currently  highly  accommodative  and  is  expected  to  support  the
economy  going  forward.  It  will  help  the  economy  sail  through  the  choppy  waters  of  global
economic slowdown.
In 2018, I announced a shift in the monetary policy operational target from the overnight interbank
interest rate to the yield on 91-Day Bill. I am pleased to underline that, what was a long-overdue
shift, has borne positive results in terms of steering short-term interest rates close to the policy
rate. The Bank introduced the 28-Day Bank of Mauritius Bills in September 2019. Presently, a net
amount of Rs2.8 billion has been issued to banks. This instrument has contributed significantly to
improve liquidity management and ensure a smooth yield curve.
There is a fourth element that I wish to highlight. I am speaking of climate change, which is fast
emerging  as  a  priority  for  many  countries.  The  2019  edition  of  the  annual  World  Economic
Forum publication lists extreme weather events, natural disasters, and failure of climate-change
mitigation and adaptation among the top five threats most likely to occur in the next 10 years.
Some 42 central banks and other regulatory authorities have set up the Network on Greening the
Financial System. This forum focuses on climate risk management in the financial sector and
fosters the transition toward a sustainable economy.
There is a clear economic case for building resilience to climate change as it may directly affect
financial institutions’ balance sheets. The Bank has included climate change on its agenda and I
will encourage all of you to do the same. I intend to engage with banks on this issue in the near
future and request them to consider to what extent climate change is, or can be, factored in their
decision-making process.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last but not least, we are constantly improving our regulatory framework to better align it with
international standards and reinforce the soundness as well as the attractiveness of our financial
industry.  The  Bank is sparing no effort to support the country’s strategy to become a  leading
regional  financial  hub.  In  line  with  the  country’s  Africa  Strategy,  the  development  of  regional
payment  facilities  will  be  accelerated  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  gateway  for  cross-border
payments.
Before proceeding to the second part of my speech, let me spend a few minutes on two specific
issues.
The quality of macroeconomic statistics is of utmost importance in policymaking. As the official
compiler of external sector statistics, the Bank has to measure cross-border transactions and
reflect them in the balance of payments and international investment position for Mauritius. The
Bank has been conducting an annual Foreign Assets and Liabilities Survey (FALS) with entities
from various sectors, which calls for specific information on our country’s foreign assets and
liabilities. I strongly encourage all those entities to provide their responses accurately and in a
timely manner.
Let  me  now  dwell  on  recent  exchange  rate  developments,  a  topic  on  which  I  have  been
frequently  solicited  from  various  quarters.  As  I  said  at  the  post-MPC  press  briefing  last
Wednesday,  the  rupee  has  depreciated  against  the  US  dollar  both  in  nominal  and  real  terms
since the beginning of 2019. This depreciation was mostly driven by the appreciation of the US
dollar on the international market and partly by domestic economic conditions.
Concerns  regarding  an  overvaluation  of  the  rupee  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  have  receded
substantially. You will recall that the IMF has mentioned in several of its Article IV Consultation
Staff Reports that the rupee was overvalued. This seems to have been corrected. I wish to also
highlight that the Bank has not intervened at all on the FX market since mid-August 2019.
This brings me to the second part of my speech which is about what WILL happen.
I will now dwell on the core elements of the roadmap that the Bank has drawn to pave the way for
a jurisdiction that fully embraces technology.
The successful shift in the operational target of monetary policy has enabled us to lay down a
solid  foundation  for  a  thorough  revamp  of  the  monetary  policy  operational  framework.  We
propose  to  roll  out  a  new  framework  next  year,  which  is  being  reviewed  to  infuse  greater
dynamism into the money market and set the basis for a more reliable benchmark yield curve.
As  part  of  its  new  strategy,  the  Bank  will  strengthen  its  forward-looking  monetary  policy
framework. The overall communication on monetary policy will be upgraded, complemented by
more  regular  dialogue  with  stakeholders.  These  improvements  will  help  anchor  inflation
expectations and enhance clarity on policy formulation and objective.
Financial players, especially banks given their prominence in the sector, have an important role
to play in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy signals to the economy. At my last
meeting of the Banking Committee in October 2019, I had urged bankers to ensure that market
interest rates are adjusted in a timely manner to changes in the policy rate in order to ensure the
effectiveness of monetary policy.
To boost the development of the FX market, the Bank is considering various measures, such as
improving  transparency  on  exchange  rates,  heightening  efficiency  on  the  FX  market,  and  the
adoption by the industry of the Global FX Code.
These measures would enhance dynamism in the FX market and offer greater opportunities to
market operators to manage net open positions and hedge exchange rate risks. A more dynamic
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
money  market,  a  likely  consequence  of  the  new  monetary  policy  operational  framework,  will
provide considerable support to the FX market and stimulate its development.
Macroeconomic policies in the past few years have attracted FX inflows. There is, however, a
need  to  address  the  numerous  challenges  facing  the  export  sector  given  the  weakening
economic  prospects  in  major  exports  markets.  Structural  reforms  and  measures  to  attract
foreign direct investment in productive sectors are prerequisites to the strategy to rekindle the
export sector.
Ladies and gentlemen, the country’s foreign exchange reserves have attained an all-time high of
USD7.3 billion. Though the current account remains in deficit, the capital and financial accounts
of the balance of payments have steadily generated positive  FX inflows which have helped to
finance  this  deficit.    The  one-year  level  of  import  cover  is  a  solid  insulation  against  adverse
external shocks.
As you all know, the management of the central bank’s balance sheet has wide-ranging macro-
economic implications. The balance sheet comprises mainly FX reserves and monetary policy
instruments. A strong and sustainable balance sheet position ensures that the Bank can fulfil its
policy goals effectively.
In the light of the low yield global environment and the high costs inherent to conducting monetary
operations,  the  Bank  has  recently  received  technical  advice  for  an  optimisation  of  its  balance
sheet  management.  Further,  the  Bank  intends  to  increase  transparency  in  the  conduct  of  its
operations through additional disclosures in its financial statements.
Ladies and gentlemen, the protection and consolidation of our financial industry’s ecosystem is a
priority. We have strengthened the legal and regulatory frameworks through the issuance of new
guidelines  and  enhancement  of  existing  ones  and  the  enactment  of  several  key  pieces  of
legislation.    These  pave  the  way  for  innovations  in  payment  systems  and  the  protection  of
consumers  of  financial  products  and  services.  [  The  main  ones  are  the  National  Payment
Systems  Act  2018,  the  Ombudsperson  for  Financial  Services  Act  2018,  and  the  Mauritius
Deposit Insurance Scheme Act 2019.]
The Bank is also finalising the revision of the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 and the Banking Act
2004. These revised enactments will modernise the central banking legal framework in sync with
international as well as domestic developments. The upgrading of the banking laws and revisions
of the regulations will help keep pace with the progress in this industry and fast evolving financial
ecosystem.  Cloud  technology,  artificial  intelligence,  cyber-security,  Fintech,  RegTech  and
SupTech are intricately linked to banking and cannot be overlooked.
The crisis management and resolution framework, also embedded in the revised legislation, will
ensure a reliable safety net for customers in the event of a banking crisis. The deposit insurance
scheme and the centralised KYC will be rolled out in the near future.
In the pursuit of financial stability, the  Bank regularly assesses the soundness of the financial
system and publishes a Financial Stability Report twice a year. Regular stress tests are carried
out to gauge whether it can safely withstand a variety of extreme but plausible macroeconomic
shocks.
The Bank is moving to a full-fledged risk-based supervisory framework. Concurrently, the Bank
has  completed  the  enhancement  of  its  risk-based  supervisory  framework  for  Anti  Money
Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT).  Alongside this process, the
Bank  is  working  on  an  outreach  programme  for  the  banking  sector  jointly  with  the  Mauritius
Bankers Association Limited and has also enhanced its interactions with other licensees.
Work is ongoing with the OECD with a view to making Mauritius a stronger IFC. All stakeholders
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
have  to  work  closely  for  the  benefit  of  the  financial  sector  of  Mauritius,  especially  within  the
parameters  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Combatting  Money  Laundering  and  the  Financing  of
Terrorism  and  Proliferation  2019–2022.  This  strategy  sets  out  the  approach  to  tackle  money
laundering,  terrorist  financing  and  proliferation  threats  over  the  next  three  years.  We  are  also
closely engaging with banks and our licensees on compliance with AML/CFT requirements to
ensure that all the risk mitigating systems are well in place.
Speaking  of  the  payment  systems  infrastructure,  a  notable  achievement  this  year  was  the
implementation of the Mauritius Central Automated Switch which combines the Card Payment
System and the Instant Payment System. MauCAS provides an innovative digital platform that
significantly  broadens  the  range  of  financial  services  offered  to  customers.  It  also  makes
banking, e-commerce and mobile payments inter-operable, and promotes a ‘cash-lite’ society.
We expect to on-board all banks on the platform over the next six months. I also invite non-bank
stakeholders to leverage this new platform for channelling local payments. MauCAS will foster
the  emergence  of  Fintech  start-ups  and  e-government  initiatives.  There  are  unprecedented
opportunities to tap in this industry and its development will help shape digital Mauritius.
To  keep  pace  with  international  developments  in  the  digital  currency  space,  I  have  engaged
discussions  with  some  international  institutions  for  the  introduction  of  a  central  bank  digital
currency for retail and wholesale payments in Mauritius. We are determined to make our country
a leader in the region, where a well-regulated central bank-issued digital currency becomes a
reality.
I am pleased to announce that, as part of its financial literacy strategy, and to contribute to the
emergence of a new breed of Mauritian tech entrepreneurs, the Bank will launch early next year a
Fintech competition. This competition will target college and university students and will serve as
an incubator hub to develop apps that will benefit consumers of financial products and services.
Cybersecurity remains paramount for the Bank. We are living in a world where cyberattacks on
the banking industry are increasing and are being committed with more sophisticated tools. The
Bank  is  already  monitoring  the  SWIFT  Customer  Security  Programme.  It  is  conscious  that
additional tools and precautions must be taken by the industry as a whole. The Bank wishes to
have  an  industry  approach  to  this  problem  and  proposes  to  come  up  with  an  enhanced
cybersecurity  framework  for  the  banking  industry.  This  framework  will  be  based  on  the  latest
Bank for International Settlements and the Financial Stability Institute standards and principles.
My  vision  is  a  banking  landscape  where  technology  will  redefine  bank-customer  interaction.  I
want a dynamic banking landscape without impediments for mobility, flexibility, accessibility, and
security.
Let the future of the banking industry show the truth in the statement uttered by the great Charles
Darwin. I quote: “It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent that
survives. It is the one that is the most adaptable to change!” End of quote.
Ladies and gentlemen, we need to own the change process of our country.  Whether you are
from  the  business  community  or  from  the  media,  you  all  have  a  determining  role  to  play  in
sketching this new economic and financial landscape.
I hope that you are as eager as I am to dive into the future!
On that note, I take this opportunity to convey to you, on behalf of the Board of Directors, staff
members  of  the  Bank  and  in  my  own  name,  our  warmest  regards  and  best  wishes  for  the
upcoming festive period.
I thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
