For release on delivery 
1:00 p.m. EDT 
November 1, 2019 
 
Friedrich Hayek and the Price System 
Remarks by 
Randal K. Quarles 
Vice Chair for Supervision  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
         
at 
 
November 1, 2019 
“The Road to Serfdom at 75:  The Future of Classical Liberalism and the Free Market” 
Ninth Annual Conference of the William F. Buckley, Jr., Program at Yale 
New Haven, Connecticut 
 I am delighted to be back in New Haven and particularly to be in the company of 
so many students interested in thinking rigorously about ideas.  And I am honored to be 
participating in the William F. Buckley, Jr., Program’s conference today on Friedrich 
Hayek and the future of classical liberalism.1 
Over the course of this afternoon, you will hear a series of presentations that put 
Hayek’s thinking in the context of contemporary developments and that offer a variety of 
perspectives on his intellectual legacy.  Hayek was a prolific—some might even say 
profligate—thinker.  He was at various times, and in various modes, an early 
neuropsychologist, an epistemologist, a theoretical economist, a political philosopher, a 
moral philosopher, a philosopher of science, a historian of ideas, a public intellectual, and 
a social polemicist.  This vast range has caused some to undervalue his contributions as 
an economist, notwithstanding his eventual Nobel Prize—when Hayek moved to the 
United States in 1950, the University of Chicago Economics Department would not hire 
him because, as Milton Friedman said, “At that stage, he really wasn’t doing any 
economics,” and Paul Krugman famously said that “the Hayek thing is almost entirely 
about politics, not economics.”2  Others believe his broader thought, while seminal, was 
inconsistent across these various areas, and Hayek himself never demonstrated how it all 
hung together.  In my contribution to the discussion today, I want to examine a particular 
example of the lasting effect that Hayek has had on economic thinking—one pertaining 
to the importance of freely determined prices for producing efficient economic 
                                                 
1 All of my remarks today represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal 
Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Financial Stability Board.  I would like to 
thank Ed Nelson for his assistance in preparing these remarks. 
2 See, respectively, Cassidy (2000) and Krugman (2011). 
 - 2 - 
outcomes—and consider how Hayek’s insights in this area can, in fact, tie together the 
various strands of his larger philosophy. 
So as not to appear entirely out of touch with more immediate developments, I 
will end by descending from the empyrean to the terrestrial with a discussion of the 
economic outlook and the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) policy decision 
from earlier this week.  
Hayek and Economics 
Hayek’s contributions to economics ranged widely, and many were important and 
of lasting influence.  Among them were his studies of the relationship between the 
economic and political arrangements of a society.  That body of work included, of course, 
his celebrated book The Road to Serfdom, which was published 75 years ago this year 
and is a focus of this event, as well as his later monograph, The Constitution of Liberty.3  
In addition, Hayek contributed prominently to monetary analysis.  His work in this area 
included the theory of the business cycle that was part of the thinking of the Austrian 
school of economics.4  It also included Hayek’s studies of the feasibility and implications 
of private-sector currency issuance—contributions that have informed modern-day 
analyses of the repercussions of electronic money.5 
Today, however, I will be concerned instead with still another key contribution 
that Hayek made to economic analysis:  understanding the operation of the price system.  
                                                 
3 See Hayek (1944, 1960).  For an extensive analysis of these books, see Caldwell (2004) and, more 
recently, Caldwell (forthcoming). 
4 See, for example, Hayek (1935).  For an examination of this body of work, see O’Driscoll (1977). 
5 See especially Hayek (1976).  For recent formal investigations of the topic, see Brunnermeier, James, and 
Landau (2019) and Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2019).  My Board colleague, Lael Brainard, has 
recently discussed the policy implications of electronic money.  See Brainard (2019).  The potential 
implications of privately issued currency in the form of stablecoins are under active consideration by the 
Financial Stability Board, which I chair, in work to be delivered to the Group of Twenty later next year. 
 - 3 - 
This contribution was formalized in his most famous paper in the economic-research 
literature:  his article “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” which was published in the 
American Economic Review in September 1945.6 
Hayek (1945) Revisited 
It is worth outlining the basis for the high esteem in which economists hold 
Hayek’s 1945 contribution.  In 1974, the press release by the Royal Swedish Academy of 
Sciences that announced Hayek’s Nobel Prize in Economics stated:  “The Academy is of 
the opinion that von Hayek’s analysis of the functional efficiency of different economic 
systems is one of his most significant contributions to economic research in the broader 
sense. . . .  His guiding principle when comparing various systems is to study how 
efficiently all the knowledge and all the information dispersed among individuals and 
enterprises [are] utilized.  His conclusion is that only by far-reaching decentralization in a 
market system with competition and free price-fixing is it possible to make full use of 
knowledge and information.”7 
In the research that the academy described, Hayek’s 1945 paper was the key 
article.  More recently, this paper received further prominent acclaim when it was 
categorized by an expert panel as being one of the top 20 articles ever published in the 
American Economic Review.8 
With regard to the paper’s contribution to the understanding of economic 
processes, an illuminating discussion was provided in 2005 by Oliver Williamson—
himself later a Nobel laureate in economics.  Williamson cited Hayek’s 1945 paper, 
                                                 
6 See Hayek (1945). 
7 See Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1974, paragraph 10). 
8 See Arrow and others (2011, p. 4). 
 - 4 - 
along with Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations from the eighteenth century, as forming 
the core of a “venerated tradition in economics” of studying the notion of “spontaneous 
order” arising from a freely operating market system.9 
How does Hayek’s case for the price system fit in alongside the other work that 
Williamson mentioned?  As Paul Samuelson—yet another Nobel Prize winner—had 
occasion to note, the argument for the price system that Hayek articulated in 1945 was 
complementary with, but distinct from, the argument that Adam Smith espoused in The 
Wealth of Nations.10  Smith focused on how market mechanisms guide producers toward 
satisfying consumers’ wants.  Hayek instead stressed how the market mechanism makes, 
as he put it, “fuller use . . . of the existing knowledge” than a directed economy is able to 
do.11 
Hayek emphasized that the signals transmitted by the various individual prices in 
the economy could, together, serve as a useful means of guiding overall resource 
allocation.  The reason is that prices convey messages to consumers and producers even 
when the information that drives prices is not aggregated or directly observed.12  For 
example, a large increase or decrease in the price of gasoline conveys information that 
influences consumer behavior and that also affects the behavior of energy producers, 
even when neither of these sets of market participants are aware of the precise factor 
initiating the price change.  As a related matter, Hayek recognized that prices transmit 
                                                 
9 See Williamson (2005, p. 1).  This discussion referred to Smith (1776) and Arrow and Debreu (1954) 
alongside Hayek (1945). 
10 See Samuelson (1983, p. 6). 
11 The quotation is from Hayek (1945, p. 521). 
12 Hayek’s analysis therefore differed from general equilibrium approaches to economic problems, 
exemplified by the work of Arrow and Debreu (1954).  Such approaches tend to evaluate market outcomes 
in terms of their ability to reproduce the allocation decided on by a hypothetical social planner who 
possesses complete knowledge of all information in the economy and who is charged with maximizing the 
welfare of the community. 
 - 5 - 
information even in a situation in which much of that information is not explicitly 
disclosed by one market participant to another, or even consciously articulable by any 
market participant at all.  Hayek believed that all of us “know” many things that we 
cannot articulate but that we nevertheless act on in practical situations, and the price 
system can therefore aggregate and transmit that knowledge which we could not 
otherwise convey. 
Hayek’s analysis had implications for the viability of different economic systems.  
With regard to centrally planned economic systems—which had considerable support in 
the West in 1945, in light of the increased use of government economic controls in many 
countries during World War II and the dismal performance of market economies during 
the Great Depression—Hayek’s analysis suggested that these systems would likely 
exhibit great inefficiency.  To Hayek, it was totally unrealistic to expect an economy to 
operate efficiently if it was based on the “direction of the whole economic system 
according to one unified plan,” as such a plan lacked the valuable information embedded 
in market-determined prices.13 
The economist Gregory Mankiw has elegantly summed up Hayek’s insight here:  
“Information is very, very dispersed among the population. . . .Nobody can possibly 
know all the information you need to run a centrally planned economy.”14  Hayek’s 
economic analysis therefore complemented the philosophical and political arguments he 
marshaled against centrally planned economies in The Road to Serfdom.  Again, it is 
important to recognize that this is not a contingent or technological problem.  It is not 
only that the dispersion of knowledge makes it hard to gather, although that is certainly 
                                                 
13 See Hayek (1945, p. 521). 
14 See Mankiw (2017). 
 - 6 - 
true—but if that were the only issue, then perhaps future advances in technology such as 
quantum computing would remove that obstacle.  Rather, as already mentioned, we all 
know many important things that we cannot articulate; and many of these things we come 
to know precisely through our participation in trade and exchange through the market.  
This type of knowledge (a) is by its nature not conveyable to a central planner because 
we are not fully aware of all we know, and (b) would not even exist apart from the social 
interactions facilitated by the market which a central planner would replace.   
The flip side of Hayek’s analysis was that, while there are insurmountable 
obstacles to economic efficiency via a central plan, an efficient economy may still be 
obtainable by letting the price system work.  To quote Mankiw again, Hayek’s analysis 
implies that “markets figure out a way to aggregate, in a decentralized way, dispersed 
information into desirable outcomes.”15  Furthermore, this mechanism does not require 
the government or any one individual to process that dispersed information into a central 
network or to be able to aggregate the information into a statistical series.  It is, instead, 
sufficient for the proper operation of the price mechanism that the relevant information 
be embodied implicitly in the economy’s multiplicity of prices of individual goods and 
factors of production.  This information is recorded in such prices because they respond 
to the behavior of individual buyers and sellers in the economy.16  Consequently, as 
longtime Hayek scholar Gerald O’Driscoll has observed:  “What particularly 
recommends the price system to Hayek is the ‘economy of knowledge’ with which it 
operates.  It is [in Hayek’s description] nothing short of a ‘marvel.’ ”17 
                                                 
15 See Mankiw (2017).  See also Taylor (2012, p. 1). 
16 The process is interactive, with market participants not only influencing prices, but also responding to 
price signals. 
17 See O’Driscoll (1977, p. 27). 
 - 7 - 
How Hayek (1945) Has Influenced Economics 
Hayek’s 1945 paper has had a great influence on subsequent economic research.  
It has been found to be highly relevant to a variety of areas of economic inquiry.  For 
example, Hayek’s analysis has proved valuable in the development of standard 
microeconomics, since his contribution deepened economists’ understanding of the 
working of the price system and promoted further investigation of the question of how 
decentralized information is transmitted by markets.18  Hayek’s emphasis on prices as 
processors of information has also had applications to international trade theory.19  And 
in macroeconomics and monetary theory, Milton Friedman’s Nobel lecture, published in 
1977, cited Hayek’s 1945 paper when arguing that, because it disrupted the signals 
arising from relative-price movements, inflation both lowered the efficiency of the 
economy and led output to deviate from its natural (or full-employment) level.20  Hayek 
likened the price mechanism to a “system of telecommunications,” and Friedman’s 
description of inflation as a form of “static” interrupting price signals was in keeping with 
this analogy.21 
Hayek’s ideas on prices influenced Joseph Stiglitz in his analysis of markets with 
asymmetric information and Roger Myerson’s insights on mechanism design theory.  
Each of these bodies of work earned a Nobel Prize.22 
                                                 
18 See, for example, Serrano (2002). 
19 For example, an article in the area of international trade noted (Bernhofen and Brown, 2004, p. 49):  
“The insight that prices contain the relevant information about underlying economic fundamentals goes 
back to the pioneering work of Hayek (1945).” 
20 See Friedman (1977, pp. 456–67).  The notion that distortions to relative-price patterns lead the 
economy’s output level to deviate from its natural value would be formalized by Woodford (2003). 
21 See Hayek (1945, p. 527), and, for Friedman’s use of the analogy between inflation and static, see 
Friedman and Friedman (1980, pp. 17, 274). 
22 Shortly before he received the prize, Stiglitz (2000, p. 1468) noted that the 1945 Hayek paper recognized 
that “the central problem of economics was a problem of knowledge or information”—and so it anticipated 
 - 8 - 
Qualifications and Extensions 
I do not want to leave the impression, however, that all of the conclusions in 
Hayek’s 1945 paper have become unchallenged principles chiseled into the economic 
consensus.  On the contrary, one of the reasons why the paper has been so influential is 
that it remains a benchmark reference for understanding the case for relying primarily on 
a market system, based on freely determined prices, for determining the production and 
allocation of resources.  The paper has therefore set a high bar for preempting the price 
system or for other interventions in the market:  When economists point to cases in which 
market mechanisms can be improved on by regulation or other public-sector intervention, 
or to instances in which price signals do not appear to be operating effectively, they need 
to identify a specific market failure as the source of the inefficiency.  Essentially, they 
need to establish instances in which the price system can be improved on as a means of 
processing information.23 
Even Hayek acknowledged that the price mechanism works within an ecosystem 
of laws and social institutions, and those may evolve in ways that interfere with the 
signaling of prices.  For example, one of the important events that raised doubts about the 
functioning of the private market’s pricing process occurred in the years leading up to the 
                                                 
the field of the economics of information.  And in his Nobel lecture, Myerson (2008, p. 586) credited 
Hayek’s “widely influential paper” with helping spur mechanism-design research—by characterizing 
alternative institutional frameworks as different mechanisms for “communicating widely dispersed 
information about the desires and the resources of different individuals in society.” 
23 For example, while Stiglitz (2000) agreed that the price system is a means of collecting and transmitting 
dispersed information, he took issue with the notion that this system always produced the most efficient 
economic equilibrium.  Specifically, Stiglitz argued that incomplete information could lead to 
unnecessarily high unemployment and other undesirable outcomes that could be improved on by 
government intervention.  In a similar vein, Dasgupta (1980, p. 115) noted in response to Hayek’s (1945) 
position:  “It can immediately be argued that the fact that much information is private is not on its own 
sufficient to warrant the unfettered play of market forces to be judged the best possible resource allocation 
mechanism.” 
 - 9 - 
financial crisis.  This period featured pricing by financial markets that seemed, in some 
prominent cases, not to be adequately reflecting information about actual risks.  Spreads 
on risky private-sector debt reached very low levels, and damaging spillovers to the 
nonfinancial sector occurred in the form of unduly high real estate prices and excessive 
leverage by borrowers in the housing market.  One of my predecessors at the Federal 
Reserve Board, Donald Kohn, has noted the seeming herd-like behavior of financial 
markets in the pre-crisis period that generated this situation—an “underpricing of risk.”24 
The financial crisis, and the deep recession that followed it, prompted changes in 
the United States’ regulatory framework.  These changes have been designed to make the 
financial system more resilient than it was before the crisis.  By creating appropriate 
incentives and rules, they should also encourage financial markets to price risk more 
appropriately than they did in the years leading up to the crisis—for example, by 
reducing the danger of investor complacency regarding the riskiness of their investments 
and the possibility of adverse scenarios.  If we follow Hayek and regard the price system 
as like a telecommunications network, and then apply that metaphor to the financial 
sector, we can think of the institutional and regulatory changes to the financial system 
over the past decade as designed to improve the reliability and signal quality of the 
transmissions.25 
How does all of this relate to the larger questions of philosophy and social order 
to which Hayek devoted much of his thought?  Hayek’s insights about the price system 
depend importantly on his theory of knowledge:  The information that is available to us 
as a society is the aggregate of the highly dispersed and sometimes inarticulate 
                                                 
24 See Kohn (2009).  See also Yellen (2017, p. 4). 
25 I recently discussed post-crisis reform to financial regulation in Quarles (2019). 
 - 10 - 
knowledge possessed by each of us individually.  It is not only hard to convey that 
information to a central authority for processing into a rational decision—it is also 
conceptually impossible given the nature of that knowledge.  And, indeed, important 
parts of that knowledge will not even be generated except through our interaction with 
each other through the mechanism of the market.  Trying to centralize economic 
decisionmaking, then, is not just too hard to do as a practical matter.  It would actually 
reduce the amount of knowledge available to us as a society, by replacing those myriad 
individual interactions in a free marketplace.  Thus, even if some technological way to 
aggregate information other than through prices could be invented, it would lead to less 
efficient, less humane outcomes because it would be based on less total human 
information.  The price mechanism, then, is not just a matter of economics—it is a matter 
of social and, indeed, civilizational progress.  As Hayek says in The Constitution of 
Liberty, “[C]ivilization begins when the individual in pursuit of his ends can make use of 
more knowledge than he himself acquired and when he can transcend the boundaries of 
his ignorance by profiting from knowledge that he himself does not possess.”26  I think 
this ties together the various threads of Hayek’s thought throughout a long life:  his early 
work on psychology (“How do we know?”), his later epistemology (“What do we know, 
and what does it mean to know it?”), his economics (“How do we make knowledge 
usable?”), and his social and political theory (“What institutions will ensure that the 
greatest amount of human knowledge will be usable in the pursuit of their human 
fulfillment?”).  Contrary to those polemicists across the ideological spectrum whose 
tendentious simplifications of Hayek’s thought would turn him into a crude icon rather 
                                                 
26 See Hayek (1960, p. 22). 
 - 11 - 
than a complex thinker, this is a deeply human, and a deeply humane, project.  I will look 
forward to the contributions of the others you will hear from today in how Hayek 
elaborated it and how we can further these principles today. 
Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy 
Now I would like to turn to the current economic scene and this week’s FOMC 
decision.  Let me start by saying that the U.S. economy is doing well, and I am optimistic 
about the outlook.  Economic conditions are currently very close to meeting our—that is, 
the FOMC’s—dual-mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price 
stability. 
 A particular source of strength has been the labor market.  Setting aside the 
monthly volatility and, specifically, the effects of the recent strike at General Motors, 
labor market indicators are as strong as they have been in quite some time.  The 
unemployment rate has been running near a 50-year low, and the proportion of the 
population currently employed is close to its highest level in a decade.  Encouragingly, 
labor force participation has held up, as the tight labor market has motivated workers to 
either join or remain in the labor force, halting, at least for the time being, a long-standing 
downward trend.  Although the pace of job gains has slowed this year, we expected some 
deceleration because of how low the unemployment rate has fallen.   
 A strong job market and high employment have in turn supported economic 
growth.  Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) grew 2-1/2 percent over the past four 
quarters, a healthy pace by historical standards and a major contributor to overall growth 
since consumption represents over two-thirds of economic activity.  Because the labor 
 - 12 - 
market remains tight, I expect wage growth to pick up, which would then in turn 
underpin further strength in consumption and overall growth. 
 For the other half of our mandate, inflation as measured by the PCE index was 1.3 
percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core PCE inflation, which 
excludes increases in the prices of food and energy, was 1.7 percent.  While these 
readings are below our 2 percent inflation objective, they are fairly close, and my 
assessment is that inflation will inch toward our objective in the coming months. 
 Outside the near term, I am also optimistic about the longer-term potential of the 
U.S. economy.  I am heartened by a recent pickup in labor productivity growth.  A 
notable development of the post-crisis period has been the abysmal pace of labor 
productivity growth.  After averaging about a 2-1/4 percent pace in the two decades 
leading up to the crisis, labor productivity growth has been closer to 1 percent, on 
average, since 2011.  While there has been much speculation, it remains to be seen what 
has driven this slowdown.  Consequently, the slowdown could resolve unpredictably.  
Although the quarterly data are volatile, I have been encouraged by a pickup in labor 
productivity in the first half of this year, when it grew at a 3 percent annual rate.  Further 
out, I admit to being a bit of techno-enthusiast, and I see the potential for many emerging 
technologies, including 5G communications, artificial intelligence and machine learning, 
and 3-D printing, to further boost productivity growth in the coming years. 
 Having established my optimism, I will now circle back to some more worrying 
signs in the recent data that suggest some headwinds are holding back growth.  One 
prominent factor weighing on a relatively robust domestic economy has been weak 
growth among our trading partners.  The International Monetary Fund projects that global 
 - 13 - 
economic growth in 2019 will be the slowest since the financial crisis.  Partly as a 
consequence of weak foreign growth, U.S. exports have been flat over the past year. 
Another weak spot has been investment.  After a strong 2017 and start to 2018, 
business fixed investment has tailed off this year and fallen outright in the second and 
third quarters.  I find the weakness of investment to be of particular concern because 
increasing investment and the capital stock are important for raising the potential capacity 
of the economy.  It is likely that some of the weakness in capital spending is a result of 
elevated uncertainty, for foreign growth generally but also specifically for trade 
developments. 
Against this backdrop, at our meeting earlier this week, we decided to lower our 
target range for the federal funds rate for the third time this year.  We took this action to 
help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide 
some insurance against ongoing risks.  By lowering the federal funds rate this year, we 
are supporting the continued expansion of the economy.  Overall, with these policy 
adjustments, I believe that the economy will remain in a good place, with the labor 
market remaining strong and inflation staying close to our 2 percent objective.  We see 
the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming 
information about the economy continues to be broadly consistent with our outlook of 
moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 
2 percent objective.   
    References 
- 14 - 
Arrow, Kenneth J., B. Douglas Bernheim, Martin S. Feldstein, Daniel L. McFadden, 
James M. Poterba, and Robert M. Solow (2011).  “100 Years of the American 
Economic Review:  The Top 20 Articles,” American Economic Review, vol. 101 
(February), pp. 1–8. 
 
Arrow, Kenneth J., and Gerard Debreu (1954).  “Existence of an Equilibrium for a 
Competitive Economy,” Econometrica, vol. 22 (July), pp. 265–90. 
 
Bernhofen, Daniel M., and John C. Brown (2004).  “A Direct Test of the Theory of 
Comparative Advantage:  The Case of Japan,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 
112 (February), pp. 48–67. 
 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019).  “Minutes of the Federal Open 
Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019,” press release, August 21, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190821a.htm. 
 
Brainard, Lael (2019).  “Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments 
Landscape,” speech delivered at “The Future of Money in the Digital Age,” a 
conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and 
Princeton University’s Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, October 16, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20191016a.htm. 
 
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau (2019).  “The 
Digitalization of Money,”  paper presented at “The Future of Money in the Digital 
Age,” a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, 
Washington, October 16, 
https://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/markus/files/02c_digitalmoney.pdf. 
 
Caldwell, Bruce (2004).  Hayek’s Challenge:  An Intellectual Biography of F.A. Hayek.  
Chicago:  University of Chicago Press. 
 
——— (forthcoming).  “The Road to Serfdom after 75 Years,” Journal of Economic 
Literature. 
107–23. 
 
Cassidy, John (2000).  “The Price Prophet,” New Yorker, February 7, pp. 44–51. 
 
Dasgupta, Partha (1980).  “Decentralization and Rights,” Economica, vol. 47 (May), pp. 
 
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Daniel Sanches (2019).  “Can Currency Competition 
Work?” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 106 (October), 1–15. 
 
Friedman, Milton (1977).  “Nobel Lecture:  Inflation and Unemployment,” Journal of 
Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 451–72. 
 - 15 - 
Sons. 
 
Friedman, Milton, and Rose Friedman (1980).  Free to Choose:  A Personal Statement.  
New York:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
 
Hayek, Friedrich A. (1935).  Prices and Production, 2nd ed.  London:  G. Routledge and 
 
——— (1944).  The Road to Serfdom.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press. 
 
——— (1945).  “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic Review, vol. 
35 (September), pp. 519–30. 
 
——— (1960).  The Constitution of Liberty.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press. 
 
——— (1976).  “Denationalisation of Money:  An Analysis of the Theory and Practice 
of Concurrent Currencies,” Hobart Paper 70.  London:  Institute of Economic 
Affairs, October. 
 
Kohn, Donald L. (2009).  “Comments on ‘Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis 
Financial System,’ ” speech delivered at the Eighth BIS Annual Conference 2009, 
Financial System and Macroeconomic Resilience:  Revisited, Basel, Switzerland, 
July 10, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20090710a.htm. 
 
Krugman, Paul (2011).  “Things That Never Happened in the History of 
Macroeconomics,” New York Times, The Conscience of a Liberal (blog), 
December 5. 
 
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (2004).  “Keynote Address to the 2003 HOPE Conference:  My 
Keynesian Education,” History of Political Economy, vol. 36 (supplement), pp. 
12–24. 
 
Mankiw, N. Gregory (2017).  “N. Gregory Mankiw:  America’s Economy and the Case 
for Free Markets,” Conversations with Bill Kristol, interview, April 9, YouTube 
video, 1:06:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QY4M6a56nFs. 
 
Myerson, Roger B. (2008).  “Perspectives on Mechanism Design in Economic Theory,” 
American Economic Review, vol. 98 (June), pp. 586–603. 
 
O’Driscoll, Gerald P., Jr. (1977).  Economics as a Coordination Problem:  The 
Contributions of Friedrich A. Hayek.  Kansas City, Mo.:  Sheed Andrews and 
McMeel. 
 
Quarles, Randal K. (2019).  “The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back 
and Looking Ahead,” speech delivered at the European Banking Federation’s 
European Banking Summit, Brussels, October 3, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20191003a.htm. 
- 16 - 
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1974).  “Economics Prize for Works in Economic 
Theory and Inter-Disciplinary Research,” press release, October 9, 
https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1974/press-release. 
Samuelson, Paul A. (1983).  “My Life Philosophy,” American Economist, vol. 27 (Fall), 
pp. 5–12. 
Serrano, Roberto (2002).  “Decentralized Information and the Walrasian Outcome:  A 
Pairwise Meetings Market with Private Values,” Journal of Mathematical 
Economics, vol. 38 (September), pp. 65–89. 
Smith, Adam (1776).  An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 
5th ed., Edwin Cannan, ed., 1930.  London:  Methuen and Co. 
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2000).  “The Contributions of the Economics of Information to 
Twentieth Century Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 
(November), pp. 1441–78. 
Taylor, John B. (2012).  “Why We Still Need to Read Hayek,” speech delivered at the 
Hayek Lecture, New York, May 31, 
http://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/Hayek%20Lecture.pdf. 
Williamson, Oliver E. (2005).  “The Economics of Governance,” American Economic 
Review, vol. 95 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 1–18. 
Woodford, Michael (2003).  Interest and Prices:  Foundations of a Theory of Monetary 
Policy.  Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press. 
Yellen, Janet L. (2017).  “Financial Stability a Decade after the Onset of the Crisis,” 
speech delivered at “Fostering a Dynamic Global Economy,” a symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, 
Wyo., Aug. 24–26, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170825a.htm. 
