Mahesh  Kumar  Jain:  Microfinance  as  the  next  wave  of  financial
inclusion
Speech  by  Mr  Mahesh  Kumar  Jain,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  SIDBI
(Small Industries Development Bank of India) National Microfinance Congress 2019, Mumbai, 26
November 2019.
 Shri  Mohammad  Mustafa,  Chairman  &  MD,  SIDBI,  Dr.  Charan  Singh,  CEO  and  Director,
Foundation for Economic Growth and Welfare, Mr. Gavin McGillivray Head, DFID India, other
dignitaries,  participants,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  Good  Morning  to  all!  I  am  very  happy  that
senior bankers, sector specialists, academicians and practitioners are coming together on a
single platform to deliberate on the Vision of Microfinance in India at this National Microfinance
Congress  and  the  means  to  achieve  the  same  in  the  backdrop  of  an  evolving  regulatory,
political and economic landscape. It is indeed a great pleasure to be amongst all of you here
today.
2. This Congress is quite opportune and timely, as after nearly a decade and half of efforts in
financial  inclusion,  where  banks,  NBFCs,  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  and  other  financial
institutions have played a significant role, today we are at an inflection point needing to unleash
the next set of financial inclusion interventions for converting a large part of our population to
efficient consumers of financial services. With the technological transformation taking place in
associated areas, I see a significant role for the microfinance industry in this process, including
in identifying, enabling and handholding a sizeable set of the last mile population to consume
financial  services  rationally,  to  grow  out  of  poverty  and  become  productive  citizens  of  the
country.
3.  The  Indian  microfinance  sector  has  witnessed  phenomenal  growth  over  the  past  two
decades. It is gratifying to note that both the number of institutions providing microfinance as
also the quantum of credit made available to the financially excluded clients have increased
significantly  during  this  period.  At  this  juncture,  it  is  equally  important  to  discuss  the  way
forward. Therefore, I understand that the deliberations in this Congress will include emerging
concerns / issues faced due to major changes in the sector in recent years; strategic drivers,
trends  and  possible  solutions  for  stimulating  industry  growth,  innovative,  futuristic  and  high-
impact  business  models  being  adopted  across  the  sector  as  also  the  opportunity  areas  of
policy intervention and technological transformation in the industry.
Role of microfinance in the economy
4. Microfinance, involving extension of small loans and other financial services to low income
groups, is a very important economic conduit designed to facilitate financial inclusion and assist
the  poor  to  work  their  way  out  of  poverty.  It  is  argued  that  microfinance  can  facilitate  the
achievement  of  national  policies  that  target  poverty  reduction,  empowerment  of  women,
assisting vulnerable groups, and improving standards of living.
5. The journey of financial inclusion in the past two decades has been one of intensive efforts
and incremental experimentation. However, the quantum jump came when Pradhan Mantri Jan
Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) was launched in 2014, which enabled achievement of the objective of
providing bank accounts to adult population in almost every household.  The reach of mobile
phones  and  e-KYC  has  ensured  these  accounts  are  accessible  to  those  who  have  been
included in the financial services milieu.
6. The Reserve Bank of India has been making sustained efforts to increase the penetration of
formal  financial  services  in  unbanked  areas,  while  continuing  with  its  policy  of  ensuring
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
adequate flow of credit to productive sectors of the economy and also ensuring the availability
of banking services to all sections of people in the country.
7.Till two decades ago, on the supply side, the absence of technology and infrastructure was a
major  impediment  as  it  restricted  expansion  of  banking  services  to  far-flung  areas  of  the
country  comprising  over  600  thousand  villages.  The  institutionalization  of  the  framework  of
Business Correspondents (BCs) has been a major step towards enhancing access to banking
services. The RBI advocated a combination of ‘Brick and Mortar’ structure with technology for
extending financial inclusion in the geographically dispersed areas. With all these measures,
the number of banking outlets in villages has gone up significantly.
8. The new banking entities (i.e. two new universal banks and ten small finance banks) have
also  helped  to  further  the  cause  of  financial  inclusion  in  the  country.  Considering  the  strong
linkage between financial inclusion and payment systems,  RBI has also taken several steps
including encouraging use of mobile banking, pre-paid instruments such as digital and mobile
wallets, etc. For more than a decade now, banks have worked hard to sustain the momentum
for achieving the objective of financial inclusion.
9.  Financial  inclusion  is  becoming  a  focus  area  for  banks,  NBFCs,  Financial  Technology
(FinTechs) and other financial entities. Small Finance Banks have also been set up to further
financial inclusion with a client base comprising mainly of migrant labour workforce, low income
households, small businesses and other unorganised sector entities. Today, when it comes to
financial inclusion and microfinance, there are several channels such as universal banks, small
finance banks, micro finance institutions, BCs, etc. Therefore, as a country that is determined
to achieve universal financial inclusion at affordable cost, this is a defining moment, and we
should seize the opportunity.
10. Several innovative measures have been undertaken by the RBI to facilitate the creation of a
conducive environment and increase the level of penetration of the banking system to serve the
unserved and underserved population for achieving the objective of sustainable and inclusive
economic  growth.  A  co-origination  model,  which  enables  the  scheduled  commercial  banks
(excluding Regional Rural Banks and Small Finance Banks) to co-originate loans with the non-
deposit taking systemically important NBFCs has also been rolled out for credit delivery to the
priority  sector.  This  is  expected  to  boost  lending  to  micro  enterprises,  small  and  marginal
farmers, Self Help Groups (SHGs), etc.
11.  In order to boost credit to the needy segment of borrowers, the  Reserve  Bank has also
advised all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks and Small Finance
Banks) that bank credit to registered NBFCs (other than MFIs) for on-lending will be eligible for
classification as priority sector under respective categories subject to certain conditions.
12. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises form a vital component of the economy in terms
of their contribution to employment generation, innovation, exports, and inclusive growth. In view
of this, the Reserve Bank had constituted an ‘Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises’ (Chairman: Shri U. K. Sinha) to identify causes and propose long-term solutions
for the economic and financial sustainability of the MSME sector. The Committee has made
various recommendations in areas such as legislative and institutional framework, access to
finance, capacity building and new technological interventions for lending to MSME sector. The
recommendations are being examined for implementation.
13. Since 2006, the RBI has adopted a planned and structured approach to address the issues
of financial inclusion by focusing both the supply and demand side. Having spoken about the
supply side, let me now discuss the equally important, but less focussed, demand side aspects
of  financial  inclusion.  With  the  growing  formalisation  of  financial  services,  we  must  now
intensify our efforts on the demand side, which is to focus on enhancing capabilities so that
individuals in the low income groups are in a position to not merely avail the offered services,
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
but are also capable of demanding preferred products and services suitable to their needs /
choices.
14.  The  MUDRA  is  a  case  in  point.  While  such  a  massive  push  would  have  lifted  many
beneficiaries  out  of  poverty,  there  has  been  some  concern  at  the  growing  level  of  non-
performing assets among these borrowers. Banks need to focus on repayment capacity at the
appraisal stage and monitor the loans through their life cycle much more closely.
15. The role and importance of the microfinance sector in our economy has also been steadily
growing.  According  to  The  Bharat  Microfinance  Report  2019  prepared  by  Sa-Dhan,  MFIs
operate in 29 States, 5 Union Territories and 570 districts in India. The MFIs are also expanding
into newer territories for reducing their concentration risk.
16. Tailored products for providing credit to those without a credit score, entrepreneurial and
consumption credit, handholding, financial literacy, social occasion credits and insurance (life
and non-life), are all waiting to be tapped in scale and size. Limited forays have been made but
are yet to achieve their full potential.
17.  The  RBI  defines  Financial  Inclusion  as  the  “process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate
financial products and services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable
groups such as weaker sections and low income groups in particular, at an affordable cost in a
fair  and  transparent  manner  by  regulated,  mainstream  institutional  players”.  The  National
Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) 2019–24 has been framed by us. It gives the Vision to
make  financial  services  available,  accessible,  and  affordable  to  all  citizens  in  a  safe  and
transparent manner to support inclusive and resilient multi-stakeholder led growth.
Potential of Microfinance
18.  A  major  demographic  change  is  taking  place  in  our  country  with  a  huge  and  growing
working population. There is a big chunk aspiring to grow into the middle class with the support
of institutional credit. Therefore, microfinance can play a big role in meeting their requirements
and fulfilling their goals.
19. The credit needs of low-income groups range from emergency loans, consumption loans,
business loans, working capital loans, housing, etc. In addition to credit, poor households would
benefit from a combination of financial services, including savings, remittances, loans, micro-
insurance, micro-pensions, and the like.
20.  In  today’s  world,  technology  is  shaping  the  future  of  finance.  All  the  key  players  are
harnessing technology to provide an efficient experience to the end user. In the Indian context,
improving  the  accessibility  of  financial  platforms  using  FinTech  is  key.  Therefore,  designing
suitable financial products that cater to specific needs of the financially excluded population,
and  provide  acilities  like  digital  on-boarding,  is  vital  in  achieving  the  objective  of  financial
inclusion.
21. The goal of universal Financial Inclusion can be achieved only through synergistic efforts
between the mainstream financial entities and other players like MFIs, Fintech etc. as they play
a complementary role in championing this cause. Therefore, banks and NBFCs need to explore
the  possibility  of  establishing  business  collaboration  among  themselves,  and  with  FinTech
firms as it could be pivotal in accelerating the agenda of financial inclusion through innovation.
In  addition  to  incorporating  emerging  technology  faster  into  their  businesses,  the  entities
engaged in microfinance could also look at collaborating with FinTechs and other entities who
can  help  them  mine  customer  and  transaction  data,  cross-sell  products  and  introduce  new
customer-centric  products  and  services,  and  streamline  operations.  They  will  also  have  the
opportunity and need to raise the digital literacy of their customers that is not highly informed
and aware and, therefore, can be susceptible to frauds.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The way forward
22. Thanks to the growth of the internet and mobile phones, today we are seeing an explosion
of  data  in  several  sectors  of  our  economy.  Likewise,  in  microfinance,  a  lot  of  formal  and
informal data is becoming available in the form of digital footprints by low income customers
who also transact on e-commerce platforms and use the internet. These digital footprints are
being used by leading banks and online lending firms to lend to individuals and micro and small
enterprises. Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning are also finding greater application in
the Indian banking and financial services industry.
23. It is interesting to see that leading e-commerce companies have tied up with banks and
NBFCs  to  offer  working  capital  loans  to  their  suppliers  at  competitive  terms.  Most  of  the
suppliers are micro and small entrepreneurs
24. The introduction of GST, which is one of the largest and most significant tax reforms in the
world,  is  also  helping  formalise  the  informal  economy  in  a  significant  way. As  a  result  of  a
much-improved digital footprint, individuals engaged in proprietary businesses, micro and small
enterprises,  now  become  attractive  clients  for  banks  and  NBFCs,  thereby  reducing  their
dependence  on  informal  sources  of  funds.  The  cost  of  credit  for  the  micro  and  small
enterprises will also decrease significantly as lending will shift from collateral-based to cash
flow-based.
25. While opening a new world of opportunities, the application of technology in finance has its
own share of risks and challenges for the regulators and supervisors. Early recognition of these
risks and initiating action to mitigate the related regulatory and supervisory challenges is key to
harnessing  the  full  potential  of  these  developments.  This  also  brings  in  the  need  for  a
transparent,  technology  and  data-driven  approach.  Similarly,  systemic  risks  may  arise  from
unsustainable credit growth, increased inter-connectedness, pro-cyclicality, and financial risks
manifested by lower profitability. Data confidentiality and consumer protection are major areas
that also need to be addressed.
Summing up
26. To sum up, the microﬁnance sector is undergoing a multitude of changes amidst growing
competition,  rising  expectations  of  masses,  technological  advancements  and  an  evolving
regulatory  landscape.  The  sector  is,  therefore,  expected  to  widen  the  horizon  beyond  micro
credit  to  transform  the  livelihoods  of  the  borrowers.  Being  constantly  mindful  of  the
technological  transformation  in  the  banking  and  financial  services  industry,  the  sector  must
continue to pursue the adoption of innovative, futuristic and high-impact business models. The
focus of the sector must be on Digital Microfinance.
27. Keeping in view the need to increase transparency, address customer-centric issues and
safeguard the interests of low-income customers, microfinance lenders must put the interests
of their clients first and implement the Code for Responsible Lending and the Code of Conduct
in both letter and spirit. Redressing consumer complaints quickly and effectively should be on
top of the agenda for MFIs and the Self Regulatory Organisations (SROs).
28.  The  Microfinance  institutions  must  broaden  their  client  outreach  to  reduce  concentration
risk and to serve a wider clientele base. From a financial inclusion perspective, they should also
critically review their operations to ensure that some of the regions do not remain underserved.
29. While the growth of the microﬁnance sector in the past few quarters has been quite healthy,
we  must  be  cognizant  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  sector  to  factors  such  as  external
developments,  technological  changes,  event  risks  and  income  inconsistencies  of  the
borrowers. The growing use of technology would give rise to operational risks and there would
be concerns related to client data protection which would need to be addressed.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
30.  Banks,  NBFCs  and  financial  institutions  are  well  placed  to  innovate  in  cutting-edge
technologies be it AI, machine learning, blockchain etc. SIDBI could handhold the micro finance
providers in this process, specifically with regard to lending to the micro and small enterprises,
in areas such as alternate credit scoring methods, predicting probability of default, etc. With
fast changing technology, SIDBI could also take the lead in hosting an ecosystem, within a well-
defined regulatory sandbox, to create an infrastructure, which will reduce the turnaround time
and  provide  customer-centric  products  with  robust  risk  mitigation.  This  could  also  act  as  a
crucible  to  test  cutting-edge  products  for  micro-entrepreneurs  and  a  vehicle  to  provide
feedback to regulators.
31. I am sure that the deliberations at this National Microfinance Congress would seek to arrive
at  concrete  action  points  for  time-bound  implementation  towards  the  betterment  of  the
microfinance sector.
I wish the Microfinance Congress and its participants all the very best!
References
Annual Report of the RBI for the Year 2018–19 and 2017–18
The Bharat Microfinance Report 2019, published by Sa-Dhan
www.business-standard.com/article/pti-stories/mfin-sa-dhan-release-code-for-responsible-
lending-for-micro-credit-industry-119091600745_1.html,  September  16,  2019,  accessed  online
on November 23, 2019
Opportunities  and  Challenges  of  FinTech  (Shri.  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of
India, March 25, 2019, Keynote Address Delivered at the NITI Aayog’s FinTech Conclave)
qz.com/india/1139501/indias-online-lenders-are-looking-at-social-media-and-other-
unconventional-data-to-determine-credit-worthiness/, accessed online on November 23, 2019
www.financialexpress.com/opinion/one-year-of-gst-formalising-the-informal-economy/1229009/
July 3, 2018 accessed online on November 23, 2019
Financial Inclusion in India – The Journey so far and the Way Ahead (Shri. S. S. Mundra, Deputy
Governor, September 19, 2016 – at the BRICS Workshop on Financial Inclusion in Mumbai)
Formalizing  India’s  informal  economy,  Shri.  Anil  Padmanabhan,  July  11,  2016,  accessed  on
www.livemint.com on November 23, 2019
Strengthening  Governance  in  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  –  Some  Random  Thoughts
(Keynote Address  by  Shri. Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  at  FICCI’s
Workshop  on  ‘Strengthening  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs):  Good  Governance  and  Strategic
People Practices, April 23, 2012 at Mumbai
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
