Jorgovanka  Tabaković:  Women’s 
development - truly equal
Speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the International
Conference  “Women’s  Leadership  and  Sustainable  Development  –  Truly  Equal”,  Belgrade,  2
October 2019.
leadership  and  sustainable
 The most profound mystery is that of human being. Human being, man and woman.
Women are accused of impractical and dangerous sentimentality, but can we say that men are
inherently realistic? Immortal genes and the alternation of matriarchy and patriarchy – what does
it all prove? The relativity of superiority and differences.
A man can live without a woman, but without women, there is no future.
Women are still kept outside of certain areas and roles in society. This is the mirror of gender
essentialism which is often a tool of ostracism. Women are gaining ground in central banking
and of this process I can speak confidently only from my own experience.
There  are  women  who  have  been  loved  three  times  in  their  life.  First  by  their  mothers,  who
delivered  them  to  this  world,  then  by  their  husbands  whom  they  married,  and  lastly  by  the
children they delivered. The same is true of men. And love is that sacred root of plants that exude
strength and love – for everything they do, for everyone around them and for anything they may
face.
All who are born yearning to be loved, and raised with a lack of love, have a more difficult time
succeeding  in  life,  I  think,  I  believe  –  because  I  can  only  speak  with  certainty  about  my  own
experience.
I had the support of others but not because I was a woman, rather because I desired knowledge,
I was open to learning, talking, committed to myself and to others. I didn’t seek the company of
those who wanted to indulge me, but of those who were able to think and see far ahead,
beyond their own pocket and their own lives.  
We  should  be  aware  that  this  world  should  not  be  a  simple  alternation  of  matriarchy  and
patriarchy  but  rather  that  we  should  support  each  other’s  best  characteristics  while  moving
towards the holiest of goals.
There  are  such  riddles  and  challenges  ahead  of  us  that  require  various  voices,  different
experiences and wisdom.
We  shouldn’t  labour  under  the  illusion  that  all  women  would  give  the  same  response  to  any
particular question.
We should therefore include more women in decision-making, because women are talented and
dedicated, and want to do their part. By excluding them, we deprive not only women, but also
society of better results and progress. Women are as talented as men. And among them there
are differences as much as there are among men.
This means that it’s always possible for a group of men to find a woman who shares their views
– who also thinks that women are inferior and should be excluded.
My guiding principle in life is the results I achieve.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  are  powerful  women  who  stand  behind  their  name,  expertise  and  work;  those  whose
modesty is keeping them in the shadow of the men they work for; but there are also those who
claim  power  from  powerful  men.  The  power  of  each  of  these  categories  shows  how  society
treats women, but also how women need to be more supportive of women.
Just as I believe that it is wrong not to promote someone only because that person is a
woman, I also believe it is equally wrong to give someone a chance only because that
person is a woman. I select my associates based on their professional merits and human
qualities, not their gender.
In  my  opinion  it  is  crucial  that  any  position  should  be  held  by  a  professional  –  with  adequate
knowledge, experience, character and honesty. I can personally confirm that the National Bank of
Serbia, which I’m heading for more than seven years now, does not seek to meet quotas in order
to  advance  women  in  leading  positions.  The  persons  who  are  currently  at  the  head  of  our
organisational parts are all experts with a good deal of experience. All of them have a sense of
responsibility and teamwork. I know that such a balanced and modern approach has yielded a
significant  contribution  to  the  success  which  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  as  an  institution,  is
recording today in terms of fulfilling its mandate.
With  dedicated  work  we  have  achieved not  only  low  and  stable  inflation,  but  have  also
anchored inflation expectations of the financial, corporate and household sectors within the target
tolerance band for quite some time now. This is a proof of the confidence we have built up
since I came to the helm of the National Bank of Serbia.
It  is  owing  to  this  stability  and  the  continued  improvement  in  the  business  environment  that
Serbia is one of the few countries in the region that have kept their GDP growth projections and
posted record-high FDI inflows. Interest rates on loans have been lowered, lending activity and
banking system stability have increased, the level of non-performing loans is down to the lowest
level on record, and banking sector liquidity has increased by RSD 16.5 bn. The result is a better
quality of living and the creation of preconditions for sustainable development.
We  use  the  opportunities  that  are  presented  to  us,  and  more  importantly,  we  create
opportunities. We have transformed Serbia into a stable economy with a good perspective. At
the same time, Serbia is making significant progress in terms of gender equality. Allow me to
illustrate  this  with  an  example. According  to  a  World  Bank  research  “Women,  Business  and
Law”,  in  2019  Serbia  shared  the  high  16   position  with Australia  and  Iceland  on  a  list  of  188
countries. This is the best result in the region and a more favourable rating compared to many
other EU members. Another indicator of the important results in this remit is the movement in the
gender equality index, which we started publishing in 2016 as the first non-EU country to do so.
First, I believe that gender equality complements the achievements of our civilisation, as well as
that it is an imperative for our future.
Second, gender equality is a factor of development which should not be merely spoken of, but to
which we must make an active contribution.
th
I believe that this is the case with the National Bank of Serbia. During 135 years of the Bank’s
history, it often happened that women made up the majority of the Executive Board members,
whereby they had a key influence on strategic decision-making. Chronologically, the inclusion of
women  in  central  bank  governance  is  dominant  in  the  21   century. Today women hold the
positions  of  the  Governor  and  Vice-Governors  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  and
constitute  the  majority  in  the  Executive  Board.  This  is  why  I  feel  entitled  to  say  that
gender equality is respected and implemented, but even more importantly, that there is
equality and respect for each individual.
st
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1.  Know thyself 2. Nothing in excess 3. Make a pledge and mischief is neigh. The carvings at
the  entrance  to  Apollo’s  temple  in  Delphi  with  these  three  maxims  give  us  a  key  to
successful living, if success is measured by how much we are satisfied with ourselves, as
well as how much others are satisfied with us.
These three maxims speak very vividly about the woman and her role in today’s society. What do
we actually want as persons, what are our accomplishments, what are we prepared to sacrifice
in order to achieve the chosen goal and is every sacrifice in the achievement of that goal really
needed and justified? Do we know how to remain the masters of our own peace, our happiness,
not making too many promises because we have an opportunity to participate in the game?
The  essence  of  these  questions  are  topics  whose  backbone  is  the  difficulty  to  balance
motherhood and career.
Why is the choice always either/or, black or white, career or motherhood, my way or no
way? Balance is a key to success.
Career or motherhood?
Motherhood  does  not  necessarily  mean  family.  Family  is  an  obligation,  but  also  a  source  of
support. How did we come to sacrifice family to service activities? Instead of solidarity within the
home, family and generations, we now have paid services – service providers who care for our
children, as well as for our parents, the elderly. We have lonesome individuals who have lost
their bearings and a clear goal in this race for individuality and recognition. Not all relations are
those of purchase and sale, not everything can be bought. That is why we need to preserve our
humanity, self-respect and the respect of others.
Being  a  woman  is  amazing.  Being  a  mother  is  even  more  so.  I  can  testify  to  this  with  my
experience of raising three children, two daughters and a son – who are now grown-up, and good
and educated persons, of whom I am proud and whom I respect.
But  being  a  successful  woman,  a  satisfied  woman  and  a  mother  who  shows  that  it  is
possible to be both – this is the best way to motivate others.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
