   December  8,  2019 
Bank  of 
Japan 
 
 A Perspective on the Future of Asia 
Remarks at the Asia Pacific Initiative Forum in Yokohama 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction 
Good  morning  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  join  you  today  at  the 
inaugural meeting of the Asia Pacific Initiative Forum. I am confident that this forum will 
develop into a central platform where Asian business leaders and policy makers can gather to 
share insights, forge new partnerships and develop new innovative ideas to tackle global as 
well as intraregional challenges. 
 Today, I would like to touch upon some characteristics and future challenges for Asia from a 
macro perspective. My speech will be based on my experience serving as Vice Minister for 
International Affairs at the Ministry of Finance in Japan, President of the Asian Development 
Bank and Governor of the Bank of Japan. 
 I. An Asian Century 
I  would like to  begin by  first trying to put the word  "Asia" into context. Looking into the 
etymology of "Asia," one explanation is that it comes from the Akkadian word asu, which 
means "to go out, to rise," in reference to the sun, thus "the land of the sunrise."1 So a couple 
of  thousand  years  back,  all  people  or  cultures  originating  from  the  east  were  collectively 
classified  into  a  single  category  of  "Asians"  or  "Asia."  However,  the  actual  diversity  of 
ethnicity,  religion  and  culture  across Asia  is  immense  compared  with  other  regions  of  the 
world. For example, the number of Asian sovereign states that are members of the United 
Nations  is  48,  and  there  are  more  than  10  different  official  languages  used  in  multiple 
sovereign states. There are also vast differences in the stage of development of Asian states, 
as the largest country in terms of per capita GDP on a purchasing power parity basis is more 
than 7 times as large as the smallest one in the region.2 
 While it is difficult to generalize about Asia, the expression "the Asian Century" is used quite 
frequently.  The  phrase  expresses Asia's  growing  global  presence,  and  is  used  similarly  to 
terms such as the "Pacific" or the "Chinese" century, and also to terms such as the "East Asian 
miracle" or "Asia's rise."  
 
                                                        
1 Etymonline.com., "Asia – Origin and meaning of Asia by online Etymology Dictionary." Retrieved 
November 24, 2019. 
2 U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, "The World Factbook," 2018. 
 1 
 At the same time, the term "Asian Century" evokes a historical narrative of shifting centers 
of world power such as from Great Britain in the 19th century to the United States in the 20th 
century. Back in 1904, Halford Mackinder, an English geographer, academic and politician 
wrote "The Geographical Pivot of History," in which he forecast that the 20th century was 
going  to  be  the  Asian  Century.  His  forecast  turned  out  to  be  incorrect.  However,  many 
envision the 21st century as an Asian century, given the expansion of the Asian economy and 
the  growth  of  its  population.  Kishore  Mahbubani,  a  Singaporean  academic  and  former 
diplomat has argued that the last two centuries of Western domination of world history have 
actually been an anomaly from history.  In the period from A.D. 1 to 1820, the two largest 
economies of the world were those of China and India.3 More recent data on the economic 
presence of Asia is shown in Chart 1. 
 II. Current State of Asia 
Before I proceed, let me briefly mention some recent facts regarding Asia. Asia has led global 
growth for the past several decades, and as of 2018, accounts for more than 40% of global 
GDP. 4  The  region  is  home  to  around  60%  of  the  world’s  total  population.  The  share  of 
intraregional  trade  has  been  increasing  and  accounts  for  58%  of  the  total  trade  of  all  the 
region's countries. Financial interconnectedness is also deepening. These characteristics are 
shown in Chart 2. 
 Regional policy cooperation is taking place through various platforms. ASEAN is the center 
of  regional  economic  integration  in  South  East Asia,  and  the  scope  of  its  cooperation  has 
widened with the involvement of other countries to form ASEAN+3 and ASEAN+6, and even 
beyond Asia through arrangements such as APEC. Many Asian countries are members of G20 
and  their  contribution  to  global  policy  making  is  increasing.  In  the  area  of  central  bank 
cooperation,  regional  forums  such  as  EMEAP  and  SEACEN  are  enhancing  the  active 
exchange of views and the sharing of knowledge among members. 
 The movement of people across borders is becoming much more active as regional integration 
deepens. This is also reflected, for example, in the regionalization of the media and popular 
                                                        
3 Schibotto, Emanuele, and Gabriele Giovannini, "Singapore's Role in the Asian Century – interview 
with Kishore Mahbubani," Asian Century Institute, February 12, 2015. 
4 International Monetary Fund, "IMF Data Mapper, World Economic Outlook October 2019 (GDP)."  
 2 
 culture. There is a long-established network of production, distribution and consumption of 
Chinese-language pop music, opera and films within the Chinese community all around Asia. 
In the 1990s, Japanese television dramas became a staple of audiences across East Asia. This 
success  encouraged  the  Korean  television  industry  to  actively  export  its  own  dramas 
regionally.  These  developments  have  resulted  in  a  loosely  integrated  regional  media  and 
cultural industry in East Asia which has also helped promote intra-Asian tourism and cultural 
exchange. 
 III. Asia as Future 
With the increasing interconnectedness of the region and its growing economic presence, it 
is not surprising that there are expectations that Asia can and will lead the world. But simply 
extrapolating from the strong economic performance of recent decades can be misleading. As 
we well know, economic size alone is not enough to be accepted as a global leader. Looking 
back at history after World War II and how the major powers have evolved, it clearly shows 
that  it  is  not  just  about  brute  economic  or  military  power. A  combination  of  vision,  moral 
values and respect toward others are also essential. 
 What do we have to do in Asia to truly harness the potential of this vast and complex region, 
so that Asia can play an active role  at the global stage? Asian countries will need to work 
further to deepen intraregional collaboration based on mutual recognition and respect while 
acknowledging the diverse nature of this region. Specifically, further deepening of economic 
regional  interconnectedness  will  certainly  be  necessary.  Also,  a  broader  perspective  to 
increase joint engagement in the global community on non-economic issues will be important. 
I would like to touch upon them separately. 
Enhancing Regional Integration 
If  Asia  is  to  take  on  a  global  leadership  role,  this  would  require  the  promotion  and 
maintenance of open and flexible economies and markets. The strengthening of Asian supply 
chains would also be essential for enhancement of economic interconnectedness. Much has 
already  been  achieved  on  economic  integration.  For  example,  in ASEAN,  there  has  been 
progress in eliminating tariffs, advancing services liberalization, liberalizing and facilitating 
investment and facilitating skilled labor mobility. However, as shown in Chart 3, compared 
to  Europe,  Asia  has  a  lower  participation  rate  in  global  supply  chains.  Promoting  trade 
 3 
 liberalization  through  frameworks  such  as  TPP11  and  RCEP  would  be  the  way  forward, 
especially in an environment where global trade tensions are high. It is important to promote 
trade not only in goods but also in services. The region is steadily transitioning from being 
mainly a production area of the world to the biggest corporate and consumer market in the 
world. This naturally increases the demand for services in the region as well. 
 Equally  important  is  coordination  on  cross-border  regulatory  and  institutional  elements 
within  the  region.  Discussions  in ASEAN's  Economic  Community  Blueprint  20255  could 
provide  hints  on  how  to  address  such  cross-border  issues.  For  example,  the  business 
community has in the past raised issues regarding the differing requirements and regulations 
among  ASEAN  countries  with  incomplete  mutual  recognition  agreements,  and  the 
burdensome  processes  and  inadequate  transparency  in  some  member  countries. Although 
substantial progress has been made, differences among members remain in terms of ease of 
doing business and trading across borders. These challenges are noted in other Asian countries 
as well. While the EU has been aiming for economic integration through the establishment of 
a single market, Asian countries, such as the members of ASEAN, have preferred to preserve 
each  country's  sovereignty.  This  is  certainly  appropriate,  reflecting  the  region's  diversity. 
Having said that, as regional economies become more dependent on each other, more work 
is necessary to reduce barriers to free trade of goods and services and for direct investment. 
This  would  boost  intraregional  demand  as  a  source  of  growth.  It  is  also  essential  to  work 
jointly  in  developing  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  to  enhance  the  effective  use  of 
regional savings and to invite long-term capital inflows.  
 As a basis for further strengthening such economic ties, it is also important to patiently strive 
to deepen fundamental mutual understanding among countries and people in the region. As I 
mentioned earlier, Asian countries are highly diverse not only in economic aspects such as 
income, industrial structure and technological progress, but also in many other fields such as 
religion and culture. For this reason, it is important to foster a stronger sense of trust while 
respecting each other's unique characteristics. 
                                                         
5 ASEAN's Economic Community (AEC) Blueprint 2025 enlists concrete actions to be taken by 
2025 in order to realize the AEC envisaged in ASEAN's Community Vision 2025. 
 4 
 Engaging with the Global Community 
Asia  must  also  actively  engage  in  global  discussions  beyond  pure  economic  issues.  For 
example, according to research by a consulting firm comparing the soft power of different 
countries, only four countries from Asia are in the top 30,6 as shown in Chart 4.  With around 
60% of the global population, Asia has a responsibility to play a constructive role in global 
issues such as climate change and inequality. Through  effective dialogue, ideas and values 
originating  in  Asia  could  provide  a  positive  impetus  to  the  global  debate.  From  this 
perspective, it is important to continue to actively participate in international discussions and 
to raise Asian voices through frameworks such as the G20. 
 As I mentioned, climate change is an area that requires Asia's active contribution. Addressing 
climate change risk requires a global effort. But, as a region that would be greatly affected by 
increases in natural disasters, rising sea levels, and damage to agricultural and fishery industry, 
this is a much more urgent issue for Asia. At the same time, in step with economic growth, 
carbon dioxide emissions in Asia have increased rapidly, and counted for more than half of 
total global emissions in 2017.7 It is important to collaborate within the region and with the 
global  community,  by  for  example  actively  encouraging  the  introduction  and  sharing  of 
environment-friendly technologies. 
 How to take advantage of digital transformation is another area that Asia could play a leading 
role in the global discussion. Many Asian countries including China, India and Japan are key 
innovators and manufacturers of digital technology. If countries in the region can coordinate 
their digital supply chains, the synergies would be significant. From another perspective, most 
Asian countries face intractable demographic dilemmas. In much of East Asia, fertility has 
dropped below replacement rates, populations are aging,  and workforces declining.  Labor-
saving  technology  can  help  mitigate  this  demographic  challenge  and  should  improve  the 
productivity of East Asian countries.  
 Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  globalization  that  led  the  development  of  the  global  economy  after 
                                                        
6 Portland, "The Soft Power 30," 2019. 
7 Global Carbon Project, "Global Carbon Budget 2018." 
 5 
 World War  II  has  slowed  recently.  Countries  have  become  more  inward  oriented,  and  this 
change has become a major headwind for cross-border financial and economic activities. On 
the other hand, multilateral efforts are indispensable  in tackling many issues  ranging  from 
trade to climate change. 
 Asia  is  one  of  the  regions  that  has  benefited  most  from  post-war  financial  and  economic 
globalization. In this age of uncertainty, the search for a new "global order" continues. This 
brings both challenges and opportunities for the Asian region, and expectations for the region 
to contribute to the global debate are high. To that end, it is important for Asia to promote 
further intraregional collaboration based on mutual understanding and respect. Strengthening 
the bond within Asia will enable the region to contribute to solving global issues. Based on 
my many years of working with colleagues in Asia,  I am confident that the Asian Century 
will certainly come. 
 Thank you for your kind attention. 
  6 
