Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Evolving governance, risk and control in
the digital age
Welcoming  remarks  by  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Conference on “Governance, Risk and Control in the
Era of Disruption”, Kuala Lumpur, 9 December 2019.
*   *   *
Dr. Firas Raad, World Bank’s Country Manager for Malaysia, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen.
Good morning and welcome to Sasana Kijang.
Bank Negara Malaysia is delighted to host this Conference on Governance, Risk and Controls in
the Era of Disruption. Let me begin by sincerely thanking our joint host, the World Bank Group for
working with us to put together a rich programme that speaks directly to issues that I am sure
are keeping at least some of us awake at night.
In the year 2000, the English author and academic, Sir Malcolm Bradbury wrote this: “We no
longer live in the Age of Reason. We don’t have reason, we have computation. We don’t have a
tree of knowledge, we have an information superhighway. We don’t have real intelligence, we
have artificial intelligence. We no longer pursue truth, we seek data and signals. We no longer
have philosophers, we have thinking pragmatists. We no longer have morals, we have lifestyles.”
This rather grim view of the world was written almost two decades ago. Since then, the extent of
technological change and disruption that has come to define our world gives these words a
significance that few could have imagined.
For central banks and financial regulators, technological changes have far reaching implications
– in particular on the structure of financial markets, banks and other financial institutions.
Corporations around the world from every industry, origin and size, are directing enormous
resources towards investments in technologies that are transforming the way they conduct
business. The global annual spend on business technology is estimated to be close to US$4
trillion in 2019 . Of this, financial services firms rank in the top quartile of annual spend to
revenue. Global investments in financial technology start-ups are reported to have chalked up
another US$22 billion in the first half of 2019 , driven by a combination of interest and demand
from consumers for new fintech propositions and the scaling up of challenger and collaborative
fintechs.
These developments raise important questions for the conduct of monetary policy, the
management of payment systems, financial regulation and supervision, and even the very
concept of money as the lifeblood of any economy.
On many fronts, we find ourselves in unchartered territory – often uncomfortably so.
In response, central banks and financial regulators are similarly expanding resources both to
better leverage technology in performing our core functions of promoting monetary and financial
stability, and to defend against its attendant risks. Central to both these goals is our ability to
evolve – and in many respects, re-define – our governance, risk and control environment for the
age of disruption.
Why is this necessary? Because new financial technologies are presenting significant
opportunities, but also enormous challenges for central banks and financial regulators.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
They hold out the promise for achieving broader and more inclusive access to financial services,
characterised by greater speed and convenience, and lower costs. The emergence of new
financial institutions and multiple payment systems could dramatically improve financial
intermediation and reduce concentration risks. Greater access to data also carries tremendous
value for better surveillance and policymaking.
However, these developments also carry with them new risks and challenges – from more
interconnected systems through which risks can transmit in and across organisations and
financial systems; to concerns associated with privacy, misinformation, security and criminal
abuse. Moreover, as financial systems continue to undergo major technological transformations,
their resilience remains largely untested during periods of crisis.
Technological disruptions will continue to push the limits of our ability to identify and pre-empt
risks. This will also increasingly place authorities who are responsible for financial stability, at
odds with a desire to encourage and not stifle innovation. Managing this balance will require us to
approach governance, risk and controls with fresh lenses.
For Bank Negara Malaysia, this has entailed a number of strategic imperatives. The first has
been a sharper focus on strengthening regulation and supervision to promote resilience. The
Bank recently published new standards on risk management in technology for financial
institutions and strengthened our expectations on the management of outsourcing risks by firms.
Financial institutions will also be required to develop recovery plans for surviving a range of
stressed scenarios, a key objective of which is to preserve the continuity of critical economic
functions performed by systemic financial institutions.
Work is also in progress to establish a financial sector cyber threat intelligence platform. The
platform which will be operational in the coming year, seeks to overcome barriers to critical
information sharing on cyber threats and will have the capacity to collate, aggregate, analyse and
share cyber threat information from multiple sources in real time. We have also doubled our
approved headcount for IT supervision to ensure that we continue to provide adequate coverage
of technology risks in the financial system in our supervisory activities.
Second, the Bank has sought to encourage a more nimble response to innovation in the financial
sector. Along with a number of other regulators, the Bank introduced its regulatory sandbox in
2016 to enable firms to test innovative solutions in actual production with appropriate safeguards,
while suitable regulation that is fit-for-purpose is developed. At a practical level, this has led to
important changes in the way the Bank works, leveraging on “agile” teams where small, cross-
functional and dynamic groups are formed to observe, gather feedback, efficiently assess and
formulate regulation iteratively.
Since its establishment, over 80 solutions have been evaluated for testing in the sandbox. Of
this, about a quarter have piloted or are preparing to pilot their solutions in the sandbox, with
some already having graduated to offer their solutions in the broader financial system. The
insights gained have led to adaptations of existing regulations as well as the development of new
frameworks for firms that exit the Sandbox. They have also informed the Bank’s thinking on
regulating innovation, with lessons taken in the development of the digital bank framework which
will be issued for consultation very shortly.
The idea of the sandbox has since been replicated internally within the Bank as an avenue for
staff to prototype new solutions that will improve the way the Bank works. This includes new
technological applications in regulation and supervision, surveillance, data analytics,
communications and in the delivery of the Bank’s public services.
The third imperative has been to ensure alignment in the Bank’s governance and culture with our
digital objectives and priorities. At the Bank, we are keenly minded that it’s the people and the risk
culture, or “the way we do things around here” that ultimately matters.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
This arguably remains the most difficult part of our journey. Digitalisation is driving disruption, and
the digital world is inherently complex – in its logic, design, development and delivery. We have
put in place strengthened and more integrated governance arrangements to direct our digital
strategy, policy and standards. At the same time, we recognise that our digital goals and
aspirations can only be achieved through the values and behaviours of staff that promote
inclusivity (between those that have technological skills and those that don’t); accountability (that
is, the effective and responsible use of technology); effective collaboration that breaks away from
working in silos; and an appropriate level of risk-taking that is compatible with a more agile and
responsive organisation.
And so we have taken pains to be specific and deliberate in our approach to building a digital
culture within the Bank. This starts with being clear across the organisation on our tolerance for
higher risks associated with disruptive innovations – through the development and
communication of our digital risk appetite. We are shifting conversations on new digital initiatives
away from the technical solutions themselves, to a greater focus on the business process
transformations that they are intended to serve, and that is what we measure and track.
We are also investing heavily in equipping our people with the knowledge, skills and confidence
to make sound judgment calls in an environment where the pace of change is occurring at a
dizzying speed, and our ability to anticipate risks is likely to be more constrained. At a practical
level, this means being more precise about escalation, decision and communication protocols,
while allowing more flexibility in internal policies to allow business lines to respond swiftly to
emerging situations. It also means allowing more dynamic structures to evolve within the
organisation to support specific strategic business use cases, such as our cloud centre of
excellence.
In an era of disruption, efforts to reduce the complexity of financial products and services to the
average person could become more challenging. A key reason for this is the dramatically
increased access to financial solutions for people from every walk of life, whether they are suited
for them or not. To reap the promise that such access brings of opportunities to reduce inequality
and improve standards of living, it is imperative that individuals are sufficiently confident and
capable of making wise financial decisions.
This brings me to the fourth strategic priority of the Bank – which is building financial capability
among the Malaysian public to navigate opportunities and risks in the changing financial
landscape. It has long been our conviction that encouraging a population that is both financially
and digitally literate is a necessary and vital condition to harness the full potential of fintech and
contain its risks.
To that end, the Government recently launched Malaysia’s National Strategy for Financial Literacy
which includes a specific focus on helping consumers protect themselves against fraud and
exploitation, and embrace innovation more confidently in the digital era. In the area of
remittances, our work to improve conditions for the use of formal remittance channels by
leveraging on technology, particularly by workers and small businesses across the country, has
led to substantial reductions in the cost of remittances. This has been accompanied by a marked
increase in the volume of remittances now captured through formal channels as a result of our
outreach and education efforts which also benefitted greatly from our four-year collaboration with
the World Bank under the Greenback initiative.
Ladies and gentlemen,
As central banks and financial regulators, the opportunities and challenges confronting us in the
era of disruption are both internal and external. Internally, we share many of the same concerns
and  pressures  that  firms  in  general  face  in  dealing  with  technological  disruptions.  Externally,
however, we are confronted with broader issues of financial stability and consumer protection
that  will  continue  to  challenge  existing  regulatory  frameworks  and  approaches.  How  we  think
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
about  governance,  risk  and  controls  need  to  take  both  perspectives  into  account,  and  will
demand a high degree of organisational agility.
In closing, I would like to take another crack, if I may, at Malcolm Bradbury’s reflections. “We live
in the Age of Disruption. We have algorithms, data and signals, and so we must aspire for
greater insight and understanding. We have greater uncertainty, and so we must aspire for
greater predictability in our actions. We have greater access for all, and so we must equally
aspire towards greater confidence for all. We have thinking pragmatists, and so we must
complement them with philosophers of information and human capacity for change. We have
digital-driven lifestyles, and so we must strive to preserve shared values that promote societal
well-being.”
I think we would do well to keep these goals in mind in our efforts to strengthen governance, risk
and controls in the era of disruption. On that note, let me welcome you once again to the
Conference and wish you productive discussions ahead.
Thank you very much.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
