Arthur Yuen: Greening financial institutions
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority,  at  the  HKMA  and  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  Seminar  on  “Greening
Financial Institutions”, Hong Kong, 11 October 2019.
 1.  Vivek (Pathak), ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
2.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  seminar  on  greening  financial
institutions.
3.  The effects of climate change are already visible around the world. In the past four decades,
we  have  witnessed  some  of  the  warmest  years  on  record,  and  the  number  of  natural
disasters has more than doubled.  In Asia, 50% of our urban population are living in low-lying
coastal  zones  and  flood  plains.    The  long-term  effects  of  climate  change  will  likely  bring
damages to our economies and businesses.
4.  Hong Kong sits along the coast and therefore climate change risk is particularly relevant to
us.  For  instance,  I  believe  banks  in  Hong  Kong  felt  impacted  by  the  Super  Typhoon
Mangkhut from last year.  Whereas properties close to the harbour used to be valued better,
banks would now have more considerations on their valuations when granting mortgages.
5.  Under this setting, not only are the governments being compelled to act in the face of climate
change, most notably under the 2015 Paris Agreement, there is also a growing consensus
amongst  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  to  take  a  more  proactive  stance  against
these risks.
6.  For  example,  the  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial
System, commonly known as the NGFS, in which over 40 central banks and supervisors
have  already  reached  a  consensus:  and  I  quote,  “climate-related  risks  are  a  source  of
financial  risk  and  therefore  fall  squarely  within  the  mandates  of  central  banks  and
supervisors to ensure that the financial system is resilient to these risks.” The HKMA is a
member of NGFS, and we are fully on board with this
7.  The Bank for International Settlements is also committed to supporting green finance and
investment practices, and supports the NGFS research on climate-related risks and their
implications for financial stability.
8.  The HKMA has many roles – as a bank regulator, one of the largest asset owners globally,
and a key promoter of market development. Hence, the HKMA is in a very advantageous
position  to  promote  green  and  sustainable  finance  in  Hong  Kong.  In  May  this  year,  we
unveiled three sets of measures on green finance:
9.  The first measure is a three-phased approach to promote Green and Sustainable Banking in
Hong  Kong.  Initially,  to  develop  a  common  framework  to  assess  the  existing  baseline  of
individual banks to establish how “green” they are, by talking to the industry to identify the
parameters to be included in the assessment; secondly, to engage and consult the industry
on  whether  supervisory  requirements  are  needed;  and  if  needed,  how  the  HKMA  should
develop our supervisory expectation or requirements; and thirdly to focus on implementation,
monitoring and evaluation.
10.  The  second  measure  relates  to  responsible  investment  by  the  Exchange  Fund.  The
Exchange Fund now adopts a guiding principle that priority will be given to Green and ESG
investments, if the long term return is comparable with other investments on a risk-adjusted
basis.
11.  Our  third  measure  is  the  launch  of  the  Centre  for  Green  Finance  under  the  HKMA’s
Infrastructure  Financing  Facilitation  Office,  focusing  on  capacity  building  to  facilitate  the
equipping  of  financial  institutions  with  the  knowledge,  skills,  tools  and  other  resources  in
green finance.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
12.  In fact, we’re now in our developmental plan to prepare banks for the upcoming changes. A
working group on the assessment framework has been in place since August, and today’s
seminar marks the beginning of the capacity building programme for the Centre for Green
Finance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assessment  framework  will  help  banks  understand  their
readiness  for  change,  while  the  capacity  building  events  will  equip  practitioners  with  the
necessary knowledge for the changes.
13.  For today’s seminar, we will first invite the IFC to provide an overview of the opportunities
and  challenges  to  green  banking,  and  introduce  some  case  studies  on  their  approach  to
assisting banks in “greening” their operations. This afternoon, several banks will share their
initiatives  and  practical  experience  on  their  green  journey,  including  governance,  risk
management, disclosure and green products and business policy.
14.  And here I would like to extend our special thanks to the IFC for their dedicated support for
this workshop. Their expertise will surely benefit our audience today.  I would also like to
thank HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank, Citibank, BOC and BNP Paribas for sharing their
experiences with everyone later today.
15.  Ladies and gentlemen, I wish you all a fruitful workshop and I look forward to working closely
together with the industry to develop green and sustainable banking in Hong Kong. Thank
you very much.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
