 03.12.2019 
 Low interest rates for longer. Profitability and risk appetite in the Spanish 
banking sector  
15th Banking Industry Meeting/IESE 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor  
 
    Ladies and gentlemen, good morning: 
First I would like to thank the organisers, and, in particular, Professor Juan José Toribio, for 
their invitation to participate in the 15th Banking Industry Meeting. 
 
In October the Banco de España published its Autumn 2019 Financial Stability Report. As 
usual,  this  report  identifies  the  main  risks  to  financial  stability  in  Spain  and  their  recent 
behaviour. The analysis shows that the balance of risks to financial stability has worsened 
since  the  publication  of  the  Spring  report  and  identifies  three  main  risks:  the  global 
economic slowdown and geopolitical uncertainty, low bank profitability, and the legal risk 
for banks derived from the potential consequences of the outcome of pending court action.  
The worsening of the risks to the stability of the Spanish financial system in the past half 
year is due in particular to the downward revision of the global economic outlook. Indeed, 
this year global GDP growth is expected to be the lowest since the international financial 
crisis; in addition, the balance of risks to this growth is tilted downward, mainly as a result 
of the continuing high level of geopolitical uncertainty.  
The downward revision of economic forecasts in the past year has been across the board, 
but has especially affected the euro area and emerging market economies, and Spain has 
not been immune to this trend.   
In  view  of  this  situation,  central  banks  have  responded  by  further  easing  monetary 
conditions. In the case of the European Central Bank (ECB), at our September meeting we 
resolved to launch a package of measures which included cutting the deposit facility interest 
rate by 10 basis points (bp) to -0.50%, strengthening forward guidance on interest rates and 
improving the financing conditions of quarterly targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO-III). We also decided to resume net purchases under the asset purchase programme 
at a monthly pace of €20 billion as from 1 November and without a defined time limit. 
Our analysis indicates that this package of monetary policy measures provides a substantial 
monetary stimulus which will help to further ease the conditions of lending to households 
2/29 
 and firms and thus assist the economic recovery of the euro area and, consequently, the 
sustained convergence of inflation towards our medium-term target. 
In any event, from the financial stability standpoint, the downward revision of the growth 
and inflation outlook and the resultant higher expectation that interest rates will remain very 
low, or will even be negative for a further period pose challenges of at least two types for 
credit institutions.  
First,  this  macroeconomic  context  will  represent  a  challenge  for  deposit  institutions  to 
recoup  levels  of  profitability  more  in  line  with  the  cost  of  capital.  Indeed,  in  the  last  few 
months market expectations for growth of bank profits have declined.  
Second, this context of “low interest rates  for longer” may provide greater incentives for 
economic agents to take risks, which could heighten the risk to financial stability.  
Today I would like to devote my address to the analysis of these two matters, focusing on 
their impact on the Spanish banking sector. I will also present the results of the latest stress 
test exercise conducted by the Banco de España.  
1.  Low bank profitability  
 
Profitability is one of the main variables characterising the financial position of banks 
and the first line of defence against adverse shocks.  
Indeed,  the  volume of  a bank’s  profits  determines  the  return  its owners  can  earn  on  the 
capital invested. This, duly adjusted for the risks assumed, will affect the bank’s valuation. 
Moreover, profit levels determine the margin these agents have to address shocks. Indeed, 
low  profitability  reduces  the  possibility  of  generating  capital  internally  through  retained 
earnings.  
Note  that  banks’  capital  acts  as  a  buffer  that  allows  potential  losses  to  be  absorbed  in 
adverse scenarios, so that they can continue to offer financial services to households and 
 3/29 
 firms,  thus  contributing  to  smoothing  –  rather  than  amplifying  –  negative  shocks  to  the 
economy.1  
 Since the international financial crisis the profitability of the European banking sector has 
remained very low and below the cost of capital. And this, despite a drop in the cost of 
capital, mainly due to the lower risk-free interest rate of the economy, but also to banks’ 
improved risk profile, manifested, among other variables, in higher solvency ratios. 
By contrast, US banks have managed to achieve very high levels of profitability (in 2018, 
11% in the USA compared with 6% in Europe) more in line with the cost of capital (between 
8% and 10% in 2018). Our analyses indicate that this is one of the reasons why the market 
value to book value ratio of US banks significantly exceeds that of European banks, which 
remains at values below one. 
                                                                                              
1  Also,  a  high  level  of  capital  entails  a  stronger  link  between  the  personal  wealth  of  the  owners  and  the  economic 
performance  of  the  banks,  thus  contributing  to  mitigate  the  risk  profile  that  the  latter  are  prepared  to  assume  and, 
therefore, the likelihood that they will overreach themselves and will subsequently require traumatic correction measures. 
4/29 
   
Spanish banks are no exception to this European pattern, although their profitability 
at consolidated level remains above the European average. The breakdown of the return 
on  assets  shows  that  the  higher  figures  of  Spanish  banks  compared  with  the  euro  area 
average  are  basically  due  to  their  higher  net  interest  income.  This  reflects  the  fact  that 
Spanish banks have a higher share of their business in less mature markets where margins 
are higher, such as the Latin American economies. On the downside, Spanish banks have 
higher expenses from asset impairment and provisions than euro area banks. 
 
The profitability of the Spanish banking system has a significant cyclical component. 
In the past economic crisis profitability contracted more sharply than in other jurisdictions: 
in 2012 it entered negative territory, standing at –21% in terms of equity and at -1.2% in 
terms of assets according to the consolidated financial statements, which include not only 
business in Spain but also international exposures. The main reason for this was the higher 
losses on the loan portfolio associated with a significant rise in defaults, particularly in the 
Spanish  construction  and  real  estate  activity  sectors,  where  banks  had  an  excessive 
concentration.  
 5/29 
 Subsequently,  the  profitability  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  has  tended  to  recover  in 
recent  years,  basically  because  impairment  losses  have  decreased  as  loan  quality  has 
improved. A fundamental factor has been the decrease in non-performing assets, including 
both non-performing loans (NPLs) and foreclosed assets.  
 
Turning to the more recent information, in the first three quarters of 2019 the net profit 
of  Spanish  credit  institutions  attributable  to  the  controlling  company  decreased  by 
18%. The decline in profits is due to a significant fall in gains on financial assets and liabilities 
(-23%), accompanied by an increase of nearly 4% in operating expenses. Thus, the fall in 
net operating income amounted to 1.1%. The increase in operating expenses in the past 
year was largely due to staff reduction agreements at some banks. 
Additionally,  impairment  losses,  which  had  been  falling  uninterruptedly  since  2013, 
increased by 10.6%. Net interest income rose by somewhat more than 3%, while net fees 
and commissions grew by 2.5%. 
The decline in profit was seen at nearly all banks, albeit to differing extents. As a result, ROE 
decreased by more than 1.5 percentage points (pp) with respect to the same period a 
year earlier and stood at 6.2%. This figure is lower than current estimates of the cost 
of capital, which, subject to their characteristic uncertainty, are somewhat above 7%. 
6/29 
   
In any event it should be borne in mind that profitability levels vary considerably across 
banks, both in Spain and in other European countries. This shows that profitability issues 
affect the sector unevenly because of the heterogeneity of banks’ business models across 
countries and within each jurisdiction, and also because of the multiplicity of explanatory 
factors.  
Factors explaining low bank profitability  
To better understand the factors behind the low profitability of Spanish banks compared 
with  pre-crisis  levels,  I  intend  to  focus  on  their  business  in  Spain.  This  is  because 
profitability  figures  as  per  the  consolidated  financial  statements  are  influenced  by  the 
growing  share  of  international  exposure  in  recent  years,  which  complicates  the 
interpretation  of  earnings  as  they  are  affected  by  significant  changes  in  composition. 
Furthermore, only a small number of banks have significant international exposure, so the 
performance  figures  based  on  consolidated  financial  statements  may  not  be  very 
representative of the majority of the banking sector. 
 7/29 
  The profitability data based on individual financial statements of business in Spain are 
also  highly  cyclical,  even  more  so  than  those  from  the  consolidated  statements.  This 
reflects the greater severity of the crisis in Spain than in other economies in which Spanish 
banks  had  exposures  and  highlights  the  benefits  of  diversification.  Also  apparent  is  a 
marked  recovery  in  recent  years,  despite  which  in  2018  both  ROE  and  ROA  were  still 
lower than before the crisis.  
The breakdown of the return on assets shows that the main determinant of the current 
low  profitability  of  business  in  Spain  compared  with  the  pre-crisis  period  is  a 
weakening of net interest income expressed as a proportion of assets, or net interest 
margin.  This  fall,  concentrated  between  2009  and  2013,  was  from  1.4%  to  0.9%.  The 
indicator then steadied at around 1% of total assets. The fall was attributable to several 
factors.   
 8/29 
 One factor is the increase in the relative  share of non-performing  assets,  i.e. those 
that do not earn interest, such as NPLs or foreclosed assets. Specifically, between 2007 
and  2013  the NPL  ratio of  business  in  Spain  rose  by  nearly  13  pp.  It  then fell gradually, 
against a background of decreasing loan volume, and at mid-2019 stood at 5.3%, more 
than 8 pp below the ceiling reached in 2013. However, this ratio is still well above its pre-
crisis level. Foreclosed assets have fallen by 50% from the high reached in 2011, but still 
amounted to nearly €40 billion in June 2019. 
Additionally, in that period there was a strong contraction in the bank credit portfolios, 
which  resulted  from  the  sharp  correction  of  the  excessive  debt  built  up  by  Spanish 
households and firms in the pre-crisis years and from banks’ loss of market share in the 
total financing of the economy.  
During those years, banks cushioned the balance sheet effect of this fall in their credit 
portfolios by increasing their exposure to other assets, especially through government 
debt purchases. As these debt securities provide lower returns than lending to households 
and firms, in the long run this portfolio rebalancing resulted in a fall in the average return on 
assets. However, when the sovereign debt crisis came to an end, the increase in value of 
these debt securities provided a positive, albeit short-lived, boost to profitability. This effect 
fades gradually once interest rates stop falling and, furthermore, in recent years banks have 
substantially  reduced  their  holdings  of  these  securities  in  the  available-for-sale  portfolio, 
which, since it is measured at market prices, is where these gains are recorded. 
On our estimates, the overall effect of these changes in asset composition – associated 
with the increase in non-performing loans and the decrease in the relative share of 
credit  on  balance  sheets  –  would  explain  some  70%  of  the  decline  in  net  interest 
margin in the Spanish banking system between 2007 and 2018. 
 
The fall in market interest rates has also played its part in narrowing the net interest 
margin, since the cost of liabilities, and especially of deposits, which are the main source 
of funding for Spanish banks, tends to be less sensitive to changes in market returns 
than the remuneration of assets.  
 9/29 
 Indeed, regarding assets, the remuneration of variable-rate loans, which make up most 
of  the  stock  of  outstanding  credit  in  Spain,  adjusts  to  the  new  market  prices  as  the 
reference indices are updated (which generally occurs with a lag of less than one year). 
Further, interest rate falls also pass through to new lending, which likewise gives rise to 
a cut in the average remuneration of assets. 
Regarding liabilities, the zero level of interest rates has acted as a lower bound for the 
cost of deposits. The reason for this downward stickiness in the cost of deposits is that 
negative interest rates in these instruments could reduce the supply of funds, especially in 
the case of households, as they may prefer to hold cash, which has zero but not negative 
remuneration, rather than deposits.  
However,  as  regards  other  bank  liabilities,  such  as  debt  securities,  interest  rate 
decreases pass through to their cost without the zero level acting as a lower bound. 
Indeed,  the  average  cost  of  some  financing  instruments,  such  as  covered  bonds,  fell  to 
negative  values  in  the  summer.  The  impact  on  costs  is  particularly  important  against  a 
background  in  which  banks  have  to  meet  regulatory  MREL  requirements.  Since  these 
instruments can absorb losses in the event of difficulties, their interest rates upon issuance 
are usually higher than those of ordinary debt instruments, so there is much more room for 
them to decrease, particularly in comparison with deposits. 
Analysis of the average loan-deposit spread, in terms of outstanding balances, shows 
that there is indeed a historically positive relationship between this variable and the 
level of market interest rates.  
However, since 12-month EURIBOR turned negative in February 2016, not only has this 
spread not narrowed, but it has actually widened. There are three reasons for this. 
First, average loan remuneration has been underpinned in recent years by the decline 
in non-performing loans, which has lowered the proportion of loans that do not generate 
any interest.  
Second,  banks  have  to  a  certain  extent  rebuilt  their  portfolios,  focusing  more  on 
business such as consumer lending that provides higher net interest income, albeit at 
the expense of increasing the risk profile of their credit portfolios. 
Third, in February 2016 there was still some room for a further decline in the cost of 
deposits which averaged 0.35% for outstanding balances and 0.20% for new business. 
Since then deposit rates on new business have fallen by an amount similar to the decline in 
average loan remuneration. However, the cost of deposits is currently very close to zero, so 
it will be more difficult to pass through any further falls in loan remuneration.  
    10/29 
   It is often argued that banks’ net interest income is being adversely affected not only by 
the low level of interest rates but also by the flattening of the yield curve observed in 
recent years. This effect depends, first, on the extent to which there are positive differences 
between the maturities of banks’ assets and liabilities, in other words, what is known as 
maturity  transformation.  However,  in  order  for  the  flattening  of  the  yield  curve  to  have  a 
negative impact on banks’ net interest income, in addition to maturity transformation, there 
also needs to be lending at fixed interest rates. If the loans granted are variable rate, their 
remuneration will generally be linked to short-term yields, and will therefore not be affected 
by changes in the yield curve.  
In the case of Spain, although banks perform maturity transformation, the bulk of long-term 
lending is variable rate. In consequence, the flattening of the yield curve in recent years 
should have had less impact on Spanish banks’ net interest income than on the net 
interest  income  of  banks  in  other  European  jurisdictions  where  fixed-rate  loans 
predominate, such as Germany and France. However, in recent years a significant volume 
of  new  fixed-rate  mortgage  lending  is  starting  to  be  observed,  so  these  effects  could 
become more significant in the future. 
       11/29 
 In any event, to assess the overall impact of interest rates on banks’ profitability, it is 
important to note that interest rates affect not only net interest margin but also other 
income statement items. 
In particular, lower interest rate levels help reduce losses on credit portfolios, thanks to 
the favourable effect they have on borrowers’ ability to repay their loans, associated both 
with lower loan costs and with the higher income and lower unemployment levels linked to 
the positive macroeconomic impact of lower interest rates.  
These effects have been especially significant in countries such as Spain where the 
banking system had a high level of non-performing loans and where short-term and 
variable rate lending predominates, since this means that changes in market yields are 
rapidly passed through to the cost of outstanding debt. This effect thus explains part of the 
decline in the NPL ratio in recent years. 
In addition, lower interest rates help drive up the prices of financial and real assets. 
This effect is immediate in the case of debt securities, especially long-term ones, as their 
prices are more sensitive to yield changes. The prices of equities and real assets, such as 
housing,  are  also  boosted  by  lower  interest  rates,  owing  to  their  effect  on  the  discount 
factor, although these prices are also affected by other factors, such as macroeconomic 
expectations. 
All this entails capital gains for banks exposed to these financial and real assets. It 
also increases the value of loan collateral, which enhances the credit quality of loans and, 
therefore, reduces losses on the credit portfolio. That said, it is true that these capital gains 
become exhausted once interest rates cease to decline and remain at low levels. 
In  addition,  low  interest  rates  and,  in  general,  more  accommodative  financial 
conditions naturally have a positive impact on economic activity and employment and 
help stimulate the flow of credit, thus also driving up banks’ profitability. Indeed, this 
is the key rationale behind an expansionary monetary policy such as that implemented in 
the euro area in recent years. As an illustration of these effects, according to various ECB 
12/29 
 studies2 and the Banco de España’s own estimates, the set of monetary policy measures 
adopted since mid-2014 will have an overall impact on real GDP growth in the euro area of 
around 2 pp in cumulative terms between 2016 and 2020. Moreover, these estimates do not 
include  the  measures  agreed  in  September  which,  according  to  the  Banco  de  España’s 
estimates, could add up to 0.4 pp in cumulative terms to euro area GDP growth by 2021.  
In any event, it is fair to say that there is evidence that, since the ECB’s deposit facility rate 
fell below zero, negative surprises in short-term interest rates have been accompanied by 
falls in European banks’ stock market valuations. 
Given  the  endogenous  nature  of  the  monetary  policy  response  to  projected  economic 
developments, this response by bank share prices to monetary surprises may reflect, on 
the  one  hand,  the  negative  impact  of  less  favourable  projections  for  the  future 
macroeconomic setting and, on the other, the market view on the direct negative effect 
of  further  interest  rate  cuts  on  banks’  future  profitability  against  a  backdrop  of  a 
prolonged period of negative rates.  
In short, although there is no conclusive evidence that low or even negative rates have 
adversely affected the supply of bank credit to date, we cannot rule out the possibility 
that if rates remain at very low levels for a further – potentially extended – period, 
there  could  ultimately  be  certain  negative  consequences  for  the  bank-based 
transmission of monetary policy.  
For this reason, the decisions adopted by the ECB Governing Council at its meeting 
of 12 September were accompanied by mitigating measures, such as the introduction 
of a two-tiered reserve remuneration system (to ensure that the negative deposit facility rate 
is not applied to part of the surplus liquidity held by banks). These measures are intended 
to soften the potential negative impact on banks’ profitability of the latest interest rate 
cut, and thus to ensure the effective transmission of monetary policy through this channel. 
Similarly, the reduction in the interest rate applicable to the third round of TLTRO operations 
and the increase in their maturities will cut the cost of banks’ liabilities.  
                                                                                              
2  See,  for  example,  Rostagno,  Altavilla,  Carboni,  Lemke,  Motto,  Saint-Guilhem  and  Yiangou  (2019),  forthcoming,  or 
Hammermann et al. (2019), “Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net asset 
purchases”, ECB Economic Bulletin, 2/2019. 
 13/29 
   
Lastly, allow me to refer briefly to the role of regulation. On occasions it has been argued 
that  the  higher  regulatory  pressure  on  banking  activity  in  recent  years,  together  with  the 
future regulatory requirements pending implementation following finalisation of the Basel III 
agreements, have negative effects on banks’ profitability. 
Irrespective of this, it should be recalled that the Basel III reform package aims to address 
the shortcomings identified in the regulatory framework in place prior to the global 
financial  crisis  and  to  strengthen  regulation,  supervision  and  banking  practice 
internationally in the interest of financial stability. 
In accordance with this aim,  the Basel III reforms have significantly strengthened the 
resilience  of  the  global  banking system.  Specifically,  since  2011,  internationally  active 
banks’ common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital has risen by 91% to over €3.7 trillion. In addition, 
the average risk-weighted CET1 ratio has risen from 7.2% to 13%, while banks’ average 
tier 1 capital leverage ratio has risen from 3.5% to 6%. 
Moreover, these figures will likely continue to rise in coming years, given that some of the 
Basel III reforms will not be fully in place until 2022. Indeed some, such as the output floor, 
which limits the difference between risk-weighted assets (RWAs) under the standardised 
and IRB approaches, have a transition period that may continue up until 2027.  
A  document  published  by  the  Basel  Committee3  in  June  reviews  the  recent  academic 
literature  on  the  macroeconomic  benefits  and  costs  of  higher  capital  requirements. 
According to the literature, the Basel III reforms give rise to capital levels within the range of 
estimates that point to positive net  macroeconomic benefits for society as a whole, as a 
result of the greater financial stability and enhanced shock-absorbing capacity they provide. 
                                                                                              
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2019): “The costs and benefits of bank capital – a review of the literature”, 
June. 
14/29 
 In short, there is no evidence to suggest that we have gone too far in calibrating the 
Basel III capital requirements. 
The priority, therefore, should be for jurisdictions now to apply these standards in full, 
consistently and within the periods agreed. This is the message reiterated by the G20 
leaders, and banks are required to adapt to this new regulatory environment. We must fight 
against what has come to be known as the “regulatory cycle”, according to which (and there 
is empirical evidence to confirm this), over time, memories of crises and of their negative 
effects tend to fade, the pressure of individual interests grows and the temptation to ease 
regulatory standards increases. 
Clearly,  a  different  question  altogether  is  the  need  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field.  In 
particular, it is important to ensure that the risks associated with the non-bank financial 
intermediation  sector,  and  those  stemming  from  its  interconnectedness  with  the 
banking  sector,  are  properly  regulated  and  supervised.  This  requires,  among  other 
things, close monitoring of the regulatory perimeter of the whole financial system, to ensure 
that market participants operate under the principle of regulatory neutrality. 
Responses to the low profitability environment 
In recent years, Spanish banks have partially cushioned the fall in net interest income 
by means of various strategies. To address the current low profitability environment, they 
should persevere in some of these strategies and embark on others. 
First,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  banks  have  made  great  efforts  to  reduce  their  non-
performing and  foreclosed assets.  But  the  non-performing  loan  ratio still stands  at 
5.3%  for  business in  Spain  and  foreclosed  assets amount to  around  €40 billion,  in  both 
cases well above the pre-crisis levels. 
Banks  should  therefore  persevere  with  this  strategy.  To  illustrate  the  room  for 
improvement that still exists in connection with these non-performing assets, if the level of 
provisioning of average total assets were as low as in 2005 (which, at 0.26%, was the lowest 
level  recorded  since  2000),  it  is  estimated  that  Spanish  deposit  institutions’  annual 
consolidated profit would increase by €1.7 billion. This would raise average ROA by 10 bp 
and ROE by 1.3 pp.4 
                                                                                                   
4 In addition, in a hypothetical scenario in which all foreclosed assets were performing assets, earning a return equivalent 
to average ROA (0.49%), net profit would increase by around €60 million, a modest but far from negligible figure. 
 15/29 
  Second, banks have diversified their revenue generation and in particular there has 
been an increase in fee income. Among these fees, the relative increase in those linked to 
the  marketing  of  products  such  as  investment  funds  stands  out,  in  a  setting  in  which 
demand for these products has risen, boosted by households’ search for more profitable 
investments, given the low level of return on deposits. This has meant that gross income, 
which  includes  fees  and  net  interest  income,  has  declined  by  less  than  the  net  interest 
margin. Likewise, as I indicated earlier, banks have tended to increase the share of business 
in their portfolios that provides higher net interest income (such as consumer lending), albeit 
at the expense of increasing the risk profile of their credit portfolios. 
 
Third,  banks  have  also  made  great  efforts  to  cut  their  operating  expenses  through 
branch closures and staff reductions. Specifically, the number of branches has decreased 
by more than 40% (by some 20,000), while staffing levels have been cut by more than 30% 
(some 90,000 fewer employees). 
16/29 
 Nevertheless,  to  date  these  cuts  in  expenses  have  been  more  moderate  than  the 
decline  in  gross  income,  as  reflected  in  a  constant  increase,  up  to  2017,  in  the  ratio 
between the two (the efficiency ratio), which reveals the deterioration in efficiency in this 
period. Overall, in business in Spain there has been a significant increase (deterioration) in 
the efficiency ratio at the individual level, of around 9 pp since 2014, which took it to 56.2% 
in June 2019. 
In terms of assets, operating expenses in 2018 were similar to their pre-crisis levels. Yet 
in a setting where credit accounts for a significantly lower proportion of assets than it did 
then,  these  expenses  should  also  be  lower  given  that  the  costs  associated  with  the 
management of non-credit assets are lower.  
 
The consolidated statements show that, despite the deterioration in efficiency levels, the 
Spanish banking system’s efficiency ratios remain better than those of the main European 
banking systems and also than those of banks in the United States and Japan, although 
they are worse than those observed in other jurisdictions such as, for example, the Nordic 
countries 
Once again, to illustrate the potential gains, in terms of rates of return, of an improvement 
in efficiency, in a scenario in which banks achieved their best (lowest) efficiency ratio since 
2000 (43.2% in 2009), it is estimated that the profit attributed to the dominant institution 
would have been almost €3 billion higher than the figure actually recorded in June 2019. In 
consequence, ROA would have increased by 17 bp and ROE by 2.2 pp. 
If we combine this hypothetical scenario with that of the non-performing loan ratio at record 
lows, annual profit could have been almost €5 billion higher than the actual figure, with ROA 
27 bp  higher  and  ROE  3.5 pp  higher.  Thus,  ROE  would  be  comfortably  above  the 
statistically viable upper range for estimation of the cost of equity. 
Clearly, these estimates are only illustrative and should be understood as a ceiling for the 
actual effects, as it is probably difficult to achieve such a low non-performing loan ratio in a 
setting of lower indebtedness and with significant changes in credit portfolio composition. 
 17/29 
 And  also  because  part  of  the  increase  in  banks’  costs  are  the  result  of  technology 
investments, which are allowing banks to adapt to the new environment and are therefore 
essential. They are also indicative of the measures that banks should be prioritising.  
Fourth, the role that consolidation can play as a mechanism for harnessing economies of 
scale  and  improving  efficiency  and,  therefore,  for  increasing  profitability,  is  regularly 
discussed. Added to this is the cost pressure associated with the high IT investments being 
made to address changes in a competitive environment with new competitors. And also the 
need  for  banks to  have  preferential  access to international  capital  markets to  be  able to 
respond efficiently to the implementation of the new post-crisis banking regulations and, 
especially in Europe, to comply with the MREL requirements. 
In the last decade the Spanish banking sector has already undergone a very significant 
consolidation process. Specifically, since 2009 the number of banks has fallen by more 
than 30%. Looking ahead, potential future consolidation processes should be led by 
the market, in other words, by value creation for shareholders, while we supervisors 
should ensure that these processes do not undermine financial stability. 
 Fifth, we cannot overlook the potential role of international diversification, as shown by 
the part it has played in some of the largest Spanish banks in the last decade. Thus, over 
that period, the Spanish banking sector has increased its international exposure by 45%, 
while banks in countries such as Germany, France and Italy have reduced their international 
exposure by 38%, 16% and 15%, respectively. 
Despite  the  risks  associated  with  business  in  emerging  market  economies,  international 
diversification  of  banking  business,  especially  when  focused  on  retail  business  and 
organised in a decentralised manner, brings important benefits, in terms of greater diversity 
of business models and revenue sources, as was seen during the last crisis. In addition, 
18/29 
there is evidence that the lower the level of synchrony between the economic and financial 
cycles of the countries in which banks operate, the greater these benefits.5 
In this respect a profound reflection at the European and the international level on the 
regulatory treatment of diversification in the banking business may be appropriate, so 
that, in conjunction with the greater complexity it may entail, some of its beneficial effects 
on banks’ risk profiles may be afforded better recognition. 
  Sixth,  nor  should  we  overlook  the  importance  of  operational  risk  being  correctly 
managed by banks. 
Operational  risk  accounts  for  9.3%  of  the  risk-weighted  assets  of  Spanish  deposit 
institutions by volume, slightly below the European average (10.5%). In any event, we know 
on  past  experience  that  the  deterioration in  solvency  associated  with  an operational  risk 
event can be high. Indeed, for European banks affected by the most serious operational 
events, this deterioration has remained over 1.25 pp of CET1 in the last five years, rising to 
2.1 pp in 2018. 
As I mentioned in my introduction, in the case of Spain, potential costs associated with 
legal  risks  continue  to  contribute  to  operational  risk  at  deposit  institutions.  The 
processes linked to past litigation, for example over floor clauses, have had an estimated 
cost  for  the  sector  of  more  than  €2.2 billion  up  to  June  2019.  Moreover,  there  are  other 
significant legal processes still pending settlement. 
In  addition,  legal  risk  and  certain  other  factors  relating  to  banks’  conduct  have  had  a 
significant  impact  on  the  reputation of  the  banking  sector,  and  not only  in  Spain.  In  this 
respect it is important to note that reputation and customer confidence are fundamental to 
the banking business. In consequence, and also from a purely economic standpoint, given 
that in the long term litigation costs are far higher than the possible benefits that some banks 
                                                                                              
In  5  See  I.  Argimón  (2017),  “Decentralized  multinational banks and  risk  taking:  the  Spanish  experience  in  the crisis”, 
Banco de España Working Paper No. 1749. 
 19/29 
 may have obtained in the short term as a result of questionable behaviour, banks should 
strive  to  reverse  this  trend,  providing  their  customers  with  financial  products  and 
services suited to their needs and capabilities, and also supplying the key information 
in a clear and transparent manner. 
Similarly, banks should address the technology risk stemming from the impact of the 
adoption  of  new  technologies  on,  for  example,  the  probability  of  suffering 
cyberattacks,  with  extremely  high  potential  effects  on  operational  risk  and  banks’  own 
reputation. 
Lastly, climate change and the transition towards a more sustainable economy pose 
another key challenge. Although this affects all economic agents, it is particularly important 
in the financial sector. Banks face two types of risks in this area: “physical” risks linked to 
the direct effect of climate change on their asset values, and “transition” risks linked to the 
process  of  technological  and  regulatory  transition  to  a  more  sustainable  economy.  In 
coming years, identifying, quantifying and mitigating these risks will require considerable 
effort, although the notable development of green sustainable financial markets in Spain in 
recent years should be highlighted. 
2.  Low interest rates and banks’ risk appetite 
 In a low interest rate setting, there are greater incentives for economic agents to take on 
greater risk. The work of the macro- and microprudential authorities consists in ensuring 
that this greater risk-taking is not excessive and does not ultimately generate problems for 
financial  stability.  The  authorities  should  use  the  various  prudential  instruments  at  their 
disposal to prevent this from occurring. The longer interest rates remain low, the more likely 
it is that risk-taking may become excessive. Clearly, deposit institutions are not immune to 
this, especially when profitability is low. Let us now assess the situation in this respect in 
the case of the Spanish banking sector.  
 20/29 
 First, the private sector debt ratio stood at 130% of GDP in Q2, a drop of around 70 pp 
from  the  peak  recorded  in  2010,  and  is  now  below  the  euro  area  average.  In  recent 
months, external financing to non-financial corporations has continued to expand at year-
on-year  rates  close  to  1.1%,  with  significant  –  albeit  increasingly  modest  –  growth  in 
financing through the issuance of corporate debt securities and a decline in bank lending 
that is flattening out. Even though the weight of corporate debt securities in bank balance 
sheets is very low, it has risen gradually in recent years, and it is therefore also something 
that should be monitored in the future. 
In this respect the credit cycle indicator used by the Banco de España (the credit-to-GDP 
gap,  which  compares  the  credit-to-GDP  ratio  with  its  long-term  trend  value)  remains  in 
negative  territory  (around  -8 pp  up  to  June  2019),  although  it  is  gradually  approaching 
equilibrium. The forecasts for coming years suggest that this indicator will become positive 
towards the first half of 2021. Likewise, the indicator that measures credit intensity, which 
reflects the weight of change in credit relative to GDP, is currently close to equilibrium, on 
an upward path that is expected to be maintained in the next two years. 
By  segment,  in  the  case  of  non-financial  corporations,  there  have  been  two  key 
developments since the global financial crisis. First, their debt relative to GDP has fallen 
by around  40 pp,  down to  73%,  below  the  European  average.  And  second,  the  level of 
concentration of bank lending to the non-financial private sector in the construction 
and  real  estate sectors,  which before  the  global  financial crisis  was over  25%,  has 
continued to correct and now stands at 9.6%. 
This has been fundamental in the fall observed, as a proportion of GDP, in real estate sector-
related lending (understood in the broadest sense, i.e. including loans for house purchase), 
which has gone from 101% in 2009 to 50% at present. 
 It also partly explains the fact that the allocation of new lending has improved considerably 
since  the  international  financial  crisis.  In  particular,  the  empirical  evidence  available 
suggests that banks now discriminate more between firms according to their credit quality 
and  productivity.  This  should  help  contain  any  increase  in  non-performing  loans  in  the 
future. 
 21/29 
 Moreover, the economic recovery, lower borrowing costs and the intense deleveraging 
undertaken  by  firms  have  prompted  a  widespread  decrease  in  the  financial 
vulnerability of Spanish firms. Indeed, since 2013 the debt service-to-profit ratio has fallen 
very significantly, from 24% to 11% in 2017 in the 50th percentile when firms are ranked by 
profitability. 
However, this has been an uneven reduction and there are still firms that show a certain 
degree  of  vulnerability  to  potential  shocks  that  reduce  their  capacity  to  generate 
income or raise the interest rates at which they borrow funds. Specifically, in the first 
three  deciles,  the  average  of  this  ratio  is  around  20%,  indicative  of  a  certain  degree  of 
fragility. 
  In this respect, if financially vulnerable firms are defined as those that are unable to regularly 
pay the interest on their financial debts out of ordinary and interest income, it is observed 
that the relative weight of debt associated with vulnerable firms has fallen continuously since 
2013, down to levels in 2018 very similar to those recorded in 2008. 
At the same time, it is estimated that in a hypothetical adverse scenario in which corporate 
profits continue to decline (on a scale, for example, equivalent to half of the decline observed 
in the last crisis, between 2008 and 2012), the consequent increase in vulnerability would 
be comparatively less intense than that which would have occurred in 2008 in response to 
the same adverse shock, reflecting today’s lower level of corporate indebtedness. That said, 
some types of firms and sectors may still have a significant degree of vulnerability to the 
deterioration of the environment, according to the strength of their financial position and the 
nature of the possible shocks. 
   22/29 
   In the case of households, their indebtedness as a proportion of GDP has also declined 
very significantly, by 28 pp from the peak recorded in 2010. Accordingly, at 58.3% at 
present,  it  has  now  practically  converged  with  the  euro  area  figure.  The  latest  data 
indicate that total household financing was practically steady in September, in year-on-year 
terms, with a slight deceleration since the start of the year.  
By component, we can see significant divergence between credit for consumer goods 
purchases  and  credit  for  house  purchases.  The  former  grew  at  a  rate  of  9%  in 
September 2019, though easing compared with previous months, and the volume of NPLs 
increased at a rate of 15%. Consequently, while this item accounts for just 6.2% of bank 
credit to the non-financial private sector, and given that the return on this portfolio is higher 
than on the rest, even in extremely stressed scenarios, we are also closely monitoring its 
movements.   
Mortgage lending has fallen to a year-on-year rate of 1.6%. This portfolio accounts for 
46% of all loans to the non-financial private sector, meaning it is systemically important. 
The conditions under which these loans are granted are a basic element for determining 
their future degree of non-performance, and they are therefore crucial to financial stability. 
Several dimensions have to be taken into account.  
      23/29 
 First, the degree of leverage, which can be calculated taking the loan-to-value ratio of the 
property subject to mortgage. Empirical evidence shows that the probability of a mortgage 
loan defaulting is greater the higher this ratio is. In this respect, since the global financial 
crisis we have witnessed a substantial reduction in the share of operations with high-
risk  leverage  levels.  And  in  recent  years  the  average  degree  of  leverage  has  held 
stable. 
However, to correctly assess this facet of mortgages, we should bear in mind that house 
prices  in  Spain,  i.e.  the  denominator  of  leverage,  have  been  increasing  at  a  high  rate  in 
recent years. To date, this rise in house prices has not translated, on available estimates, 
into an overvaluation of residential real estate assets. That said, we must continue to monitor 
this market closely in case this risk materialises, and to analyse other facets of the conditions 
under which mortgages are granted that are less influenced by the collateral value.  
  24/29 
 A second relative facet is the effort that repaying the mortgage entails for agents that have 
incurred this debt. Once again, empirical evidence shows that loan-to-income and debt 
service-to-income ratios are relevant variables for determining the probability of mortgage 
default, although the low interest rate environment mitigates the risk.  
  In any event, as more than half of new mortgage loans continue to be taken out at a variable 
rate,  high  loan-to-income  ratios  continue  to  be  a  source  of  possible  vulnerability  for 
households. However, in this instance too, mortgage lending standards appear to be 
prudent, with no evidence that they have recently eased. 
Third, an additional dimension that is also relevant for estimating the probability of default 
is the maturity of the mortgage loans granted. Longer maturities are usually related to 
more foreclosures. Likewise in this case, standards have become stricter following the 
crisis and have not eased in recent months.  
Empirical evidence further shows that it is  the combination of some of these dimensions 
that  may  prompt  disproportionate  increases  in  the  probability  of  loan  default.  These 
mortgages  with  very  lax  conditions  in  several  dimensions  have  also  become  much  less 
significant in recent years.  
      25/29 
   
The evidence available also reveals that households cease to meet their financial obligations 
when they have to forgo a portion of the regular income they receive or when they lose their 
jobs.  But  lending  standards  and  price-setting  policies  play  a  key  role  in  mitigating  these 
impacts. Hence, a key factor in the monitoring of bank mortgage lending standards is the 
extent to which interest rates charged vary in step with the risk borne. Prudent behaviour 
would advise charging a higher interest rate the greater the risk assumed.  
In  this  respect  we  can  see  that,  set  against  pre-crisis  behaviour,  where  there  was 
scarcely any relationship between certain risk characteristics of mortgage loans and 
the interest rate charged, the relationship is now positive and statistically significant. 
Nonetheless, we should also note that this relationship has gradually diminished in 
intensity in recent years, in a trend that banks should strive to reverse so as to have prices 
properly reflect all the costs and risks assumed.  
Generally, then, the main conclusion that may be drawn from the foregoing analysis is that 
Spanish banks do not, for the moment, appear to be significantly increasing their risk profile. 
That said, some factors do require close monitoring.  
       26/29 
 3.  Resilience of banks to shocks  
  One way of analysing banks’ resilience to shocks is to subject them to stress tests. The 
Banco de España conducts stress test exercises annually for all Spanish banks. To do so it 
takes  as  its  starting  point  the  banks’  end-year  balance  sheets  from  the  previous  year.  It 
defines a baseline macroeconomic scenario, which coincides with the Banco de España 
projections available at the time the exercise is performed, and another, stressed scenario, 
which attempts to reflect the effect of the previously identified risks materialising.  
The difference between the two scenarios reflects the degree of stress of the exercise, which 
is slightly greater than last year, in step with the increase in perceived risks.  
  27/29 
  The  results  obtained  in  the  latest  stress  test  performed  by  the  Banco  de  España  – 
published in the Autumn 2019 Financial Stability Report – are generally positive. However, 
earnings-generating capacity under the baseline scenario does not reflect the effect of the 
downward  revision  in  the  macroeconomic  projections  made  in  the  Banco  de  España’s 
September forecasting exercise.  
In the baseline scenario, banks generate modest earnings; these do, however, provide for 
an increase in solvency ratios of almost 1 pp in three years if the dividend distribution pattern 
observed in the preceding years holds. This would not be enough to abandon the bottom 
rung of the European solvency ranking, which is why improving profitability and a prudent 
shareholder remuneration policy are so important.  
Under  the  adverse  scenario  a  portion  of  capital  is  consumed,  but  moderately  so  at  the 
aggregate level, although there is substantial heterogeneity across banks. Specifically, the 
reduction in the CET1 capital ratio is 0.4 pp for large banks with a significant international 
presence,  2.7 pp  for  the  other  banks  supervised  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM) and 0.6 pp for less significant institutions.  
The  difference  obtained  between  banks  with  an  international  presence  and  other  SSM-
supervised  banks  shows,  once  again,  the  importance  of  geographical  diversification  for 
absorbing  shocks.  The  smaller  decline  in  capital  at  less  significant  banks  is  largely  on 
account of their lower credit risk and the lower weight of exposures to the real estate sector, 
i.e. it may be attributed to better asset quality.  
The results obtained are generally more favourable than last year, since banks have used 
this past year to reduce their exposure to price changes in certain assets, such as sovereign 
exposures  and  foreclosures.  Specifically,  banks  have  offloaded  significant  foreclosure 
packages in 2018 and in 2019 to date.  
 28/29 
 Conclusions 
Allow me to conclude. From the standpoint of financial stability, the downward revisions in 
the euro area growth and inflation outlook in the past two years and, as a consequence, the 
heightening of expectations that interest rates will hold at very low and even negative levels 
over a longer period, pose a dual challenge.   
On  one  hand,  this  macroeconomic  setting  poses  a  challenge  to  regaining  levels  of 
profitability at banks more in step with the cost of capital. Low bank profitability – which, in 
the  case  of  many  Spanish  and  European  banks,  stands  below  the  cost  of  capital  and 
hampers  the  shoring-up of  solvency  – is, without doubt,  one  of the  main  risk  factors  for 
financial stability.  
In this setting, banks should harness the levers for improvement available to them in the 
current macro-financial environment, including most notably: stepping up the granting of 
solvent credit; diversifying their fund-generating sources; reducing non-performing assets 
(NPLs and foreclosures); increasing their efficiency; and enhancing their reputation.  
On the other, this context of “low interest rates for longer” may generate greater incentives 
for risk-taking by economic agents. Spanish banks, it would appear, are not significantly 
increasing their risk profile, although there are some factors that require close monitoring. 
Prudence in extending credit should be maintained as a key element for increasing banks’ 
capacity to absorb aggregate negative GDP or interest rate shocks and for ensuring financial 
stability.  
In this connection, according to the latest stress test conducted by the Banco de España, 
the resilience of Spanish banks as a whole to potential shocks has improved on last year, 
though the heterogeneity across banks is high.  
In  any  event,  the  Banco  de  España  constantly  monitors  the  risks  to  financial  stability 
associated with the banking sector. Were such risks to emerge, the new macroprudential 
policy instruments available to the Banco de España are specifically designed to mitigate a 
potential excessive build-up of risks and to increase banks’ loss-absorbing capacity should 
these risks materialise.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 29/29 
