    
 
Light is therefore Colour: Remarks at the launch of the new £20 
banknote 
 
Speech given by 
Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England 
 Turner Contemporary Gallery, Margate 
10 October 2019 
  I would like to thank Clare Macallan for her assistance in preparing these remarks and Lizzie Levett 
and Lisa Young for providing background information.  
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
1 
    
 
It is a pleasure to be back at Turner Contemporary in Margate to unveil the new £20 banknote featuring JMW 
Turner.   
Banknote character 
Turner was a frequent visitor to Margate, drawn by “the skies over Thanet”, which he held to be “the loveliest 
in all Europe”.  The East Kent coast inspired more than 100 of his works and this gallery stands on the site of 
Mrs Booth’s seafront guesthouse, where Turner stayed whenever he visited.   
Turner’s contribution to art extends well beyond this stretch of shoreline.  He was precocious  – exhibiting at 
the  Royal  Academy  at  15,  and  becoming  an  Academician  at  24  –  as  well  as  prolific,  producing  more  than 
550 oil paintings, 2,000 watercolours, and 30,000 sketches and drawings.   
Turner  is  rightly  celebrated  for  his  unique  ability  to  capture  light  and  highly  varied  atmospheric  effects 
through  use  of  vibrant  colour  and  flowing  brushwork;  he  often  went  to  extremes  in  pursuit  of  the  visceral 
artistic experience.  His paintings blaze with the heat of the sun, shimmer in moonshine, and rumble under 
the weight of gathering storm clouds.   
These  works  transformed  the  field  of  landscape  art.    Before  Turner,  landscapes  were  generally  viewed  as 
subjects  unworthy  in  their  own  right;    their  role  was  merely  to  provide  backdrop  to  the  real  action.    Turner 
elevated the genre by showing how paint could not only convey the appearance of  a place but also capture 
something of its spirit. 
Turner also used art to hold a mirror to the technological and social transformations happening around him.  
Masterpieces  such  as  Rain,  Steam  and  Speed  –  The  Great  Western  Railway  captured  the  advent  of  the 
steam age.  The Slave Ship reflected on the moral preoccupations of his times.  
The artistic developments that Turner pioneered resonated well beyond  his lifetime, providing  inspiration to 
the  Impressionists  and  leading  Mark  Rothko  to  joke  “This  man  Turner,  he  learnt  a  lot  from  me”.    A 
contemporary reviewer may have put it best when he placed Turner among ‘the masters whose day is not so 
much of to-day, as of “all times”’.1 
Indeed, Turner’s legacy  endures today  through his influence on art for over  two  centuries, to the prize that 
bears his name to celebrate British contemporary art, to this magnificent gallery, the Turner Contemporary. 
Soon  Turner’s  work  will  feature  on  another  2  billion  works  of  art  –  the  new  £20  notes  from  the  Bank  of 
England. 
                                                        
1 The Champion, Newspaper Article, published 7 May 1815. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
Banknote design  
The new £20 note celebrates Turner, his art and his legacy in all their radiant, colourful glory. 
The  design  features  Turner’s  self-portrait,  from  1799,  alongside  one  of  his  most  eminent  paintings,  The 
Fighting Temeraire.2  This painting is a tribute to the HMS Temeraire – which battled with distinction during 
Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar in 1805 – and an elegy to the decline of sail, showing the great warship being 
pulled  by  a  steam  tug  to  her  last  berth  to  be  broken  up  for  scrap.    The  novelist  William  Makepeace 
Thackeray called it “as grand a painting as ever figured on the walls of any academy, or came from the easel 
of any painter”.3  The public clearly agrees, voting it Britain’s greatest painting in a BBC poll in 2005.4 
The  Fighting  Temeraire  exemplifies  Turner’s  innovative  use  of  light,  shade,  colour  and  tone.    These 
contributions to the visual arts are captured in the quote – ‘Light is therefore colour’ – which is from an 1818 
lecture by Turner. 
Turner rarely signed his paintings, so the signature on the banknote was taken from his will.  That is fitting 
because, in a codicil  to that testament,  he  bequeathed his paintings to the nation, and  in doing so made a 
significant contribution to British society.  Few Turners are locked away in private collections or spread to the 
four winds.  The vast majority are free for the British public to see across some of our greatest galleries.   
The note references several of these galleries.  A small purple foil on the reverse side of the note echoes the 
spiral staircase at Tate Britain, which holds most of the Turner Bequest in the Clore Gallery.  The main foil of 
the note contains an image of Turner Contemporary in blue.  And the shape of the window around the foil is 
based  on  the  Trafalgar  Fountains,  which  are  an  iconic  feature  in  the  square  outside  The  National  Gallery 
where The Fighting Temeraire hangs. 
The  purpose  of  design  features  like  these  is  not  simply  to  make  the  banknotes  beautiful  but  also  to 
strengthen their security.   
The new £20  will  be  our most secure note  yet, featuring several innovative elements.  For  example, rather 
than having a single foil element – the Turner Contemporary in blue – there is an additional foil in a second 
colour:  the Margate Lighthouse in gold.  And there is a second transparent element in the bottom corner of 
the note, inspired by the windows of Tintern Abbey, which was a popular tourist spot in Turner’s times and 
which he memorialised in another of his great watercolours in 1794.   
These security features are made possible by printing the new £20 on polymer, rather than paper.  Polymer 
banknotes also remain in good condition for longer, meaning the new £20 will be safer, cleaner and stronger. 
                                                      
2 The self-portrait is currently on display in Tate Britain, and The Fighting Temeraire can been seen in The National Gallery. 
3 P. Ackroyd, Turner (Vintage, 2006) page 136. 
4 See: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/4214824.stm.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
The varied colour of our banknotes also plays an important role in making the nation’s money as inclusive as 
possible.    Features  like  the  differing  colour  palettes,  differing  sizes  and  raised  print  enable  those  who  are 
visually impaired to recognise different notes.  As with the new polymer £10, the new £20 will also include a 
tactile feature – a series of raised dots in the upper left-hand corner – to improve accessibility further. 
Conclusion 
Banknotes are meagre pieces of paper  – or more accurately polymer – of no intrinsic value that serve vital 
economic  functions.    They  facilitate  trade.    They  store  value.    They  act  as  a  unit  of  account.    As  the  man 
whom Turner will replace on the £20 Adam Smith observed, banknotes may be mere barren tokens but they 
are the “universal instrument of commerce”.5 
And  money  serves  as  a  collective  memory  for  a  country  and  its  people;  it  has  cultural  value  as  well  as 
economic. 
As the new Turner £20 testifies, money can be a work of art in everyone’s pocket.  Far from being “barren”,6 
our  banknotes  celebrate  UK’s  heritage,  salute  its  culture  and  testify  to  the  great  achievements  of  its  most 
notable citizens.  
That tradition continues with the new £20.  JMW Turner will circulate alongside Winston Churchill on the £5, 
and Jane Austen on the £10.  In 2021, Alan Turing will soon replace Boulton and  Watt on the £50.  These 
individuals have advanced British thought, demonstrated exceptional leadership, and more generally helped 
to shape this diverse society and forge our common values. 
I’m delighted to be joined today to celebrate Turner’s continuing influence by one of our most eminent artists, 
someone  whom Turner has influenced and one of Margate’s own.   As precocious and prolific as Turner,  a 
fellow Royal Academician, the master of confessional art and fittingly, past winner of the Turner Prize, please 
welcome Tracey Emin. 
                                                      
5 Book I, Chapter 4 “On the Origin and Use of Money” of Smith, A (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations.   
6 A moniker used by Kocherlakota.  See Kocherlakota, N (1998), “Money is Memory”, Journal of Economic Theory, 81 (2).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
4 
 
4 
 