Continental drift? – Transatlantic economic relations in 
turbulent times 
Speech at the Council on Foreign Relations 
16.10.2019 | New York | Jens Weidmann 
 1 Introduction
 2 Germany’s current account surplus
 3 Trade tensions
 4 The role of central banks
 5 Conclusion
1 Introduction
Richard Haass,
Steven Sokol,
John Lipsky,
Ladies and gentlemen,
If our meeting had taken place 200 million years ago, my journey to New York would have 
been rather short. At that time, all of the land masses on Earth were joined together in the 
super-continent of Pangaea, including North America and Europe. And New York City, the 
spot where we are meeting today, would have been at the very heart of our common 
continent.
Tectonic plate shifts caused Pangaea to break apart and created the world as we now 
know it.
Ocean. Indeed, our continents keep drifting apart by about one inch every year.
 Since then, North America and Europe have been separated by the Atlantic 
 [2]
 [1]
Unfortunately, this may be true in the figurative sense as well: when it comes to the matter 
of mutual understanding on both sides of the Atlantic, the gap appears to be expanding 
rather than contracting.
But there is a big difference between geology and geopolitics: while the continental drift 
between the United States and Europe cannot be slowed or halted, the political distance 
between them is neither inevitable nor irreversible. To bridge the divides, we have to talk to 
each other. That is why events like today’s – and the activities by the Council on Foreign 
Relations and the American Council on Germany in general – are so important.
I would like to thank you for inviting me here today. It is a great pleasure to be part of a 
debate with such a distinguished audience. To kick off the forthcoming discussion, I would 
like to sketch out some thoughts on transatlantic relations from the perspective of a 
German central banker, in particular on the German current account surplus, trade 
tensions, and the role of central banks.
2 Germany’s current account surplus
We may be separated by an ocean today, but the United States and Europe are held 
together by strong economic ties, being the foremost trading partners in the world. And 
Germany in particular is one of the most important trade and investment partners for the 
US. In 2018, our bilateral trade in goods alone totalled 184 billion US dollars.
This exchange appears lopsided, as German merchandise exports outstrip imports by far, 
contributing to a surplus in the bilateral current account vis-à-vis the US. However, 
Germany doesn’t just export goods. The flipside is: it also exports capital that fosters 
growth, jobs and prosperity here. Indeed, about 11 percent of the foreign direct 
investment stock in the US comes from Germany.
 [3]
Moreover, purely bilateral considerations are misleading. Nobel laureate Robert Solow hit 
the nail on the head, when he complained: “I have a chronic deficit with my barber, who 
doesn’t buy a darned thing from me.”
global dimensions, bilateral trade balances generally don’t have much explanatory value.
 In a world where the division of labour has 
 [4]
This is especially true with respect to the European Union and its single internal market. 
Not only do German exports contain inputs from other EU Member States: US goods and 
services may also reach German customers via our partner countries. In fact, vis-à-vis the 
EU as a whole, the United States has run a current account surplus in every year since 
2009, according to official US statistics.
 [5]
But even beyond the bilateral perspective, Germany runs a current account surplus with the 
rest of the world. Indeed, this surplus has been very high for an extended period of time 
now. Its sustainability has been questioned, and rightly so.
Therefore, we have to take a closer look at the driving forces.
gaining knowledge requires looking beyond the surface and investigating the underlying 
forces. When a country has a current account surplus, this means that it saves more than it 
invests.
 It’s a bit like geoscience: 
 [6]
In Germany, the rise in corporate savings was a key driver of developments after the turn of 
the millennium. Back then, German firms faced rather high debt levels and responded by 
reducing the distribution of profits to company owners.
 Their equity levels are sound 
again in the meantime, so it would be plausible that they increase their payouts. And 
indeed, this tendency has already contributed to the decline in the current account surplus 
since 2015.
 [7]
But there are also calls for targeted political measures by German authorities to reduce the 
surplus. However, this is easier said than done. A country’s current account is the result of 
multi-layered market processes that offer few options for policymakers to address 
distortions.
All eyes are on fiscal policy, and Germany is often called on to increase public spending. It 
is correct that Germany has built up fiscal space in recent years. But an expansionary fiscal 
policy is already incorporated in the budget plans of the government.
In the short term, some additional fiscal spending might be possible. However, with respect 
to macroeconomic stabilisation, any further stimulus appears unnecessary, unless a 
perceptible deterioration in the economic outlook becomes apparent. Germany’s output 
gap is about to close and forecasts don’t foresee a marked deterioration.
It would be important to use the leeway wisely in order to promote sustainable growth in 
the long run and not just cause a flash in the pan. Targeted investments in infrastructure, 
expenditure on research and education, and promoting incentives to work and invest by 
reducing taxation are keywords in that context. Climate change is another important 
challenge, for which the German government has just proposed a package of measures.
The current account surplus is already in the process of shrinking, and a loosening of fiscal 
policies may contribute to that. But we shouldn’t expect miracles. According to our 
calculations – and even in a more optimistic scenario – fiscal policy measures of a realistic 
size would reduce only a smaller part of Germany’s current account surplus. They would 
raise imports only to some extent. And the impact on the current account deficit to GDP
ratio in the US would be even far smaller.
economic size: the US economy is roughly five times as large as the German economy.
 One intuitive reason is the difference in sheer 
 [8]
3 Trade tensions
When considering options beyond fiscal policy, import tariffs in particular seem to be back 
in fashion. Proponents believe that higher tariffs can solve several problems at once: they 
claim that raising tariffs can reduce current account deficits, protect jobs, and even make 
people better off.
 [9]
 Intuitively, imports will be reduced. But exports are likely to fall 
This belief is mistaken. Indeed, even the impact of new tariffs on the current account 
balance is ambiguous.
at the same time, due to weaker foreign demand and an appreciation of the domestic 
currency. More importantly, by introducing new tariffs, a country runs the risk of damaging 
its own economy. Tariffs increase the prices of imported goods, and this weakens the 
purchasing power of consumers.
Indeed, American researchers have found that the US tariffs introduced last year were 
almost completely passed through into US domestic prices.
by other countries will probably do even further damage. As Roberto Azevêdo, Director 
General of the World Trade Organization warned: “An eye for an eye will leave us all blind.”
 [11]
 Retaliatory tariffs adopted 
 [10]
The trade conflict between the United States and China shows what this means. According 
to Bundesbank simulations, the measures that have been adopted or brought up could cut 
the output of both countries by more than a half percent over the medium term. World 
trade would be reduced by 1.5 percent.
Having said that, there are legitimate concerns regarding economic relations with China. 
Indeed, not only the US is pressing for changes. In a joint communication, the European 
Commission likewise criticises the lack of reciprocal market access. China shields its 
domestic companies from competition through numerous measures. For example, 
European companies have to fulfil several preconditions to access the Chinese market, such 
as transferring key technologies to Chinese counterparts.
 [12]
So one thing is very clear: China’s state-led economy poses challenges for both the United 
States and Europe. This is just one reason why bilateral negotiations are not enough. We 
need multilateral approaches and rules that ensure fair competition in global trade and 
investment.
Multilateralism is enshrined in the World Trade Organization. While its rulebook needs an 
update, the WTO has fostered global trade and prosperity for 25 years now. A particularly 
important achievement has been its dispute settlement system. The recent ruling by WTO 
arbitrators regarding trade in civil aircraft demonstrates that the system works.
By contrast, a full-blown trade war between the United States and the European Union 
could cost both sides dearly. The potential adverse effects might be considerably larger 
than in the case of the current trade spat with China. For comparison, the value of US
exports to the EU is three times greater than the value of its exports to China.
Assuming in a purely hypothetical scenario that new tariffs of 25 percent were imposed on 
all bilateral trade flows between the US and the EU, a simulation by the Bundesbank 
suggests that such a trade war could shrink the US output level by 1.5 percent over the 
medium term. Other countries would also be adversely affected, albeit to a lesser extent, 
and world trade would be diminished by 3.5 percent.
Of course, such quantitative model exercises should be taken with the proverbial pinch of 
salt. However, one thing needs to be clear: trade is not a zero-sum game. Erecting trade 
barriers means distorting the global economy and lowering its level of activity. Retaliatory 
tariffs may affect the distribution of welfare losses across countries to some extent but will 
reduce overall output further.
4 The role of central banks
Ladies and gentlemen,
The tariffs enacted since the beginning of last year are already weighing on world trade. 
Moreover, the ongoing trade spats have undermined business sentiment and contributed 
to the high level of uncertainty. They are a key factor behind the current weakness in the 
global economy. And a further escalation of trade conflicts remains one of the most 
important risks despite the latest signs of progress in the trade talks between China and 
the US.
In this situation, central banks aiming for price stability have to act if the inflation outlook is 
affected. Beyond that, I find it worrying when trade policy debates become entangled with 
monetary issues.
Allegations have been raised that some countries are intentionally devaluing their 
currencies with the aim of improving domestic price competitiveness at the expense of 
their trading partners. A series of competitive devaluations, nowadays often called a 
“currency war”, could erode financial stability and damage all economies involved. 
However, as far as I can see, no major economy is currently engaging in strategic 
competitive devaluations, far less in a currency war.
To be clear, from a monetary policy perspective, exchange rates are an important 
transmission channel, because they may affect inflation via import prices, for example. But 
neither the Federal Reserve nor the Eurosystem target exchange rates. The Eurosystem’s 
primary objective is to maintain price stability in the euro area. And the Fed has a similarly 
domestic mandate which also includes employment. Of course, one could discuss specific 
monetary policy measures in terms of their effectiveness and side-effects, but that is a 
different story.
What the debate on competitive devaluations illustrates above all is that political pressures 
on central banks have risen recently. Attempts by politicians to influence monetary policy 
are nothing new. What is new, however, is the impression that the classic trade-off 
between price stability and other economic policy objectives may have vanished for good 
against the background of low inflation.
In principle, both monetary and fiscal policy might strive to stimulate the economy. Some 
observers thus claim that monetary policy and fiscal policy should act in concert and that 
central bankers should bow to politicians. They evidently believe that central bank 
independence is superfluous in this day and age.
It is true that, at the lower bound of interest rates, fiscal policy is in theory often considered 
a powerful instrument. And in the current environment the ECB Governing Council reminds 
governments of their responsibility for macroeconomic stabilisation and longer-term 
growth. However, the interests of monetary policy and fiscal policy will not overlap forever.
The news magazine “The Economist” asserts in its latest issue that the link between lower 

unemployment and higher inflation has gone missing, referring to a “strange new world”.
[13]
 But history advises caution. As Alan Greenspan once observed: “[…] history is strewn 
with visions of such ‘new eras’ that, in the end, have proven to be a mirage.”
 Indeed, 
other studies stress that “reports of the death of the [so-called] Phillips curve may be 
greatly exaggerated”.
 [14]
 [15]
 [16]
A recent Bundesbank analysis finds that, in Germany, the cyclical impact of wages on prices 
 While the pass-through of wage changes has diminished since the 
is still intact.
1970s, it has been broadly stable lately. Indeed, a 1 percent rise in wage costs would 
ultimately push up consumer prices by around 0.3 percent. But this pass-through can take 
several years. A slow firming of inflation shouldn’t (Tonne) really be a surprise.
When central banks have reached their policy aims, at the very latest, monetary 
policymakers will have to be able to make the autonomous decision to withdraw the 
monetary policy stimulus. Former Fed Chair William Martin once famously quipped that it 
was the Fed’s job to remove the punch bowl “just when the party was really warming up”.
 [17]
It would be naive to believe that politicians would then relinquish their influence over the 
central bank or give precedence to the objective of price stability over their own agenda. 
That is why independent monetary policymakers with a clear mandate remain a key 
foundation on which to ensure price stability in the future as well.
In my view, it is all the more important for central banks to stick to a narrow interpretation 
of their mandate. In fact, it’s hard to square the independence of a public sector institution 
with democratic principles. In Europe, it has been granted to monetary policy as an 
exception for the specific aim of safeguarding price stability. If the mandate were 
interpreted broadly, independence would be called into question sooner or later, and 
rightly so.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
During the era of the Pangaean supercontinent, a mountain range stretched through this 
very spot. And, in a way, this continues to shape the Manhattan cityscape even today. 
Under the weight of these mountains, a particularly hard layer of rock was formed. The 
mountains were eroded by the forces of nature over millions of years. But the remaining 
hard layer of rock provides the indispensable foundation for today’s skyscrapers.
 [18]
Thus, the Manhattan skyline is also a reminder of the importance of a solid footing. The 
foundation of the European Monetary Union needs to be rendered firmer still. The 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area was borne out of institutional weaknesses, among 
other things. As far as its resolution and underlying causes are concerned, a lot has 
happened in recent years. In particular, the creation of the banking union has been an 
important step.
However, you could still say that the monetary union has a strong leg and a weak leg. 
From the outset, the strong leg has been its monetary framework with the independence 
of central banks and the prohibition of monetary financing of governments enshrined in 
the European Treaties.
The weak leg is its framework for fiscal and economic policy. Decision-making here 
continues to reside largely with the member states, while joint liability has tended to 
increase in recent years. To resolve this weakness, some observers have proposed the 
creation of a true fiscal union, where decision-making powers would be shifted to the 
European level.
As Thomas Sargent observed in his Nobel Lecture, Americans faced a similar, perhaps even 
more pressing situation a long time ago, after the Revolutionary War.
 The Articles of 
Confederation had placed fiscal sovereignty largely in the hands of the states. But the 
young republic was creaking under the strain of common war debt.
 [19]
Following intense debate, Americans eventually opted for fiscal union, but it was 
embedded in a strong political union resting on democratically legitimised institutions. A 
new constitution created a federal government with a range of enforceable powers fitted 
within a sophisticated system of checks and balances.
Is this a model that could work for Europe, too? Surely, American history can teach us 
important lessons. A key point may be that, even within a federal state, action and liability 
must be finely balanced, as was highlighted by the default of several US states in the 19
century.
th
The transatlantic partnership, underpinned by our shared values of freedom and 
democracy, has given us more than 70 years of peace and prosperity. It is worth preserving 
and fostering.
Thank you for your attention!
Footnotes:
1. R. S. (Seite) Dietz and J. C. Holden (1970), The Breakup of Pangaea, Scientific American, 
Vol. (Volume) 223, No. (Number) 4, pp. (pages) 30-41.
2. https://pubs.usgs.gov/publications/text/understanding.html
3. https://apps.bea.gov/international/xls/fdius-current/fdius-ubo-detailed-country-position-
2008-2018.xlsx
4. P. Passell (1994), Economic Watch; Big Trade Deficit With Japan: Some Think It's No 
Problem, The New York Times, 15 February 1994.
5. G. Felbermayr, Beobachtungen zur US-Leistungsbilanz, ifo Schnelldienst, 2018, 
Vol. (Volume) 71, No. (Number) 9, pp. (pages) 31‑33.
6. Deutsche Bundesbank, The drivers of German net exports from the perspective of a 
DSGE model, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. (pages) 19-21.
7. Deutsche Bundesbank, On the corporate payout ratio in Germany, Monthly Report, 
March 2019, pp. (pages) 24-27.
8. Deutsche Bundesbank, Possibilities for adjusting the US current account deficit, Monthly 
Report, July 2017, pp. (pages) 83-85.
9. Deutsche Bundesbank, The danger posed to the global economy by protectionist 
tendencies, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp. (pages) 77-91.
10. M. Amiti, S. (Seite) J. Redding and D. Weinstein, The Impact of the 2018 Trade War on U.
S. (Seite) Prices and Welfare, NBER Working Paper No. (Number) 25672, March 2019.
11. https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news18_e/dgra_05mar18_e.htm
12. European Commission, Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the European 
Council and the Council, EU-China – A strategic outlook, March 2019.
13. The Economist, The world economy’s strange new rules, 10 October 2019.
14. A. Greenspan, Testimony Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 
U.S. (Seite) Senate, 26 February 1997.
15. P. Hooper, F. S. (Seite) Mishkin and A. Sufir, Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure 
Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or is It Just Hibernating?, NBER Working Paper 
No. (Number) 25792, May 2019.
16. Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence from 
selected empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. (pages) 15-37.
17. W. M. Martin Jr., Address before the New York Group of Investment Bankers Association 
of America, 19 October 1955.
18. E. B. Rogers (2013), Bedrock, Sand, and Water: The Geological Landscape of New York 
City, SiteLINES: A Journal of Place, Vol. (Volume) 9, pp. (pages) 7-11; H. Quinn (2013), 
How ancient collision shaped New York skyline, BBC Science,
19. T. Sargent (2011), Nobel Lecture: United States Then, Europe Now, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. (Volume) 120, No. (Number) 1, pp. (pages) 1-40.
