     
 
 
 
 
 
“Climate crisis requires urgent action by 
financial sector and financial supervisors” 
 
Opening statement Frank Elderson at the Banco de 
España Climate Change Conference 
Madrid, 11 December 2019   
   
 
   At the Climate Conference the Banco de España hosted in Madrid, a panel session was held with as 
main topic: the challenges for the Financial System posed by climate change. Frank Elderson was 
invited for this panel and opened the session by stating that the current climate crisis requires urgent 
action by governments, financial sector and supervisors. 
  1 
 
   Fifteen of the twenty largest fires in California history have occurred since 2000, since the 1970s, 
there has been a fivefold increase in the annual burned area in the state. Half of all coral reef systems 
in the world have been destroyed, putting a quarter of marine life at risk. In Australia, rainfall for 
January to August 2019 was the lowest on record in Queensland and New South Wales. Tenterfield and 
Stanthorpe were 77% below the long-term average. Droughts in Southern Africa are causing taps to 
run dry, and a record 45 million people facing severe food shortages. Victoria Falls in Zambia is 
experiencing unprecedented droughts and is at risk of drying up because of climate change, warns 
Zambian president. Average water flow at the popular tourist attraction is down by half in 2019. The 
recent flooding in Venice left 70% of the historic centre under water. Luigi Brugnaro, mayor of Venice, 
has estimated the damage will be over €1 billion. Extreme weather events in East African countries like 
South Sudan, Kenya and Somalia have led to floods that have affected more than three million people, 
pushing hundreds of thousands from their homes and resulted in more than 250 deaths. And this this 
is only a short overview of recent media reports. 
 
Serious tipping points seem to be reached shortly. As recently published by Science Advances, more 
than one third of Earth’s 435,000 plant species, are exceedingly rare. Unprecedented sea ice loss in 
the Arctic, both in ice volume and in thickness. Only if global emissions fall by more than 7 percent 
each year, between 2020 and 2030, can the Paris climate target of 1.5 degrees of global warming be 
achieved. But so far, emissions have been rising every year, once again to a record high in 2018. 
 
And there are serious financial consequences. In 2018 the world suffered $166 billion in losses from 
extreme events related to climate change. Earlier this year, Lloyd's of London announced a $1.3 billion 
loss, due to an increase in extreme-weather related insurance claims. We have seen the first - and 
probably not last - Climate-Change Bankruptcy with the fast fall of PG&E after California’s wildfires. 
 
A 2018 report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimated that global economic 
damages by 2100 would reach $54 trillion with a 1.5-degrees Celsius of warming of the planet, $69 
trillion with 2 degrees Celsius of warming and $551 trillion with 3.7 degrees Celsius of warming.1 Due 
to the droughts in Zambia, the water and power shortages are set to shrink the country’s economy by 
6.5 per cent this year. 
 
And there is an increase in climate litigation. As of May 2018, more than 1000 cases had been filed in 
25 jurisdictions.2 In the already famous Peruvian farmer case, Lliuya argues that RWE, as one of the 
world’s top emitters of climate-altering carbon dioxide, must share in the cost of protecting his 
hometown Huaraz from a swollen glacier lake at risk of overflowing from melting snow and ice. 
 
Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, has recently warned that the global financial system is 
backing carbon-producing projects that will raise the temperature of the planet by over 4°C.  
More than double the pledge to limit increases to well below 20C contained in the Paris Agreement. 
 
While the world is experiencing the severe impact of climate change already on a daily basis, we are 
far from where we should be and on our way to making it worse.  
 
This is why from now on I will no longer use the too neutral, too comfortable phrase ‘climate change’.  
Just like the ECB president, Christine Lagarde, stated during a hearing at the European Parliament 
Economic Affairs Committee: we are in the middle of a “climate emergency”. From now on I will call it 
what it is: a crisis. The Climate Crisis.  
 
Now this is not the end of the story. Crises need to be fought. All over the world steps are being taken 
to fight this climate crisis. And it is being fought on many fronts. Let me now focus on the financial 
front. I am very pleased that last week, EU negotiators have agreed a deal to establish a taxonomy, a 
common set of European rules on what can be considered a green investment. This taxonomy is not 
only essential for the financial sector. It will help all economic actors to identify which economic 
activities contribute to the transition to a green and low-carbon economy. 
 
                                                 
1 https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/  
2 M. Nachmany & J. Setzer, ‘Global Trends in Climate Change Legislation and Litigation: 2018Ssnapshot’, 
Grantham Research Institute report, May 2018, p. 5.  
2 
 
  The work of the European Committee on disclosure requirements is also something we encourage as a 
financial supervisor. It contributes to more insight into - and transparency about - climate-related risks 
and exposures of financial companies under supervision. The network of central banks and regulators 
for greening the financial system, the NGFS -of which by the way our hosts, the Banco de España 
where among the first members - the Network is growing and growing. It is now almost easier to 
name the central banks who haven’t yet joined, than to give you a full list of all central banks and 
regulators who share our concerns. 
 
I stand here also in my capacity as chair of this network. The network that in its first publication stated 
that climate change is a driver of financial risk. The network that stated: taking the consequences of 
climate change seriously, falls squarely within our mandates as central banks and supervisors. The 
network that called for action by setting six recommendations to manage risks and scale up green 
finance. 
 
These six recommendations were published in an NGFS report earlier this year, and are already seeing 
follow-up. Next year, we expect to come up with at least three new publications, with which we 
facilitate the financial sector to assist in reaching the objectives of the Paris Agreement. One about 
transition scenarios and guidelines for scenario-based climate risk analysis. And a publication on 
current environmental risk assessments methodologies. And a guide on integrating climate & 
environmental risk into supervision. 
 
And while exchanging experiences and ideas, the fifty-four NGFS members are also looking closer into 
risk differentials between green and brown assets, and the market dynamics around green finance. 
The climate crisis needs to be fought on many fronts. Many actors have a vital role to play. 
Governments, private firms, NGOs, scientists, consumers, the press... And of course, also the financial 
sector has a vital role to play: banks, insurance companies, pension funds, investment funds, credit 
rating agencies. And, and this is why I stand here: also central banks and supervisors have a vital role 
to play.  
 
The good news is, that a growing number of us realises this, and acts upon it. All 54 members of the 
NGFS. A number that continues to grow fast. There is strong resolve to act, within the Bundesanstalt 
für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht, the Banque de France, the Bank of England, the Bank Al-Maghrib, el 
Banco de Mexico, the New York State Department of Financial Services, the People’s Bank of China, 
the Mionetary Authority of Singapore, De Nederlandsche Bank. And of course within el Bance de 
España. And so I could go on 54 times. And growing. 
 
And the sector is stepping up. The Dutch financial sector, our banks, pension funds, insurers and asset 
managers, have pledged to actively contribute to the implementation of the Paris Agreement. Just like 
the Spanish sector has very recently done, as I read in El Pais this week. 
 
The Dutch financial sector’s commitment to making the energy transition a success involves the 
commitment to measure and publicly report the carbon footprint of their relevant financing and 
investment activities from 2020 onwards and reduction targets for 2030, for all their relevant financing 
and investment activities by no later than 2022. 
 
Also parties who some might not immediately think of to be at the forefront of fighting the climate 
crisis are taking concrete actions. This week, hedge fund TCI, which manages assets worth $28bn, has 
written to companies including Airbus, Moody’s and Google parent Alphabet warning them to improve 
their emissions disclosures or they will vote against their directors. TCI called upon asset owners to fire 
asset managers that do not require such disclosure. 
 
So now the only logical step for me, is to call upon you. Everyone here present today, to act. We are 
very much in need for internationally concerted efforts to address the climate crisis. Ever more central 
banks and financial supervisors realise also they have a role to play. Not because they engage in 
politics, but because their mandate requires them to. And in increasing numbers, they act. No one can 
look away. No climatologist. No politician. No banker. No investor. But also no central banker. And no 
supervisor.  
 
We must act. We must act now with an urgency commensurate with the speed the climate crisis is 
unfolding. We must step up our game.  There is no place to hide. There is no plan B because there is 
3 
 
  no planet B. And as long as sea levels continue to rise, we as central banks, acting squarely within our 
mandate, will continue to raise the bar. 
 
4 
 
