Luigi  Federico  Signorini:  Macroprudential  policy  -  effectiveness,
interactions and spillovers
Welcome address by Mr Luigi Federico Signorini, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the
fourth annual Macroprudential Policy Group research workshop, Rome, 10 October 2019.
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to the fourth Macroprudential Policy Group research workshop.
We are honoured to host an event that has become one of the most important opportunities to
discuss  macroprudential  policy  in  Europe.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers,  the  keynote
speaker,  the  contributors  to  the  four  sessions  and  the  panellists  for  the  roundtable  that  will
conclude the conference this afternoon.
The papers to be presented today cover a wide array of topics and will help us to understand
crucial features of the transmission mechanism of macroprudential policies. They take stock of
the experience accumulated in recent years across the euro area. They also strive to contribute
to  the  development  of  a  measure  of  the  prudential  stance,  an  endeavour  that  I  have  always
advocated as essential for the conduct of macroprudential policy. Let me spend a few words on
this point.
The concept of stance should convey information on the overall impact of the policy instruments
that have been implemented, on their adequacy in meeting policy objectives given the identified
risks,  and  on  the  required  policy  orientation. A  credible  stance  would  help  to  enhance  policy
communication, reinforce transmission channels and counter potential inaction biases.
Certain steps towards setting a framework for a macroprudential stance in the EU have been
taken.  A  notable  contribution  is  a  recent  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  publication,  which
proposes a “risk-resilience” framework to define the macroprudential stance. In that framework,
the amount of systemic risk faced by the financial sector is compared to the level of resilience
against negative shocks stemming from microprudential provisions, regulatory aspects or public
safety  nets,  and  the  additional  resilience  created  by  the  active  macroprudential  tools.  The
macroprudential stance is defined as loose or tight depending on whether the difference between
risk and resilience is above or below some  pre-specified level that measures the risk tolerance
of the authorities, and thus, the “neutral” policy stance.
This is an interesting framework and I certainly welcome it as a good starting point for a policy
discussion.  It  is  a  high-level  framework,  however,  and  certain  concepts  need  further
development.  Without  any  claim  to  being  exhaustive,  I  would  like  to  mention  three  important
dimensions along which I think the approach could be further improved.
First, the boundary between the effects of micro and macroprudential policies is more artificial
than real. The two, while different in purpose, share instruments and are directed to the same
participants in the financial markets. Indeed, it is the overall level of micro and macroprudential
requirements that affects the ability of the financial system to finance the real economy, both in
normal  and  stressed  times.  Consequently,  a  narrow  notion  of  the  macroprudential  stance
should,  in  my  opinion,  be  replaced  with  the  more  comprehensive  one  of  an  overall  prudential
stance,  one  that  would  account  for  how  both  categories  of  prudential  measures  affect  the
economy. Let me emphasise that this is not just a question of semantics. Microprudential capital
requirements, for instance, have been substantially increased after the crisis. In the short run, the
contractionary effects on the credit cycle associated with such an increase were, directionally
and qualitatively, of the same nature as those associated with the activation of a cyclical buffer.
This of course does not mean that it was wrong to do it; an increase in the quantity and quality of
bank capital was required to strengthen the banking system, in light of all the shortcomings of the
old supervisory rules that the crisis had exposed. However, it was clear to all that there was a
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
price to pay for this, in terms of tighter credit: at least temporarily, during the transition to the new
standards. An overall prudential stance measure would capture this policy tightening; a narrower
perspective misses it. Had the former existed, it would have supplied valuable input, for instance,
to  the  discussion  on  transitional  arrangements.  The  discussion  took  place  anyway,  because
regulators were qualitatively aware of the issue, but in a sort of informational vacuum.
I would thus suggest to devote further thought to such issues of definition.
The conceptual framework should also more explicitly capture the idea that one central aim of
macroprudential policies is to limit the endogenous pro-cyclicality of the financial sector. Risks
tend  to  be  underestimated  by  market  participants  during  booms  and  overestimated  in  busts,
resulting in an amplification of cycles. To lean against this procyclical pattern in risk perceptions,
the  framework  for  the  macroprudential  stance  should  have  a  clear  cyclical  perspective.  One
might also note that, in normal macro-economic discourse, “neutral” is a factual assessment of
the  stance  and  is  not  synonymous  with  “right”;  in  certain  cases  policymakers  wish  to  have  a
loose,  in  other  cases  a  tight  stance.  One  way  to  set  this  idea  within  the  ESRB  conceptual
framework might be to say that the macroprudential authorities would need to lower their risk
tolerance in booms and thus activate  contractionary policies early; symmetrically, they would
increase their risk tolerance as booms turn to busts, and thus provide accommodative policy and
support growth when the cycle weakens. But whatever the specific phrasing, a more prominent
cyclical element would, in my view, be welcome.
The  use  of  macroprudential  tools,  especially  the  more  wide-ranging  ones  such  as  the
countercyclical buffer, should always be carefully considered in this light. Timing is essential. We
may or may not be able one day to fine-tune the prudential stance so as to define an “optimal
policy  rule”  over  the  cycle  but,  as  a  minimum,  we  should  be  alert  to  the  risk  that  the
countercyclical buffer may end up to be used like a procyclical one. “Better late than never” is a
poor guide to countercyclical action; the Hippocratic injunction to physicians, “First, do no harm”,
is more apt. An objective evaluation of the stance, and a cyclical benchmark against which to
measure it, would be most useful in this respect. This is an important reason why I look forward
to any progress in this field, whether we can ever fine-tune macroprudential policy or not.
My third and final point on conceptual issues is that, ideally, the prudential stance should also
account for the interaction of macroprudential policies across countries. Euro-area countries are
deeply  integrated.  During  stress  periods,  this  may  lead  financial  instability  in  one  country  to
propagate to other countries, if an inaction bias prevails; the same holds, again symmetrically, for
the effect of contractionary measures. How, and to what extent, this can be done is, I think, a
matter for further potentially valuable reflection.
Before concluding, let me add that a different issue is sometimes raised about the relationship
between monetary and macroprudential policy. This is an important and complex issue and it
would not be possible for me to discuss it here at any meaningful length. Let me however make
one observation that applies especially to tailored macroprudential policies, i.e., the ones that are
aimed at preventing instability in specific markets. Such measures, I would argue, are best seen
as  working,  not  as  a  restraint  on,  but  as  a  complement  to,  monetary  policy.  The  latter  is,  by
nature, pervasive, and as such it can have unwanted side-effects in certain areas or markets.
Should  such  pockets  of  vulnerability  emerge,  authorities  can  activate  tailored  macroprudential
policies to tackle them. In this context, macroprudential measures do not aim at “neutralizing” the
effects of monetary policy. Rather, a targeted use of macroprudential tools creates more room
for manoeuvre for monetary policy to follow its price-stability mandate. Recently, various euro-
area countries have adopted macro measures to contain imbalances in the real estate sector,
sometimes  in  response  to  the  ESRB’s  warnings  or  recommendations.  This  is,  in  my  view,  a
successful example of how monetary and macroprudential policies can complement each other.
  2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is time for me to close this address. I look forward to the valuable exchange of experiences,
insights and evidence that will take place during this conference. I am sure it will help us improve
our  understanding  of  the  way  macroprudential  tools  can  be  best  used  to  satisfy  our  financial
stability  mandate,  and  to  complement  other  macroeconomic  tools.  I  thank  you  all  for  your
participation and your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
