Denis Beau: The role of cryptoassets in the payment system
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Official Monetary
and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Meeting, London, 15 October 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The  payment  landscape  is  currently  dominated  by  a  bank-based  ecosystem,  an
interchangeable use at par, of commercial bank and central bank money as settlement
assets, and an anchor role for central bank money which is the sole settlement asset
with legal tender status. It is certainly an understatement to say that this landscape may be
significantly  altered  given  technological  developments  and  changes  in  consumer  preferences
underway. As these developments and changes unfold, both the « front-end » arrangements that
ensure the interaction between the payer or payee and the payment service provider, to initiate or
receive  payments,  and  the  «  back-end  »  arrangements  that  transfer  information  and  funds
between 
the  emergence  of  so  called
«  crypto assets  »  like  the  bitcoin  and  so  called  «  stablecoins  », we  may  also  see  new
settlement assets develop which may compete against and possibly, according to their
promoters,  replace  commercial  and  central  bank  money  as  settlement  assets  at  the
center of our payment systems.
the  payee,  will  change.  With 
the  payer  and 
For  the  time  being,  in  spite  of  their  rapidly  growing  number  and  variety,  crypto-assets  only
account for a marginal share of assets held by economic agents. In October 2019, according to
CoinMarketCap,  total  outstanding  crypto-assets  represented  EUR  205  billion  globally;  in
comparison,  the  euro  area’s  M3  monetary  aggregate  amounted  to  EUR  12.5  trillion
in August 2019.
In addition, the diversity of views on the contributions that crypto-assets can make to the
efficiency and safety of our payment systems mirrors the one in their forms. Some see
crypto-assets as a disruptive innovation poised to radically change the way our monetary and
financial system operates, and changing it for the better. Others believe that for the time being
they do not provide a new and attractive answer to the classical trilemma payments solutions
face  between  low  cost,  high  execution  speed  and  low  risk,  and  would  change  the  way  our
monetary and financial system operates for the worse.
To  share  with  you  a  few  thoughts  on  this  debate,  speaking  from  the  perspective  of  a  central
banker and a supervisor mindful of the benefit of innovations but also of the risks they could bring
to financial and monetary stability, I will focus my remarks on:
1- whether and how crypto-assets can contribute to improve our payment systems,
2-  the  public  policy  challenges  they  raise,  in  particular  for  central  banks,  and  how  to  address
them.
I – Crypto-assets and the future of payment systems
1-  In  the  payment  instrument  landscape,  there  is  currently  a twin trend: the  share  of  cash
payments  dwindles  while  cashless  payments  undergo  a  transformation  driven  by
behavioral changes and technological innovation. Shifts in consumption patterns, such as
the growth of e-commerce, are fueling a steady decline in the use of cash in transactions, while
the use of electronic payment instruments and systems is increasing, rooted in the current surge
in  global  digitalization,  along  with  the  development  of  internet-based  technologies  and  multi-
functional technological devices.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, the decline of cash payments needs to be put into context because, if the downwards
trend is undisputable – the volume of banknotes returned by the public to cash processing firms
fell by over 10% between 2012 and 2017, -banknotes still dominate face-to-face transactions-
particularly  small-value  ones.  Banknotes  remain  the  main  payment  instrument  in  Europe  by
number  of  transactions,  accounting  for  79%  of  the  latter  in  the  euro  area  and  68%  in  France
(54% and 28% respectively in value).
The increase in the use of electronic payment instruments and systems is developing along
four different pathways.
First, the sophistication of internet technologies and devices for transactions: the number
of  channels  used  to  initiate  and  accept  payments  has  increased  significantly.  Contactless
payments and mobile payments are some examples.
Second, the availability of payment services at any time:  payment  services  are  becoming
more available, ignoring physical borders and time constraints to satisfy customer demand for
instant,  continuous  and  uniform  payment  services,  as  economic  agents  become  ever  more
mobile.  Instant  payments  in  Europe  are  for  example  designed  to  be  executed  in  less  than
15  seconds  compared  to  the  duration  of  24H  to  48H  for  traditional  payment  orders.  This
improvement  in  the  functioning  of  payment  systems  represents  a  huge  step  for  liquidity
circulation.
Third, a  broader  range  of  participants:  the  payments  market  has  expanded  to  include
competition from big techs and major retailers, which are following a wide range of strategies in
this respect. The flipside of this trend is that the increasingly global nature of the market is raising
sovereignty issues, including those relating to the control of data when the providers are located
outside the region or jurisdiction where they offer their services.
Last, the crave for blockchain technology: all around the world, market participants and big
techs have launched or are preparing to launch new projects for tokens designed to serve as
means  of  payment  or  settlement  using  the  blockchain  technology.  We  all  have  in  mind  first-
generation crypto-assets like Bitcoin and Ethereum, but there are now many others coming or
foreseen, like the JP Morgan Coin, the UBS’ Utility Settlement Coin or The Facebook’ Libra.
2- The development of crypto-assets are part of the innovations fueled by these underlying trends
affecting payment instruments and systems, combining the search for anonymity, management
of non-intermediated peer-to-peer payments and the use of entirely web-based technologies. But
they  also  have  their  specificities.  Actually, they  have  unique  financial,  monetary  and
technical features which set them apart from the currencies and payment instruments
issued by financial institutions and central banks. Regarding the first wave of crypto-assets
which have been brought to the market, they are not a claim on any natural or legal entity, they do
not have a guaranteed fixed exchange rate with the currency issued by the central bank and they
rely extensively for their circulation on blockchain, a distributed ledger technology system using
cryptographic  techniques. A  second  wave  might  develop  in  the  form  of  «  stablecoin  »  with  a
potentially global reach, some of which sponsored by large technology or financial firms, whose
distinctive feature, beyond their potentially large size and reach, is that they seek to stabilize their
value by linking it to an asset or a pool of assets.
What are the specific benefits of such blockchain-based initiatives?
First, the blockchain technology and more broadly the DLT could help answer market’s
needs and demands. There is in particular a strong demand for quick and safe cross-border
payment solutions, available 24h/24, enabling smooth exchanges. There are a number of local
instant  payment  solutions  already  in  place  in  a  number  of  countries  in  particular  in  Europe,
available  24/7,  settling  retail  payment  orders  up  to  15  000  euros  in  less  than  15  seconds. A
 2 / 6
ins t 
BIS central bankers' speeches
certain  number  of  initiatives  follow  the  European  Payment  Council  SCT
scheme.  The
Eurosystem has even launched its own service, under the name of TIPS to help ensure a pan-
European reach.
ins t 
However, these solutions are costly for end users and, at the global level, we are far from having
a network (or set of interconnected networks) that would support quick and cheap transfers of
funds.
Second, and in close relation to the previous point, the DLT could help remedy the current
limits of the existing wholesale market infrastructures. Those wholesale infrastructures also
have various shortcomings. Since RTGS are not interoperable, correspondent banking is often
the  only  solution  to  transfer  fiat  money  across  borders.  However,  correspondent  banking  is
costly, and the perimeter of the AML/CTF and KYC checks is in some cases uncertain for the
counterparties of a payment order. Furthermore, for security reasons, the access to payment
systems  is  limited  to  a  certain  type  of  entities  (mainly  credit  institutions,  investment  firms,
ancillary  systems,  etc.).  Finally,  cross-border  payments  lack  traceability.  The  DLT  could  also
help improve current aspects of wholesale clearing and settlement mechanisms and facilitate in
particular  gross  and  simultaneous  Delivery-versus-Payment  processes,  cross  currency
settlements and resilience and recovery from operational incidents.
If the issues at stake are not the same in developed as in developing countries, the objectives of
crypto-assets,  and  in  particular  stablecoins,  are  the  same  everywhere.  They  seek  to  shortcut
central  authorities  and  more  generally  financial  intermediaries.  However,  they  bring  their  own
problems.
3- Indeed, it is quite clear that crypto-assets undergoing technical and economic trials bring
about  not  only  opportunities  to  improve  our  payment  systems  but  also  material  risks
which  on  the  contrary  might  weaken  them  if  unaddressed,  both  from  an  efficiency
through the  introduction  of  new  sources  of
perspective  and  a  safety  perspective 
fragmentation, instability and fraud.
As many central bankers have pointed out, today’s crypto-assets do not satisfactorily offer
the  qualities  expected  from  a  settlement  asset  to  be  used  interchangeably  with
commercial  bank  money  and  central  bank  money,  let  alone  to  displace  central  bank
money  as  the  central  reference  of  value,  as  the  privileged  settlement  asset  for
wholesale transactions and as the last recourse settlement asset given its legal tender
status.  The  reasons  for  this  assessment  are  well  known  and  documented  and  boil  down  to
stressing that there are misnamed as « currencies » for three reasons:
First, their value fluctuates enormously, preventing them from being used as units of account.
For instance, the value of Bitcoin (not however representative of all crypto-assets) went up to
more  than  19  300  euros  in  December  2017  and  has  since  fallen  down  to  7400  euros  in
September  this  year. And  stablecoins  represent  an  imperfect  improvement  in  this  field:  their
value aims to be relatively stable based on backed assets, but in fact fluctuates, in particular if
they  are  not  backed  on  safe  assets. As  a  result,  very  few  prices  are  denominated  in  crypto-
assets  and  not  many  large  brick-and-mortar  or  online  retailers  accept  bitcoin  for  example,
although  there  are  some  exceptions  [i.e.  showroomprivé.com,  France’s  second  largest  flash
sale web retailer, which has accepted bitcoins since 2014].
Second, as  intermediaries  in  exchanges,  crypto-assets  are  far  less  effective  than  a
settlement asset with legal tender status, insofar as (i) their price volatility makes it hard to
use them as a means of payment, (ii) they generate transaction fees that are far too high for
simple retail transactions (for instance, the redemption fee on Tether is 3%), and (iii) they offer no
guarantee of a refund in the event of fraud.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, the fact that they have no intrinsic value and that they offer no guarantee that they can be
converted at par upon demand with commercial bank money or central bank money means that
they cannot be used to create trustworthy stores of value.
In  addition, crypto-assets «  front  end  »  and «  back-end  »  payment  arrangements  are
significantly exposed to risks of various nature, including legal, financial, operational and
compliance  risk  with  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  consumer  and  investor
protection, which need to be seriously addressed if they are not to become the « weak links » in
our payment systems, with the risk that they undermine the safety of the whole payment chain.
From that perspective, stablecoins of potential large size and reach may pose additional
challenges  of  system-wide  importance,  to  competition  policy,  financial  and  monetary
stability.
II- Public policy challenges, in particular for central banks, and how to address them.  
1- In that context, various courses of action are available to the public authorities.
The first would be to ignore crypto-assets. But even if the volumes in play remain small and
do  not  represent  a  threat  to  financial  stability,  the  risks  that  I  mentioned  earlier  must  be
addressed. This is all the more true for stablecoins which raise the most serious issues and
deserve attention and responses before they possibly meet a significant market demand. 
The second course of action would be to ban crypto-assets outright because of these same
risks. Several countries have already gone down this route, including China in 2013 and Russia
in 2017.
A third option, and the one that has so far been the preferred response in Europe and France to
innovations  with  the  potential  to  change  the  payment  services  market,  is to  establish
appropriate regulations that make it possible to reconcile two key imperatives:
- First, address the risks that I mentioned
-  Second,  preserve  the  potential  for  technological  innovation  offered  by  crypto-
assets
To  that  end,  should  we  reconsider  or  reaffirm  the  two  current  core  features  of  our  payment
systems (see: the role of central bank money in payment systems-CPSS 2003)? Namely:
- the coexistence and competition of central bank money and private money (mainly so far
commercial bank money) as settlement assets
- the anchor role of central bank money
My answer to this question would be to reaffirm and therefore preserve those core features
which have served well the public interest of financial and monetary stability. But this
does not mean that we should aim for the status quo both in terms of regulatory and
oversight frameworks and in terms of services that central banks should offer in providing
central bank money as a settlement asset in payment systems.
2 - A  number  of  risks  to  which  crypto-assets  payment  arrangements  are  exposed  are
familiar and in this respect, existing regulatory and oversight frameworks only require to
be adapted to address them.  To  that  end,  three  key  issues  to  be  considered  are  the  legal
qualification of crypto- assets, venues used to exchange them and the conditions under which a
crypto-asset can be exchanged into another one, in commercial bank money or in central bank
money. France has already moved into that direction with the adoption of a regulatory regime for
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
blockchains, tokens and ICOs. After a Blockchain Ordinance authorizing some specific security
tokens to be seen as securities when they are not registered in a central security depository,
France adopted in May this year a legislation on crypto-assets, referred to as the PACTE bill. The
bill includes henceforth provisions on blockchains, tokens, ICOs and providers of crypto-asset
services.
However, adaptation  of  local  national  regimes  should  fit  into  a  larger  regulatory
framework to be adopted at global level. There is indeed a need for overall consistency to
prevent regulatory arbitrage under the “same activities, same risks, same rules” principle, and
also to address risks that fall outside existing frameworks, including risks for fair competition and
for transmission of monetary policy. Indeed, in July 2019, G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors  agreed  that  possible  stablecoins  initiatives  must  meet  the  highest  regulatory
standards,  be  subject  to  prudent  supervision  and  oversight  and  that  possible  regulatory  gaps
should, as a matter of priority, be assessed and addressed. Accordingly, at global level, several
groups are working on a global regulatory and supervisory approach towards crypto-assets and
a  G7  working  group  is  finalizing  a  report  investigating  specifically  the  impact  of  global  stable
coins, which should be published shortly.
3- But adapting the regulatory framework might not be enough. To preserve the advantages of
multiple issuers of settlement assets in providing innovative, efficient and safe means of
payment,  central  banks  as  issuers  of  the  reference  settlement  asset  may  contribute
further in revisiting and improving the conditions under which they make available that
settlement asset.
In that perspective, a possibility regularly mentioned is that central banks issue their money in
digital form, the so-called concept of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). It is important here
to draw a distinction between a retail CBDC, accessible to the general public, and a wholesale
CBDC, accessible only to financial intermediaries.
As regards retail CBDC, different motivations to introduce it can be considered.
One  motivation  could  be  for  instance  the  need  to  cope  with  a  significant  demand  for  digital
payment solutions and avoid that the supply be ensured only by private payment structures (e.g.
Libra) or a non-euro area CBDC, which may achieve significant market power, thus posing risks
to  security  and  financial  stability.  Another  motivation  could  be  the  political  will  to  ensure  the
accessibility of central bank money for the general public, in particular in countries where the use
of cash in payments is declining. There may be other reasons.
But my feeling is that, at this stage, the “business case” for pushing a retail CBDC at the
scale of the Euro area is somehow weak. I don’t believe anyhow that such an initiative should
be conceived as a mean to counterbalance private initiatives such as Libra, keeping also in mind
that the weaknesses the latter intends to address in cross-border payments may not be more
easily handled by such CBDC. Furthermore, the macroeconomic implications of the issuance of
a CBDC must be sufficiently well understood and anticipated before the introduction of CBDC for
retail purposes can be considered.
Motivations  for  a  wholesale  CBDC  are  of  a  different  nature.  We  already  begin  to  observe  a
tokenization of financial assets (securities or means of settlement) exchanged between financial
actors. The risk there is that such a trend leads to disorderly approaches and heterogeneous
adaptations of market infrastructures, in particular when it comes to the modalities of settlement.
Several  initiatives  or  projects  are  in  effect  considered  by  the  industry  in  the  post-trade  area,
pointing to the role central banks could play in this regard, as they have done in the past.  Against
this background, the potential role of a wholesale CBDC is in my view worth considering if
not desirable.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But all in all, I would say that, whatever the final orientations taken, we shouldn’t refrain from
experimenting the different forms of CBDC.
Another contribution for central banks could be to help address one the major failings of the
current payment systems which is cross-border retail payments, which is one of the drivers
of the development of crypto-assets.
One solution to the weaknesses of private initiatives in the field of cross-border payments could
be  to  interconnect  these  systems.  It  is  technically  and  legally  feasible  for  a  given  area,  for
example, in the euro zone. However, at the global scale, between systems of different areas, it is
more complex, in particular when several currencies are involved.
Another domain where progress can be made is promoting the adoption of common international
industry  standards  facilitating  the  interoperability  of  payment  systems  at  global  scale.  In
particular,  it  would  be  necessary  to  foster  the  harmonization  of  domestic  and  international
regulations  with  respect  to  AML/CTF,  KYC.  Developing  support  programs  for  countries  with
underdeveloped payment infrastructures could also enhance financial inclusion by strengthening
the development of local domestic and cross-border payment systems.
We need to work further on these important issues – and will do so.
In  conclusion,  it  is  hard  to  anticipate  the  role  that  crypto-assets  might  play  in  the  payment
system of the future, especially since the characteristics and features of these assets look set to
change  considerably.  While  it  is  clear  that  crypto-assets  undergoing  technical  and  economic
trials bring about opportunities  to  improve  our  payment  systems,  they  can  also  bring  material
risks  to  our  payment  systems  which,  if  unaddressed,  might  introduce  new  sources  of
fragmentation, instability and fraud. In that context, beyond contributing to the adaptation of the
regulatory framework to address those risks, central banks may contribute further in revisiting
and possibly improving the conditions under which they make available central bank money for
settlement purposes. The intrinsically digital and global nature of crypto-assets means however
that a coordinated international approach is necessary to be effective in addressing the issues
raised by crypto-assets. The work currently underway by the G7 and also the FSB, under this
aegis of the G20, should therefore be seen as important and promising.
Thank you for your attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
