Capital Markets Union: A Central Banking Perspective on the 
Way Forward 
Keynote lecture prepared for the 2nd Annual Conference of the Joint Research Centre 
(JRC) Community of Practice in Financial Research Capital Markets Union: Unlocking 
Europe’s Economic Potential 
04.12.2019 | Brüssel | Claudia Buch 
 1 Motivation
 2 Financial markets in Europe: Where do we stand?
 2.1 Financial structures and capital flows
 2.2 Insolvency regimes as an example of institutional differences
 3 What can be done?
 3.1 Transparency about data and regulation
 3.2 Communication and financial literacy
 3.3 Identification of frictions and policy evaluation
 4 Summing Up
 Figures
 References
1 Motivation
The free movement of capital constitutes a cornerstone of the European integration process. More 
than 60 years ago, the Common Market was initiated with the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Since 
then, a number of initiatives have been undertaken to further this integration by abolishing capital 
controls, harmonising financial sector and banking regulation, and by establishing the Single 
Supervisory Mechanisms and the Single Resolution Mechanism.
Despite these significant efforts of institution-building and legal harmonisation, there is a sense 
that the cross-border integration of financial markets in Europe remains incomplete compared to, 
for instance, the United States.
 [1]
Incomplete cross-border integration of financial markets may impede investment opportunities for 
households and firms and an efficient allocation of assets across countries. At the same time, 
European societies need to deal with challenges such as demographic change, climate change, 
and changing patterns of globalisation. This creates a need to re-assess the state of integration of 
financial markets and to evaluate policy measures that can help to eliminate existing bottlenecks 
and reduce frictions.
This, in a nutshell, is the background against which the Capital Markets Union (CMU) project was 
launched in 2015 in order to “get money – investments and savings – flowing across the EU so 
that it can benefit consumers, investors and companies”.
 In this sense, the Capital Markets 
Union complements the Banking Union, which focuses on banks and the centralisation of 
supervisory powers. 
 [2]
The CMU project has many facets and implications, and not all of the objectives or policy 
measures are of core relevance or even within the mandates of central banks. Still, the Eurosystem 
as such and individual central banks in Europe
 have taken a key interest in the Capital Markets 
Union project because it is closely linked to central banks’ objectives and tasks: 
 [3]
As regards price stability, well-functioning and integrated financial markets facilitate the smooth 
transmission of monetary policy. The traditional channels of monetary policy transmission – the 
bank lending channel or the portfolio channel – essentially operate through the way banks’ 
balance sheets respond to monetary policy instruments. Even more fundamentally, banks are key 
counterparts for the operational implementation of monetary policy measures and play an 
important role in payment systems. 
As regards financial stability, resilient financial markets do not amplify but rather smooth shocks to 
the real economy and reduce systemic risks. Since the financial crisis, several macroprudential 
measures have thus been implemented that mitigate systemic risk in the banking system. Beyond 
banking, a healthy balance between debt and equity finance can mitigate systemic risks, as it 
provides ex ante insurance against economic risks. In contrast to creditors, equity owners 
participate directly in economic gains – but also in losses. In addition, equity finance is essential for 
start-ups and can contribute to the financing of innovations and thus growth. In this sense, equity 
finance can yield a “double dividend”.
 [4]
Taking into account these potential benefits of well-functioning, integrated capital markets, new 
proposals are being developed on how to further advance the project. In October 2019, the “Next 
CMU High-Level Expert Group” presented recommendations “to shape and strengthen capital 
market-based investment and financing for the real economy in the EU 27, in the medium and 
long term”.
investment, developing equity markets, increasing liquidity across markets, and measures to 
improve the international role of the euro. In November 2019, the EU Commission announced the 
composition of a High-Level Forum to take forward the Capital Markets Union.
initiatives add to and build on a number of earlier initiatives and proposals on how to advance the 
integration of financial markets in Europe.
 Recommendations range from enhanced opportunities for long-term savings and 
 These 
 [7]
 [6]
 [5]
So why has progress been rather slow? Why do we, more than 60 years after the initial inception 
of the Common Markets, after the abolition of capital controls in Europe, and after the 
harmonisation of key elements of the legislation, still see the need for further integration of 
markets?
I see four main reasons:
First, the global environment has changed. Capital markets have become more integrated – and 
will become increasingly so, due to the digitalisation of financial services. This calls for the 
identification and potential removal of barriers to integration that remain in Europe. In addition, 
the introduction of the euro and the conduct of a common monetary policy impose more 
demanding requirements on integrated capital markets than the conduct of monetary policies at 
the national level. 
Second, frictions are hard to identify. The academic literature in the 1990s focused primarily on 
the importance of capital controls for the cross-border integration of financial markets. Capital 
controls have been reduced significantly in most advanced economies, leading to expectations 
that the integration of financial markets would proceed rapidly. Yet barriers to full integration 
remain in place. In Europe, price-based measures of financial integration declined strongly after 
the financial crisis and remain below pre-crisis levels (Figure 1). Quantity-based measures have not 
increased over the past 15 years or so.
based on gravity models and micro-level data have indeed shown that there are many regulatory, 
cultural, and institutional frictions beyond capital controls that matter.
 Key advancements in the measurement of frictions 
 [9]
 [8]
Third, communicating the benefits of the CMU project is difficult. Public discussions often portray 
the CMU as a project that may diminish the role of banks or that may be promoting Anglo-Saxon 
capital markets. Consequently, and given the ongoing discussion on Brexit, the project may be 
perceived as having lost its political urgency. Yet neither of these narratives captures the core of 
the CMU project: the potential welfare benefits that it can bring for consumers and households.
Fourth, removing remaining barriers of integration is becoming increasingly harder. Initially, the 
removal of capital controls and restrictions to the cross-border movement of capital was a 
relatively easy administrative task. As those “low-hanging fruits” have been picked, more difficult 
measures remain to be tackled.
Take, for example, frictions resulting from different legal systems to deal with insolvencies. Such 
differences constrain the collection of collateral and the securitisation of bank loans across 
countries in case of a default of the borrower. It has been argued that harmonisation of insolvency 
legislation would bring benefits.
traditions and national norms that it is hard to see how a strong degree of harmonisation could be 
achieved in the foreseeable future. Hence, a more realistic approach would be start with, identify, 
and remove issues that impede the transparency, speed, and costs of national insolvency laws and 
thus increase their effectiveness.
 Yet insolvency legislation is so deeply engrained in legal 
 [10]
More fundamentally, any steps towards further integration depend on the political economy of 
reforms: Do reforms provide net benefits to incumbents? How powerful politically are those 
incumbents?
 As key steps towards integration have been taken, additional reforms will 
almost inevitably move into areas where core interests of incumbent market participants and 
institutions are affected. These are likely to resist further harmonisation and the removal of 
 [11]
barriers to integration – barriers which may impede the efficient functioning of pan-European 
markets, but which also protect existing market structures. At the same time, public scepticism 
concerning the overall benefits of the European project make opponents to reform politically more 
powerful.
So how can we address these issues? How can we reap the potential benefits of CMU while 
remaining realistic about what is achievable? In this talk, I would like to stress three aspects that I 
consider important for the CMU project and where central banks can make concrete 
contributions:
1. Transparency in terms of data and relevant regulations: Over the past decade, the data 
infrastructure in Europe has improved significantly. Central banks, statistical agencies, and 
reporting entities have invested massively to improve our understanding of financial markets. 
Yet regulatory and technical constraints hamper using these data smoothly across public 
institutions and making relevant data available for private market participants and researchers. 
Similarly, obtaining information on relevant national regulations at low cost is not always 
straightforward. Improving transparency and access to existing information can thus make 
relevant contributions to the CMU project.
2. Improved communication and financial literacy: A CMU project that is to bring benefits to 
individual consumers and households must be communicated and explained accordingly. Many 
terms that are used to describe the benefits of the project, such as “enhanced private sector risk 
sharing” or even the name “Capital Markets Union”, are reasonably clear for trained economists, 
but their concrete meaning is much harder for laymen and -women to grasp. A sufficient degree 
of financial literacy and consumer protection is needed for consumers and firms to actually 
grasp the benefits of integrated financial markets or of pan-European pension products. Hence, 
developing or strengthening national strategies to improve financial education can complement 
further steps towards the CMU.
3. Evaluate policies and identify relevant frictions: Since the launch of the CMU project, the 
Commission has initiated and implemented a number of concrete measures. It is certainly too 
early to tell whether these measures have been effective in reaching the objectives of the 
project. Hence, much remains to be done with regard to research and analytical work to follow 
up on the progress made so far, identify remaining frictions, and assess potential benefits of 
future policy changes. A good data infrastructure is a core element of such an evaluation 
agenda.
Before going into more detail on these proposals, let me give a quick recap of where we stand in 
terms of financial market integration and development in Europe.
2 Financial markets in Europe: Where do we stand?
The financial crisis of 2007-09 and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe exposed critical fault lines in 
the European financial infrastructure: a heavy reliance on debt finance, including cross-border debt 
flows, a lack of harmonisation of supervisory practices and exchange of information, a lack of 
institutional infrastructure to resolve failing financial institutions, and missing mandates to address 
financial stability risks. The institutional infrastructure has been overhauled in the meantime and 
new regulatory frameworks have been implemented in line with globally agreed standards. These 
institutional changes, together with a changing market perception of risks, have altered the 
structures of financial markets and cross-border capital flows. Still, financial markets across 
European countries display a significant degree of heterogeneity in terms of financial institutions, 
capital flows, and legal frameworks.  
2.1 Financial structures and capital flows
Despite differences in financial systems across European countries, bank finance continues to 
provide a higher share to the financing of firms than, for example, in the United States. In the Euro 
Area, bank assets have a level equivalent to 300% of GDP, compared to 85% in the US. Equity 
shares listed on stock markets stand at 68% of GDP, below the United States’ 170% of GDP. 
Finally, private sector debt securities outstanding are almost 85% of GDP in the Euro area and 
roughly 100% in the US.
financial institutions have caught up (Figure 2). 
 The financial system in Europe thus remains bank-based, but other 
 [12]
Overall, financial market development is also quite heterogeneous across Europe. It is lower than 
in the US because of differences in financial market depth (Figure 3).
development of financial institutions, capturing banks, insurance companies, and mutual funds, is 
more similar across European countries. Comparing these indices over time shows that financial 
structures change very slowly, and it is not easy to link changes to regulatory quality or the 
intensity of banking supervision. If anything, capital controls seem to be an important covariate of 
financial market development and depth.
 By contrast, the 
 [14]
 [13]
Cross-border portfolio equity investments within the euro area have grown steadily over the past 
15 years (Figure 4). These capital flows were also the most resilient during the financial crisis 
(Figure 5). The composition of intra-euro area asset holdings has shifted towards a growing 
foreign share of equity investment and a stable or declining share of foreign debt instruments.
[15]
portfolio investments and direct investments. Within the category of portfolio investments, the 
composition has shifted from debt flows towards equity flows (Figure 6). 
 In the global financial system, there has been a similar trend, showing a shift towards 
 At the same time, markets for venture capital remain highly fragmented and underdeveloped 
compared to, for instance, the United States. Between 2012 and 2014, investments of private 
equity and venture capital funds in the United States were more than eight times higher than in 
the EU. GDP, in contrast, is about the same. This gap increased further in the years 2015 to 2017.
 [16]
 In addition, almost 90% of private equity and venture capital in Europe is concentrated in 
eight member states that represent 73% of EU GDP.
this market segment.
 There is little cross-border investment in 
 [18]
 [17]
National banking markets are also quite fragmented in Europe. At least in the core countries of the 
 [19]
Euro Area, the share of bank assets held by foreign branches and subsidiaries is still very low.
Additionally, cross-border mergers and acquisitions among banks have been on a declining trend 
in the Euro Area since the last financial crises, both in terms of the number and the valuation of 
the transactions. Mergers are still mainly performed within countries.
 [20]
 [21]
As a result of the incomplete cross-border integration of financial markets - and in particular 
equity markets -, cross-border risk sharing through private markets remains limited in Europe. 
Almost 80% of the idiosyncratic shocks to a country’s GDP growth remained unsmoothed as of 
2017 (ECB 2018).
 Consumption is about four times more sensitive to asymmetric shocks in 
Europe than this is the case across the individual states in the US.
national GDP growth below the average growth rate of the EU, private consumption in the 
affected country falls by some 80 basis points, on average, if the country is in the EU. This 
consumption variation — and thus the unsmoothed element of local shocks — is only about 20 
basis points for the 50 US states. 
 [22]
 For every 1% point drop in 
2.2 Insolvency regimes as an example of institutional differences
Insolvency rules play a critical role for savings and investment decisions. Deciding where and how 
to invest requires forming expectations about expected return and legal rights in case risk 
scenarios materialise: Will my rights as creditor be protected? How will I, as a debtor, be able to 
service my debt obligations? Insolvency legislation answers such questions by providing decision 
rules on how to reallocate resources to more productive uses when a firm or household 
encounters serious financial difficulties. 
Ineffective insolvency regimes, in contrast, may delay adjustment to adverse shocks. This was 
particularly evident in the post-crisis deleveraging process and the reallocation of capital in the 
European economy: balance sheets were often burdened with legacy assets from the past, thus 
preventing the shifting of resources to new and productive uses. Effective insolvency regimes that 
allow swift recovery or liquidation in a predictable and transparent manner can thus facilitate debt 
restructurings and the reallocation of funds to their most productive use. It would also increase 
the likelihood that viable businesses do not end up in inefficient liquidations.
How different legal systems contribute to the efficiency of insolvency proceedings can be judged 
against the costs, speed, and transparency of these regimes:
Costs: Insolvency proceedings in Europe tend to be lengthy and costly, in particular for SMEs.
[23]
 In the euro area, for example, the cost of insolvency amount on average to 10% of the 
insolvency assets’ value.
mininum of 3.5% and a maximum of about 22%. Hence, when restructuring a loan and 
liquidating assets, almost one fourth of the total value may get lost due to the cost of insolvency. 
These are resources that cannot be put into more productive use after the restructuring has 
happened.
 The range of this value across countries is quite high though, with a 
 [24]
 Speed: Insolvency regimes influence the time required to enforce debt contracts and, therefore, 
the cost of credit.
recover assets and collect contractual claims.
new productive activities may resume. 
 It can take up to 4 years in some countries or 0.4 years in others to 
 Such delays again imply that time is lost until 
 [26]
 [25]
Transparency: Transparency is important because investors need sufficient information to exercise 
their rights under the law.
 For instance, creditors must receive adequate notice of meetings 
at which creditor decisions are to be taken, as well as receive sufficient information on the debtor. 
Additionally, insolvency law should provide guidance on how courts might exercise their 
discretion, and the judicial proceedings should be open and transparent.
 [27]
 [28]
Intransparency and fragmentation of insolvency laws pose special challenges for cross-border 
investments if there are differences in corporate insolvency regimes, and if there is uncertainty 
with respect to the duration of insolvency proceedings. European countries differ in terms of the 
treatment of collateral in insolvency proceedings. Some Member States have insolvency regimes 
that make it costly to collect collateral, while others have regimes that provide for an easy and 
quick collection. The same holds true for silent privileges of tax authorities, social insurance, and 
labour claims, which some countries have abolished in favour of equal treatment of senior 
creditors. 
The efficiency of insolvency regimes, indeed matters. Empirical evidence suggests that countries 
 [29]
with more efficient insolvency regulations receive higher levels of cross-border investment.
this context, efficiency is a combination of the number of rules, administrative and judiciary 
resources, procedures, processes and measures taken. Improvements of restructuring, insolvency 
and discharge procedures will help to reduce the length and the costs of procedures and increases 
their efficiency. Pre-insolvency regimes, i.e. measures that take effect before bankruptcy 
proceedings are started, are especially important. The effects differ across sectors:
[30]
insolvency framework, and debtholders respond more to the availability of restructuring tools than 
shareholders.
 Households and institutional investors are particularly sensitive to the efficiency of the 
 In 
 3 What can be done?
The list of potential policy measures that can address the incomplete integration of financial 
markets across Europe and the under-development of specific market segments is quite a long 
one. In discussing what can be done, I would thus like to focus on three aspects: transparency and 
access to data and information, communication and financial literacy, and policy evaluation.
3.1 Transparency about data and regulation
Data and information are core inputs into the production of financial services. Measures that 
promote access to relevant data and information for markets, investors, and households can thus 
contribute to an improved functioning of financial markets.
 [31]
The role of publicly available, standardised credit information is a key difference between bank-
based and market-based financial systems.
based on two criteria: the applicants’ financial capacity or ability to repay a loan, and the 
applicants’ willingness to repay the loan.
from long-standing customer relationships is at the core of banks’ business models. Therefore, 
investors rely more on publicly available, standardised information that allows them to compare 
alternative investments.
 Creditors assess loan applicants’ creditworthiness 
 Gathering and processing private credit information 
 [32]
Much has indeed been done since the financial crisis to improve the data infrastructure in Europe 
and to collect data on financial market segments that were difficult to analyse prior to the crisis: 
   [33]
Credit registries that provide information on the supply side and the demand side of credit 
markets differ across European countries.
 They differ, for instance, in terms of reporting 
thresholds or types of data collected. In order to provide a harmonised data infrastructure, the 

Eurosystem started the Analytical Credit and Credit Risk Datasets (AnaCredit) initiative in 2016.
[34]
 Since September 2018, banks within the European Monetary Union report up to 89 data 
attributes per loan and involved counterparties on a monthly basis. AnaCredit only collects data 
on non-natural persons as counterparties. Banks have to report loans granted to a single debtor 
if the outstanding exposure over all loans to this debtor is at least 25,000 Euro. Additionally, 
implementing feedback loops, which require an adequate legal basis, would be a way to share 
and use the rich information contained in AnaCredit more widely, including across market 
participants.
The unambiguous identification of a firm is of crucial importance for the collection, aggregation, 
and dissemination of information.
authorities and market participants lacked key information on the connectivity and the 
interdependence of the global financial system. This prevented an adequate pricing of risks 
related to interconnectedness and adequate policy measures addressing resulting risks. Ensuring 
 During the financial crisis, it became obvious that 
 [35]
that each firm receives a Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) can thus contribute to improved information 
and transparency. The LEI is a 20-digit code that enables a unique identification of legal entities 
participating in financial transactions. The G20 endorsed the LEI in 2012. The Global LEI System
 [36]
 is now operational and has issued 1.5 million LEIs worldwide. However, in order to fully 
reap the benefits of the identifier, further steps to broaden its coverage are needed.
 New data initiatives have been launched that provide granular information on markets for 
derivatives with the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) or securities holdings 
(Securities Holdings Database, SHSDB). EMIR aims at enhancing the transparency of over-the-
counter derivatives trading. Financial and non-financial counterparties must report their activities 
to trade repositories, which provide granular data access to supervisory authorities. The SHSDB 
contains positions and transactions of security-by-security holdings.
 [37]
Essentially, all of these initiatives have been developed in the traditional systems that serve 
statistical purposes, on the one hand, and supervisory purposes, on the other hand. In terms of 
costs and information provided, these systems would benefit from the development of a 
consistent and integrated system for collecting statistical, resolution and prudential data. The next 
steps to be taken to reach this objective are currently the subject of a feasibility study on 
integrated reporting of the European Banking Authority (EBA). This study will take into account 
the work that the European System of Central Banks has already carried out regarding the 
integration of data.
More specifically, the European System of Central Banks has been working on two initiatives with 
the aim to develop an integrated reporting system. The Banks’ Integrated Reporting Dictionary 
(BIRD) is a “dictionary” that specifies which data should be extracted from banks’ internal IT 
systems to generate the reports required by authorities.
close cooperation with the banking industry. It is a voluntary initiative aiming to reduce the 
reporting burden on banks and to enhance the quality of reported data to authorities. The 
objective of the Integrated Reporting Framework (IReF) is to harmonise and integrate existing 
ESCB statistical requirements. Following a cost-benefit analysis in 2020, implementation is 
currently planned for the years 2024 to 2027.
 It has been developed since 2015 in 
 [38]
 [39]
The EBA feasibility study together with the ESCB initiatives on IReF and BIRD are expected to help 
banks with their data reporting, reduce redundancies, minimise the reporting burden, foster data 
standardisation and enhance data quality. Users, including external researchers, would benefit 
from consistent and standardised reports and the enhanced possibility of data sharing.
Apart from information on the activities of market participants such as banks, a high-quality data 
infrastructure requires transparent and accessible information on relevant regulations. Currently, 
there is no central database or website where such information is collected. While all EU legal acts 
are stored in a central database,
 information on whether, when and how these legal acts are 
transposed into national laws is often hard to gather.
information slow, cumbersome and thus costly for both, market participants and academics. 
 That makes finding relevant 
 [40]
 [41]
3.2 Communication and financial literacy
 [42]
“Improved private sector risk sharing” is often cited as one of the main objectives of the CMU in 
economic terms. Translating this abstract objective into an intuitive language is important as a 
means of ensuring public support for the project. 
What “risk sharing” essentially means is “enabling productive investments through insurance 
against adverse events”. Assume two owner-run firms that have fully financed their firms through 
equity capital. In good times, the owners enjoy the full gains from their activities. These gains 
accrue to individual owners but also to the economy as such through a greater variety and better 
quality of products and services, growth and innovation. In bad times, however, owners that have 
invested their wealth in their individual firms have to bear the full losses. If they do not have any 
other means of income, their consumption will thus fluctuate with the firm’s profits.
Owners thus have two options. They can save some of their income in good times, invest in bank 
deposits, and draw down deposits in bad times. The bank can then extend credits to other firms. 
Alternatively, the firms’ owners can hold equity in their neighbour’s firm. If the profits of the two 
firms are not perfectly synchronised (or “correlated”), they will “share risks”: if one firm is doing 
well, the other one is not, and vice versa. Both owners can stabilise their income and consumption 
and thus insure against the perils of fluctuating profits. Without this insurance mechanism, they 
may not have started their enterprise in the first place – thus foregoing economic benefits. 
Of course, going from this simple example to an intuitive communication of the benefits of cross-
border risk sharing in modern market economies is not trivial. Nevertheless, I think we need these 
simple examples to explain why “risk sharing” can be economically beneficial. 
Take the example of the development of pan-European savings and pension products, one core 
objective of the CMU. Well-functioning pensions systems can indeed provide savings instruments 
and insurance services for the individual. In order to reap these benefits, individual market 
participants must have a basic understanding of relevant financial concepts, and appropriate 
regulations must be in place to prevent the build-up of risks for the individual household or even 
the financial system. 
Financial literacy is the key to informed decision making at the individual level. It is an individual 
skill, related to the capability of individuals to deal with financial concepts, to take sound financial 
decisions, and to balance the risks and returns of these decisions. Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a, 
2011b) developed three questions measuring fundamentals necessary for financial decision 
making related to interest rates, inflation and the benefits of investment diversification. These 
questions have been widely used and added to several national surveys, including the Panel on 
Household Finances (PHF) in Germany.
includes economic behaviour such as managing day-to day spending well, looking ahead and 
planning for unanticipated expenditures, as well as selecting and using available products 
appropriately.
 A related concept is financial capability, which 
 [43]
 [44]
 Results from an OECD/INFE Survey of Adult Financial Literacy 
The OECD International Network on Financial Education (OECD/INFE) defines financial literacy as a 
combination of the awareness, knowledge, skill, attitude, and behaviour necessary to make sound 
financial decisions.
Competencies show that there is considerable scope for improvement in terms of overall levels of 
financial literacy (Figure 8).
 On average across G20 countries, fewer than half of adults (48%) 
could answer 70% of the financial knowledge questions correctly. Furthermore, the percentage of 
men achieving the minimum target score for financial knowledge is about 11 percentage points 
higher than that for women. In terms of behaviours or actions required to improve financial well-
 [45]
being, only 52% of adults reached the minimum target of exhibiting six of the nine behaviours 
discussed.
behaviour and cross-border financial flows.
 Such differences in financial literacy can have implications for investment 
 [46]
 [47]
3.3 Identification of frictions and policy evaluation
The European Commission launched the Capital Markets Union project in 2014. Following a public 
consultation, an Action Plan proposed 33 concrete measures. The European Commission delivered 
all the measures it put forward in the CMU Action Plan of September 2015
 The majority of these measures have been adopted in the 
term review of June 2017.
meantime, while a few are still under negotiation. However, because many proposals were 
adopted only recently, it is hard to gauge their effect at this point.
 and in the mid-
 [48]
 [49]
Ultimately, deciding “what works” in terms of mitigating frictions that prevent an improved 
functioning of financial markets in Europe requires a structured impact assessment. A sufficient 
amount of time needs to elapse before reforms can work their way through the financial system 
and, ultimately, affect the real economy. 
 [50]
In 2015, the European Commission initiated a Call for Evidence to solicit feedback on the effects 
of the overall EU regulatory framework.
 Based on the responses, the Commission adopted a 
 The Commission concluded that whilst the financial 
Communication in November 2016.
services framework in the EU was generally working well, targeted follow-up measures were 
justified in four areas: reducing unnecessary regulatory constraints on financing the economy, 
enhancing the proportionality of rules while preserving prudential objectives, reducing undue 
regulatory burdens, and making the regulatory framework more consistent and forward-looking. 
 [51]
Generally, evidence-based policymaking in Europe can build on the Commission’s “Better 
Regulation Guidelines”, which set out key principles for evaluations with a requirement for 
qualitative, and where possible, quantitative assessments of regulations and policy measures 
taken. This includes causal identification of effects of policy interventions: “Evaluation looks for 
evidence of causality – i.e. did the intervention bring about the expected changes or were there 
other unintended or unexpected changes?” (European Commission 2015, p. 50).
 [52]
Much has happened over the past decade to collect better and more granular data and to make it 
available for analytical purposes. A good infrastructure for policy evaluation, however, requires 
more:
 incentives for academics to engage in evaluation projects, incentives within public 
institutions to conduct thorough evaluation studies, a constructive dialogue between academics 
and administrations, and easily accessible repositories of evaluation studies to learn about 
evaluations that have been conducted so far. The Bank for International Settlements, for example, 
has developed a repository of evaluation studies in the context of bank capital regulation: 
Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta Exercise (FRAME).
policy areas and financial sector reforms would be relatively straightforward.
 Extending this repository to other 
 [53]
Moreover, the policy evaluation framework that the Financial Stability Board developed in 2017 
can give guidance on how to conduct policy evaluations.
sector reform initiatives that were launched at the G20 level post crisis: enhancing the resilience of 
the financial system, ending “too big to fail”, reforming derivatives markets, and transforming 
shadow banking into resilient sources of finance. For sufficiently implemented reforms, an initial 
analysis of their effects is now possible. The FSB framework guides analyses of whether the G20 
 It builds on the major financial 
 [54]
financial regulatory reforms are achieving their intended outcomes, and help identify any material 
unintended consequences that may have to be addressed, without compromising on the 
objectives of the reforms. 
To achieve this goal, the framework puts a special emphasis on estimating private and social costs 
and benefits as well as on the distinction between temporary effects – applicable during the 
transition to the new state – and permanent effects. Withdrawing public (“too big to fail”) 
guarantees for financial institutions is a case in point.
 While the private costs of issuing debt 
might increase because investors cannot count on being bailed out, the reforms benefit society as 
a whole because public subsidies are reduced. Assessing costs and benefits of reforms for society 
and assessing the long-term versus the short-term effects of reforms requires a good 
methodological framework, which the FSB provides. 
 [55]
4 Summing Up
The objectives of the Capital Markets Union remain as important today as they were five years ago 
when the European Commission started the project. Much has been achieved since then. The 
Commission has delivered all the measures it put forward in the CMU Action Plan of September 
2015 and in the mid-term review of June 2017. The majority of these measures have been 
adopted in the meantime. However, since most were adopted only recently, it is too early to 
analyse their effectiveness.  
In this talk, I have highlighted three aspects that can help advance projects under the umbrella of 
the Capital Markets Union.
First, improved transparency in terms of data and regulations can be beneficial for market 
participants, households, firms, and not least academic researchers. Many promising initiatives are 
currently underway in the Eurosystem and beyond, some of which require additional legislative 
changes to reap their full benefits. For example, the Legal Entity Identifier takes the pivotal 
technical role of connecting relevant information on markets, instruments and counterparties. The 
more nodes (or entities) that have a LEI, the clearer the picture of the economy can become. To 
foster this idea, an initiative at the EU level to make the LEI mandatory could be envisaged. 
However, an improved informational environment should not be confined to information on 
financial activities; greater transparency is also needed with regard to relevant regulations and 
institutional differences across countries.
Second, communication and financial literacy are key. The CMU project and its benefits need to be 
explained in a way that is accessible to non-experts and people who do not regularly deal with 
financial market issues. For Europe’s citizens to realise the potential gains from better and more 
integrated financial markets, a sufficient degree of financial literacy is required. Therefore, 
promoting national strategies towards improved financial literacy – to the extent these exist – or 
even starting such initiatives is a key complement to the CMU project.
 [56]
Third, evaluating whether the policy measures taken in the context of CMU so far are sufficient to 
address identified frictions and what the likely effects of newly proposed policy measures might be 
requires a structured policy evaluation process. Policy evaluation is not an end in itself, but rather 
helps convince the public that policy measures taken serve the intended objectives – while 
minimising negative side effects. In the area of insolvency legislation, for example, the most 
promising way forward may be to focus on overcoming specific frictions by agreeing on certain 
minimum requirements that serve to selectively improve key aspects of insolvency regimes in order 
to make them more efficient, such as those that determine cost, speed and transparency. A good 
evaluation design can help identify the effects of such measures.
Footnotes:
1. 
Valiante (2018)
2. 
https://ec.europa.eu/finance/docs/policy/190315-cmu-factsheet_en.pdf
3. 
See, for example, de Galhau and Weidmann (2019) or Buch and Goulard (2018).
4. 
Buch (2015) 
5. 
The Next CMU High-Level Group (2019) 
6. 
European Commission (2019) 
7. 
See, for example, Véron and Wolff (2016). 
8. 
ECB (2018: p. 4)
9. 
For the relevance of gravity factors for capital flows see the seminal papers of Portes, Rey and 
Oh (2001) and Portes and Rey (2005). For bank flows, distance, cultural factors such as 
language and legal traditions, regulations, or and other political or institutional factors were 
shown to play an important role (Buch 2005, Brueggemann et al. 2011, Hermann and Mihaljek 
2010, Niepmann 2015, or Papaionnaou 2009). For evidence on the micro-level see, for 
instance, the special issue of the International Journal of Central Banking (IJCB) provides 
evidence on cross-border prudential spillovers (Buch and Goldberg 2017).
10. 
ECB (2018: p. 6-7) and Bhatia et al. (2019) 
11. 
Historically, changes in financial regulations have often been driven by the interests of 
incumbent firms and the political impact of “insiders” (Rajan and Ramcharan 2016, Rajan and 
Zingales 2003).
12. 
Bhatia et al. (2019)
13. 
The Financial Market Development Index was developed by Svirydzenka (2016). It combines 
information on stock and (private and public) bond market capitalisation as well as on the 
volume of stocks traded relative to GDP.
14. 
Bremus and Buch (2019)
15. 
ECB (2018: p. 14)
16. 
Lannoo and Thomadakis (2019).
17. 
The countries included are Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
18. 
Lannoo and Thomadakis (2019) 
19. 
ECB (2017) 
20. 
ECB (2017)
21. 
ECB (2018) 
22. 
Bhatia et al. (2019)
23. 
Bergthaler et al. (2015)
24. 
Lehmann (2017)
25. 
Kliatskova and Savatier (2019) 
26. 
The World Bank (2019) 
27. 
European Commission (2016) 
28. 
IMF (1999)
29. 
Bremus and Kliatskova (2019). The authors develop an “efficiency index” based on McGowan 
and Andrews (2018).
30. 
Kliatskova and Savatier (2020)
31. 
De Fiore and Uhlig (2011) 
32. 
World Bank (2014)
33. 
Rothemund and Gerhardt (2011) 
34. 
Regulation (EU) 2016/687 of the European Central Bank of 18th May 2016 on the collection of 
granular credit and credit risk data. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money_credit_banking/anacredit/html/index.en.html.
35. 
The World Bank (2018)
36. 
The system consists of the LEI Regulatory Oversight Committee, the Global Legal Entity 
Identifier Foundation, and the Local Operating Units. Further information is available from 
https://www.gleif.org/en/.  
37. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/securities_holdings/html/index.en.html
38. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/ecb_statistics/cooperation_and_standards/reporting/html/bird_dedicated.en.html.
39. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/ecb_statistics/co-
operation_and_standards/reporting/html/index.en.html.
40. 
EUR-Lex; https://eur-lex.europa.eu/advanced-search-form.html?
qid=1575369073345&action=update.
41. 
The information on national transpositions in the EUR-Lex database tends to be incomplete. 
One reason is that the database publish only information on transpositions into national law 
that are reported to them by the Member States. In Germany, the following database provides 
relevant information: https://www.caplaw.eu/de/Rechtsgebiete/Kapitalmarktrecht/. 
42. 
For a more detailed discussion on the link between financial stability and financial literacy, see a 
speech given at the 5th OECD-GFLEC Global Policy Research Symposium to Advance Financial 
Literacy, Paris, May 18, 2018: https://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/financial-literacy-
and-financial-stability-738614.
43. 
Schmidt and Tzamourani (2017)
44. 
OECD (2018)
45. 
OECD (2016). 
46. 
OECD (2017) 
47. 
Van Rooij at al (2011), Graham et al. (2005) 
48. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0468
49. 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/mid-term-review-capital-markets-union-action-plan_en 
50. 
European Commission (2015)
51. 
European Commission (2016) 
52. 
Buch and Riphahn (2019)
53. 
Boissay, Claessens and Villegas (2019)  
54. 
Financial Stability Board (2017) 
55. 
For details on an ongoing evaluation of TBTF reforms, see https://www.fsb.org/2019/05/fsb-
launches-evaluation-of-too-big-to-fail-reforms-and-invites-feedback-from-stakeholders/ 
56. 
OECD (2015)
Figures
Figure 1: Price-based and quantity-based composite indicators of financial integration
Source: ECB, “Financial Integration in Europe”, 2018, Chart A
Figure 2: Total assets of the euro area financial sectors
Source: ECB, “Report on Financial Structures 2017”, Chart 1.1
Figure 3: Financial market development across Europe
Source: Buch and Bremus (2019) based on Svirydzenka, Katsiaryna (2016)
Figure 4: The share of cross-border equity finance in Europe
Source: Bremus & Buch (2019) based on External wealth of nations dataset (Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti 2007)
Figure 5: Sources of external financing provided to euro area NFCs by component
Source: ECB, “Report on Financial Structures 2017”, Chart 1.4
Figure 6: Composition of global finance flows by categories before and after the crisis
Source: Bussière, Schmidt, and Valla (2016)
Figure 7: Consumption risk sharing in the euro area and its channels
Source: ECB (2018), p. 14.
Notes: The chart displays, by year, the contribution of capital markets (via cross-border ownership 
of productive assets), credit markets (via cross-border borrowing and lending), fiscal tools (via 
public cross-border transfers), and relative prices (via changes in the domestic consumer price 
index relative to the euro area average index) to the smoothing of country-specific shocks to real 
GDP growth. The respective contributions are calculated using a vector-autoregression (VAR) 
model whose parameters are estimated over a ten-year rolling window of annual data, applying 
the Asdrubali and Kim (2004) approach enhanced for relative price adjustments. The bars display 
the share of a one-standard-deviation shock to domestic GDP growth that is absorbed by each 
respective risk-sharing channel. The shares are computed on the basis of the cumulative impact of 
the shock on the variables capturing each risk sharing channel over a five-year horizon. Year-to-
year variations in the shares reflect changes in the re-estimated model parameters. The remaining 
portion represents the portion of the shock to country-specific real GDP growth that remains 
unsmoothed and is fully reflected in country-specific consumption growth. The individual bars may 
fall below 0% if one or more of the channels involved has a dis-smoothing effect on country-
specific consumption growth. All bars together total 100%.
Figure 8: Financial knowledge, attitudes and behaviour (average scores)
Source: OECD/INFE International Survey of adult financial literacy competencies (2016)
References
•
Bergthaler, W. et al. (2015): “Tackling Small and Medium Sized Enterprise Problem Loans in 
Europe, IMF Staff Discussion Note 2015/04, Washington DC.
      Bhatia, A., S. Mitra, A. Weber, S. Aiyar, L. Antoun de Almeida, C. Cuervo, A. Oliveira Santos, and 
T. Gudmundsson (2019): “A Capital Market Union for Europe”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 
SDN/19/07, Washington DC.
Boissay, F., S. Claessens and A. Villegas (2019): “Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta 
Exercise”, last updated March 2019, https://stats.bis.org/frame/, Basel.
Bremus, F. and T. Kliatskova (2019): “More efficient insolvency regulations could increase 
financial markets’ resilience”, in DIW Weekly Report 16/17/18 / 2019, p. 148-159, Berlin.
Brüggemann, B., J. Kleinert, and E. Prieto. (2011). “A Gravity Equation of Bank Loans”, Paper 
presented at Deutsche Bundesbank Workshop, Eltville.
Buch, C. (2005): “Distance and International Banking”, Review of International Economics, 
13(4), 787-804.
Buch, C. (2015): „Finance and growth – guidelines for financial sector reform“, Frankfurt 
Finance Summit 2015, 17 March 2015, https://www.bis.org/review/r150318d.pdf, Frankfurt a. 
M.
                  Buch, C. M., and F. Bremus (2019): “Capital Markets Union and Cross-Border Risk Sharing”, in: 
“Capital Markets Union and Beyond”, By F. Allen, E. Faia, M. Haliassos and K. Langenbucher, 
MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Buch, C. and L. Goldberg (2017): “Cross-Border Prudential Policy Spillovers: How Much? How 
Important? Evidence from the International Banking Research Network”, International Journal of 
Central Banking, March 2017, https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb17q1a1.htm. 
Buch, C. and S. Goulard (2018): „The Future of the Euro Zone” on the occasion of the Banque 
de France and Deutsche Bundesbank joint conference „Monetary Policy Challenges“, Paris, 21 
June 2018, Frankfurt a. M. and Paris.
Buch, C. and R. T. Riphan (2019): “Evaluierung von Finanzmarktreformen – Lehren aus den 
Politikfeldern Arbeitsmarkt, Gesundheit und Familie, Leopoldina Forum Nr. 1, National Academy 
of Sciences Leopoldina, Halle (Saale).
Bussière, M., J. Schmidt and N. Valla (2016): „International Financial Flows in the New Normal: 
Key Patterns (and Why We Should Care)”, CEPII Policy Brief 2016- 10, CEPII.
De Fiore, F., H. Uhlig (2011): “Bank Finance versus Bond Finance”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 47 (7), 1399-1421.
ECB (2017): “Financial integration in Europe”, May 2017, Frankfurt a. M.
ECB (2018): “Financial integration in Europe”, May 2018, Frankfurt a. M.
European Commission (2015): “Call for evidence: EU regulatory framework for financial 
services”, https://ec.europa.eu/finance/consultations/2015/financial-regulatory-framework-
review/index_en.htm, Brussels.
European Commission (2016): “Commission Communication on the call for evidence: EU 
regulatory framework for financial services”, Brussels. 
European Commission (2016): “Insolvency frameworks in the Euro area: efficiency principles and 
benchmarking”, Note to the Eurogroup, Brussels.
European Commission (2019): “Commission announces the composition of a High-Level Forum 
to take forward the Capital Markets Union”, Daily News 18/11/2019, 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/mex_19_6297, Brussels.
Financial Stability Board (2017): “Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects 
of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms”, July 2017, Basel.
Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey and H. Huang (2005): “Investor competence, trading frequency, and 
home bias”, NBER Working paper 11426, https://www.nber.org/papers/w11426.pdf, 
Cambridge. 
Herrmann, S. and D. Mihaljek. (2013): “The Determinants of Cross-Border Bank Flows to 
Emerging Markets”, Economics of Transition, 21(3), 479-508.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (1999): “Orderly & Effective Insolvency Procedures - Key 
Issues”, Legal Department, IMF. Washington DC.
Kliatskova, T. and L. B. Savatier (2019): “Insolvency Regimes and Economic Outcomes”, DIW 
Roundup No. 133, Berlin.
Kliatskova, T. and L. B. Savatier (2020): “Insolvency regimes and cross-border investment 
decision”, DIW discussion paper, forthcoming, Berlin.  
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007): “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II”, Journal of 
International Economics, 73: 223–250.
Lannoo, K. and A. Thomadakis (2019): “Rebranding Capital Markets Union: A Market Finance 
Action Plan”, CEPS-ECMI Task Force Report, Centre for European Policy Studies, Brussels.
                  Lehmann, A. (2017): “Will better insolvency standards help Europe’s debt deleveraging?”, 
Bruegel, Brussels. 
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2011a): “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for 
Retirement Well-being”,in: Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell (eds.): Financial Literacy. 
Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace, Oxford University Press, 17-
39, Oxford. 
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2011b). Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in the United 
States. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10 (4), 509525, 
McGowan, M. A. and Andrews, D. (2018): “Design of Insolvency Regimes across Countries”, 
OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 1504, Paris.
Niepmann, F. (2015): “Banking across borders”, Journal of International Economics, 96 (2), 244-
265.
The Next CMU High-Level Group (2019): „Savings and Sustainable Investment Union – Report to 
Ministers and presented to the Finnish Presidency, October 2019, https://nextcmu.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/The-Next-CMU-HL_DO.pdf, Brussels.
OECD (2015): “National Strategies for Financial Education”, OECD/INFE Policy Handbook, 2015, 
Paris, https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-education/National-Strategies-Financial-Education-
Policy-Handbook.pdf, Paris.
OECD (2016): “OECD/INFE International Survey of adult financial literacy competencies”, Paris. 
OECD (2017): “G20/OECD INFE report on adult financial literacy in G20 countries”, Paris.
OECD (2018): “OECD/INFE Toolkit for Measuring Financial Literacy and Financial Inclusion”, 
Paris. 
Papaioannou, E. (2009): “What Drives International Financial Flows? Politics, Institutions and 
Other Determinants”, Journal of Development Economics, 88, 269-281. 
Portes, R., H. Rey., and Y. Oh (2001): “Information and Capital Flows: The Determinants of 
Transactions in Financial Assets”, Journal of International Economics, 45, 783-796. 
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005): “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows”, Journal of 
International Economics, 65, 269-296.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (2003): “The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development 
in the Twentieth Century”, Journal of Financial Economics, 69 (1), 5-50.
Rajan, R. G., and R. Ramcharan (2016). “Constituencies and Legislation: The Fight Over the 
McFadden Act of 1927”, Management Science, 62 (7), 1843-1859.
Rothemund, M., M. Gerhardt (2011): “The European Credit Information Landscape: An Analysis 
of a Survey of Credit Bureaus in Europe”, European Credit Research Institute Industry Survey, 
Brussels. 
Schmidt, T. and Tzamourani, P. (2017): „Zur finanziellen Bildung der privaten Haushalte in 
Deutschland: Ausgewählte Ergebnisse aus der Studie "Private Haushalte und ihre Finanzen 
(PHF)“, Vierteljahrshefte zur Wirtschaftsforschung, ISSN 1861-1559, 86 (4), 31-49.
Svirydzenka, K. (2016): “Introducing a New Broad-based Index of Financial Development”, IMF 
Working Paper WP/16/5, Washington DC.
Valiante, D. (2018): “CMU and the deepening of financial integration”, in D. Busch, E. Avgouleas 
and G. Ferrarini, eds., “Capital Markets Union in Europe”, Oxford EU Financial Regulation Series, 
Oxford University Press, 2018, Oxford.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi and R. Alessie (2011): “Financial literacy and stock market 
participation”, Journal of Financial Economics, 101 (2), 449-472. 
     Véron, N. and G. B. Wolff (2016): “Capital Markets Union: A Vision for the Long Term”, Journal 
of Financial Regulation, 2 (1), March 2016, 130–153 
Villeroy de Galhau, F. and J. Weidmann (2019), “Hin zu einer echten Kapitalmarktunion”, 
contribution published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 4 April 2019, Frankfurt a. M.
The World Bank (2014): “International committee on credit reporting: facilitating SME financing 
through improved credit reporting”, Washington, DC, 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/429511468053058455/International-committee-
on-credit-reporting-facilitating-SME-financing-through-improved-credit-reporting. 
The World Bank (2018): “Improving Access to Finance for SMEs - Opportunities through Credit 
Reporting, Secured Lending and Insolvency Practices”, 
https://www.doingbusiness.org/content/dam/doingBusiness/media/Special-Reports/improving-
access-to-finance-for-SMEs.pdf, Washington DC. 
The World Bank (2019), “Doing business 2020”, 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/resolving-insolvency, Washington DC.
