Closing remarks for the 13th edition of the Regional Seminar on Financial Stability 
Florin Georgescu, First Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Romania 
Bucharest, September 13, 2019 
 Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
 
  We have reached the end of the 13th edition of the Regional Seminar on Financial 
Stability and it is my pleasure to provide some closing remarks.  
  After  two  days  of  interesting  presentations  and  intense  debates,  I  will  try  to 
summarize some of the ideas presented here. 
  In  this  year’s  edition  of  the  Financial  Stability  Seminar,  whose  topics  was 
“Inclusion and Financial Stability”, we have discussed about: 
o  Financial inclusion and income inequality 
o  Correlation between macroprudential policy and financial inclusion 
o  Access to banking financing 
o  Climate-related risks  
All these were discussed in the context of financial stability. 
  Some of the subjects, like macroprudential policy and its effects, were discussed 
in-depth these days, but also in the previous editions of the seminar. And that’s 
how  it  should  be.  This  policy  represents  a  key  element  in  ensuring  financial 
stability.   
  Macroprudential policy, according to ESRB recommendation, has ”the ultimate 
objective to contribute to the safeguard of the stability of the financial system as 
a  whole,  including  by  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and 
decreasing  the  build-up  of  systemic  risks,  thereby  ensuring  a  sustainable 
contribution of the financial sector to economic growth”. On the other hand, the 
focus  of  micro-prudential  supervision  is  to  safeguard  individual  financial 
institutions from idiosyncratic risks and prevent them from taking too much risk, 
while ensuring the consumer protection of both investors and depositors. 
  In  the  past  years,  many  of  these  issues  have  been  addressed.  In  terms  of 
macroprudential  policy,  we  have  seen  in  all  the  European  countries  measures 
implemented  on  the  supply  side,  namely  capital  buffers,  and  in  some  member 
states even measures on the demand side.  This is also the case for Romania which 
introduced debt service-to-income and loan-to-value requirements.  
 1 / 4 
   Some of the topics, like financial inclusion and inequality are just as important 
as  macro  and  microprudential  policies  and  I  welcome  the  fact  that  some 
presentations addressed these aspects. 
  Financial inclusion and income inequality are more and more a subject of interest 
for  central  banks.  It  is  a  topic  that  was  on  the  agenda  of  a  previous  financial 
stability  seminar  and  today’s  also,  and  in  my  opinion,  it  deserves  a  special 
attention.  
  The papers discussed these days lead to the idea that higher financial inclusion 
will reduce inequality, but what I would like to emphasize is that in low income 
and  developing  countries  in  general,  the  most  important  factor  in  reducing 
inequalities stays within the national authorities competencies.  
  Proper  economic  policies  must  be  implemented  in  order  to  ensure  inclusive 
economic  growth,  which  generates  the  reduction  of  inequality.  As  it  was  very 
well  underlined  previously,  households  in  Romania  borrow  more  than  the 
inhabitants  of  peer  countries.  However,  credit  to  low-income  people  does  not 
come  from  banks,  where  they  are  not  eligible.  They  resort  to  non-financial 
institutions  instead,  where  looser  credit  standards  come  at  the  cost  of  higher 
interest rates. 
  Adequate  economic  policies  will  help  increase  the  credit  worthiness  level  of    
low-income citizens, which then can apply for sustainable loans.  
  Also, good economic policies means an increase in the quality and complexity of 
manufactured  products  within  an  inclusive  economic  growth.  It  means  higher 
research  and  development  expenditures  that  will  determine  an  increase  in  the 
supply of medium and high tech goods.  
  The global economy is still in a favorable position, albeit decelerating, while the 
uncertainty is rising. New opportunities, but also new risks and new challenges 
emerge, such as Brexit, the trade and currency war, the cold war of technology, 
the debt crisis, money laundering, climate changes, higher inequality. All these 
aspects must be addressed as complementary to current policies.  
  Besides  the  discussions  that  took  place  here,  related  to  the  soundness  of  the 
financial sector and the need to have financial services widely accessible, I would 
like to underline two main points, in which I strongly believe.  
 
    2 / 4 
The first one is that “There is no financial inclusion without social inclusion”  
  As we look at the development indicators, we can notice, on the one hand, that 
significant quantitative progress have been achieved in reducing the worldwide 
poverty across countries. One the other hand, however, there are still important 
and  rising  differences  related  to  the  living  standard,  healthcare,  education, 
sanitary conditions within the countries.  
  Inequality among the citizens affects their living standards, state of mind and the 
democracy itself.  
  Interest in social spending issues has risen globally over the last decade. The IMF 
has voiced increased concerns about rising inequality, the need to support vulnerable 
groups, to address demographic, technological and climate developments. In their 
2019 report, social spending is mentioned as a key policy in maintaining social and 
political stability. 
  Even companies seem to intend to change their strategy. After being accused of an 
obsession  with  short-term  earnings  while  neglecting  investment,  depressing 
wages and failing to pay for the negative externalities they created, some changes 
in the corporate decision-making are expected.  
 The second point is that “There is a strong link between financial stability, on the 
one hand, and capital and financial discipline, on the other.”  
  A competitive and stable economic framework has to ensure an appropriate balance 
between rights or liberties and obligations or accountability of entrepreneurs.  
  While  many  efforts  have  already  been  made  on  the  macroprudential  side,  we 
should also pay attention to the micro level. When a crisis hits, you have to have 
your  house  in  order.  That  means  you  have  to  address  preemptively  your  own 
vulnerabilities.  
  At the heart of any economy lies the capital, which in developing countries is the 
main  factor  of  production.  The  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  ensure  the 
competitiveness  of  the  economy,  which  creates  the  conditions  for  reaching  an 
optimal macroeconomic equilibrium.  
  The  segregation  between  freedom  and  responsibility  at  the  level  of  firms 
seriously  undermines  the  foundation  of  the  market  economy  and  creates  deep 
social disparities. 
  3 / 4 
  Besides  a  strong  capital base, a  fully  functional  market  economy  needs  strong 
financial and payment discipline. Without these, financial instability would likely 
appear.  
 
 
  
 
        And, I would like to conclude by expressing, on behalf of the National Bank of 
Romania, our appreciation to all the participants for attending the seminar and to 
the IMF for their constant support in organizing such useful debates.   
  As the purpose of the seminar is to discuss current financial stability challenges 
and to exchange knowledge in dealing with such challenges, I believe that the 
objective has been achieved during these two days event. 
  Finally, taking into account: first, the issues I have mentioned above; second, the 
direct and strong correlation between the capital and the real economy and  third, 
the  fact  that  the  distinguished  participants  who  will  take  part  in  the  next  year 
seminar  can  offer  the  possibility  to  share  experience  among  countries  and 
institutions,  I would like to suggest that the 2020 event topic to be “The capital 
in the real economy as a cornerstone of the financial stability”. 
  4 / 4 
