Luis de Guindos: Interview with El País
Interview with Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and El País,
conducted by Mr Luis Doncel on 11 October 2019, and published on 26 October 2019.
 Central bankers have become increasingly prominent figures. Would it be preferable for
them to go back to being rather low key?
Monetary policy has been overly prominent because other policy areas have not taken action.
That’s not good.
Mario Draghi’s term as ECB President is about to end. How will he be remembered?
His  mandate  was  marked  by  the  debt  crisis,  three  country  bailouts,  the  extreme  situations  in
Spain and Italy, and the real prospect of Greece being forced to leave the euro area. With one
sentence he made it patently clear that he would preserve the single currency, thus marking the
beginning of the recovery from 2013 onwards. The second standout moment is large-scale asset
purchases.  Despite  the  challenges  of  ECB  decision-making,  he  built  a  consensus  for
implementing a policy that at the time was strictly necessary. In so doing, he modernised the
ECB’s toolkit, bringing the institution into line with the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England.
His latest measures have been heavily criticised. Draghi himself has acknowledged that
the side effects are increasing. Isn’t it a contradiction to say that the ECB has room to act
while, at the same time, warning of the adverse effects of its policies?
You have to find the right balance. We try to take action and do our part, but the side effects are
becoming increasingly clear over time. Central bankers are not almighty. We cannot fix problems
such as trade wars or Brexit. Fiscal policy, structural reforms and the banking union have their
part to play. If they don’t, the side effects will be larger. And that’s what we want to avoid.
Are  the  fiscal  plans  announced  by  governments,  for  example  in  Germany  and  the
Netherlands, sufficient?
The patchwork of fiscal policies – national policies and the Stability and Growth Pact – is not
sufficient  to  deal  with  a  severe  downturn.  The  existing  framework  offers  very  little  scope  for
complementing monetary policy. That is why I am convinced of the need for a centralised and
independent fiscal instrument. It would also provide support to national fiscal policies.
The ECB has not met its inflation objective since 2013. Has it failed to fulfil its price
stability mandate?
Let’s not forget that the risk of deflation was averted, and that risk was extremely dangerous.
Inflation has indeed been below the objective for some time, but behind this there are structural
changes for which we don’t yet have a full explanation.
Is this damaging the institution’s credibility?
No. We would have had a credibility problem if deflation had taken hold. The question is why
wage increases are not passing through to price inflation. This is one of the legacies of the crisis
a decade ago.
What is Christine Lagarde’s biggest challenge?
On the one hand, the severity of the economic slowdown. We expect growth to be slightly above
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1%, but with downside risks. In the financial sector, the greatest challenges are banks’ very low
profitability, risks stemming from low rates and the assets managed by the funds industry, which
have grown considerably.
The ECB’s policies have had the undesired effect of redistributing income.
They have had a certain negative effect on savers and have potentially pushed up asset prices,
but they have also had a positive effect in the form of economic growth, job creation and wage
increases. According to our calculations, the net effect has added 2 percentage points to growth.
As a result of the ECB’s actions, the situation in Europe is nothing like it was ten years ago.
There has been criticism of the ECB becoming more political and less technical with
Christine Lagarde and you at the helm – both of you are former ministers with no central
banking experience.
Monetary policy must be just another element that has a place within economic policy. It’s good
to have experience in other areas. Central bankers have sometimes been working in an ivory
tower. Christine Lagarde – not to mention myself –is well versed in the euro area’s mechanisms.
The ECB’s decision-makers need to understand the context, make sound choices from among
the alternatives and communicate appropriately. Ms Lagarde will do this extremely clearly.
Internal criticism, resignations, partisan leaks to the press… Divisions within the ECB
seem to have flared up in recent weeks.
Strangely, there’s sometimes more politics going on inside a central bank than in governments.
Seriously though, the 25 members of the Governing Council should try to build a consensus. And
when a decision is made, it must be embraced.
That isn’t happening right now. Are these fights damaging the ECB?
I wouldn’t say they are damaging it, but certainly they are not contributing to the effectiveness of
the policies.
Criticism  of  Draghi  is  intensifying  in  the  north  of  Europe.  Are  you  fearful  of
disengagement from the European project in countries such as Germany?
We  have  to  redouble  our  communication  efforts.  The  ECB  has  delivered  low  inflation  and  a
favourable environment in which Germany has enjoyed ten years of strong growth. Germany has
been much better off with the euro.
In September the votes against came from countries that together account for more than
half of the eurozone’s population.
I don’t represent Spain on the Executive Board. You have to act with the entire eurozone in mind.
The  “one  member,  one  vote”  system,  as  occurs  in  the  Governing  Council,  is  especially
democratic  as  it  avoids  imbalances  in  the  decision-making  process.  But  we  clearly  have  to
consider Germany. If the German economy grinds to a halt, we will all be affected. We’re all in
the same boat.
Could Ms Lagarde’s arrival ease some of these tensions?
I don’t think there will be a sudden change in policy by any means. I’m confident that everyone on
the Governing Council will work together with Christine Lagarde with unwavering loyalty from the
outset.
The ECB has just lowered its growth forecasts, but some people think they are still too
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
optimistic.
The slowdown is coming from the external sector, which has a strong impact on countries like
Germany.  If  it  does  fall  into  recession,  it  will  be  a  technical  recession  and  the  economy  will
rebound quickly. The risk is not so much one of recession, but rather of entering a prolonged
period of very moderate growth, below 1.5%. This is why players other than the ECB have to get
involved.
Is the euro area prepared for a no-deal Brexit?
The financial sector is, yes. But the main impact will not come from the financial sector; it will
come  from  the  overall  impact  on  the  United  Kingdom,  which  is  the  second-largest  European
economy. Contingency plans are in place in the financial sector, but other sectors are not as well
prepared.
The Spanish economy is also starting to be a concern.
Spain  has  enjoyed  above-average  growth  since  2013,  but  nobody  can  escape  the  global
slowdown.  That  said,  the  Spanish  economy  can  steer  clear  of  a  recession  if  mistakes  are
avoided, because it is much better prepared than in the past. It is more competitive, its banking
sector is healthier and levels of private debt are lower.
And government debt of close to 100% of GDP Did we waste the opportunity to bring it
down more quickly in the good years?
Considerable efforts have been made. Spain’s deficit had reached 11% of GDP, but this year it
will be around 2%. It’s always the case that more could have been done, but equally less could
have been done.
To what extent is the current political deadlock weighing on the economy?
I  won’t  comment  on  countries’  internal  political  issues. All  I  can  say  is  that  I  was  an  acting
minister for almost a year, and it’s not a nice situation to be in. A cyclical slowdown is coming,
but certainly not a crisis like we saw in 2008.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
