Anita  Angelovska  Bezhoska:  Strengthening  of  the  institutional
capacity of the NBRNM in the process of its accession to the ESCB
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
North  Macedonia,  at  the  opening  conference  of  the  Twinning  Project  "Strengthening  of  the
institutional capacity of the NBRNM in the process of its accession to the ESCB", Skopje, 30
October 2019.
 Your Excellency Gerberich, dear Mr. Janmaat, Secretary Vučić, representatives of the central
banks of Germany and Croatia, ladies and gentlemen,
It is my great pleasure to address you at today’s event to mark the launch of a particularly
important project that we expect to contribute to our further profiling as a modern central bank,
with strong capacity and readiness to join the European family of central banks.
The European Union has been important institutional, economic and political benchmark
for  us  from  the  outset  of  the  transition  process.  The  EU  pre-accession  process  itself
provides  key  tools  that  support  and  reinforce  the  reform  process  in  a  country  aspiring  to  full
membership, thereby strengthening its institutional capacity and economic foundations. Faster
institutional and economic convergence, including faster convergence to the European central
bank values, will also mean faster integration into the European family.
That  is  why  we,  at  the  National  Bank,  have  been  strengthening  our  capacity  through
various modalities, often with direct EU support using the available tools. Active use of
TAEX  programs  and  direct  bilateral  cooperation  with  EU  central  banks  are  just  some  of  the
modalities used to strengthen our infrastructure in various operating segments. In this light, I think
it is worth recalling the 2012 IPA project whose primary purpose was a detailed screening of our
compliance with the European legislation and practices and a clear identification of gaps. I am
pleased  that  today,  thanks  to  the  commitment  of  my  colleagues,  many  of  the  gaps  identified
during  the  project  have  already  been  filled.  In  today’s  dynamic  environment,  however,  where
European legislation is undergoing major changes, harmonization with European standards is an
ongoing process that implies permanent strengthening of the institutions’ capacities.
On behalf of the National Bank, I sincerely thank the EU for standing behind us and our
efforts  for  further  alignment  of  the  rules,  policies  and  operations  with  the  European
standards, with a view to further strengthening macroeconomic and financial stability. By
supporting  this  project,  we  have  been  given  confidence  that  we  will  undoubtedly  justify  by
delivering  concrete  results.  Project  activities  encompass  four  central  banking  areas. And  it  is
particularly important that in the aftermath of the global economic crisis, these areas underwent
major changes globally which pose new challenges for central banks.
The first component includes payment services and payment systems - an area where
the  frequency  of  financial  innovations  is  the  greatest,  which  makes  the  challenges
extremely high. The activities will be largely focused on drafting of the new law and the new
bylaws on payment services and payment systems – in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance.
The new regulation will entail transposing the latest European legislation in this area and setting
grounds  for  significant  changes  to  our  payment  landscape.  Opening  the  door  to  fintech
companies will provide opportunities to strengthen competition in the payment services market,
and thus to enrich the offer of new, innovative and easily accessible products at a competitive
price.
Reflecting on the scope of this project, we have had in mind that, inter alia, the recent global
economic  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  macroeconomic  stability  does  not  necessarily
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure financial stability. It acknowledged though that financial instability has long-term adverse
effects on economic growth and macroeconomic stability. This explains the large step taken by
the EU - a banking union set up on two pillars: the single supervisory mechanism and the single
resolution  mechanism.  Undeniably,  countries  heading  towards  the  EU  and  the  European
Monetary  Union  will  have  to  work  hard  to  harmonize  the  supervisory  setup  as  well  as  other
institutional and structural elements relevant for the smooth financial sector functioning.
Therefore,  the  second  component  addresses  the  banking  regulation  and  supervision
and  aims  to  improve  our  supervisory  capacities.  Upon  significant  alignment  with  the
European capital requirements, the focus will now be on the process of managing liquidity, but
also  on  strengthening  risk  management  in  general,  especially  credit  risk,  which  given  the
structure of banking activities is the most significant risk in the banking book. Project activities
are in line with the latest Joint Conclusions of the economic and financial dialogue with the EU
and  among  other  things  are  aimed  to  further  reduce  non-performing  loans,  i.e.  improve  the
quality of banks’ balance sheets, which is important prerequisite for stronger credit support.    
I am pleased that this project validates our strategic goal of providing quality statistical
data, fully compliant with international and European statistical standards. Specifically, the
third project component focuses on the further development of financial account statistics, which
is  key  to  identifying  cross-sectoral  linkages  within  an  economy  and  thereby  identifying  any
possibility of spillover of shocks from one sector into another. Recently, we have taken a number
of activities in this segment. Almost two years ago, we made our first data transfer of the annual
accounts  -  stock  to  Eurostat,  and  in April  last  year,  we  prepared  detailed  data  on  the  flow  of
assets and liabilities for the government sector, which is one of the key components in compiling
spreadsheets for the excessive deficit procedure (EDP). The project activities will be aimed to
further improving of the quality of this statistics, especially given that its first release is scheduled
for next year.
For  us  at  the  National  Bank,  the  achievement  in  the  fourth  component  -  research,
knowledge and skills in policy analysis - will be of immense importance. Emphasis will be
on assessing the relationship between real and financial cycles and identifying the implications of
financial factors for the economic fluctuations in the Macedonian economy. This topic has been
particularly relevant since the outbreak of the global economic crisis, and undoubtedly, analyzing
it will improve the recommendations of decision makers.
Distinguished guests,
It is a great pleasure for us to partner with the central banks of Germany and Croatia in delivering
such a large and significant project. I thank them for being part of this project and for supporting
us in the process of European integration.
I also thank the central banks of Belgium, Lithuania, Portugal, Romania and the Netherlands who
have also accepted to support our way towards European values. I believe in the not too distant
future  we  will  be  partners  not  only  in  implementing  projects,  but  also  equal  partners  in  the
creation of European standards in central banking.
Finally, let us remember what Robert Schuman said in the 1950 Declaration, “Europe will not be
made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements
which first create a de facto solidarity.” I hope that the achievements we make during the project
delivery  will  reaffirm  our  readiness  to  be  active  and  beneficial  participants  in  the  further
construction of Europe.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
