Johannes Beermann: Maintaining a safe and efficient cash cycle in
times of change
Speech  by  Dr  Johannes  Beermann,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 4 December 2019.
1 Introduction
 Dear Johann,
Ladies and gentlemen,
When trying to make sense of the many and varied individual transactions and decisions being
made in an economy, economists like to think in terms of the circular flow model.
In its most basic form, companies pay wages to consumers, who in turn purchase goods from
companies. Economists are very familiar with the basic principle: goods flows are matched by
monetary flows of identical value – just in the reverse direction of flow.
This way of thinking can be traced all the way back to a medical doctor. When, back in the 18th
century, François Quesnay observed the various economic activities taking place around him, he
is said to have been reminded of the flow of blood in the human body. 
As  complex  a  system  as  the  human  circulatory  system  can  be  reduced  to  a  few  basic
observations: at the centre lies the heart, which pumps fresh blood through a dense network of
arteries to the various organs. This keeps the system up and running. The deoxygenated blood
then makes its way back to the heart.
We central bankers are arguably more comfortable talking about cash flows. But the parallels to
the flow of blood in the human body are plain to see. And in the world of cash, too, it is essential
for the system as a whole that every single organ involved works properly and in a coordinated
manner.
Cash usage in both South Africa and Germany remains high. The South African Reserve Bank
and  the  Bundesbank  are  pumping  an  increasing  amount  of  cash  into  circulation.  Demand  for
cash is on the rise.
But times are changing. Contactless payment methods are becoming more popular in Germany
and beyond. Commercial banks, important elements of the cash cycle, are struggling with their
existing business models.
Looking ahead, central banks need to ensure that their cash systems are fit for purpose. It is
therefore a great pleasure to be here today to exchange views and learn from each other about
potential future challenges.
2 Internal cost efficiency in the cash cycle
Cash  remains  the  most  frequently  used  method  of  payment  in  Germany  for  everyday
transactions. Three out of four purchases at the point of sale are paid in cash.
German  households  value  cash.  This  means  that  we  need  to  maintain  an  adequate  cash
infrastructure.  It  is,  after  all,  the  Bundesbank’s  statutory  mandate  to  promote  the  smooth
functioning of payment transactions and payment systems.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
The Bundesbank is an integral component of the cash cycle in Germany, but we are not the only
game  in  town.  The  way  in  which  the  cash  cycle  functions  internally  is  based  on  close
cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  central  bank,  commercial  banks,  cash-in-transit
companies and retailers. 
All actors in the cash cycle need to work together to ensure that handling and distributing cash
remains efficient in terms of costs.
What does this mean?  With the diversity of payment options increasing, their underlying cost
structures are coming under greater scrutiny. Measuring these reliably is not an easy task, but
we have to try nevertheless.
The Bundesbank recently published a comparative study on the costs of using different payment
methods in the German retail sector.  It turns out that, at least on a transaction basis, paying in
cash is less costly than paying by debit or credit card.
But  with  regulations  bringing  down  the  transaction  costs  of  card  payments  and  the  rise  of
contactless payment options, this gap could narrow.
At the same time, we are at risk of measuring underlying cost structures inaccurately if we fail to
recognise  that  transaction  costs  may  simply  be  becoming  less  obvious.  Customers  reveal
personal  data  when  making  card  and  contactless  payments  such  that,  in  a  way,  costs  are
shifted towards them. It might be necessary for regulators to consider how to deal with this from
a consumer protection point of view.
At the end of the day, bringing down the costs associated with handling and distributing cash is a
matter  of  maintaining  efficiency.  This  requires  sensible  investment. All  actors  along  the  cash
value chain are in it together to ensure that processes are automated and quick.
Credit  institutions  in  Germany,  for  example,  are  replacing  traditional  ATMs  with  devices  that
customers  can  use  to  both  deposit  and  withdraw  cash.  These  machines  can  even  recycle
banknotes. One in three of the roughly 60,000 ATMs in Germany have already been replaced with
such upgraded devices.
In the retail sector, more and more automated points of sale and back office systems are being
deployed – for example, systems which can portion paid-in banknotes in store. Mounting cash
handling  costs  are  likely  to  entice  cash-in-transit  companies  to  invest  in  more  efficient  and
automated processes.
Finally, turning to us, central banks need to keep on investing in the long-term sustainability of
their own processes.
Let me give you two examples of what the Bundesbank is doing in this regard.
First, we have been upgrading a large number of our cash processing machines located across
our network of branches in Germany.
Second, we are in the process of setting up our new state-of-the-art cash center in Dortmund.
Once operational, this branch will pool operations previously performed by five other branches. It
will be equipped with automated transport vehicles and high-bay warehouses.
These substantial investments in the existing cash infrastructure are necessary to ensure that
cash remains one of the variety of payment options that customers can choose from for their
everyday transactions.
3 External resilience of the cash cycle
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen,
Just like the human body, the cash cycle is essentially a closed system. Working smoothly and
efficiently from within is the foundation on which everything else is based. But this by itself is of
little use if the system is not resilient against external influences.
Attempts to inject counterfeit banknotes into the financial system are one example of this. The
good  news:  their  success  is  limited  in  the  euro  area.  Enhanced  security  features  were
introduced with the issuance of the new Europa series of euro banknotes. This is to keep ahead
of  counterfeiters,  and  the  banknotes  are  also  more  durable  than  the  first  series.  Placing
explosives  around  ATMs  is  a  bolder  example  of  an  external  attack  that  tends  to  receive
considerable public attention.
Generally speaking, storing wealth – be it in electronic or physical form – will always attract illegal
activities. The way to counter these is with effective law enforcement – white blood cells, if you
like.
Safety measures tend to imply further regulations. Regulations tend to generate costs. It is an
obvious trade-off.
But the only cash cycle that households will trust in is a safe one. Trust is particularly important
in times of crisis. Cash is naturally immune to power outages, failing payment systems or even
large-scale  cyberattacks.  We  observe  sharp  spikes  in  cash  demand  in  regions  affected,  for
example, by earthquakes or hurricanes.
A  safe  and  resilient  cash  value  chain  can  act  as  a  cushion  for  households  during  periods  of
economic uncertainty. Cash does this by establishing a link between households and the central
bank.  To date, this link has been physical and, for the most part, established via commercial
banks.
In  my  view,  having  a  tactile  means  of  payment  is  important.  Our  evidence  suggests  that  this
2
helps households keep their personal budgets in check.
Moreover, physical cash is easily understood and ready to use regardless of age or access to
financial services. Cash does not limit financial inclusion as it is claimed at times – it enhances it.
But  in  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates  and  ongoing  digitalisation,  the  domestic  banking
sector is transforming. The number of bank branches is on the decline. Such structural changes
could pose new challenges to the cash cycle in Germany.
On the other hand, an increasing number of retailers are offering basic banking activities such as
depositing or withdrawing cash at the counter. This, however, requires staff and cash handlers to
be  sufficiently  trained  in  areas  such  as  recognising  counterfeit  banknotes.  The  Bundesbank
offers training tools to facilitate that learning process.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
So, does that mean that cash is alive and well? As in other places, Germany is seeing a gradual
decline in cash usage. Nevertheless, it remains popular.
The lion’s share of the cash held by households in Germany is used not to make purchases but
rather as a store of value. The opportunity costs of holding this highly liquid asset are currently
low.
As long as Germany’s cash infrastructure remains intact, the country’s cash system will remain
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
stable. This means that households can hold as much (or as little) cash as they want.
A  resilient  and  efficient  cash  cycle  does  not  come  for  free.  It  requires  appropriate  levels  of
regulation and investment. But a healthy system in turn generates trust in its internal functioning
and external resilience.
Trust is at the core of the monetary system and serves as the basis for all stable currencies.
Thank you.
1
2
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019). The cost of payment methods in the retail sector, Monthly Report, June 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Payment behaviour in Germany in 2017 – fourth study of the utilisation of cash
and cashless payment instruments.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
