    
 
 
 
 
 
“The quest for policy scope: Implications for 
monetary policy strategies” 
 
Speech by Klaas Knot at the fourth annual high-level 
conference Racing for Economic Leadership: EU-US 
Perspectives  
 
New York, 16 October 2019 
 
 
  In New York, at the 4th annual high-level conference on EU-US perspectives, Klaas Knot participated in 
a session “The Quest for policy scope”. Mr Knot highlighted implications for monetary strategies, by 
discussing how longer-term changes in the global economy continue to create important challenges for 
monetary policy. These challenges have gained in relevance over time. They should be important 
elements of future reflections on monetary policy strategy. 
    1 
 More than a decade after the Global Financial Crisis erupted, inflation in the euro area has still not 
reached the ECB’s aim of below, but close to, 2%. This despite unprecedented conventional and 
unconventional monetary easing and five years of economic expansion. Moreover, market-based 
indicators of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area have fallen, fueling concerns that the 
anchoring of inflation expectations may have weakened. 
Against the backdrop of a weakening global economy and heightened geopolitical risks, these concerns 
prompted the ECB to take further measures to boost inflation at its September meeting. 
A lot has been said and written about the desirability of this package of policy measures. Last week the 
ECB published the Account of the meeting, which includes an extensive overview of the arguments 
exchanged in its Governing Council. Today I do not want to dwell anymore on the merits of the policy 
package or its individual elements. Rather, I would like to look ahead and discuss how longer-term 
changes in the global economy continue to create important challenges for monetary policy. These 
challenges relate to the controllability of inflation by monetary policymakers. I will argue that these 
challenges have gained in relevance over time. I therefore believe they should be important elements of 
future reflections on monetary policy strategy. Some of these challenges affect all central banks, while 
others are specific to the institutional context in which the ECB operates.   
Setting the stage  
To set the scene, let me first present two stylized facts on long-run inflation dynamics. First, low and 
falling inflation is not a recent phenomenon. At DNB we have performed an analysis that decomposes 
inflation in a time-varying trend and a cyclical component [Figure 1]. The results show that inflation 
has been subject to a renewed downward trend since the crisis. This differs from the episode that is 
known in the literature as the Great Moderation when there was no significant up- or downward trend in 
inflation.   
Figure 1 Euro area HICP inflation and its trend 
Percent 
Notes: The trend is estimated by an Unobserved Components Model of HICP inflation and the 
unemployment rate for the euro area, see Bonam et al. (2019). 
  2 
 Second, not only has inflation been subject to a downward trend, but also its inertia – or persistence – 
has increased since the crisis [Figure 2]. After having declined gradually between the mid-1980s and 
the early 2000s, inflation persistence is now back at its long-term average. 
 Figure 2 Euro area HICP inflation and its persistence 
percent 
Notes: Inflation persistence is estimated from a time-varying autoregressive model over a 30-quarter 
moving window for seasonally adjusted, quarter-on-quarter euro area headline inflation. The graph 
shows HICP inflation (in percent) together with the inflation persistence parameter. The vertical bar 
shows the start of the GFC. For details, see Bonam et al. (2019). 
 
 The million dollar question is then what these developments signal for central banks’ ability to 
control inflation. Let me explain my take on this issue. Notwithstanding the ongoing debate on its 
validity, I still regard the Phillips curve as a relevant analytical framework to structure our thinking.  
According to the standard view, the Phillips curve explains the inflation process in terms of three main 
elements. The first element is expectations of future inflation. Expectations can be forward-looking, in 
which case inflation is self-equilibrating; or backward-looking, in which case inflation is more persistent. 
The second element is economic slack, which captures the impact of aggregate demand. While slack 
has traditionally been measured by an output gap or unemployment gap, recent research suggests that 
more granular indicators of labor market conditions are needed to better capture Phillips curve 
relationships in the data.1 
 The third element is shocks. These shocks can in principle have a positive, negative or ambiguous 
effect on inflation. If shocks are more permanent, inflation will be more inertial. If we look back at the 
euro area over the past decade, most of these shocks appear to have been quite persistent and have 
 1	See	e.g.	Aaronson,	S.,	Cajner,	T.,	Fallick,	B.,	Galbis‐Reig,	F.,	Smith,	C.	and	W.	Wascher	(2014).	Labor	Force	Participation:	
Recent	Developments	and	Future	Prospects,	Brookings	Papers	on	Economic	Activity,	Fall,	197‐255;	and	Bonam,	D.,	de	
Haan,	J.	and	D.	van	Limbergen	(2018).	Time‐varying	wage	Phillips	curves	in	the	euro	area	with	a	new	measure	for	
labor	market	slack,	DNB	WP	587,	March.	
 3 
 dampened inflation for some time. The main example here is the lower level of energy prices that we 
have experienced in recent years.2 Brexit can be seen as another shock that has an impact on the euro 
area economy, although it is not clear yet whether it will push inflation up or down. 
Inertia in inflation can also reflect slow moving changes in the economy, which have been at work on a 
global scale for some time. As documented in a recent report by the World Bank, these changes include 
the ongoing globalization trend, the declining bargaining power of labor, demographic changes, 
technological progress and the rise of e-commerce, and financial factors.3 Empirically, this inertia can 
be captured by a downward trend in (core) inflation.4   
Now, how would this apply to the characteristics of inflation dynamics that I have just described? First, 
in a benign environment like the period of the Great Moderation between the mid-1990s and the early 
2000s, inflation expectations were mainly forward-looking. Slack had a strong and stable link with 
inflation. And shocks were temporary and not very large. Also, there was no discernible trend in 
inflation. In this environment, monetary authorities had no difficulties in keeping inflation expectations 
well-anchored. 
In the current environment, however, inflation is low and more persistent. In a Phillips curve 
framework, this might reflect more backward-looking inflation expectations, more persistent negative 
shocks, and/or a flatter slope of the Phillips curve. But there is another interpretation as well - the 
Phillips curve elasticities may have remained broadly stable, while at the same time a downward trend 
is pushing down inflation persistently. The latter finding is confirmed by DNB research on the trend-
cycle decomposition that I showed you before.5 
Let me stress here that I am not talking here about a secular trend that inherently lasts forever. 
Indeed, the model used by DNB allows for a time-varying trend. Some of the underlying factors might 
fade out or reverse. For example, if the ongoing surge in protectionism becomes entrenched, the trend 
towards increasing globalization that we have observed since the mid-1980s might actually be 
reversed. Hence, inflation might at some point start trending upwards again. For the moment, however, 
the declining trend inflation component is something we will have to deal with.  
So what does this environment imply for central banks? Despite accommodative monetary policy, 
inflation may remain persistently below the central bank’s objective for a considerable amount of time. 
This could undermine monetary authorities’ credibility and the effectiveness of their policies. 
To support credibility, central banks may therefore want to push the cyclical inflation component even 
harder, more aggressively easing policy in conventional and unconventional ways. As Janet Yellen 
  2	For	a	thorough	analysis	of	this	phenomenon	in	the	euro	area,	see	Ciccarelli,	M.	and	C.	Osbat	(2017)	Low	inflation	in	
the	euro	area:	Causes	and	consequences.	ECB	Occasional	Paper	No	181,	January.	
3	Ha,	J.,	Ivanova,	A.,	Ohnsorge,	F.,	Unsal	and	D.	Filiz	(2019).	Inflation:	Concepts,	Evolution,	and	Correlates.	World	Bank	
Policy	Research	Working	Paper	No.	8738.	
4	A	thorough	empirical	analysis	of	how	the	changes	in	the	global	economy	can	be	characterized	by	a	trend	in	inflation	
is	provided	in	Cecchetti,	S.,	Hooper,	P.,	Kasman,	B.,	Schoenholtz,	K.	and	M.	Watson	(2007).	Understanding	the	Evolving	
Inflation	Process.	Paper	presented	at	the	US	Monetary	Policy	Forum,	9	March.	For	a	discussion	of	the	decline	in	trend	
inflation	and	increase	in	inflation	persistence	in	the	euro	area	over	the	past	decade,	see	Ciccarelli,	M.	and	C.	Osbat	
(2017)	Low	inflation	in	the	euro	area:	Causes	and	consequences.	ECB	Occasional	Paper	No	181,	January.	
5	See	Hindrayanto,	I.,	Samarina,	A.	and	I.	Stanga	(2019).	Is	the	Phillips	curve	still	alive?	Evidence	from	the	euro	area.	
Economics	Letters	174,	149‐152.	For	a	discussion	of	these	results	in	a	broader	context,	see	Bonam,	D.,	Galati,	G.,	
Hindrayanto,	I.,	Hoeberichts,	M.,	Samarina,	A.	and	I.	Stanga	(2019).	Inflation	in	the	euro	area	since	the	Global	Financial	
Crisis.	DNB	Occasional	Study	No.3.	
 4 
 observed in the US context, “given that inflation has been so very low for so long […] it may be 
necessary to have a hot labor market for inflation to move back to 2 percent on a stable basis.”   
But in doing that, a central bank like the ECB would face another major challenge. Eventually, these 
policies will run into economic, institutional and legal restrictions.  
Certain economic restrictions, like the difficulties associated with lowering interest rates far into 
negative territory, have become more relevant as a consequence of a falling natural rate.6 The scope 
for central banks to fight recessions by lowering short-term policy rates has likely gotten structurally 
smaller. While non-standard monetary policy measures can be used to ease policy further when policy 
rates have reached their effective lower bound, these too will eventually run into economic restrictions, 
when increasing side-effects start to outweigh the diminishing marginal returns of further easing. These 
restrictions are not unique to the ECB, and they challenge the notion that also persistently low inflation 
“is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon”.7 
Other, institutional and legal restrictions are more specific to the EMU. The ECB operates in an as of yet 
not fully complete monetary union and faces a large number of heterogeneous fiscal counterparts. It is 
also bound by a Treaty that explicitly prohibits it from engaging in monetary financing, the 
interpretation of which has been subject of debate and even litigation. 
The ECB, however, has stood up to the challenge. Supported by the significant strengthening of EMU 
and reduced legal ambiguity around the ECB’s freedom to act, the ECB has substantially widened its 
toolkit. Both in terms of instruments to ease the stance of monetary policy beyond the ELB, and 
instruments to restore impairments in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. This has 
contributed to a strong recovery of the euro area economy (Figure 3). From 2013 until 2018, growth 
has steadily exceeded potential, closing the output gap in the process. While it is challenging to put a 
number on the ECB’s contribution, ECB staff analysis suggests that the monetary easing since 2014 has 
cumulatively contributed almost 2% to GDP.8  
            6	For	an	overview	of	the	debate	on	the	changing	natural	rate	of	interest	and	its	determinants,	see	Bonam,	D.,	van	Els,	
P.,	van	den	End,	J.W.,	de	Haan,	L.	and	I.	Hindrayanto	(2018).	The	natural	rate	of	interest	from	a	monetary	and	financial	
perspective.	DNB	Occasional	Study	No.3,	June.		
7	Milton	Friedman’s	much	quoted	proposition	can	be	found	in	Friedman,	M.	(1963).	Inflation	Causes	and	
Consequences.	Asia	Publishing	House,	New	York.	
8	Hartmann,	P.	and	F.	Smets	(2018).	The	first	twenty	years	of	the	European	Central	Bank:	monetary	policy.	ECB	
Working	Paper	No.	2219,	December.	
 5 
 Figure 3 Euro area growth 
Source: Eurostat. 
  A tangible gain has been the improvement of the labor market. Unemployment has dropped 
significantly and wage growth has picked up.  Yet, the final step to consumer price inflation has thus far 
proven elusive (Figure 4). 
 Figure 4 – Euro area wage growth and core inflation 
Source: Eurostat and ECB. 
 
     6 
 With recent headwinds to growth dampening the inflation outlook, the ECB took further measures to 
support inflation. Nonetheless, given the characteristics of the inflation process that I have outlined, 
even now that economic slack appears largely absorbed, economists and financial markets alike see low 
inflation remaining persistent and converging to our inflation aim only sluggishly (Figure 5). 
 Figure 5 – Euro area inflation expectations 
Inflation expectations euro area
Percent, daily and quarterly data
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
15
16
17
18
19
Survey of Professional Forecasters 5y
Inflation swaps  5y5y
Inflation swaps  1y1y
 Source: ECB and Refinitiv. 
 The quest for policy scope 
All in all, the current situation facing the ECB is not one that was envisaged when the current monetary 
strategy was drawn up, back in 1998 and updated in 2003. The environment in which the ECB operates 
has evolved and so has the EMU’s institutional architecture. Against this backdrop, I support calls for a 
broad review of the ECB’s strategy, which should have as one of its main aims the widening of our 
policy scope. 
The challenges I have outlined in this talk warrant a discussion on the merits of increased flexibility 
in the face of external shocks. One way to achieve this would be the introduction of a symmetric 
band around the inflation aim, which would buy the central bank time and flexibility in responding to 
forces it cannot control. The monetary strategy could also be made more flexible by lengthening the 
horizon over which it would be desirable to bring inflation back towards its aim. Increased flexibility 
could help the ECB to better communicate its commitment to price stability while acknowledging its 
currently limited control over short-run inflation. It would also provide additional room for maneuver to 
prevent the built up of macroeconomic and financial imbalances, which – at the moment they collapse – 
might cause an even more severe ELB situation.9  
  9	Borio,	C.	(2018).	Looking	through	the	glass.	OMFIF	City	Lecture,	London,	22	September.		
 7 
 Of course, longer deviations of inflation from its aim pose communication challenges, and might cause a 
drift in inflation expectations. Also from this perspective, a symmetric band around our inflation aim 
would have merit. It would acknowledge that sometimes inflation will over-, while at other times it will 
undershoot. More explicit forms of ‘make-up’ strategies have been put forward too, for example by 
former FOMC Chair Ben Bernanke.10 These strategies explicitly aim at an inflation overshoot following a 
period of inflation below target. To the extent that such strategies bring us back to a very precise aim 
for average inflation, I fear, however, that they might end up limiting our flexibility rather than 
enhancing it.11  
Last but not least, the ECB does not operate in a vacuum. Whichever way central bankers will decide in 
designing a new monetary strategy, perhaps the most important precondition to preserve policy scope 
is that other policies also contribute to macroeconomic and financial stability. In the euro area, 
important steps in this regard have already been taken. The ECB’s scope to ease its monetary stance 
has benefited greatly from the improvements to EMU’s institutional architecture. Yet, it is a fact of life 
that the ECB still faces 19 different fiscal counterparts. This makes the purchase of government bonds 
more fraught than in other jurisdictions. Time-inconsistent application of the Stability and Growth Pact 
and the absence of a central fiscal capacity have also contributed to fiscal policies not having been as 
countercyclical as in other advanced economies12. I would see merit in a simpler Stability and Growth 
Pact, with perhaps more emphasis on debt levels relative to budget deficits. To what extent this should 
be complemented with steps towards more fiscal risk sharing, is very much a political question. From 
my perspective, I can only note that more effective fiscal stabilization would have the potential to make 
the ECB’s job significantly easier.  
And that offers a nice bridge to the next speaker, who will undoubtedly dwell on this subject more 
extensively. I thank you for your attention. 
  10	See	e.g.	Bernanke,	B.	(2017).	Monetary	policy	in	a	new	era.	Brookings	Institute,	October.	
11	For	a	more	extensive	discussion	on	the	pros	and	cons	of	make‐up	strategies,	see	e.g.	L.	Mester	(2018).	Monetary	
Policy	Frameworks.	Panel	Remarks	at	the	session	on	"Coordinating	Conventional	and	Unconventional	Monetary	
Policies	for	Macroeconomic	Stability",	Allied	Social	Science	Associations	Annual	Meeting,	Philadelphia,	PA,	5	January.		
12	See	e.g.	European	Fiscal	Board	(2019).	Assessment	of	EU	fiscal	rules,	August.		
 8 
