Sabine Mauderer: US Senate Democrats’ Special Committee on the
climate crisis
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Sabine  Mauderer,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the meeting, Washington DC, 17 October 2019.
*   *   *
Chairman Schatz, Members of the Committee:
Thank you for inviting me to this important meeting with central bankers. The Bundesbank is a
proud founding member of the NGFS, the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening
the Financial System.
The work being done by the NGFS demonstrates that combating climate change is a key
factor for the financial system.
Climate change can have long-term impacts on economic structures and activities, productivity
and  other  key  macro  variables,  such  as  prices.  Even  if  mitigation  strategies  are  put  in  place,
societies  and  economies  are  likely  to  face  increasing  climate  change-related  disruptions  and
supply-side  shocks.  Apart 
responses  will  affect
macroeconomic activities as well, with implications for the financial system.
from  climate  change 
itself,  policy 
We therefore look at climate change as a source of financial risk, both from the micro- and the
macroprudential perspective. The U.S. Senate Democrats’ Special Committee on the Climate
Crisis  also  made  this  strong  point  in  its  letter  to  the  Fed.  As  Frank  Elderson  from  De
Nederlandsche Bank has already covered the banking supervisory perspective, I would like to
focus on financial stability.
From a financial stability perspective, the Bundesbank has a clear mandate to take into
account a potentially systemic impact of climate-related risks on the financial system.
In this regard, we need a sound understanding of how physical and transition risks arising from
climate change affect financial stability. To achieve this understanding, we need more data on
individual and systemic climate risk exposures, prudent methods of measuring vulnerabilities to
climate risks, and analytical frameworks with longer horizons.
At  present  it  is  not  entirely  clear  to  what  extent  market  participants  adequately  price
climate-related risks.
If  the  general  market  assessment  changes,  for  example  as  a  result  of  a  natural  disaster  or
unexpectedly drastic policy measures, this could have a significant impact on market dynamics.
If  many  market  participants  sell  at  the  same  time,  this  could  rapidly  drive  down  the  prices  of
affected assets, with spill-overs to other financial market segments.
The result could be a broad decline in asset prices, with repercussions for the entire financial
system. While such a chain reaction cannot be ruled out entirely, its probability and impact are
difficult to estimate. At the same time, we must stay alert to the potential risk of “green bubbles”.
Green investments are not automatically risk-free.
To conclude: The general objective of regulation and supervision is to preserve and to
improve individual and systemic resilience against financial risk.
Therefore, any regulatory changes suggested in the context of sustainable / green finance need
to follow a risk-based approach.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  in  the  NGFS  are  developing  an  analytical  framework  in  order  to  quantify  and  assess  the
impact of climate-related risks on the economy and the financial system.
This  will  further  strengthen  our  ability  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  effectively  supervise
banks – which is why I look forward to paving the way for a greener, more sustainable financial
system.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
