GHANA ASSOCIATION OF BANKERS - 17th ANNUAL WORKING LUNCHEON 
 KEYNOTE ADDRESS 
BY 
DR. ERNEST ADDISON - GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
13TH SEPTEMBER 2019 
KEMPINSKI HOTEL, ACCRA 
  Mr Chairman;  
The Executive Secretary;  
Members of the General Council;  
Managing Directors of Banks;  
Fellows and Associates of the Ghana Association of Bankers;  
Members of the Banking Fraternity;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
   1 
1. 
A  very  good  afternoon  to  you  all  and  let  me  extend  my  warm  greetings  and  welcome  you  to  the  19th 
 Annual working luncheon of the Ghana Association of Bankers (GAB). It is indeed a great pleasure to be 
invited  to  address  this  working  luncheon  of  the  Ghana  Association  of  Bankers,  bringing  together  Chief 
Executives of Banks in Ghana.  
 2. 
To begin, allow me to highlight the critical role of the banking sector to the national development agenda. 
The growth experience of the banking industry is necessarily intertwined with that of the economy as a 
whole. And the industry has necessarily been central to economic policy and structural reforms because a 
sound and efficient banking system is indispensable for financial stability and indispensable for a healthy 
and robust economy. 
 3. 
Mr.  Chairman,  we have  gathered  here  at  a  time  of completion  of  actions  to  reform our  financial  sector 
and  a  time  when  a  lot  of  gains  have  been  made  in  country’s  monetary  and  financial  stability,  and 
confidence is being restored. These gains should begin to translate into lower interest rates that Ghana 
pays for issuing debt, as well as lead to further anchoring of inflation expectations at the low and stable 
levels and financial stability.  
  2 
4. 
However, our ability to maintain this confidence depends on the freedom with which the central bank is  
 able to take necessary but unpopular decisions to restore price and financial stability. I would want to say 
that the Bank of Ghana has enjoyed considerable political support enabling it to be effective to implement 
these  rather  difficult  measures  to  comprehensively  reform  the  banking  and  specialized  deposit  taking 
institutions  sectors  of  the  financial  system.  These  have  involved,  increases  in  the  minimum  capital  of 
universal banks, resulting in some cases mergers and acquisitions, to ensure orderly consolidation of the 
sector.  And  in  some  cases  involving  insolvent  institutions  without  any  franchise  value,  where  licenses 
were  revoked.  These  reforms  have  rather  sadly  been  misconstrued  as  being  driven  by  some  unseen 
hands to score political objectives.  
 5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to place on record that these difdficult decisions taken by the Bank of 
Ghana were based on its technical assessment and judgment of the conditions facing the financial sector. 
In particular, I would like to take this opportunity to clarify the misinformation about the circumstances 
surrounding the license revocation of the Heritage Bank. We were quite measured not to engage with the 
directors of the Bank at the time, but sometimesit pays to clarify such actions to avoid misperceptions. 
During our assessments of this bank, we were able to unravel the financial engineering that went into the 
creation of false capital upon which the then Heritage Bank obtained its license.  The Heritage Bank did 
not  have  the  initial  GH¢120  million  capital  required  to  obtain  the  Universal  Banking  license  that  was 
 3 
granted  in  2016.  In  fact,  the  shareholders  and  directors  of  the  Heritage  Bank  had  roundtripped  on  a 
 GH¢30  million  payment  made  by  Cocobod  to  Alive  Industries,  a  related  company  belonging  to  the 
principal  shareholder—bank  statements  and  the  transaction  documents  are  available  for  those  who  are 
interested to review.  
 
  Discriminatory Reforms 
 
6. 
There  has  also been  some  assertions  that  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  allowed  banks  that  were  not  able  to 
raise the minimum capital by the deadline to continue even after the deadline. I am sure you all followed 
the  debate  on  the  need  to  support  indigenous  banks  which  received  a  favourable  response  from  the 
Government  through  the  creation  of  the  Ghana  Amalgamated  Trust.  The  Banks  that  received  support 
from GAT met the qualifying criteria of being better governed and well managed. What is being perceived 
as  discriminatory  should  rather  be  seen  as  the  reward  for  better  corporate  governance  and  good 
management.  That  was  the  qualifying  criteria.  With  the  exception  of  the  two  state-owned  banks  (ADB 
and NIB), the private banks that received assistance were assessed and considered better managed than 
those that had their licenses revoked. 
  4 
  Section on Bailout or Resolution 
 7. Now, the question on people’s minds is whether Bank of Ghana could have used the bail-out money to 
keep the banks in operation. Ladies and Gentlemen, such reasoning suggests a lack of understanding of 
the fundamental issues at play. Let me say that the underlying factors that accounted for the resolution 
of  the  banks  were  deeper  than  liquidity  issues.  Here,  one  can  mention  very  serious  infractions,  weak 
governance structures and related-party transactions which rendered those defunct banks insolvent. I will 
not  rehash  these  issues  but  rather  look  forward  to  the  emergence  of  a  stronger  and  well-capitalised 
banking  sector,  and  as  major  stakeholders  of  the  financial  sector,  we  should  all  commit  ourselves  to 
never  roll  back  the  gains  we  have  achieved  in  the  industry.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  is  confident  that  the 
actions taken in terms of recapitalisation, closure of insolvent banks and widespread regulatory reforms 
will gradually bringing back trust and confidence in the Ghanaian banking sector. 
  Restoring the Health of the Banking Sector   
8. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have every reason to feel confident about gains and achievements made so far 
in  the  financial  sector.  The  financial  sector  is  currently  healthier  and  better  able  to  withstand  external 
shocks  compared  to  the  financial  sector  at  the  beginning  of  2017.  It  is  better  capitalized,  liquid, 
 5 
profitable, and more efficient and has adequate capital buffers to enable it manage any adverse external 
 developments.  Such  an  optimistic  outlook  seemed  nearly  impossible  in  2017  when  we  started  these 
reforms.  
 9. 
Mr.  Chairman,  a  dynamic  growth-oriented  financial  system  must  be  strong,  well  capitalised,  and 
effectively supervised within a fair regulatory environment in accordance with international best practices 
and standards. There is therefore, a huge regulatory burden on us to remain vigilant towards all forms of 
risks in the banking sector and to tighten our regulatory and supervisory responsibilities to continue with 
efforts  at  strengthening  and  stabilizing  the  banking  industry.  These  reforms  will  ensure  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  banks,  aligning  macro  and  micro-prudential  risks  to  bank  capital  and  addressing  cross-
sectoral  and cross-border  risks  to  the  industry.    In  other  to  address  potential  risks  and  to  properly  risk 
profile individual banks, we are taking steps to revise the current risk-based supervision framework in line 
with current developments in the global banking environment.  
 10. 
To further boost depositors’ confidence and lock-in the reform process, the Deposit Insurance Protection 
Corporation  (DIPC)  would  become  fully  operational  effective  October  1,  2019.  The  deposit  insurance  is 
one of the key pillars in securing financial sector stability. As Amended, the Ghana Deposit Protection Act 
2016 (Act 931) was enacted to protect small savings from losses incurred as a result of the occurrences 
 6 
of an insured event such as the revocation of a Deposit Taking Institution’s  license. Among others, the 
 Act also supports the development of a safe, sound, stable and efficient market-based financial system. 
In the process of operationalising the DIPC, the Bank has already sent letters to banks to begin a process 
of  onboarding  after  agreeing  on  an  annual  premium  of  0.3  to  1.5  percent  of  insurable  deposits  with 
participating institutions. The Bank of Ghana, which is the Project Implementation Authority, will support 
the  DIPC  for  3  years  to  ensure  sustainability.  The  agreed  payout  in  the  event  of  bank  failure  and  the 
revocation  of  licenses  have  been  pegged  at  Gh¢6,250  per  customer  for  banks  and  Gh¢1,250  per 
customer for Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions. 
 Consolidating the Gains 
11. 
Going forward, we expect access to credit to be on a predictable and cost effective terms as part of the 
benefits of the reforms and this week we have met with every bank and discussed ways in which these 
results  can  be  realised  by  the  end  of  the  year.  And  such  a  successful  outcome  would  depend  on 
macroeconomic policies and reforms in the financial sector. But it will also depend on the private sector’s 
own initiative, resourcefulness, and capacity to take advantage of opportunities  that have  been created 
by the reforms. We are aware that the clean-up of the MFI has led to a sharp fall in deposit rates of MFI 
 7 
in  Ghana,  as  depositors would  rather save  with  strong  well  managed  institutions  than  chase  yield.  This 
 should have a knock on effect on all deposit rates in the financial sector.  
 The Receivership Process 
12. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now turn to update you on the receivership process and the progress that 
has been made so far.  We remain confident that  despite the initial hiccups associated with records the 
receivership process has progressed steadily.  
 The receivership process has progressed steadily in line with expectations and include the following:  
Validation of the financial position of the defunct banks;  
Realization of assets/recoveries; and 
To settle creditors and engage other stakeholders. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
 These activities were subsequently categorised under three phases of the receivership process, namely:  
   Phase 1 – preservation of assets and validation of the financial positions;  
Phase 2 – Realization of the assets (including loan recoveries), administration of creditor claims 
and payment of interim dividends as appropriate; and 
8 
 Phase 3 – Complete assets realizations, resolution of matters in litigation, payment of dividends 
 as appropriate, complete administrative and statutory duties.  
13. 
As  we  speak  today,  total  loans  taken  over  by  the  Receivers  amounted  to  Gh¢10.1  billion,  while  total 
proceeds  realized  up  to  date  are  over  Gh¢849  million.  These  proceeds  were  realized  through  loan 
repayments  by  customers,  placements  repaid,  proceeds  from  sale  of  vehicles,  bonds,  other  income  – 
interest from placements made and the refund of commissions paid. As regulators, we are very grateful 
for  the  support  received  but  urge  the  investigating  bodies  and  the  judiciary,  the  Government,  Chief 
Justice and Security Agencies to work steadily to recover certain assets from shareholders, directors and 
loan  defaulters  of  the  erstwhile  defunct  banks.  Currently,  there  are  fifty-two  (52)  cases  in  the  various 
courts in the country, 50  of which have  been assigned  to specific  judges/courts. In addition, over sixty 
(60) cases have been referred to the Special Investigative Team.  
   14. 
The  task  is  enormous  but  we  have  confidence  in  our  judicial  system  to  bring  those  culpable  to  justice. 
The Bank of Ghana will continue to work with the Receiver to ensure that bottlenecks in the receivership 
process cleared for the orderly winding down of the defunct banks.  
 9 
 Internal Reforms 
 15. 
Unfortunately, our predecessors in line with the governance challenges in the country at the time allowed 
the  central  bank  operations  intertwined  with  the  political  economy  thereby  committing  considerable 
resources  into  non-core  functions  of  the  bank  including  building  5-star  guesthouses  in  Takoradi  and 
Tamale as well as the Bank Hospital in Cantonments. We have refocused the Bank around its core central 
bank  responsibilities,  that  is  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  management,  price  stability,  financial 
stability,  banking  sector  regulations,  and  supervision.  A  number  of  our  staff  are  going  through  internal 
administrative  process  to establish  culpability,  if  any,  that  contributed  to  the  challenges  resulting  in  the 
clean-up  of  the  financial  sector.  Once  that  process  is  completed,  the  public  would  be  briefed  of 
administrative  actions  that  have  been  taken.  In  fact,  yesterday  one  staff  was  dismissed  for  gross 
misconduct and conflict of interest involving the award of the Sibton Switch Contract which was cancelled 
in  August  of  2017.  The  signal  has  been  sent  clearly  to  staff  about  the  need  to  ensure  discipline  and 
professionalism in line with the new Code of Conduct that was launched in May this year. 
    10 
Capacity Building Efforts 
 16.  Mr.  Chairman,  we  will  continue  with  our  regulatory  reforms  and  efforts  at  strengthening  the  internal 
structures of the Bank of Ghana to prevent complicity of staff with third parties in the course of discharge 
of  their  supervisory  duties.  The  strengthening  of  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  capacity  will  happen 
through improved systems, processes, accountability and training, all in a bid to better identify violations, 
detect  early  warning  signals,  enforce  the  law,  and  ensure  that  banks  take  prompt  corrective  actions  to 
address emerging risks. Our crisis management framework is also being strengthened to help us contain, 
manage, and resolve crises more promptly. We are bringing international best practices and standards to 
create a central bank that is fit for purpose.  
 Proud of Collaboration 
17. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, at the end of the clean-up exercise, I am confident to say that as a bank, we are 
proud  of  the  reforms  and  achievements  so  far.  These  have  been  possible  as  a  result  of  support  and 
collaboration with key stakeholders, that is the banks and SDIs, strong support from the government, and 
not  the  least  the  strong  support  from  our  international  partners—the  IMF,  World  Bank,  and  other 
development partners. 
  11 
Conclusion 
 18. 
Finally,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  pursue  policies  and  programs  aimed  at 
developing  a  vibrant  financial  system  capable  of  harnessing  financial  resources  for  the  growth  and 
development of our country. We appreciate the healthy working relationship existing between the Bank of 
Ghana and the Ghana Association of Bankers and we believe that this co-operation should continue and 
be deepened to enhance the performance of the banking sector. 
   Thank you for your attention. 
    12 
