Benjamin E Diokno: Sustainable finance towards a climate-resilient
Philippine economy
Speech by  Mr  Benjamin  E  Diokno,  Governor of  Bangko  Sentral ng  Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 2nd Annual National Business Climate Action Summit, Pasay City,
21 November 2019.
 Secretary Emmanuel de Guzman of the Climate Change Commission, Ms. Ma. Alegria Limjoco,
President,  Philippine  Chamber  of  Commerce  and 
Industry,  Mr.  Titon  Mitra,  Resident
Representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Philippines, colleagues
from  the  other  government  agencies,  fellow  speakers,  friends  from  the  banking  industry,
development partners, sustainability advocates, esteemed guests, a pleasant morning to all of
you!
First, let me congratulate the Climate Change Commission, the PCCI, the Philippine Business
for the  Environment, and the  UNDP for organizing this 2nd Annual  National  Business  Climate
Action Summit. I am honored to join you in this important gathering as we exchange views on
sustainable finance and firm up our commitment in pursuing a low-carbon, climate-resilient, and
sustainable development pathway for the Philippines.
According to a study made by  Climate  Central and published on the  Nature  Communications
journal, the impacts of sea-level rise and coastal flooding is seen to become more extensive that
could  erase  coastal  cities  by  2050.  The  Philippines  is  one  of  the  countries  identified  to  be  in
danger and the National Capital Region could likely be submerged due to climate change.
Then, last 8 November 2019, we commemorated the 6th year anniversary of Typhoon Yolanda
which is considered to be the strongest typhoon that struck the country in 2013.  Lastly, three
major  earthquakes  hit  North  Cotabato  and  surrounding  provinces  in  October  2019  alone. 
Thousands of families were affected and scores of houses and infrastructures were damaged.   
After what happened, we cannot help but ask ourselves if we are ready to withstand any other
form of calamity that may befall on us?  If we are uncertain with our answers, all these headlines
should serve as a strong wakeup call. 
We  should  prepare  for  threats  or  risks  that  may  happen  any  time  especially  those  that  have
prolonged significant impact such as those resulting from environmental degradation or climate
change risk.
Several climate vulnerability reports have consistently positioned the Philippines at the top as one
of the countries exposed and vulnerable to natural disasters or climate change hazards. These
facts  provide  a  strong  impetus  and  sense  of  urgency  for  all  stakeholders  to  work  together  to
address environmental issues including climate change.
In  light  of  this  urgent  call  for  action,  global  leaders  and  financial  regulators  embarked  on  a
mission to understand and manage the potential impact of climate and environment-related risks
to the local and global economy.
The National Government, on its part, has deployed a number of initiatives which aim to address
climate  change  risks.    Through  the  years,  several  special  laws  have  been  enacted  and
implemented. These include the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Solid Waste Management Act,
Renewable Energy Act, Climate Change Act, among others.
The  Philippine  Development  Plan of 2017–2022 outlines the government’s climate-related and
other environmental priorities.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
infrastructures  and  designs;  (v)  promotion  of 
Some of the strategies included in the  PDP are as follows: (i) promotion of green technology
innovations; (ii) institution of appropriate incentives to intensify the use of more energy efficient
technologies; (iii) further development and use of renewable energy; (iv) promotion of climate-
smart 
low-carbon,  energy-efficient  and
environment-friendly  urban  transport  systems;  and  (vi)  promotion  of  sustainable  consumption
and production.
We understand that the Climate Change Commission has a huge task to coordinate, monitor
and evaluate the programs and action plans of the Government to ensure that climate change is
mainstreamed into the national and local development plans and programs.
With the growing sustainability considerations, a crucial question is what is the role of financial
authorities  and  supervisors?  Indeed,  central  banks  can  shape  their  response  to  climate  and
environment-related risks in line with their mandates.
At the BSP, we have remained steadfast in the pursuit of our core mandates with the end goal of
achieving a more globally competitive Philippine economy, and a safe, sound and stable financial
system. The BSP’s mandates on price and financial stability and efficient payments system have
been strengthened with the amendments to the BSP Charter in February 2019.  So, how do we
address the effects of climate change?
On monetary policy, data on natural disasters, including the damage to the agriculture sector and
other industries essentially feed into the BSP’s policy analysis.
The  potential  impact  of  climate  patterns  such  as  La  Nina  and  El  Nino  episodes  and  natural
disasters are used by the BSP in quantifying the potential impact of adverse weather conditions
on the agriculture sector and in turn, inflation trends.
On  financial  stability,  the  BSP  knows  the  potentially  significant  impact  of  climate  change  and
other environmental-related risks to the financial system. In particular, this may affect the credit
and  operational  risk  exposures  of  banks  that  would,  in  turn,  translate  into  profitability  and
solvency concerns.
We also recognize that the BSP has a role to play in the process. In line with this, we have rolled
out  a  two-pronged  approach  in  promoting  environmental,  social  and  governance  (ESG)
principles.  First,  through  capacity  building  and  awareness  campaign,  and  second  by
mainstreaming ESG principles through the issuance of enabling regulations. We deem that this
approach will increase the BSP and the banks’ understanding of the risks posed by environment
degradation  and  climate  change  on  the  financial  sector,  enhance  capacity  to  manage  these
risks, and increase banks’ awareness on the investment opportunities for green or sustainable
projects before issuing regulatory expectations on sustainable finance.
Meanwhile, operationally, the  BSP is already undertaking pockets of activities related to green
practices.  Just recently, the BSP participated in the open-ended green bond fund launched by
the Bank for International Settlements as part of sustainable investing in reserve management.
The BSP also implemented the MB Paperlite Facility that resulted in the significant reduction of
paper  usage  during  MB  meetings,  and  installed  energy-efficient  mechanisms  such  as  solar
panels and inverter technology in air-conditioning systems. Lastly, the BSP will be issuing ESG-
related regulations in phases.  All of these are part of our commitment to adopt a culture that
embodies sustainability.
Earlier I mentioned the two-pronged approach for sustainable finance. As we build institutional
capacity,  we  argue  that  sustainable  finance  is  ultimately  a  public  good.  When  done  right,
sustainable  finance  can  translate  into  profitable  investments,  while  at  the  same  time  attain
environmental and social objectives. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We also subscribe to the idea that financial regulation can be a useful tool to contribute to the
achievement of national and international environmental and social objectives. In this regard, the
BSP  has  been  actively  involved  in  global  and  local  conversations  on  sustainability  though  our
membership in the Sustainable Banking Network, Alliance for Financial Inclusion and ASEAN.
We  also  participated  on  a  study  on  banks’  perceptions  on  sustainable  finance  as  well  as
engaged in capacity building initiatives for both internal and external stakeholders in partnership
with both local and international development partners.  
On the regulatory pathway, the BSP believes that the optimal approach remains to be one that is
“enabling” – one that provides ample flexibility, sensitive to risk-appetite and business models,
and proportionate to the banks’ size, structure and complexity of their operations. This approach
aims to shift perspectives from a myopic compliance exercise to a forward looking stance that
puts greater weight on the long term financial interest and sustainability of the organization. 
Following this approach, the  BSP will be issuing  ESG related regulations in phases.  The first
phase  will  provide  high  level  principles  and  broad  expectations  on  the  integration  of  ESG  and
sustainability  principles  in  the  corporate  and  risk  governance  frameworks  as  well  as  in  the
business strategies and operations of banks. 
The  second  phase  will  provide  more  granular  expectations  in  managing  climate  change  and
other environment-related risks in relation to credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks.  The
third phase may cover potential regulatory incentives.
Complementary to the policy issuances is our own research on the impact of natural disasters
on the Philippine banking performance.  Using existing regional data, we found that episodes of
extreme  weather  conditions  have  negative  impact  on  financial  intermediation  (deposits,  loans,
NPL, provision for NPL, profitability).  However, the impact is short-lived given the sound financial
position of banks.  The damage tapers off after a year or so. 
It is important, however, to underscore that we are not starting from scratch. The BSP’s existing
corporate  and  risk  governance  standards  serve  as  the  underpinning  regulations  for  our  ESG
issuance.  In particular, since 2012, we have established the accountabilities of the board and
senior management in promoting good governance and in adopting effective risk management
systems in banks.  The BSP regulations also emphasize the adoption of appropriate credit and
operational risk management systems, including stress testing framework.
This is to ensure that various risks including environmental issues and climate change risks are
considered in the banks’ decision-making process and stress testing exercises. The results of
the stress testing should feed in the capital planning and business continuity arrangements of
banks.
Moreover,  with  the  geographical  location  of  the  Philippines,  banks  are  prone  to  physical  risks
from  severe  weather  condition.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the  BSP  adopted  a  policy  that  provides
temporary regulatory relief to banks which are located in areas affected by natural calamities.
The regulatory relief aims to assist affected banks in their recovery and allow them to resume
normal operations.
This  refers  to  the  risks  resulting  from  climate  change  which  can  be  event-driven  (acute)  or
longer-term  shifts  in  climate  patterns  (chronic)  that  may  cause  direct  damage  to  assets  or
indirectly through the disruption of supply chain. Acute physical risks include floods, typhoons,
droughts,  wildfires,  earthquake.  Chronic  physical  risks  include  changes  in  precipitation  and
extreme weather variability, rising sea levels and chronic heat waves.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  there  is  a  sound  business  case  for  sustainable  finance  and  this  is
gradually gaining traction. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
At  present,  Philippine  banks  are  getting  more  involved  into  green  finance,  issuing  green  or
sustainability  bonds  in  order  to  fund  and  refinance  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency
projects, green buildings and other green assets.
Some  banks  adopted  sustainability  as  part  of  their  corporate  social  responsibility  (CSR)
initiatives while others have gone farther to integrate ESG principles and adopt Environment and
Social Risk Management (ESRM) into their business operations.
There  are  banks  that  have  adopted  voluntary  reporting  of  sustainability  performance  and
established partnerships with international experts to assess and address climate change risks.
Some banks even walked an extra mile by providing technical assistance to their clients so they
themselves could imbibe sustainability practices.
The BSP is just a piece of the puzzle that will advance the country’s climate and sustainability
development goals. 
Aware of the magnitude of multi-faceted challenges surrounding sustainable financing, the BSP
is supporting the “whole-of-country” approach in this important undertaking. In this respect, the
BSP along with key agencies in the government have collaborated and created an inter-agency
group  that  will  institutionalize  and  facilitate  the  implementation  of  a  roadmap  for  sustainable
finance.
The group is looking forward to adopting enabling policies that will promote sustainable finance. It
also aims to facilitate investments in public infrastructure and mobilize funds to finance green or
sustainable projects. 
Apart  from  the  public  sector,  there  is,  likewise,  a  need  to  increase  awareness  of  the  private
sector,  business  enterprises  and  part  of  the  households  on  the  impact  of  climate  and
environment-related risks hopefully with the unceasing support by the development partners and
academe.  Hence, a ‘whole-of-country approach’ should be adopted in promoting sustainability
across the country.
All said, let me leave you with some key takeaways:
Climate  change  and  environmental  challenges  can  pose  risks  on  the  stability  of  the  financial
system. A whole-of-country approach is basic and necessary to address such risk and scale up
promotion of green/sustainable finance.
Initiatives  to  inclusive  green/sustainable  finance  is  yet  to  pick  up.  The  BSP’s  support  to
sustainable  finance  is  crucial,  especially  in  promoting  and  signaling  with  stakeholders.
Nevertheless, private sector response is gaining some ground.
In closing, I emphasize that sustainability is more than just a buzzword – it is a way of right living
and existence. Sustainable finance is a tool to foster environment and social-friendly businesses
and communities towards a climate-resilient Philippine economy. 
Thank you and good morning!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
