Ong Chong Tee: Strengthening trust in our capital market
Keynote speech by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of the
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at My Money Seminar, Singapore, 16 November 2019.
 1   Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. It is my pleasure to join you in this afternoon’s My
Money public seminar. My Money was an initiative back in 2009 of the national financial education
programme MoneySense, in collaboration with the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS), the
Securities  Investors  Association  of  Singapore  (SIAS),  and  the  Singapore  Management
University’s (SMU) Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics.
2   The name of the programme itself, My Money, underscores the importance of taking personal
responsibility for one’s own finances— be it spending, savings or investments.
3   This afternoon, I will focus my remarks around some issues related to the retail investor. A
retail  investor  must  know  his  or  her  own  return  objective  and  risk  tolerance.  He  should
understand the products that he is looking to invest in, and how these products can achieve his
investment goals.
4   Other stakeholders also have an important part to play. These will include the banks, fund
managers and other financial service providers that are involved in the creation, marketing and
sale of financial products. Regulators like MAS and SGX RegCo are of course also integral in that
they set the ground rules for participants in the marketplace.
5   There are three important enablers:
a culture of fostering customers’ trust in the financial industry;
strong market discipline that incentivises right behaviours; and
adequate and timely public disclosures of pertinent information.
Engendering trust in the financial industry
6   Let me start with the theme of trust. It was a decade ago that we had the Global Financial
Crisis. With a suite of regulatory reforms that followed, the global financial system is generally
safer and stronger. Just being safe is not good enough. A vibrant financial sector must be able to
support the smooth functioning of credit and money flows. It should meet the savings, investment
and insurance protection needs of the people. Investors on their part want to have the confidence
that they are treated fairly by financial institutions and that their savings are safe.  This is why
building trust in our financial institutions is so important. That trust goes beyond doing what is
legally required, to include what is good and what is right.
7   Some of you may have seen recent reports on the Royal Commission review in Australia that
investigated  widespread  misconduct  issues  in  its  banking  industry.  Financial  institutions  in
Singapore are generally well regarded. But we have our share of malpractices too, such as the
mis-selling of Lehman Minibonds and other structured or complex products.
8   Financial institutions have a duty to act in the best interests of their customers. However, in
our  supervisory  reviews,  we  have  uncovered  lapses  in  conduct.  These  cases  often  reflected
misaligned incentives and insufficient attention paid to remediation actions and staff training.
9      Even  back  in  2009,  MAS  issued  our  Fair  Dealing  Guidelines.  These  require  financial
institutions and their representatives to recommend products and services that are suitable for
their target customer segments. The Guidelines include supporting customers with clear, timely
and relevant information to make informed investment decisions.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
10      MAS  expects  boards  and  management  of  financial  institutions  to  stand  behind  these
commitments. We have recently proposed guidelines to strengthen the accountability of senior
managers  in  charge  of  key  functions  within  a  firm.  Under  these  enhanced  guidelines,  boards
must clearly designate the officers who are responsible and those who are accountable for the
conduct and business operations in their organisations. The measures will include having a clear
governance and oversight framework.
11      To  avoid  a  situation  where  individuals  with  a  pattern  of  misconduct  and  transgressions
simply move from one financial institution to another, or what is referred to in regulatory circles
as  “rolling  bad  apples”,  MAS  will  further  require  that  financial  institutions  conduct  reference
checks with the previous employers of their representatives. Carrying out reference checks is
already a long-standing industry practice. MAS’ proposal will harden this requirement.
12      MAS  will  also  step  up  our  monitoring  of  financial  advisory  practices  in  the  industry.  One
example is our mystery-shopping exercises where we send researchers to “live test” the sales
and  advisory  processes  in  sampled  financial  institutions.  We  will  carry  out  more  thematic
reviews  of  financial  advisory  firms’  consequence  management  frameworks  to  assure  us  that
investor complaints are investigated in a fair and timely manner.
13      The  reality  of  course,  is  that  no  amount  of  regulations  nor  supervision  can  prevent
wrongdoings.  To  try  to  do  so  would  require  a  large  volume  of  pre-emptive  rules  as  well  as
unlimited supervisory resources. Both situations are neither possible nor desirable.
14   This is why MAS also places importance on our enforcement actions. We will not hesitate to
investigate and take errant financial institutions or their representatives to task for breaches of
our  law  and  regulations.  We  have  issued  prohibition  orders  against  individuals  for  a  range  of
misconduct, from mis-selling to dishonesty and fraud. Our message is clear— improper or illegal
conduct have no place in our financial sector.
Importance of market discipline
15   This brings me to the second topic. Market discipline.
16   As with our enforcement actions, market discipline can play an important role in shaping
behaviour. It creates a strong incentive for financial institutions to conduct their business in a fair,
transparent and responsive manner. A firm or its representatives with a poor record will deter
prospective  clients  and  investors.  Similarly,  investors  will  avoid  companies  that  have  poor
standards of governance and disclosures. In other words, investors will penalise those that have
fallen short, and reward those that have fared well.
17   To allow market discipline to work, different participants in the eco-system must play their
part. Let me use the equity market as an example and outline a few key roles.
18      MAS  is  the  statutory  financial  regulator.  We  implement  and  administer  the  laws  and
regulations  that  govern  activities  in  the  capital  market,  and  as  mentioned,  will  carry  out
enforcement actions against those who run afoul of them.
19   SGX RegCo is the frontline market regulator for listed issuers. It is responsible for ensuring
that the market operates in a fair, orderly and transparent manner. SGX RegCo administers the
listing rules that require listed issuers to, among other things, provide full, timely and accurate
disclosures  on  material  information.  Listed  issuers  are  also  required  to  have  in  place  sound
governance frameworks and practices.
20   Listed issuers are central to market discipline. Having tapped the public markets for capital,
they  have  a  duty  to  run  their  business  honestly  and  competently,  and  to  update  investors  on
relevant information promptly. It is incumbent on them to strive for high standards of corporate
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
governance and to engage proactively with all stakeholders.
21   There are also market intermediaries and other professionals. These include:
Issue  managers  and  sponsors  who  bring  issuers  to  the  market  and  are  responsible  for
proper  due  diligence  and  in  guiding  issuers  to  furnish  the  relevant  and  appropriate
disclosures. Issue managers have a key gatekeeping role in our capital markets, as they are
most  familiar  with  the  issuers.  They  can  judge  the  quality  and  suitability  of  a  prospective
issuer for public markets.
Auditors  have  an  important  responsibility  to  perform  checks  on  financial  statements  and
provide assurance that these are reliable.
Lawyers and consultants provide advice to help issuers ensure that their business dealings
and corporate actions comply with laws and rules.
Other professionals such as academia and financial journalists can also play a constructive
role when they query or opine on matters relating to a listed company’s financial statements,
strategy or governance.
22      So  it  is  an  ecosystem  of  many  different  stakeholders.  There  are  other  official  agencies
involved  too.  The  Accounting  and  Corporate  Regulatory  Authority  (ACRA)  regulates  financial
reporting, audits and auditors. ACRA has in place a Financial Reporting Surveillance Programme
where it reviews financial statements to ascertain compliance with accounting standards, as well
as the Practice Monitoring Programme where it inspects the public accountants for the quality of
their audit work.
23   There is also the Commercial Affairs Department (CAD) of the Singapore Police Force. CAD
is  Singapore’s  principal  white-collar  crime  investigation  agency.  Under  the  MAS-CAD  joint
investigation arrangement, MAS and CAD will jointly investigate offences to bring the full weight of
our law against violations and abuses in our financial system.
24      While  each  regulatory  or  investigation  agency  has  its  distinct  role,  there  is  a  shared
responsibility  in  ensuring  that  the  market  is  well-regulated,  that  corporate  malfeasance  is
thoroughly investigated and that appropriate actions are taken against wrongdoers.
25   Some have asked why investigations into potential wrongdoings can take a long time. Let me
explain. The time needed to complete an investigation varies according to the complexity of each
case.  In  complex  cases,  issues  often  cut  across  the  domain  of  several  agencies.  Take  for
instance, a case of alleged corporate irregularities. These could range from issues of mis-selling
to inadequate or false disclosures, or improper application of accounting rules, or there may also
be  breaches  of  fiduciary  duties.  A  single  case  could  span  potential  breaches  of  different
regulations and laws, such as financial advisory regulations, securities law, company law, listing
rules, accounting rules, and the Penal Code. Often, our investigators have to retrieve and review
a lot of data. Where a case has a cross-border dimension, the relevant agencies will also have to
seek  the  assistance  and  support  from  our  foreign  counterparts.  Our  investigations  must  be
thorough and rigorous to be fair to all parties concerned.
26   MAS will strengthen our co-ordination with ACRA and CAD in the surveillance of our capital
markets and in investigations. We have set up a joint forum between MAS and ACRA to review
accounting-related and disclosure issues. As mentioned earlier, MAS’ enforcement team already
has a joint investigation arrangement with CAD where our investigators collaborate closely. Our
agencies will, in addition, work closely with  SGX  RegCo as they are the frontline marketplace
regulator.
27   Industry groups also have a role as advocates of good governance and practices. SIAS, ABS
and the Singapore Institute of Directors (SID) are good examples. It is encouraging that we see
the active participation of academic researchers, journalists, analysts and even whistle-blowers,
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
who are prepared to comment on and query corporate actions or decisions. In some sense, this
demonstrates a growing maturity in our capital markets.
28   At the same time,  SGX  RegCo has introduced some affirmative initiatives.  For instance,
RegCo implemented the Fast Track programme that allows listed issuers with good history of
compliance and corporate governance standards to enjoy faster processing times for corporate
submissions.
Making disclosures more accessible and understandable
29   Let me turn to the final section of my remarks on disclosure. Ultimately, the best form of
investor protection is to empower investors by raising the level of financial literacy.
30   Clear and meaningful disclosures to the retail investor is a necessity here. MAS is working
on a number of measures to make disclosures easier to understand and more accessible. For
example,  we  are  working  with  the  local  banks  to  consider  how  to  improve  the  delivery  of
important  information  to  investors  for  investment  applications  through ATMs  for  non-complex
products. An important thing to bear in mind is that relatively simple products do not mean these
have low market or credit risks. One idea is for easier access to product disclosure documents
via a QR code; another could be clear summary highlights of key product class risk attributes in
the ATM screen page. Such initiatives will have to weigh the objective of improved disclosure of
pertinent information versus convenience and effectiveness considerations.
31   We are also working to improve the Product Highlights Sheet, or PHS. As background, MAS
requires  issuers  to  set  out  clearly  in  their  offering  documents  information  pertaining  to  their
business, operating environment, financial position and prospects, key risks as well as salient
terms of the instruments offered. A full prospectus can run into hundreds of pages. We know
many  retail  investors  are  likely  to  find  it  hard  to  digest  all  the  information  in  a  prospectus,
especially since some of these are written in a technical and legalistic manner.
32      MAS  has  therefore  required  issuers  to  furnish  a  PHS,  which  is  a  summary  of  the  key
information presented in a clear and concise manner.
It started well. But over the years, we noticed a creep where the form and content of the
PHSes put out by issuers have become increasingly technical and legalistic. This picture is
a  sample  PHS  that  we  typically  see  today.  Despite  our  efforts  to  encourage  issuers  to
simplify the language and use more visual aids, we have found that most PHSes are still
very cluttered and difficult to read.
We are reviewing how to improve the way useful information is presented in the PHS. What
you see is a prototype of an improved PHS that we are considering. We have incorporated
consumer-friendly  message  design,  clear  and  simple  language  and  the  use  of  effective
diagrams and infographics. We will seek feedback on these with the industry.
33      I  will  now  turn  to  the  topic  of  financial  scams,  a  concern  of  some  retail  investors.
MoneySense  runs  regular  campaigns  to  remind  investors  of  the  need  to  be  on  guard  against
investment scams.  I have highlighted here a web page capture of an earlier campaign where
MAS  had  put  out  an  advertisement  to  resemble  a  typical  online  investment  scam.  The
advertisement showed an island property investment. When a consumer navigated to the scam
website and indicated interest to invest, he would be told that the island property investment was
a scam and he would have lost money if he had invested. He could then learn about how to spot
red flags and protect himself when investing. You may be surprised that quite a few people had
actually “clicked” to invest into this. Thankfully, there were others who contacted us to alert on
this suspicious investment scheme.
34      Some  fraudulent  websites  have  also  attempted  to  solicit  investments  using  fabricated
information  attributed  to  well-known  personalities.  Both  MAS  and  the  police  have  issued
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
advisories on these scams.
35   To safeguard your monies, you should approach all investment propositions with a healthy
scepticism and challenge exaggerated claims. As it is often said, if it sounds too good to be true,
it is probably not true.
36   Financial education and advisories issued by the authorities will not stop those who are out
to  cheat  investors.  Strong  enforcement  action  is  necessary  so  that  offenders  pay  for  the
consequences  of  their  illegal  activities.  The  authorities  recognise  the  need  for  firm  actions  to
investigate  and  punish  wrongdoers  to  deter  illegal  behaviour.  As  part  of  our  stepped-up
surveillance,  MAS  officers  had  visited  some  so-called  investment  seminars.  Where  we  have
found breaches of securities law, enforcement actions have been taken. We have also referred
cases  involving  potential  Penal  Code  offences  to  the  CAD.  In  recent  months,  following
investigations by CAD, an individual behind a company RBI Holding Pte Ltd was charged with
multiple  counts  of  forgery  and  cheating  offences  for  his  involvement  in  fraudulent  investment
schemes. In a separate case, an individual was charged with cheating offences for promoting
schemes that promised investors a 97% return on their investment.
37   I have mentioned the MAS-CAD joint investigation. The police has also set up a centralised
anti-scam centre in CAD to tackle all forms of scams so as to enable them to intervene quickly to
disrupt scammers’ operations.
38   Finally, it is worth reiterating that one should not plunge into an investment just because it
promises a high return. Avoid buying a product on impulse or herd instinct or name-familiarity.
Construct a well-diversified investment portfolio that is aligned with your investment objective and
risk tolerance. Today’s seminar will certainly cover these investing principles in more detail.
Conclusion
39   Let me conclude. All stakeholders in the capital marketplace have a role in good corporate
governance and effective market discipline.
40      On  MAS’  end,  we  will  continue  our  financial  education  efforts  as  an  integral  part  of  our
regulatory  and  supervisory  work.  These  will  encompass  heightened  surveillance,  investigation
and enforcement actions with other authorities.
41    It leaves me to reiterate that investors should always seek to understand the issuer and
product before investing in them. Remember to “Ask. Check. Confirm”. There will be a short half-
minute video on this at the end of my remarks. Do also visit the pop-up exhibition booth outside
the theatre to learn more about the resources available to help you.
42   Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
