   DEPUTY GOVERNOR’S SPEECH ON THE LAUNCH OF GUIDELINES 
FOR REPURCHASE AGREEMENT IN GHANA 
 Central Bank Governors,  
Ministers of Finance,  
CEO and representatives from the International Capital Markets Association (ICMA),  
CEO and representatives of Frontclear,  
Representatives from the International Monetary Fund,  
Members of the governing council of the Ghana Fixed Income Market (GFIM),  
Investors,  
Distinguished Guests,  
 Good morning to you all. 
 I  welcome  you  to  this  occasion  of  the  launch  of  Guidelines  for  Repurchase  Agreements  in 
Ghana. 
 1. 
 Purpose and rationale behind the Guidelines: 
A  2017  Barclays  Africa  (now  ABSA)  African  Financial  Markets  Index,  noted  that  of  the  six 
pillars  they  used  in  the  assessment  of  African  financial  markets,  improving  the  legal  and 
regulatory frameworks through establishing the legality and enforceability of standard financial 
markets  master agreements  of the Ghanaian financial markets  could  provide a major  boost and 
enhance liquidity in the bonds and equities markets. 
 The results of the Barclays survey noted that in Ghana, ISDA documentation (International Swap 
and  Derivatives  Association)  was  well  recognized  but  Global  Master  Repurchase  Agreement 
(GMRA) was in limited use, Global Master Securities Lending Agreement (GMSLA) was rarely 
  used and the insolvency framework needed to be strengthened.  Therefore in 2017, a stakeholder 
committee  in  Ghana,  led  by  the  central  bank  agreed  on  a  simple  regulatory  environment  by 
following  the  international  ‘norm’  but  customizing  it  to  the  local  environment.    Some  of  the 
reform  measures  that  were  identified  that  could  improve  the  legal  framework  for  the  financial 
markets in Ghana was the adoption of GMRA for repo trading and at a later stage the GMSLA 
for  securities  lending,  the  linking  of  the  local  Central  Securities  Depository  (CSD)  to 
international  clearing  platforms  like  Euroclear  and  the  strengthening  of  the  insolvency 
framework in Ghana. 
 The  Ghana  Fixed  Income  Market  (GFIM)  governing  council,  which  has  been  mandated  to 
promote secondary market trading of securities supported the setup of a  stakeholder committee 
with  representation  from the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Ghana, the commercial banks, a 
lawyer from a private law firm, the Ghana Stock Exchange and the Ghana CSD to come out with 
the  Guidelines  for  a  GMRA-based  repo  trading  in  Ghana,  a  Country  Annex  and  any  other 
annexes to the GMRA that was required. 
 2. 
 The role of repos 
Repos and reverse repos can be effective instruments for the conduct of monetary policy market 
operations by the central bank.  In Ghana for example we make use of a symmetric corridor in 
which  depos  with  the  central  banks  are  conducted  at  the  policy  rate  minus  one  percent  and 
reserve repos are conducted at the policy rate plus one percent.  When properly structured, repos 
are effective vehicles for the monetary policy transmission process and can be used to defend the 
monetary policy rate. 
 Repo markets are also a key requirement of liquid Government debt markets, acting as a bridge 
between  money  and  debt  markets.    Repos  conduct  key  functions  for  the  efficient  operation  of 
debt markets; including, credit risk management, funding debt portfolios playing the yield curve 
and covering short positions and settlement failures.  Repos are a versatile instrument for a broad 
range  of  market  participants  with  very  different  business  models  due  to  their  hybrid  nature; 
serving between a collateralized loan and a full transfer of ownership. 
  3. 
Core structure and content 
These  guidelines  have  been  developed  in  consultation  with  key  market  stakeholders  in  the 
financial  sector  namely:  Ghana  Fixed  Income  Market  (GFIM),  Central  Securities  Depository 
(CSD),  with  technical  support  from  International  Capital  Markets  Association  (ICMA)  and 
Frontclear.  
 Our  guidelines  are  set  up  to  enforce  the  Global  Master  Repurchase  Agreement  (GMRA)  and 
define with respect to applicable law all relevant aspects of repos traded in Ghana.  Key changes 
set out in these guidelines  include; the absolute transfer of the title, rights, interest and benefits 
of  any  security  used  as  collateral,  the  expansion  of  eligible  instruments  that  can  be  used  as 
collateral and the requirement for margin maintenance. 
 4. 
Market implementation including targeted training together with Frontclear 
The implementation of the guidelines will require training for stakeholders.  The Bank of Ghana 
together with Frontclear will be organizing a series of training programs starting from next week 
for all major players in the repo market. These training programs will cover legal requirements 
for the judiciary and legal fraternity, as well as accounting, settlement, margining and collateral 
management for middle and back office of our financial institutions. 
 5. 
Market development expectations 
The adoption of these guidelines I believe will not only ensure legal certainty and enforceability 
but  will also  improve market  transparency, liquidity  and participation.   In conjunction  with  the 
development  of  the  guidelines,  Ghana  is  in  the  process  of  getting  a  corporate  insolvency  bill 
passed, and the BoG will issue a notice to clarify the eligibility of netting arrangements under the 
current  Banks  and  Specialized  Deposit  Taking  Institutions  Act  (BSDTI  Act).  This  will  make 
Ghana only the third netting positive jurisdiction in Africa and we look  forward to the positive 
effect this will have on our economy. 
 Looking  ahead  we  hope  to  develop  our  Repo  market  to  grow  beyond  the  borders  of  Ghana  to 
improve  intra  African  trade.  It  is  my  firm  belief  we  would  one  day  be  here  again  for  another 
launch but this time for whole of the African continent. 
  6. 
Learning and challenges ahead 
As with any new journey it will come with its own challenges but with the lessons learned from 
developed markets we hope to surmount any challenge. 
 To  my  fellow  African  Governors,  I  encourage  you  to  share  with  us  for  those  who  have  more 
developed repo markets and to those who are now starting, let’s come together and work to make 
the African financial markets the next destination of global investors. 
 To our partners, your technical assistance is invaluable. We will continue to rely on your support 
to build capacity and achieve similar milestones in our markets. 
 In  conclusion  I  will  like  to  say  a  thank  you  for  honouring  our  invitations.  I  would  also  like  to 
encourage  all  of  us  to  use  this  platform  to  engage  with  each  other  to  discover  what  mutual 
opportunities there are to share. 
  