      GHANA ECONOMIC FORUM 2019 
    WELCOME STATEMENT  
 BY  
 DR. ERNEST ADDISON  
 GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
     OCTOBER 30, 2019 
TANG PALACE HOTEL  
ACCRA, GHANA  
  Your Excellency, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, President of the Republic of 
Ghana 
 Honourable Ken Ofori-Atta, Minister of Finance 
Honourable Alan Kyeremanteng, Minister of Trade and Industry  
 
Honourable Ministers and Deputy Ministers here present  
CEOs and Representatives from the Financial Sector and Business Community 
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 Introduction  
 
1.  Good  morning  to  you  all  and  welcome  to  the  2019  Ghana  Economic  Forum.  A 
few weeks ago I got a call from our senior citizen, Mr. Kwame Pianim, about B&FT 
and  the  Ghana  Economic  Forum  and  the  need  for  sponsors  for  the  programme.  I 
agreed with him to become a strategic policy partner for this event, as the Bank of 
Ghana  believes  that  such  a  forum  will  provide  policymakers,  industry  experts,  and 
the  business  community  a  platform  to  deliberate  and  offer  solutions  on  pertinent 
issues affecting our economy. Therefore, before I proceed further, let me commend 
the Business and Financial Times (BFT) for their relentless efforts in organising this 
event  over  the  past  seven  years.  Also,  let  me  express  our  appreciation  to  all  the 
sponsors  who  have  contributed  resources  to  make  this  programme  a  success  over 
the years.     
  Page | 1  
2.  We  all  acknowledge  the  busy  schedule  of  our  President  and  therefore  deem  it  a 
 great  honour  for  His  Excellency,  the  President  to  be  with  us  this  morning  and  to 
deliver  the  keynote  address.  Your  Excellency,  we  very  much  appreciate  your 
presence and support for this programme.  
 3.  Your Excellency, Distinguish Ladies and Gentlemen, the theme for this year’s Ghana 
Economic  Forum  is:  “Sustaining Financial and Economic Stability: the key 
Priorities”.  This  theme  was  carefully  chosen  against  the  background  of 
developments in the economy over the last three years. We have achieved a good 
degree of macroeconomic stabilisation, under a fiscal and monetary regime oriented 
towards  disinflation.  This  framework  includes  an  independent  monetary  policy 
coordinated with a prudently set fiscal framework including strict public expenditure 
management.  
 4.  This framework has delivered low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations 
around  our  medium-term  target  which  serves  as  the  bedrock  for  private  sector 
investments,  business  growth,  structural  transformation  and  overall  economic 
expansion.  It  is  incumbent  on  us,  as  policymakers  to  demonstrate  strong 
commitment  to  this  policy  framework  in  the  near-term  to  ensure  that  the  gains 
achieved  so  far  are  sustained.  Achieving  macroeconomic  stability  takes  deliberate 
policies, sacrifices and resources which if not sustained, can easily unravel. I believe 
 Page | 2  
this is one of the reasons why we have gathered here to get a sense of the policy 
 direction needed to sustain the stable macro environment, going forward. 
 5.   Your  Excellency,  I  can  report  that  under  your  leadership,  the  policies  that  we  put 
into place in 2017 are yielding the right results. The economic indicators are good in 
terms  of  inflation,  external  account  balances,  reserves,  GDP  growth  and  business 
confidence.  We  have  not  only  made  significant  gains  in  stability  through  prudent 
monetary and fiscal policies but also in regulatory and structural reforms, especially 
in  the  banking  sector.  This  is  key  to  unlocking  the  financial  sector’s  capacity  to 
intermediate  efficiently  with  increased  access  to  credit  in  support  of  the  country’s 
growth agenda. Indeed, the thrust of current debate is not only about sustainability 
but also  about scaling up broad-based growth  for poverty reduction  and increased 
employment.  What  can  be  done  to  consolidate  the  gains  we  have  made  and 
transition to high and durable growth without putting stability at risk?    
 6.  I  will  not  try  to  answer  these  questions  but  briefly  note  that  sustaining 
macroeconomic  stability,  increasing  access  to  credit,  providing  good  infrastructure, 
having  strong  regulatory  frameworks,  and  most  importantly  developing  a  skilled 
workforce are all necessary conditions that create the conducive environment for job 
creation  and  inclusive  growth.    Your  Excellency,  for  us  at  the  Bank  of  Ghana  the 
outlook from the monetary policy perspective is to try to understand the nature of 
the  trade-offs  between  monetary  stabilisation,  that  is,  stabilizing  inflation  at  low 
 Page | 3  
levels – perhaps reviewing our medium-term target to a lower level, and economic 
 growth.   
 7.  Monetary  policy  will  remain  vigilant  to  deal  with  inflation  pressures  should  they 
emerge.  Further,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  taken  steps  to  build  reserve  buffers,  to 
address potential risks from the external or domestic sectors. Currently, the country’s 
gross  international  reserves  is  estimated  at  around  US$8  billion  and  expected  to 
increase with additional inflows from the cocoa syndicated loan. We are also deepening 
the  foreign  exchange  market  through  the  introduction  of  new  products  to  improve 
liquidity and ensure stability in the local currency. 
 8.  Mr.  President,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  beyond  these  broad  policy 
objectives,  I  believe  some  of  the  pertinent  issues  that  should  help  entrench 
macroeconomic  stability  and  allay  fears  of  the  investment  community  and  private 
sector  will  be  fully  addressed  during  the  plenary  sessions.  These  include  sustaining 
macroeconomic  stability  through  election  cycles;  infrastructural  development  to 
support  the  productive  sector  and  trade;  digitisation  of  the  economy  to  enhance 
efficiency;  scaling  up  human  capital  development  which  is  critical  for  sustainable 
growth and development, and last but not least, sustaining financial stability after the 
clean-up  exercise.  I  believe  that  we  will  have  fruitful  deliberations  from  the 
distinguished panellists assembled for the various sessions.   
Thank you.  
 Page | 4  
