Dear teachers, 
Dear students, 
Dear guests, 
  Welcome to the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo. I am very honored to mark 
World Savings Day with you today. This day is a very important day for the financial 
system and now its marking has become a tradition in the CBK. This day, which was 
first marked in 1924 at the International Savings Banks Congress in Milan, Italy, is 
now  celebrated  worldwide  by  organizing  various  activities  aimed  at  cultivating 
culture and developing savings habits. We begin to learn the habits and culture of 
saving from childhood. The  most common phrase we hear from an early age is a 
saved  euro  is  an  earned  euro.  This  phrase  best  demonstrates  the  importance  of 
savings.  Savings  help  us  achieve  our  dreams  and  goals.  On  the  importance  of 
savings, I would like to quote one of the most successful investors, Warren Buffet, 
who said “Do not save what is left after spending; instead spend what is left after 
saving”. 
 CBK,  within  the  framework  of  its  Financial  Education  Program,  organized  a 
competition for Kosovo elementary school students in grades 6-9 to participate in 
the competition for the selection of the best essay on savings and finance under the 
motto “Savings for a better future”. This competition was very creative, had a lot of 
good essays and the commission had a lot of hard work in selecting the winner. I can 
say that there were no losers in this competition. All the essays were very good and 
I have the honor of today awarding the most distinguished awards. 
By participating in this competition you have honored the CBK and I promise that 
we will be with you in the future as well by organizing other activities. I hope this 
competition  has  helped  you  to  better  understand  the  importance  of  finances  and 
savings and I believe that some of you are already dreaming of this profession and 
you may be part of the CBK or other financial institutions in the future. 
Dear students, I wish you great results in school, which I believe will be very easy 
with the help of your excellent teachers 
 