DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 
(Joint Ministerial Committee 
Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund 
of the  
on the 
Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries) 
ONE HUNDREDTH MEETING 
WASHINGTON, DC – OCTOBER 19, 2019 
 
DC/S/2019-0060 
October 19, 2019 
Statement by 
Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Constituency of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, 
San Marino and Timor-Leste 
        Constituency of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor-Leste 
Statement by 
Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
100th Meeting of the Development Committee 
October 19, 2019 
Washington, DC 
    The global business cycle remains very weak. Geopolitical tensions, combined with the sharp decline 
in international trade recorded in the last few quarters, weigh on firms’ confidence and on investment. 
Employment and wage growth continue to support incomes, mainly thanks to the resilience of services, 
but  manufacturing  is  particularly  sluggish.  If  the  latter  proves  to  be  persistent,  it  will  inevitably 
reverberate across the other sectors of the economy. 
 
The main risk to the global outlook once again derives from commercial tensions. Besides the already 
visible effects of the escalation of tariffs, quantitative restrictions can also have a significant global 
impact,  particularly  if  accompanied  by  dislocation  of  value  chains.  The  introduction  of  export 
restrictions in some countries may lead to trade diversion or import substitution, with efficiency losses. 
 
After many years of success in the fight against extreme poverty, a substantial and persistent global 
slowdown may reverse this trend; we are already seeing the rise of poverty in several of the poorest 
countries. Indeed, poverty risks becoming more entrenched and harder to root out. Business as usual 
will  not  be  enough.  An  effective  cooperation  among  all  development  partners,  both  bilateral  and 
multilateral, is essential to strengthen the policy dialogue and catalyze the development of the private 
sector. 
 
The battle against extreme poverty needs to be fought in Sub-Saharan Africa and fragile and conflict-
affected settings. Because of Sub-Saharan Africa’s slower rates of growth, problems caused by conflict 
and  weak  institutions,  and  a  lack  of  success  in  channeling  growth  into  poverty  reduction, 
transformational change is needed in those areas. To reach the World Bank Group’s (WBG) goal of 
bringing extreme poverty below 3 percent by 2030, the world’s poorest countries will likely need to 
grow at a rate far surpassing historical experience. Moreover, this growth must be highly inclusive, 
reaching every country. The upcoming strategy for Fragility Conflict and Violence will be a litmus test 
of WBG engagement in the most challenging environment.  
 
Several countries, particularly in Africa, are experiencing a severe deterioration in both domestic and 
external debt, which may undermine their progress in economic and social development. We welcome 
the  review  of  the  Non-Concessional  Borrowing  Policy  which  highlights the  weaknesses  of current 
policies and identifies relevant areas for improvement. We expect that the forthcoming Sustainable 
Debt  Financing  Policy  will  be  inspired  by  a  rigorous  rule-based  but  non-punitive  approach  whose 
underlying principles we fully endorse.  
 
We welcome the World Development Report 2020, “Trading for Development in the Age of the Global 
Value Chains (GVCs).” It is well balanced in identifying the sources of the potential threat posed by 
   protectionism.  GVCs  are  indeed  more  powerful  in  supporting  growth  than  standard  trade  and, 
notwithstanding the diffusion of labor-saving technologies, can continue to boost growth.   
 
The  Report  rightly  recognizes  that  with  rapid  technological  change  and  increasingly  complex 
production  arrangements,  broad-based  structural  policies—e.g.,  skill  formation  and  other  policies 
designed  to  ensure  participation  in  GVCs—provide  the  highest  payoff  in  enhancing  countries’ 
competitiveness in international markets.  
 
A country’s openness—to trade as well as international investments—tends to magnify the benefits of 
supply-side policies. The success of such a country will then depend even more on its endowment of 
“immobile factors of production,” such as the quality of infrastructures, the bureaucratic and legal 
context, the efficiency of the financial system, and human capital. 
 
Old-fashioned protectionist policies are short-sighted and, at best, ineffective in preserving comparative 
advantages. They represent the wrong answer to a legitimate demand for political action from those 
who have suffered the most from the negative consequences of structural transformations. 
 
To tackle these critical issues it is necessary to share the gains of economic integration. In particular, it 
is indispensable to reinforce the adjustment mechanisms and redistribution policies that can reduce the 
social burden of structural transformations, especially among the most disadvantaged. These include 
policies that favor labor mobility, while ensuring an adequate social safety net, along with income 
support for displaced workers that does not discourage labor market participation and foster poverty 
traps. 
 
To address beyond-the-border challenges to GVC participation, as well as enhance support for regional 
integration, the WBG should devote more attention to trade policy. For instance, helping countries 
maximize the benefits of the African continental free trade agreement would be a step in the right 
direction. In view of economies’ increased synchronization, the World Bank may also want to consider 
multi-country interventions. The Western Balkans trade and transport facilitation project is a promising 
example of how to address issues that are common within a region.  
 
We are encouraged that countries are responding to the Human Capital Project with concrete action, 
taking steps to build consensus and awareness, coordinate across sectors, improve measurement, and 
adopt reforms. It is also encouraging that some countries are trying to achieve better results with a more 
efficient allocation of existing levels of spending. 
 
We strongly support the effort to provide a finer disaggregation of the Human Capital Index (HCI), 
which may help in designing more informed policy solutions. A national aggregate HCI value can mask 
significant disparities in outcomes within a country—across regions, socioeconomic groups, gender.   
 
It is equally critical to take steps to improve measurement, as a lack of reliable data risks jeopardizing 
the index’s credibility. 
 
The Jobs and Economic Transformation agenda is of key importance in supporting governments to 
undertake policy reforms that will incentivize the private sector to invest and generate jobs. To this end 
we need to focus on reforms that can catalyze a shift from informal to formal employment and that can 
induce  productivity-enhancing  practices  and  processes,  within  and  across  sectors  and  firms.  The 
emphasis on “creating and connecting to markets” and “building capabilities and connecting workers 
 3 
to jobs” is particularly relevant to heightening job creation in IDA countries, where the largest labor 
force growth will take place in the coming years.  
 
As rightly stated in the background paper, different models are needed for different countries because 
of  disparities  in  endowments,  exposure  to  external  factors,  and  varying  development  stages.  The 
challenge will be how to make those models operational, building on country platforms that include all 
development partners.  
 
As the largest global concessional donor, IDA has a unique role to play in tackling the root causes of 
poverty  and  deprivation  and  promoting  inclusive,  sustainable,  and  balanced  development.  The 
upcoming IDA replenishment must be supported and we hope that a larger group of countries will 
consider participating, so that IDA will have adequate resources to fulfil its mission. We favor the 
confirmation  of  IDA-18  special  themes  and  the  focus  on  new  cross-cutting  areas.  To  address  the 
fundamental determinants of fragility, we support a stronger engagement of IDA in regional programs, 
including those for Sahel, Horn of Africa, and Lake Chad. We are also confident that the WBG will 
incorporate a thorough analysis of causes and consequences of migratory pressures in its Strategic 
Country Diagnostics for these areas. 
 
We support the review of IDA’s voting rights and its guiding principles. The IDA Executive Board 
must define the scope of the review clearly, to ensure an efficient process. This is a prerequisite for its 
success.  
 
Implementing the commitments of the capital package and of IDA replenishment will require a renewed 
effort,  particularly  because  of  the  difficulties  of  doing  business  in  those  contexts.  Therefore,  it  is 
important to strengthen the WBG institutions’ accountability mechanisms to maximize development 
impact.  
 
We  are  cognizant  that  scaling  up  these  commitments  requires  adequate  budgetary  resources. 
Nonetheless, to  preserve  the  recently  achieved  financial  sustainability  of  all the  WBG  institutions, 
operational efficiency must be enhanced. This includes a balanced business model of presence in the 
field. Solid income generation is critical if the WBG is to bear future needs. 
 4 
