Yves Mersch: Opening remarks
Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the “Getting to
know the EU Institutions and Organisations in Luxembourg” event, Luxembourg, 11 November
2019.
 The press is an important medium for the ECB to communicate and explain our decisions and
policies to the wider public. I am happy for today’s opportunity to extend the usual exchange with
the “ECB watchers” to Brussels-based journalists.
While I will devote most of this session to answering any questions you may have, I want to start
by  outlining  the  ECB’s  role  and  its  functions.  I  will  then  briefly  touch  upon  challenges  to  the
European  economic  outlook  that  explain  the  ECB’s  latest  monetary  policy  measures,  before
concluding with the priorities for Economic and Monetary Union from the ECB’s perspective.
The ECB and its functions
The primary task of the ECB is to maintain price stability, defined by the Governing Council as an
inflation rate of “below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”.
Maintaining price stability supports sustainable economic growth and helps to create jobs and
improve the living standards of euro area citizens.
In addition to defining and implementing the monetary policy for the euro area, we have a number
of  other  tasks  under  the  EU  treaties,  including  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment
systems.
We have an advisory role on European and national legislation in our areas of competence and
we are frequently consulted on such legislation. We are also involved in the euro area accession
process, preparing regular reports on the progress made towards the Maastricht convergence
criteria by the Member States expected to eventually adopt the euro. In addition, we help manage
the  European  exchange  rate  mechanism  and  ensure  non-euro  area  Member  States  can
participate smoothly in the banking union should they wish to join.
In 2014, the ECB was tasked with supervising about 120 significant banks in the euro area and it
is responsible for the effective and consistent functioning of the Single Supervisory Mechanism
as a whole.
To  ensure  that  the  ECB  acts  in  the  best  interest  of  European  citizens,  we  have  strong
safeguards  in  place  to  verify  that  we  act  in  accordance  with  our  mandate  and  that  our
independence is protected.
With regards to our mandate, we are subject to judicial review by the  Court of  Justice of the
European Union and we are accountable to the European Parliament.
To emphasise our independence, members of the Governing Council are seated in alphabetical
order  by  surname,  rather  than  by  nationality,  showing  that  ECB  decision-makers  act  in  the
interest  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  rather  than  in  their  national  interest,  when  deciding  on
monetary policy.
And the rationale of the latest of these monetary policy decisions is what I want to turn to next.
The euro area economic outlook and the ECB’s response
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since the beginning of this year, euro area growth momentum has slowed markedly, by more
than we had previously anticipated. The September ECB staff projections expect the euro area
economy  to  grow  by  just  1.1%  in  2019,  0.6  percentage  points  less  than  estimated  in  the
December 2018 staff projections, and by 1.2% in 2020, down by 0.5 percentage points from the
December projections.
This  slowdown  is  mainly  due  to  the  weakness  of  international  trade  in  an  environment  of
persistent  uncertainties  related  to  protectionist  policies  and  geopolitical  factors.  These  factors
are increasingly weighing on economic sentiment and, in particular, on the manufacturing sector.
Accordingly, countries which have a relatively large manufacturing sector are more exposed to
the current slowdown, with Germany a case in point.
The longer the weakness in manufacturing persists, the greater the risk that other sectors of the
economy will be affected by the slowdown as well. Risks to the growth outlook remain on the
downside overall.
Headline  inflation  remains  well  below  2%,  while  inflation  excluding  the  more  volatile  food  and
energy components has been hovering around 1% for an extended period of time. This indicates
that the weaker economic outlook may imply a delay in the pass-through of wages to prices.
Firms are absorbing increases in labour costs in their profit margins rather than passing them on
to  customers.  Meanwhile,  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  are  at  low  levels.  Although  the
likelihood of deflation remains limited, market expectations of inflation over the medium term are
settling around values that are not consistent with our inflation aim.
Inflation is currently expected to average 1.2% in 2019, 1.0% in 2020 and 1.5% in 2021, which is
well below the Governing Council’s medium-term aim of below, but close to, 2%.
So  when  the  Governing  Council  met  in  mid-September  to  decide  on  monetary  policy,  it  was
confronted with a more rapid and extended slowdown than previously anticipated, persistent and
prominent  downside  risks  to  the  growth  outlook,  and  a  further  delay  in  the  convergence  of
inflation towards the ECB’s aim.
The  Governing  Council  decided  on  a  comprehensive  package  of  measures  with  a  view  to
ensuring that inflation moves towards the ECB’s aim in a sustained manner.
The interest rate on the deposit facility was lowered from –0.40% to –0.50%. Lowering
the deposit facility rate helps to further improve the borrowing conditions of households and
businesses.  Negative rates also encourage banks to lend to the real economy instead of
holding onto liquidity.
The forward guidance on the likely future direction of the ECB’s monetary policy was
strengthened. Specifically, it clarified that the ECB expects its policy rates to stay “at their
present or lower levels until we have seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a level
sufficiently close to, but below, 2% within our projection horizon, and such convergence has
been  consistently  reflected  in  underlying  inflation  dynamics”.  By  reassuring  markets  that
policy rates will stay “at their present or lower levels” until there has been an improvement in
the inflation outlook, the ECB reinforced the impact of the cut in the deposit facility rate.
The Governing Council further decided to restart net asset purchases at a monthly
pace of €20 billion from November onwards. These purchases are expected to run for as
long as necessary to reinforce the accommodative impact of the ECB’s policy rates, and to
end  shortly  before  the  ECB  starts  raising  its  key  interest  rates.  This  is  in  addition  to  the
reinvestment  of  the  sizeable  stock  of  assets  the  ECB  has  already  purchased  under  the
asset purchase programme.
The  modalities  of  the  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations
(TLTRO III) were eased. Banks can now obtain this long-term funding at lower rates with a
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
longer  maturity.  This  should  also  help  to  ensure  that  the  ECB’s  accommodative  policies
pass through entirely to the funding costs of households and firms.
Finally,  the  Governing  Council  announced  a  two-tier  system  for  reserve
remuneration, in which part of banks’ excess reserves held with the  ECB will be
exempt from negative rates. The two-tier system is designed to strike a balance between
preserving the incentives for banks to pass through the stimulus generated by the negative
interest rate on their reserves, and mitigating the adverse effects that these negative rates
might  have  on  banks’  lending  behaviour  by  affecting  their  profitability.  The  new  two-tier
system will make sure that banks’ ability to extend loans to their customers at favourable
terms remains unimpaired.
The different elements of this comprehensive package will together support favourable financing
conditions  for  businesses  and  households,  which  will  sustain  investment  and  consumption.
Greater business and household expenditure will, in turn, support inflation dynamics and make
sure that they durably converge to the ECB’s aim.
Priorities for the ECB and Economic and Monetary Union
The conventional and unconventional measures the ECB has taken over the past decade have
been successful in addressing deflationary risks, restoring the functioning of the monetary policy
transmission mechanism and providing vital support to the euro area economy.
But the  ECB does not operate in a vacuum and other economic policies matter too. A better
policy mix, including fiscal policy, structural reforms and prudential measures, can help achieve
this objective faster and with fewer side effects.
In other words, we need a coherent economic strategy in the euro area that complements and
enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy.
This is why there was unanimity in the Governing Council that fiscal policy must make a more
decisive contribution. In view of the weakening economic outlook and the continued prominence
of downside risks, governments with fiscal space that are facing a slowdown should act in an
effective  and  timely  manner. As  long  as  fiscal  sustainability  is  ensured,  countercyclical  fiscal
policy could be very effective in the current environment, given that fiscal multipliers are higher
when interest rates are low. At the same time, governments in countries with high public debt
should pursue prudent policies and deliver on structural balance targets.
In  addition  to  better  national  policies,  work  on  completing  the  architecture  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union needs to continue. In the short term, projects that are already under way must be
completed, such as making the backstop to the Single Resolution Fund operational, finishing the
reform of the European Stability Mechanism and passing legislation for the Budgetary Instrument
for Competitiveness and Convergence before the next multiannual financial framework.
Beyond these steps, advancing the banking union and capital markets union has become even
more urgent in view of Brexit, as Europe needs to avoid capital market fragmentation.
Progress requires the removal of the remaining barriers to the free flow of capital and liquidity
across borders and banking groups. A more integrated single market for financial services can
make a decisive contribution to private risk-sharing and the absorption of shocks through cross-
border holdings of investments.
In the long run, work on a European deposit insurance mechanism needs to continue, combined
with action on a host of legislative files, from the forthcoming updates of the banking packages –
the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation and  Directive and the  Banking  Resolution and  Recovery
Directive (CRR III/CRD VII/BRRD III) – to the review of the fiscal and economic rules – known as
the two-pack and six-pack – which is scheduled for the end of this year.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Recent experience shows that policy answers need to evolve in line with the challenges of the
time  and  that  all  policy  areas  need  to  contribute.  Within  their  mandates,  central  banks  will
continue to take policy challenges into account to ensure their measures are effective.
The press plays an important role in informing the public about the ECB’s measures and critically
challenging  its  decisions.  In  my  view,  this  dialogue  with  you,  the  press,  supports  the
effectiveness of the ECB’s measures. So let’s start this dialogue here and now.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
