For release on delivery 
5:30 a.m. EST (11:30 a.m. local time) 
November 12, 2019 
 
 Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and Equilibrium Bond Yields: 
  Success and Consequences 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
High-Level Conference on Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility, cosponsored by the 
Bank for International Settlements,  
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,  
and the Swiss National Bank 
          Remarks by 
Richard H. Clarida 
Vice Chair 
at the 
Zurich, Switzerland 
November 12, 2019 
 Good morning.  I am honored and delighted to participate in this second annual 
conference on global risk, uncertainty, and volatility, cosponsored by the Federal Reserve 
Board, the Bank for International Settlements, and the Swiss National Bank.1  I would 
like especially to thank the Swiss National Bank for hosting this event.  This conference 
is part of continuing work across all of our institutions and the academic community to 
better quantify and assess the implications of risk and uncertainty.  I am pleased that this 
year the focus of the conference is on two of my long-standing professional interests—
financial markets and monetary policy.  And my remarks today will not stray far from 
those interests.  In particular, I would like to address an issue that has been much in 
focus—the decline in long-term interest rates—highlighting the role of monetary policy 
in contributing to that decline and the implications of that decline for the conduct of 
monetary policy. 
The Decline in Long-Term Interest Rates and the Role of Monetary Policy 
One of the most remarkable and fundamental changes in the global financial 
landscape over the past three decades has been the steady and significant decline in 
global sovereign bond yields.  From the late 1980s, when 10-year nominal Treasury 
yields in the United States and sovereign rates in many other major advanced economies 
were around 10 percent, global bond yields in the advanced economies have trended 
lower to levels below 2 percent today (figure 1, “Bond Yields”).   
To understand and interpret this decline, it is useful to think of the yield on a 
nominal 10-year bond as the sum of two components:  investors’ expectation over the 
                                                
1 The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  I would like to thank Vickie Chang, Stephanie Curcuru, Caitlin Dutta, Eric 
Engstrom, Don Kim, Jack McCoy, Andrew Meldrum, Katia Peneva, Marius Rodriguez, Beth Anne Wilson, 
and Emre Yoldas for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
 - 2 - 
next 10 years of the average level of short-term interest rates plus a term premium.  The 
term premium is the additional compensation—relative to investing in and rolling over 
short-maturity bills—that bondholders require for assuming the risk of holding a long-
duration asset with greater exposure to interest rate and inflation volatility.  Importantly, 
according to economic theory the equilibrium term premium can be negative.  In this 
case, which is relevant today in the United States and some other countries, the exposure 
to interest rate and inflation volatility embedded in a long-maturity bond is more than 
offset by the potential value of the bond in hedging other risks, such as equity risk.2  The 
expectation of the average level of future short-term interest rates can, in turn, be 
decomposed into the expectation of average future real interest rates and the expectation 
of average future inflation rates.  Performing this standard decomposition reveals that the 
decline in long-term rates reflects declines in all three components:  expected real rates, 
expected inflation, and the term premium (figure 2, “Yield Decomposition”).  I will now 
discuss each of these components in turn. 
With respect to expected real short-term interest rates, one reason investors expect 
lower future short-term interest rates is that neutral interest rates appear to have declined 
worldwide and are expected to remain low.  This concept of a neutral level for short-term 
real interest rates is referred to in the academic literature as r* and corresponds to the rate 
consistent with a level of aggregate demand equal to and growing in pace with aggregate 
supply at an unchanged rate of inflation.  Longer-run secular trends in r* largely, or even 
entirely, reflect fundamental “real” factors that are outside the control of a central bank.  
                                                
2 Term premium estimates have been negative in the euro area and Japan for several years.  See Cohen, 
Hördahl, and Xia (2018) and International Monetary Fund (2018). 
 - 3 - 
Policymakers and academics alike, including myself, have spent considerable time 
exploring the reasons for and ramifications of the decline in r* across countries.3  For 
example, many have pointed to slowing population growth and a moderation in the pace 
of technological change as consistent with a lower level of r*.4  Changes in risk tolerance 
and regulations have led to an increase in savings and in the demand for safe assets, 
pushing down yields on sovereign bonds.5  Importantly, economic theory suggests and 
empirical research confirms that there is a significant common global component 
embedded in individual country r*s (figure 3, “Estimates of r*”).6  This common factor 
driving individual country r*s not only reflects the influence of common global shocks 
affecting all economies in a similar way (for example, a slowdown in global productivity 
and the demographics associated with aging), but also results from international capital 
flows that respond to and, over time, tend to narrow divergences in rates of return offered 
across different countries.  Other things being equal, a decline in the common factor 
driving individual country r*s that is evident in the data would be expected to produce a 
comparable common decline in global bond yields.    
In addition to the decline in r* around the world, lower long-term bond yields also 
reflect the influence of the initial downshift and ultimate anchoring of inflation 
expectations in many countries after the mid-1990s.  Unlike the decline in r*, which 
                                                
3 See, for instance, Fischer (2016a, 2016b, 2017) and Clarida (2019).    
4 Most papers—such as Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016); Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido 
(2016); and Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2017)—estimate that demographics can explain between 1 
and 2 percentage points of the decline in r*.  
5 See Williams (2016, 2017); Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017); Glick (2019); Chen, Karabarbounis, 
and Neiman (2017); and Dao and Maggi (2018) for a discussion of the potential drivers for the increase in 
the supply of savings and increased demand for safe assets.  Other factors cited for lower real rates include 
low productivity growth (Rachel and Summers, 2019) and secular stagnation due to insufficient aggregate 
demand (Summers, 2015).   
6 See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Clarida (2019); and Jorda and others (2019). 
 - 4 - 
primarily reflects fundamental “real” factors that are outside the control of a central bank, 
the decline and ultimate anchoring of inflation and inflation expectations in both major 
and many emerging economies were the direct consequence of the widespread adoption 
and commitment to transparent, flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategies.  
For example, in the United States, after the collapse of Bretton Woods, inflation spiraled 
upward, hitting double-digit rates in the 1970s and early 1980s.  But by the mid-1980s, 
the back of inflation had been broken (thank you, Paul Volcker), and total personal 
consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation averaged less than 4 percent from 1985 to 
1990.  Following the 1990–91 recession, inflation fell further, and, by the mid-1990s, the 
conditions for price stability in the United States had been achieved (thank you, Alan 
Greenspan).  From the mid-1990s until the Great Recession, U.S. PCE inflation averaged 
about 2 percent.  And, of course, this step-down in inflation has been global, with the 
other major advanced economies experiencing a similar shift down (table 1, “Average 
Inflation Rates”).  Many major emerging market economies as well have seen a 
remarkable and very welcome decline in average inflation rates as a result of adopting 
and delivering on credible inflation-targeting polices.  To the extent that the step-down in 
inflation is expected to persist, which appears to be the case, long-term yields have 
reflected this decline one-for-one.   
However, not only has the average level of inflation fallen, but inflation has also 
become more stable.  After considerable volatility in the 1970s and 1980s, over the past 
few decades, inflation—especially core inflation, which excludes volatile food and 
energy prices—has, with rare exceptions, moved only within a relatively narrow range in 
many countries despite significant swings in the prices of oil and other commodities, 
 - 5 - 
recessions, the Global Financial Crisis, and unprecedented monetary policy actions.  
Reflecting this, inflation volatility, as measured by the standard deviation in quarterly 
inflation rates, has declined.  (See table 2, “Standard Deviation of Annualized Quarterly 
Headline Inflation Rates.”)  
What has been behind this global decline in inflation volatility?  I would argue, as 
have many others, that monetary policy played a key role in reducing not only the 
average rate of inflation, but also the volatility of inflation.7  Inflation-targeting monetary 
policy can plausibly influence the variance of inflation through several channels.  For 
example, in a textbook DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model (Clarida, 
Galí, and Gertler (CGG), 1999) featuring a central bank that implements policy via a 
Taylor-type rule, the equilibrium variance of inflation will be lower the more 
aggressively the central bank leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away 
from target.  So even if the variance of inflation shocks is constant, the variance of 
inflation itself will be an endogenous function of monetary policy.  Another related 
channel through which monetary policy can influence the variance of inflation is by 
changing the equilibrium persistence of inflation deviations from target.  In the textbook 
CGG model (1999), augmented with a hybrid Phillips curve that features an inertial 
backward-looking component, the equilibrium persistence of inflation is an endogenous 
function of the monetary policy rule such that the more aggressively the central bank 
leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away from target, the less persistent 
are inflation deviations from target in equilibrium.  In the simple case in which 
equilibrium inflation is a first-order autoregressive process (as it is in the CGG (1999) 
                                                
7 This view has also long been shared by fellow monetary policymakers.  See, for example, Bernanke 
(2007b) and Powell (2018).     
 - 6 - 
model under optimal policy), the equilibrium unconditional variance of inflation is 
monotonic in inflation persistence for any given constant variance of inflation shocks.  Of 
course, non-monetary factors may also have contributed to a lower variance of inflation.  
For example, the variance of underlying exogenous shocks to aggregate supply and 
demand may have fortuitously and coincidentally fallen in tandem with the adoption of 
inflation targeting in many countries.     
I will now turn to a third factor behind the decline in global bond yields, the 
decline in term premiums that is estimated to have occurred in many countries over the 
past 20 years.  Most studies find that term premiums have fallen substantially in major 
economies over the past 20 years, and that in the United States term premiums may have 
been negative for some time.  Decomposing the factors that drive equilibrium term 
premiums is an active area of academic research, and I will not attempt to summarize or 
synthesize this vast literature.8  But I would like to emphasize what seems to me to be 
three contributors to the decline in the term premium in the United States and perhaps in 
other countries as well.9   
First, the decline in inflation volatility has almost certainly been important in 
driving the term premium on nominal bonds lower.  The real ex-post payoff from holding 
a nominal bond to maturity is directly exposed to price-level risk, and thus, all else being 
equal, a decline in inflation volatility makes the real purchasing power of the bond’s 
payoff less risky.  Through this channel, the decline in inflation volatility should be 
reflected in a smaller inflation risk premium in nominal bond yields, which is exactly 
                                                
8 Gürkaynak and Wright (2012) provide a survey. 
9 For estimates of term premiums in other countries, see Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018), and International 
Monetary Fund (2018). 
 - 7 - 
what is estimated in the Kim, Walsh, and Wei (2019) yield curve model (figure 4, “Term 
Premium Decomposition”).  Indeed, this yield curve model attributes around 100 basis 
points of the decline in the U.S. 10-year nominal term premium since the early 1990s to a 
decline in the inflation risk premium. 
A second likely contributor to the decline in the U.S. term premium over the past 
decade is the Federal Reserve’s substantial purchases of long-duration Treasury securities 
and mortgage-backed securities in three large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs and 
one maturity extension program between late 2008 and late 2014.  These purchases, 
which were concentrated at the longer end of the U.S. yield curve, took duration out of 
the market and thus lowered the equilibrium yield required by investors to hold the 
reduced supply of long-duration assets instead of holding and rolling over short-maturity 
Treasury bills.  Estimates of the cumulative effect of these purchases on the U.S. term 
premium span a wide range, with some estimates above 100 basis points.10  Moreover, 
the global market for sovereign bonds and currency-hedged duration is tightly integrated, 
and it seems likely that asset purchase programs in other major economies, such as Japan, 
the euro area, and the United Kingdom, have contributed as well to reducing the term 
premium in Treasury securities (and, of course, LSAP programs in the United States 
likely contributed to lower term premiums abroad). 
A third contributor to a lower U.S. term premium is much less widely appreciated 
than lower inflation volatility and LSAPs.  This reflects the value that bonds have 
provided over the past 20 years as a hedge against equity risk.  As documented by 
Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (CSV) (2017) and Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira 
                                                
10 For recent reviews, see Kuttner (2018) and Gagnon (2016).  Hamilton and Wu (2012) and Li and Wei 
(2013), among others, study the effects of the Fed’s asset purchases in a term structure model setting. 
 - 8 - 
(CPV) (forthcoming), the empirical correlation between U.S. bond and stock returns 
changed sign in the late 1990s from positive to negative (figure 5, “Bond–Stock 
Covariance in the United States”).  In the 1970s and 1980s, the sign of the correlation 
was positive, which implies that bond and stock returns tended to rise and fall together.  
In this period, bonds provided a diversification benefit when added to an equity portfolio 
(the bond return beta to stocks averaged 0.2) but not a hedge against equity risk.  Since 
the late 1990s, the empirical correlation between bond and stock returns has typically 
been negative (the bond return beta to stocks has averaged negative 0.2).  This means that 
since the late 1990s, bond returns tend to be high and positive when stock returns are low 
and negative so that nominal bonds have been a valuable outright hedge against equity 
risk.  As such, we would expect the equilibrium yield on bonds to be lower than 
otherwise, as investors should bid up their price to reflect their value as a hedge against 
equity risk (relative to their value when the bond beta to stocks was positive).  According 
to CSV, the hedging value of nominal bonds with a negative beta to stocks could 
substantially lower the equilibrium term premium on bonds.  Quoting from their paper 
(page 265),  
“Thus from peak to trough, the realized beta of Treasury bonds has 
declined by about 0.6 and has changed sign.  According to the CAPM 
[capital asset pricing model], this would imply that term premia on 10-
year zero-coupon Treasuries should have declined by 60 percent of the 
equity premium.”11 
                                                
11 To elaborate a bit, this estimate of the implied decline in term premium may be on the larger side of 
estimates, because the term premium represents an expected average bond risk premium over the life of the 
bond and because the CAPM beta is expected to shrink as the bond’s remaining time-to-maturity shrinks. 
 - 9 - 
As a concrete example, consider the (ex-post) hedging value of bonds for equity risk in 
the Global Financial Crisis.  In 2008, the total return on the S&P 500 index was around 
minus 37 percent, while the total return of the on-the-run 30-year Treasury bond was 
about 38 percent!  
There is likely no single explanation for the change in sign of the correlation 
between equilibrium bond and stock returns in the United States and in other major 
countries (figure 6, “Bond–Stock Covariances in Advanced Economies”).12  One recent 
paper that does rigorously model the changing value of bonds for hedging equity risk is 
by CPV.  This paper develops and estimates a habit persistence consumption asset pricing 
model in which the sign of the equilibrium covariance between equity and bond returns 
depends on the reduced-form correlation between inflation and the output gap, the 
correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap, as well as the equilibrium 
persistence of inflation.  CPV document in U.S. data, for a sample spanning 1979:Q3 to 
2011:Q4, that (1) the correlation between inflation and the output gap changed sign from 
negative to positive; that (2) the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output 
gap changed sign, also from negative to positive; and that (3) the evidence of the sign 
change becomes statistically significant beginning in the late 1990s.  CPV also document 
that the transitory component of inflation becomes much less persistent after the 
estimated break in their sample.   
The CPV paper is agnostic as to why the reduced-form correlation between 
inflation and the output gap and that between the federal funds rate and the output gap 
both change sign in their sample, but the authors do demonstrate that in their asset pricing 
                                                
12 See, for instance, d’Addona and Kind (2006); Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2010); Eraker (2008); 
and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013). 
 - 10 - 
model, these reduced-form sign changes are sufficient to generate the sign change in the 
correlation between equity and bond returns that we observe in the data.   
I, myself, believe that the change in the U.S. monetary policy regime that began in 
1979 under Paul Volcker and that was extended by Alan Greenspan in the 1990s very 
likely contributed to the change in the sign of the correlation between inflation and the 
output gap as well as the change in sign of the correlation between the federal funds rate 
and the output gap that we observe in the data (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000).  These 
are the sorts of patterns that a simple model of optimal monetary policy would produce 
when starting from an initial condition in which inflation is well above the (implicit) 
target, as was the case in 1979.  High initial inflation triggers a policy response for the 
central bank to push up the real policy rate well above inflation in order to push output 
below potential, which, via the Phillips curve, will, over time, lower inflation toward the 
target.  If this policy succeeds ex post, inflation expectations become anchored at the new 
lower level of inflation, and policy can, then, respond to demand shocks by adjusting real 
rates pro-cyclically, the opposite of what is required when initial inflation is too high and 
inflation expectations are not anchored.13  Inflation will also be pro-cyclical with well-
anchored inflation expectations if demand shocks dominate and inflation expectations 
remain anchored. 
Implications for Monetary Policy:  The Federal Reserve’s Framework Review  
By lowering expected inflation, by anchoring expected inflation at a low level, by 
contributing to a reduction in the volatility of inflation—and thus a reduction in the 
inflation risk premium—and by contributing to creating a hedging value of long-duration 
                                                
13 Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2019) show that monetary policy actions that are interpreted as responses to 
rising inflation have more adverse spillovers to emerging markets than actions motivated by growth shocks.  
 - 11 - 
sovereign bonds, inflation-targeting monetary policy has lowered equilibrium bond yields 
relative to equilibrium short rates substantially compared with the experience of the 
1970s and early 1980s.  But, as I noted earlier, during the past decade equilibrium short 
rates have themselves also fallen substantially.  These two phenomena, taken together, 
have resulted in sovereign bond yields that are substantially lower than the pre-crisis 
experience and thus substantially closer to the effective lower bound for the policy rate 
than they were before the crisis.  But what does this mean for monetary policy?  At its 
most basic level, the answer to this question could depend on how far the nominal policy 
rate is from the effective lower bound (ELB) and the extent to which the term premium 
on long-duration bonds can become even more negative than it is at present (at least in 
the United States).14  While I do not have a precise answer to this question, I will confess 
that I think it highly unlikely in the next downturn, whenever it is, that 10-year U.S. 
Treasury yields will fall by the roughly 390 basis points that we observed between June 
2007 and July 2016 (the bottom in Treasury yields in this cycle) or even decline by the 
roughly 360 basis points that we observed between January 2000 and June 2003.  
The reality of low neutral rates and equilibrium bond yields has motivated us at 
the Federal Reserve to take a hard look this year at our monetary policy strategy, tools, 
and communication practices.  While we believe our existing framework, in place since 
2012, has served us well, we believe now is a good time to step back and assess whether, 
and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication 
practices to achieve and maintain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the 
                                                
14 For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its 
implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), 
Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019). 
 - 12 - 
world we live in today.15  As I have noted before, the review of our current framework is 
wide ranging, and we are not prejudging where it will take us, but events of the past 
decade highlight three broad questions that we will seek to answer with our review. 
The first question is, “Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives 
with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to 
reverse past misses of the inflation objective?”  Central banks are generally believed to 
have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots.  But persistent inflation 
shortfalls, such as those associated with the ELB, carry the risk that longer-term inflation 
expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.16  At our September 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, we discussed options for mitigating 
ELB risks, including “makeup” strategies in which policymakers would promise to make 
up for past inflation shortfalls with a sustained accommodative stance of policy intended 
to generate higher future inflation.17  Such strategies provide accommodation at the ELB 
by keeping the policy rate low for an extended period.  Makeup strategies may also help 
anchor inflation expectations more firmly at 2 percent than would a policy strategy that 
does not compensate for past inflation misses.  But the benefits of makeup strategies 
depend importantly on the private sector’s understanding of them as well as the belief 
that future policymakers will follow through on promises to keep policy accommodative.  
An advantage of our current framework over makeup approaches is that it has provided 
the Committee with the flexibility to assess a broad range of factors and information in 
                                                
15 Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy 
framework.  They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement 
needed changes to its framework. 
16 These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be 
insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.  For related discussions, see Reifschneider 
and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016). 
17 See Board of Governors (2019b). 
 - 13 - 
choosing its policy actions, and these actions can vary depending on economic 
circumstances in order to best achieve our dual-mandate goals.   
We are also considering whether our existing monetary policy tools are adequate 
to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or whether our toolkit 
should be expanded and, if so, how.  Because the U.S. economy required additional 
support after the ELB was reached in 2008, the FOMC deployed two additional tools 
beyond changes to the target for the federal funds rate:  balance sheet policies and 
forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.18  The review is 
examining the efficacy of these existing tools, as well as additional tools for easing policy 
when the ELB is binding, in light of the more recent experiences of other economies.   
Finally, we are focusing on how the FOMC can improve the communication of its 
policy framework and actions.  Our communication practices have evolved considerably 
since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC 
meeting.19  As part of the review, we are assessing the Committee’s current and past 
communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. 
                                                
18 As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial 
Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed 
setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).  In addition 
to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other 
measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally 
support the economic recovery.  These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit 
facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions. 
19 Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public 
understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability.  These 
enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; post-meeting 
press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee’s 
normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants’ economic 
projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the 
uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.  Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a 
summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC 
participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.  With the introduction of the Summary of 
Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker 
 - 14 - 
In terms of process, we have heard from a broad range of interested individuals 
and groups in 14 Fed Listens events this year.  At our July 2019 FOMC meeting, the 
Committee began to assess what we have learned from these events and to receive 
briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.20  But we still have much to 
discuss at upcoming meetings.  We will share our findings with the public when we have 
completed our review, likely during the first half of 2020. 
Concluding Remarks    
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new opportunities and 
challenges.  One of these challenges is how best to conduct monetary policy in the new 
world of low equilibrium interest rates.  It makes sense for us to remain open minded as 
we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability 
to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us.  For this reason, my colleagues and I 
do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate findings.  What I can say is that any 
refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be 
aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives 
in the world we live in today. 
Stepping back, earlier today, speakers at this conference discussed the challenges 
of making monetary policy in an uncertain and risky environment.  In my remarks, I have 
laid out an important example of the interaction of the macroeconomy, monetary policy, 
and the market response to risk.  The papers you are about to discuss throughout the next 
                                                
projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.  Because 
the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it 
captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.  For a discussion and data, see Bernanke 
(2007a) and Romer (2010). 
20 See Board of Governors (2019a). 
 - 15 - 
two days present cutting-edge research on the effect and measurement of risk and 
uncertainty and volatility, with a special focus on monetary policy and market behavior.  
As someone on the front lines, I look forward to learning from your insights and 
encourage your rich discussion over the next few days and your continued work on how 
to make my job easier!  Thank you, and good luck!  
    References 
- 16 - 
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007).  “Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero 
Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 
54 (April), pp. 728–52. 
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich (2013).  “A Long-Run Risks Explanation of 
Predictability Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets,” Review of Financial 
Studies, vol. 26 (January), pp. 1–33. 
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steven R. Grenadier (2010).  “Stock and Bond 
Returns with Moody Investors,” Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 17 
(December), pp. 867–94. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007a).  “Federal Reserve Communications,” speech delivered at the 
Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm. 
——— (2007b).  “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting,” speech delivered at 
the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic 
Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070710a.htm. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019a).  “Minutes of the Federal Open 
Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019,” press release, August 21, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190821a.htm.  
——— (2019b).  “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 
2019,” press release, October 9, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191009a.htm. 
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2017).  “The Safe 
Assets Shortage Conundrum,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 31 
(Summer), pp. 29–46.  
Campbell, John Y., Carolin Pflueger, and Luis M. Viceira (forthcoming).  
“Macroeconomic Drivers of Bond and Equity Risks,” Journal of Political 
Economy. 
Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira (2017).  “Inflation Bets or 
Deflation Hedges?  The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds,” Critical Finance 
Review, vol. 6 (September), pp. 263–301. 
 - 17 - 
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016).  “Demographics and 
Real Interest Rates:  Inspecting the Mechanism,” European Economic Review, 
vol. 88 (September), pp. 208–26.  
Chen, Peter, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Brent Neiman (2017).  “The Global Rise of 
Corporate Saving,” NBER Working Paper Series 23133.  Cambridge, Mass.:  
National Bureau of Economic Research, February (revised March 2017). 
Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, 
James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019).  “Monetary Policy Options 
at the Effective Lower Bound:  Assessing the Federal Reserve’s Current Policy 
Toolkit,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.  Washington:  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.003.  
Clarida, Richard (2019).  “The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates:  Some Implications 
for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination,” International 
Finance Discussion Papers 1244.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, April, https://doi.org/10.17016/IFDP.2019.1244. 
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999).  “The Science of Monetary Policy:  
A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 
(December), pp. 1661–1707. 
——— (2000).  “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability:  Evidence and 
Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 (February), pp 147–80. 
Cohen, Benjamin H., Peter Hördahl, and Dora Xia (2018).  “Term Premia:  Models and 
Some Stylized Facts,” BIS Quarterly Review.  Basel, Switzerland:  Bank for 
International Settlements, September 23, pp. 79–91, 
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1809h.pdf.    
d’Addona, Stefano, and Axel H. Kind (2006).  “International Stock-Bond Correlations in 
a Simple Affine Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 30 
(October), pp. 2747–65. 
Dao, Mai Chi, and Chiara Maggi (2018).  “The Rise in Corporate Saving and Cash 
Holding in Advanced Economies:  Aggregate and Firm Level Trends,” IMF 
Working Papers WP/18/262.  Washington:  International Monetary Fund, 
December, available at 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2018/12/07/The-Rise-in-
Corporate-Saving-and-Cash-Holding-in-Advanced-Economies-Aggregate-and-
Firm-Level-46369. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins (2017).  “A Model of 
Secular Stagnation:  Theory and Quantitative Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper 
 - 18 - 
Series 23093.  Cambridge, Mass.:  National Bureau of Economic Research, 
January (revised February 2017).  
Eraker, Bjørn (2008).  “Affine General Equilibrium Models,” Management Science, vol. 
54 (December), pp. 2068–80.  
Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert 
Tetlow (2018).  “Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for 
Monetary Policy,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.  
Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2018.059. 
Fischer, Stanley (2016a).  “Low Interest Rates,” speech delivered at the 40th Annual 
Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
New York, October 5, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20161005a.htm. 
——— (2016b).  “Why Are Interest Rates So Low?  Causes and Implications,” speech 
delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20161017a.htm. 
——— (2017).  “The Low Level of Global Real Interest Rates,” speech delivered at the 
Conference to Celebrate Arminio Fraga’s 60 Years, Casa das Garças, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil, July 31, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20170731a.htm. 
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018).  “Should 
the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 443–517, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/09/Fuhrer-et-al_final-draft.pdf. 
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016).  
“Understanding the New Normal:  The Role of Demographics,” Finance and 
Economics Discussion Series 2016-080.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, October, http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.080. 
Gagnon, Joseph E. (2016).  “Quantitative Easing:  An Underappreciated Success,” Policy 
Brief PB16-4.  Washington:  Peterson Institute for International Economics, 
April, https://www.piie.com/system/files/documents/pb16-4.pdf.  
Glick, Reuven (2019).  “R* and the Global Economy,” Working Paper Series 2019-18.  
San Francisco:  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August, 
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2019-18.pdf.  
Gürkaynak, Refet S., and Jonathan H. Wright (2012).  “Macroeconomics and the Term 
Structure,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 50 (June), pp. 331–67. 
 - 19 - 
Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012).  “The Effectiveness of Alternative 
Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (s1, February), pp. 3–46.      
Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016).  “The Risky Steady 
State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound,” Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2016-009.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, January, https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.009. 
Hoek, Jasper J., Steven B. Kamin, and Emre Yoldas (2019).  “When Is Bad News Good 
News?  U.S. Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions 
in Emerging Markets,” unpublished working paper, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, Division of International Finance, September.  
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017).  “Measuring the 
Natural Rate of Interest:  International Trends and Determinants,” Journal of 
International Economics, vol. 108, (s1, May), pp. S59–75. 
International Monetary Fund (2018).  Global Financial Stability Report:  A Bumpy Road 
Ahead.  Washington:  IMF, April, 
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/doc/IMF082/24893-9781484338292/24893-
9781484338292/Other_formats/Source_PDF/24893-9781484348772.pdf. 
Jorda, Oscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. 
Taylor (2019).  “The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870–2015,” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, vol. 134 (August), pp. 1225–98. 
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017).  “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate 
World,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317–96, 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/kileytextsp17bpea.pdf. 
Kim, Don, Cait Walsh, and Min Wei (2019).  “Tips from TIPS:  Update and 
Discussions,” FEDS Notes.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, May 21, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2355. 
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2018).  “Outside the Box:  Unconventional Monetary Policy in the 
Great Recession and Beyond,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 32 (Fall), 
pp. 121–46.    
Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013).  “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the 
Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs,” International Journal 
of Central Banking, vol. 9 (March), pp. 3–39.  
Nakov, Anton (2008).  “Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on 
the Nominal Interest Rate,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 4 
(June), pp. 73–127. 
 - 20 - 
Powell, Jerome H. (2018).  “Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low 
Inflation and Low Unemployment,” speech delivered at the 60th Annual Meeting 
of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston, October 2, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20181002a.htm.  
Rachel, Łukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers (2019).  “On Falling Neutral Real Rates, 
Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation,” paper presented at the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Spring, held at the 
Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/03/On-Falling-Neutral-Real-Rates-Fiscal-Policy-and-the-
Risk-of-Secular-Stagnation.pdf.  
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000).  “Three Lessons for Monetary 
Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 
(November), pp. 936–66. 
Romer, David (2010).  “A New Data Set on Monetary Policy:  The Economic Forecasts 
of Individual Members of the FOMC,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 
vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57. 
Summers, Lawrence H. (2015). “Have We Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation?  IMF 
Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, 
Washington, D.C.,” IMF Economic Review, vol. 63 (1), pp. 277–280.  
Swanson, Eric T. (2018).  “The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower 
Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper Series 25123.  
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. 
Williams, John C. (2016).  “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World,” FRBSF Economic 
Letter 2016-23.  San Francisco:  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August, 
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/el2016-23.pdf.  
——— (2017).  “Three Questions on R-star,” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05.  San 
Francisco:  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February, 
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/el2017-05.pdf.  
Yellen, Janet (2017).  “The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” 
speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, 
Calif., January 19, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170119a.htm. 
Exhibits: 
Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and 
Equilibrium Bond Yields:  Success and 
Consequences
R I C H A R D   H .   C L A R I D A
V I C E   C H A I R
B O A R D   O F   G O V E R N O R S   O F   T H E   F E D E R A L   R E S E R V E   S Y S T E M
N O V E M B E R   1 2 ,   2 0 1 9
Figure 1: Bond Yields
Note: 10-year generic government bond yields. 
Source: Bloomberg Finance LP.
November 12, 2019
Slide 1 of 8
Figure 2: Yield Decomposition
Note: Decomposition of the 10-year zero-coupon U.S. Treasury yield based on the model presented 
in Kim, Walsh, and Wei (2019).
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Survey of 
Professional Forecasters; Wolters Kluwer Legal and Regulatory Solutions U.S., Blue Chip Financial 
Forecasts; Board staff calculations. 
November 12, 2019
Slide 2 of 8
Figure 3: Estimates of r*
Note: The foreign r* shown in the chart captures the comovement of r*in Canada, the euro area, and 
the United Kingdom with the U.S. r*.  Specifically, the foreign r* is a linear combination of the r*s for 
Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom. The weights are equal to (minus) the cointegrating vector 
coefficient for each country as reported in Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017) from a vector-error-
correction model fitted to r*s in the United States, Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom.
Source: Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Clarida (2019); Board staff calculations.
November 12, 2019
Slide 3 of 8
Table 1: Average Inflation
*For the United States, inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE).  Core inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the price index for PCE less food and energy.     
**Staff estimate.  Begins in the third quarter of 1970.  Based on a weighted average of Australia, Canada, the euro area, Japan, 
Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.  For the euro area, inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the harmonized 
index of consumer prices, extended back to 1970 using Euro Area Business Cycle Network data.  For all other countries, inflation is the 
annualized quarterly percent change in the consumer price index (CPI).  Countries’ weights are based on real GDP at chained purchasing 
power parity.  
***Staff estimate.  Begins in the third quarter of 1971.  Based on a weighted average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hong 
Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.  The data for Venezuela end in 2005.  Countries’ weights are based on real GDP at chained purchasing power parity.  
Source: Board staff calculations; Haver Analytics; Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), "The Next 
Generation of the Penn World Table," American Economic Review, 105 (October), pp. 3150–82, available for download at 
www.ggdc.net/pwt.  
November 12, 2019
Slide 4 of 8
Table 2: Standard Deviation of Annualized Quarterly Inflation Rates
*For the United States, inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE).  Core inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the price index for PCE less food and energy.     
**Staff estimate.  Begins in the third quarter of 1970.  Based on a weighted average of Australia, Canada, the euro area, Japan, 
Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.  For the euro area, inflation is the annualized quarterly percent change in the harmonized 
index of consumer prices, extended back to 1970 using Euro Area Business Cycle Network data.  For all other countries, inflation is the 
annualized quarterly percent change in the consumer price index (CPI).  Countries’ weights are based on real GDP at chained purchasing 
power parity.  
***Staff estimate.  Begins in the third quarter of 1971.  Based on a weighted average of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hong 
Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.  The data for Venezuela end in 2005.  Countries’ weights are based on real GDP at chained purchasing power parity.  
Source: Board staff calculations; Haver Analytics; Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), "The Next 
Generation of the Penn World Table," American Economic Review, 105 (October), pp. 3150–82, available for download at 
www.ggdc.net/pwt.  
November 12, 2019
Slide 5 of 8
Figure 4: Term Premium Decomposition
Note: Decomposition of the 10-year zero-coupon U.S. Treasury yield based on the model 
presented in Kim, Walsh, and Wei (2019).
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Survey of 
Professional Forecasters; Wolters Kluwer Legal and Regulatory Solutions U.S., Blue Chip Financial 
Forecasts; Board staff calculations.
November 12, 2019
Slide 6 of 8
Figure 5: Bond-Stock Covariance in the United States
Note: 10-year Treasury returns are constructed from zero-coupon yields. The 
covariance and Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) beta are estimated from a 
rolling window of 3 months of daily data.
Source: Bloomberg Finance LP; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Board staff 
calculations.
November 12, 2019
Slide 7 of 8
Figure 6: Bond-Stock Covariances in Advanced Economies
Note: 10-year bond returns are constructed from zero-coupon yields for United 
States and generic bond yields for other advanced economies. Covariances are 
estimated from a rolling window of 3 months of daily data.
Source: Bloomberg Finance LP; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Board staff 
calculations.
November 12, 2019
Slide 8 of 8
