Benjamin  E  Diokno:  The  Philippine  economy  -  bright  prospects
ahead
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at The Asset Philippine Forum, Manila, 8 October 2019.
 Friends  from  The  Asset,  stakeholders  from  the  financial  sector  and  investment  community,
members of the media, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
I  would  like  to  thank  The Asset  for  always  inviting  us  to  take  part  in  its  annual  forum,  which
provides the audience relevant updates on the Philippine economy.
In keeping with the theme “Seizing the Opportunity,” my presentation will talk about the bright
prospects  ahead  for  the  Philippine  economy,  which  I  hope  would  prompt  investors  to  do
business here so they can “seize opportunities.”
The Philippines is among the fastest growing and most resilient economies in the world. In fact, it
grew by 6.2 percent last year and, based on forecasts by the IMF, it is poised to maintain growth
in the 6.0-percent territory this year and next.
The government is even more bullish, with the official growth targets set at 6.0 to 7.0 percent this
year, 6.5 to 7.5 percent next year, and 7.5 to 8.0 percent in 2021.
The inflation environment is also favorable. 
While  the  economy  experienced  elevated  inflation  last  year,  it  was  fixed  through  the  prompt
implementation of monetary and non-monetary actions.
BSP raised policy rates by a total of 175 basis points to arrest brewing second-round effects and
to anchor inflation expectations.
Other  concerned  government  agencies  also  implemented  measures  to  boost  food  supply,
including streamlining of processes for food importation. Congress passed, and the President
approved, a game-changing law that liberalizes rice importation.
As such, after peaking at 6.7 percent in September 2018, inflation continued its downward trend,
settling at 0.9 percent in September, the lowest in over three years. 
Based on these developments, BSP estimates that inflation will settle at 2.5 percent this year,
and 2.9 percent in 2020 and 2021, well within the official target of 2.0 to 4.0 percent.
Third-party institutions agree that inflation will be within target range up to 2021.
With this benign policy environment, the BSP, so far this year has been able to:
1)    Cut the key policy rate by a total of 75 basis points and
2)    Cut the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) by a total of 300 basis points, 100 basis points of
which will be effective at the start of November
The  favorable  growth  and  inflation  dynamics  also  helped  boost  business  confidence  and
investments in the country. This is evident in part by the increase in importation of capital and
intermediate goods to support an expanding economy.
The increase in imports has led to a manageable deficit in the current account (CA). In fact, the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
current  account  deficit  is  financeable,  with  robust  foreign  exchange  inflows  in  the  capital  and
financial account expected to keep the overall balance of payments (BOP) in surplus this year.
The  country’s  balance  of  payments  position  is  driven  primarily  by  steady  inflows  of  business
process  outsourcing  (BPO)  revenues,  overseas  Filipinos’  cash  remittances,  and  tourism
receipts.
Combined,  these  three  items  recorded  an  amount  equivalent  to  17.2  percent  of  the  country’s
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018.
Another solid source of foreign exchange is foreign direct investments (FDIs), which amounted to
about US$10 billion both in 2017 and 2018. In 2010 and earlier years, FDIs hovered at only less
than US$2 billion. Improvements in the macroeconomic and business climate are credited for the
rise in FDIs.
Looking  ahead,  we  expect  FDIs  to  remain  robust,  as  shown  by  hefty  amounts  of  investment
pledges approved by the country’s investment promotion agencies (IPAs). 
In the first half of this year, foreign investment applications approved by the IPAs amounted to
P95.6 billion, more than twice the P45.2 billion recorded in the same period last year.
The economy also enjoys sufficient buffers against external headwinds. Its gross international
reserves (GIR) are high while external debt burden is low. 
As of end-September, the GIR amounted to US$86.2 billion. This is enough to cover 7.5 months’
worth of imports of goods and payments for services and primary income. The received doctrine
is that 3 months worth of imports is enough.
The country’s external debt is manageable. It is a mere 23.8 percent of GDP as of end-June
2019. Manageability of external debt has improved significantly over the years, with the amount
recorded at nearly 60 percent of GDP in 2005.
The country’s banking system remains sound and stable. 
With  healthy  indicators,  including  more-than-adequate  capitalization  and  low  exposure  to  bad
debts, banks are able to help fund the growing investment requirements in the economy.
Credit growth, which has settled in the double-digit territory over the last few years, has benefited
the productive sectors of the economy. This bodes well for sustained growth.  
Robust  lending  growth  has  consistently  come  along  maintenance  of  good  quality  of  loans,
reflecting observance of prudent lending standards.
We expect lending growth to continue, especially with the BSP’s intention to continue slashing
the reserve requirement ratio (RRR). 
Should the inflation outlook continue to improve, we will further cut the RRR until it reaches single
digit by the end of my term in 2023.
As you know, we have room and reason to reduce the RRR as it is currently the highest among
select peer countries. RRR is a friction cost, and lowering it is consistent with the aim of further
enhancing financial intermediation.
In the past, the high RRR had served as an important tool to mop up excess liquidity. But now
that the BSP, under its amended charter, has the mandate to issue its own debt securities, we
can rely less on the RRR for liquidity management. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  lower  RRR,  the  banking  sector  can  then  lend  more  support  to  the  economy’s  growth
prospects.
It is also important to note that economic growth in the Philippines is happening not only in the
National Capital Region (NCR) but throughout the country.
In fact, growth rates of other regions are outpacing that of the NCR. Growth in the regions is
expected to remain robust, driven in part by infrastructure development across regions. 
This pattern of growth is consistent with the aim to make economic growth more inclusive.
Nevertheless,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  adopt  measures  that  will  improve  the  regulatory  and
operational  environment  so  that  banks  will  be  able  to  support  robust  and  inclusive  economic
growth. 
The financial sector can help spur a more inclusive growth through financial inclusion. We have
achieved  milestones  on  financial  inclusion  as  far  as  regulations  are  concerned.  In  fact,  the
Philippines  is  recognized  as  having  one  of  the  best  regulatory  environments  in  the  world  for
financial inclusion.
However, many municipalities still do not have banks operating in their areas. A big part of the
country’s adult population still do not use formal channels to save or borrow money.
To  enhance  financial  inclusion,  the  BSP  has  implemented  several  initiatives  and  are  further
strengthening its efforts. 
For instance, we have issued regulations allowing other entities to serve as cash agents or to
perform  financial  services  on  behalf  of  banks,  as  well  as  regulations  that  make  it  easier  for
people to open bank accounts. 
The BSP also spearheads the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) program, wherein pooled funds from
various institutions – such as state-owned banks, local governments, and cooperatives – serve
as collateral for loans applied for by micro entrepreneurs.
We have also implemented the National Retail Payment System (NRPS), which is a framework
for interoperable, secure, efficient, and affordable fund transfers.
Our  regulatory  environment  also  enables  the  promotion  of  financial  technology  (fintech).  In  a
country  like  the  Philippines  where  mobile  phone  penetration  is  high,  it  is  prudent  for  financial
regulators to recognize the potential of fintech to hasten financial inclusion.
In fulfillment of the NRPS, two interoperable payment systems have been launched—InstaPay for
low-value  fund  transfers  credited  real  time,  and  the  PESONet  for  bigger-value  fund  transfers
credited within the same banking day. 
These payment systems allow funds to be transferred electronically from one financial institution
to another. Most of the big banks are already participating in PESONet and InstaPay. Soon, we
expect  more  banks,  particularly  the  smaller  ones,  to  participate  and  further  boost  electronic
payments.
We expect e-payments to hit 20 percent of total financial transactions in the country by next year.
We are also keen on hitting the targets of reducing the number of unbanked municipalities from
about  a  third  a  few  years  back  to  only  20  percent  by  the  end  of  next  year,  and  to  have  the
estimated 20 million unbanked or under-served Filipinos access the formal financial system also
by the end of next year. 
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We can imagine the Philippines becoming a cash-light economy, with e-payments accounting for
at least half of total financial transactions in five years.
The law amending the BSP charter was signed into law last February. With it, the BSP’s ability to
fulfill its mandates of price and financial stability is enhanced.
Some highlights of the law include
(1)    increase in capitalization;
(2)    authority to issue our own debt instruments;
(3)        wider  supervision  to  include  not  only  banks  but  also  money  service  institutions,  credit
granting businesses, and payment system operators;
(4)    authority to prescribe minimum risk-based capital adequacy ratios; and
(5)    protection of concerned BSP personnel against lawsuits arising from the conduct of the
BSP’s financial regulation duties.
Other important laws concerning the BSP have also been enacted recently, including
(1)        Islamic  Banking  law,  which  provides  the  framework  for  regulation  and  development  of
Islamic banking in the country;
(2)    Gold law, which exempts from taxes the sale of gold from small-scale mining to the BSP;
(3)    the National Payment Systems Act, which formally recognizes the BSP as supervisor of the
country’s payments and settlements system;
(4)    Personal Property Securities Act, which allows use of other assets besides real properties
to serve as collateral for loans to boost micro lending;
(5)    Philippine ID system, which will ensure all Filipinos have proper identification, thus allowing
banks to comply with know-your-customer (KYC) rules when they offer financial services to the
poor; and
(6)       Anti-hacking  law,  which  imposes  stiffer  penalties  on  hacking,  thus  better  protecting  the
financial services industry and their customers from IT-related fraud.
With my appointment as BSP Governor coming shortly before and after the enactment of these
new laws, I consider it my personal mission to oversee the prompt and effective implementation
of these game-changing reforms.
We are not stopping here. More legislative reforms are in the pipeline, and we are keen to see
them being implemented soon. These include
(1)    amendments to bank secrecy laws, which will support efforts versus money laundering and
tax evasion;
(2)    amendments to the Agri-Agra law, which will relax provisions of mandated lending to the
agriculture sector;
(3)        Financial  Consumer  Protection  bill,  which  seeks  to  require  financial  institutions  to  have
mechanisms in place to protect financial consumers; and
(4)    amendments to the Warehouse receipts law, which seeks to modernize the warehouse
receipts system to better account for assets that can serve as collateral for loans.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Besides the legislative agenda, we are also pushing for a wide range of other reforms, including
in the areas of risk governance, fintech, integrity of financial system and safeguarding of public
interest; and capital market development.
The  newly  enacted  laws  and  those  in  the  pipeline  are  a  continuation  of  the  Philippines’  long
history  of  structural  reforms,  which  have  strengthened 
the  country’s  macroeconomic
environment over the years.
Rest assured that the BSP will be one with the government in continuing the reform agenda to
push the Philippines to its next stage of development.
At  the  moment,  the  Philippines  enjoys  investment  grade  credit  ratings  and  is  on  the  cusp  of
becoming an upper middle income economy.
With the reform momentum, we expect the Philippines to become an A-rated economy in the
next two years or so, and to become a high income economy by 2040.
In closing, allow me to give the following take-away points: 
First,  the  Philippines  will  remain  among  the  fastest  growing  economies  in  the  region  and  the
world; 
Second,  amid  external  headwinds,  sustained  growth  will  be  supported  by  healthy  external
payments position and strong domestic demand;  
Third, robust, sustainable, and more inclusive economic growth will be supported both by “soft”
or policy reforms and “hard” or physical infrastructure reforms; and
Fourth, the reform momentum will push the Philippines to its next stage of development where it
enjoys Single A credit ratings in the next two years or so, and where it becomes a high-income
economy in two decades. 
Amid  this  favorable  backdrop,  we  invite  everyone  to  seize  the  growth  opportunities  that  this
economy offers.  
Thank you very much and mabuhay!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
