Priorities for Emerging Nations in a New Global Environment 
Remarks by Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
34th Annual G30 International Banking Seminar 
Enrique V. Iglesias Conference Center, Inter-American Development Bank 
20 October 2019 
  I would like to first thank the Group of 30, especially Chairman Tharman, for inviting 
me to be a part of this panel on a very important topic: what should be the priorities for 
emerging  nations  in  a  new  global  environment,  which  is  changing  rapidly,  full  of 
unknowns, and driven mainly by factors beyond control of emerging nations. 
As we all know, the world is changing rapidly, especially in technology, demography, 
climate,  international  trade  pattern,  domestic  politics,  and  international  geopolitics, 
which  affect  the  structure  of  our  society  and  economy  and  the  way  we  conduct  our 
business  and  policy.  All  of  these  rapid  changes  are  challenges  for  all  of  us  advanced 
economies and emerging market economies alike.  
But let me speak from the perspective of an emerging market central banker: within this 
new landscape, how do I see the priority economic areas for EMs. In the short time I have 
today, I would like to highlight three issues that should be among the top items on an 
emerging nation’s economic policy agenda. 
Safeguarding SMEs competitiveness from global challenges 
The first issue is the supply chain disruption which comes as a result of the technological 
changes and is further complicated by the ongoing trade tension. While this is definitely 
a concern for every country, we open-economy EMs are especially concerned about how 
SMEs—particularly medium-size  firms—would  cope with  the trade  and supply  chain 
disruptions. 
Medium-size manufacturing firms are the backbone of EM economies. Prior to the onset 
of the trade tension, the new global environment has already brought upon these firms 
considerable pressure. Technological disruption tends to favor large corporations who 
better understand the technology and have the resources needed for the adaptation. Low 
interest rate environment also allows large firms to access bond financing  at very low 
1 
funding  costs.  These  factors  have  increased  market  power  of  large  firms  and  forced 
smaller firms to quickly redefine their business model in order to stay afloat. 
Amidst  these  structural  changes,  the  ongoing  trade  tension  becomes  an  additional 
burden to medium-size firms’ survival both directly and through the disruption of the 
supply chains.  Moreover, the increased  uncertainty that forces firms  to diversify  their 
production  locations  and  hedge  against  the  growing  risks  together  with  the  ongoing 
economic downturn have squeezed the profit margins. In such a circumstance, medium-
size firms are in a much more difficult position than large firms that have deeper pockets 
and larger buffers.  
Trade  tension  might  be  comparatively  short-lived  when  compared  to  other structural 
changes  like  demographic  shift  and  technological  disruptions,  but  these  short-term 
factors could result in a long-term impact to medium-size firms and the structure of the 
economy  through  channels  such  as  changes  in  competition  landscape,  market 
dominance power, and investment and employment patterns. 
Of course, the big question now is what roles could policymakers play to support this 
transition. I see SMEs capacity building as one key area where the government needs to 
be  actively  involved.  This  includes  proactive  consultation  and  coaching,  providing 
incentives  for  productivity-enhancing  investments,  prohibiting  abuse  of  market 
dominance  power  by  large  firms,  promoting  digital  adoption,  as  well  as  eliminating 
outdated laws and regulations hindering SME’s competitiveness. 
Although enhancing  SME competitiveness  might  not be  a  direct  mandate  of a  central 
bank, the Bank of Thailand has stepped up our policy focus on SMEs and worked with 
the  banks  on  a  number  of  initiatives.  New  digital  payment  platforms  have  been 
developed to lower costs of payment services, enhance payment efficiency, and provide 
a foundation for information-based lending and supply chain financing. A new database 
on system-wide  SME loans by  contract was  set up  to improve  understanding  of  SME 
financing behavior and analysis of SME credit risks. We have also expanded the range of 
foreign  exchange  hedging  products  for  SMEs  and,  recently,  taken  steps  to  encourage 
preemptive rescheduling and restructuring of SME loans to help facilitate their transition 
during this challenging period.   
2 
Dealing with financial spillovers 
The second issue  for emerging nations in  this new  global environment is  the size  and 
volatility of financial  spillovers that result from unconventional  monetary policy  after 
the GFC. 
Capital flows, especially portfolio flows, now account for a much larger portion of cross-
border flows than current account flows, and have a much larger effect on the exchange 
rates  for  EMs.  These  capital  flows—a  significant  portion  of  which  are  non-resident 
activities—are  more  sensitive  to  global  financial  conditions  which  have  been  dictated 
largely  by  monetary  policy  stance  of  AEs  and  global  investors’  sentiment  rather  than 
textbook-determinants  like  macroeconomic  conditions  in  EMs  and  interest  rate 
differentials.  Moreover,  due  to  the  large  foreign-exchange  activities  by  non-residents 
relative to the size  of  domestic  foreign  exchange markets and increases  in  derivatives 
and algorithmic foreign exchange trading activities, exchange rate could at times act as 
an amplifier as opposed to a stabilizer of shocks and capital flows, especially in EMs with 
strong external positions that are considered as safe haven like Thailand. 
While capital flows in and out of EMs might be small relative to global financial activities, 
they could have real and significant impacts on the EM economies through the exchange 
rate  channel.  Concerning  volatile  exchange  rate  movements  that  could  undermine 
financial stability, capital flows could affect EMs’ monetary policy stance. For example, 
in the low-for-long interest rate environment, EMs may need to follow AEs in delaying 
or reversing normalization of monetary policy to avoid appreciation of their currencies. 
Because  of  spillovers,  monetary  policy  of  EMs  could  be  distracted  from  their  core 
domestic policy mandates. 
The  delayed  normalization  in  the  low-for-long  or  negative-for-long  interest  rate 
environment  further  exacerbates  financial  stability  risks.  Debts—both  household  and 
corporate—  are  now  reaching  historic  highs.  Emerging  nations,  often  with  nonbank 
financial  activities  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter,  are  more  susceptible  to  risk 
buildups. 
 Financial spillovers need to be addressed at multiple levels. On a domestic-level, financial 
stability will  have to play a more prominent role in monetary policy decisions.  This is 
especially true in the current environment where inflationary pressure is subdued. For 
EMs that still have a lot of ground to cover in regulating  non-bank financial  activities, 
3 
financial  stability  cannot  be  addressed  by  macroprudential  measures  alone.  EMs  also 
need to equip themselves with policy tools to deal with rapidly changing capital flows; 
these  tools  encompass  macroprudential  measures,  microprudential  measures,  capital 
flow management measures, and at times foreign exchange intervention. 
On an international level, we need to recognize the changing landscape and the impact of 
the financial spillovers on small open economies, advanced economies and EMs alike. 
First, the burden of adjustment needs to be proportionately shared by both the source 
and recipient countries of capital flows. At present, EMs as recipients of flows are often 
restricted and reproached in their response to capital flows, while source countries have 
full flexibility in their conduct of monetary policy. In this regard, we very much welcome 
IMFs’ work on the Integrated Policy Framework which will allow small open countries 
to  respond  to  spillovers  more  effectively  taking  into  account  each  country’s  specific 
context and circumstances. We would very much hope that source countries of capital 
flows take into account spillover and spillback effects in their policy deliberation. 
Second, assessments of global imbalances and implications for currency valuation need 
to  adopt  a  “broader  view”  that  takes  into  consideration  not  only  current  account 
imbalances but also capital flows which have become much larger than current account 
flows; taking a narrow perspective of current account imbalance alone could lead us to a 
policy misstep. 
And third, central banks should have a collective voice on how much central banks can 
do, and to what extent further monetary easing can prop up the economy facing with 
structural challenges and trade disruptions. When we think about policy space, we must 
not look at the zero lower bound, effective lower bound, or the optimal size of central 
bank’s balance sheet. We must also be aware of the “financial  stability  lower bound”: 
how much additional financial  stability risks we are willing to take. This is so that the 
financial market would have a realistic view of monetary policy and not expect central 
banks to engage in excessive easing that might result in long-term financial instability.  
Preparing for the new macroeconomic thinking in the world of bilateralism 
This  brings  me  to  my  third  and  last  issue  which  is  the  importance  of  multilateral 
framework and international cooperation in  a world that is  becoming more and more 
polarized,  both  geopolitically  and  economically.  Multilateral  frameworks  that  have 
worked so well for us in the past recently got challenged by gravitation towards inward-
4 
looking policies  and bilateral economic relationships, and that has sent shockwaves to 
emerging nations on the periphery.  
The  drift  towards  bilateral-  and  trade-focused  international  economic  policies  which 
bypass  existing  channels  of  trade  conflict  resolution  severely  undermines  global 
governance of international trade. On their own, EMs have little bargaining power, and 
engaging in bilateral relationships with large countries could result in trade distortions 
and uncertainties that lead to inefficient allocation of resources. 
In addition to the direct impact on trade, this bilateral- and trade-focused thinking could 
lead to another serious implication, especially from the perspective of macroeconomists 
who  are  well-represented  in  this  room:  the  distortion  of  macroeconomic  policy 
framework. 
The global imbalance analysis illustrates this issue nicely. The existing framework that 
was developed by the IFIs prior to the GFC and was adopted internationally has been 
pivotal  in  the  way  we  made  policies  to  address  global  imbalances  in  the  past.  I  have 
talked earlier about how the current framework based on current account balance alone 
needs  to  progress  with  the  changing  environment,  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  global 
financial system, and take a broader view that includes capital flows. 
I  am  afraid  that  the  current  geopolitical  environment  will  not  allow  us  to  progress 
forward in our thinking. Even the existing current-account based framework of global 
imbalances is being challenged by the bilateral worldview that focuses on bilateral trade. 
A currency intervention assessment framework that focuses narrowly on current account 
and bilateral trade balances and disregards other types of fund flows like portfolio flows 
is an example of thinking that distracts us from macroeconomic reasoning. But this is a 
thinking that EM policymakers need to be prepared for in the new global environment.  
Conclusion 
To wrap all of this up, I think we are now living in a very challenging time. Priorities for 
emerging nations should be to get ready for the world that will be more volatile, more 
uncertain, more complex, and more ambiguous ahead. With limited monetary and fiscal 
policy space we have, we need to give more consideration to structural policies that will 
help  safeguard  our  competitiveness  from  global  challenges.  This  means  providing 
support to help medium-size firms stay competitive in the new environment. This means 
preparing digital infrastructure so that EM nations could maximize the benefits of the 
digital  revolution.  This  means  building  up  resiliency  both  by  maintaining  sufficient 
5 
external  buffers  as  well  as  strengthening  the  core  financial  system.  And  this  means 
looking more into a combination of policy tools to achieve macroeconomic and financial 
stability objectives in the changing economic and financial landscape. 
The  last  point  I  would  like  to make  concerns  international  cooperation.  Indeed,  if  we 
could choose, we would wish to return to a world with strong multilateral frameworks, 
a  world  with  solid  international  trade  governance,  and  a  world  that  grounds  policy 
thinking with economic reasoning. As small nations in the periphery, we might not have 
the luxury of choosing the world we wish to live in. I think it is more crucial than ever 
for  small  nations—emerging  nations  and  advanced  economies  alike—to  work  closer 
together and make sure that our voices from the periphery are heard and that we make 
progress on macroeconomic policy frameworks fit for the new global environment.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
6 
