Speech 
 Embargo 
31 October 2019, 4.30 pm 
Challenges confronting the pension system – options and 
limitations of monetary policy 
PK-Netz conference 
Thomas J. Jordan∗ 
Chairman of the Governing Board 
Swiss National Bank 
Berne, 31 October 2019 
© Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 2019 (speech given in German) 
∗ The speaker would like to thank Nicolas Cuche-Curti, Peter Kuster and Inske Pirschel for their support in drafting this speech. He also
thanks Claudia Aebersold Szalay, Simone Auer, Carlos Lenz, Susanne Mühlemann and Alexander Perruchoud as well as SNB Language 
Services. 
Page 1/8 
   Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be able to talk to you at this important event. It gives me the opportunity to 
explain our position in what is a difficult financial market environment for you especially as 
pension fund managers. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is responsible for our country’s 
monetary policy and not for its social policies, nor for its pension schemes. At the same time, 
however, it is important for us as the central bank that the occupational pension system should 
be able to fulfil its constitutional mandate: together with Pillar 1 – the Old Age and Survivors’ 
Insurance scheme (AHV) – it is required to ensure that insured persons can maintain their 
previous lifestyle in an appropriate manner after retirement. 
Solid funding is crucial for this, as a pension system must be financially sound if the 
population is to have confidence in it. Such confidence is, in its turn, of fundamental 
importance in ensuring that the occupational pension system can perform its key economic 
role. This consists of giving people the certainty that the assets they have saved in their 
pension scheme during their working lives will actually be available to them in their old age. 
A good pension system makes it possible for people to reliably plan their future material 
needs, and fosters security for individuals and stability for society. It is therefore a key 
precondition for the prosperity and development of a modern economy. A healthy pension 
system is central to ensuring social cohesion and is one of the cornerstones of Switzerland’s 
success. 
With its three pillars – AHV, occupational pension schemes and private pension provision – 
Switzerland has for several decades operated a comprehensive and well-functioning pension 
system. Our pension arrangements have been envied abroad, which is also reflected in the 
relevant rankings. In recent years, however, our country has lost considerable ground in this 
discipline (cf. chart 1). 
Have we become worse, or have the others improved? Whatever one might think about such 
comparisons, it is in Switzerland’s own interest to do everything it can to ensure that the 
pension funds – as key players in the whole system of pension provision – are able to manage 
the numerous challenges facing them as effectively as possible. In what follows, therefore, I 
will look at two important and specific challenges: the ongoing low interest rate environment 
and the rise in life expectancy. I will then set out what the politicians and the pension funds 
themselves could do to meet these challenges in the current situation. The SNB, too, has 
repeatedly been called upon to make a contribution. I would therefore like to outline what we 
can contribute – within the framework of our legal mandate – to the health of the pension 
system, and where our scope for action ends. 
Low interest rate environment – increasingly difficult to meet benefit 
commitments 
The first challenge that you as pension fund managers have faced for some considerable time 
now is the persistently low level of interest rates. These low rates are prevalent not only in 
  Page 2/8 
    Switzerland, but in all the major currency areas. For the pension funds, which traditionally 
have large holdings of interest-bearing investments, this situation naturally means lower 
investment income. In other words, the share of the ‘third contributor’ – the capital market – 
has diminished considerably. This makes it more difficult for the pension funds to meet their 
existing benefit commitments. 
In the BVG, the Federal Act on Occupational Old Age, Survivors’ and Invalidity Pension 
Provision dating from 1982, the entitlements of insured persons as well as other key 
parameters, such as the conversion rate1 and the minimum rate of interest,2 were defined on 
the basis of certain assumptions.3 These assumptions – e.g. for economic growth, inflation, 
and the average achievable nominal return – were based on empirical figures that were wholly 
plausible in the 1980s when the occupational pension system was calibrated. 
For some years, however, interest on investments across all maturities has been exceptionally 
low. For a closer examination, it is useful to differentiate between the long and the short term. 
Let us first look at the development of long-term interest rates, represented here by the yields 
on Swiss, German and US ten-year government bonds since 1995 (cf. chart 2). There is a 
clear downward trend. The decrease in Germany – and therefore in the euro area – was even 
more pronounced than that in Switzerland. What are the causes? I would like to highlight 
some factors I consider particularly important. To some extent, this development is due to the 
fact that since the 1990s the efforts of central banks in the advanced economies to bring down 
previously high inflation rates have been increasingly successful. As a result, the markets 
deemed the central banks’ pledge to maintain price stability to be credible. Inflation 
expectations consequently became anchored at a much lower level than before. The amount of 
interest that investors would normally demand as compensation for future inflation thus also 
decreased. If this reduction in interest rates were to be taken into account accordingly in the 
aforementioned pension fund parameters, the lower return would not in itself be 
fundamentally problematic for the pension funds, as their invested capital would also be 
subject to less inflation. 
In recent decades, however, the real rate of interest – i.e. the nominal interest rate less 
consumer price inflation – has likewise been falling (cf. chart 3). As central banks have only 
limited influence on the development of the long-term real rate of interest, other factors must 
have been at work. First, population ageing in the advanced economies has resulted in an 
increased propensity to save, which in turn has increased the supply of investable capital.4 
  1 The percentage rate applied to retirement savings to calculate the annual old-age pension. 
2 The minimum rate for the interest payable on retirement savings. 
3 The parameters apply first and foremost to mandatory insurance cover. Under the BVG, it is the portion of a salary between CHF 24,885 
and 85,320 (the ‘coordinated salary’) that has to be insured. However, many pension funds pay benefits over and above this statutory 
minimum (‘non-mandatory’ pension insurance). Pension funds that provide ‘comprehensive’ insurance cover in excess of the minimum 
benefits prescribed by law can define a conversion rate applicable to all retirement savings, provided the pension actually paid is at least as 
high as the pension payable under the mandatory insurance. 
4 If life expectancy increases while the retirement age stays the same, the number of post-retirement years rises. Thus employees have to 
save more money than previously if they are to be able to spend the same amount each year in their old age. 
  Page 3/8 
    Second, productivity growth is declining.5 This reduces the return potential of investments 
and hence also the demand for capital to finance investments. The real rate of interest had to 
fall in order to balance supply and demand on the capital market. 
Negative interest – still essential from a monetary policy perspective 
The decline in long-term interest rates also has implications for monetary policy and thus for 
short-term rates. What is known as the ‘neutral rate of interest’, i.e. the rate at which monetary 
policy neither holds back nor stimulates the economy under conditions of price stability, is 
also lower than it used to be. To achieve the same degree of monetary policy expansion in 
these circumstances, short-term interest rates must therefore also be lower now. This is one of 
the reasons why many central banks lowered their policy rates to zero or even into negative 
territory in the financial and debt crisis. It was because of this that the SNB, too, introduced a 
negative rate of interest on the sight deposits that banks hold with it. 
We are aware that the negative interest rate is an unconventional instrument, and one that has 
side effects. That is why we subject the benefits of this instrument for monetary policy, as 
well as any resulting costs, to particular scrutiny. We will only maintain the negative interest 
rate for as long as the benefits outweigh the costs. We undertook the most recent evaluation 
during our September monetary policy assessment. This showed that the negative interest 
rate, and our willingness to intervene on the foreign exchange market as necessary, are still 
essential in order to ease pressure on the franc, thereby stabilising price developments and 
supporting economic activity. Only in this way can we fulfil our mandate – to ensure price 
stability while taking due account of economic developments – in the interests of the country 
as a whole. In September, we also adjusted the basis for calculating the exemption threshold, 
which defines the portion of a bank’s sight deposits at the SNB on which we do not charge 
negative interest. This adjustment reduces the overall burden imposed on the banking system 
by negative interest to the minimum required for monetary policy purposes,6 while taking 
account of the possibility that the low interest rate environment may persist worldwide for 
some time to come. 
While negative interest rates are unusual and should only be temporary, moderately negative 
rates are not fundamentally different in terms of their economic effects from interest rates 
above zero. As the negative interest rate has brought about an easing of financing conditions 
in the economy, companies are able to take out loans for investments at lower cost. For us, 
however, this so-called ‘interest rate channel’ is not of prime importance. Rather, it is the 
effect on the exchange rate that is decisive for Switzerland as a small open economy. With the 
negative interest rate, we can ensure that the traditional interest rate differential versus other 
countries is not eroded excessively. Any further narrowing of the interest rate differential 
  5 Other hypotheses relating to the fall in the real interest rate are discussed in the economic literature. However, they are likely to provide 
less of an explanation than the factors of ageing and declining productivity growth. 
6 The adjusted method for calculating the exemption threshold takes effect on 1 November. The income the SNB earns from negative 
interest is currently expected to almost halve. 
  Page 4/8 
    would increase the upward pressure on the franc, which would lead to lower economic growth 
and higher unemployment. 
The measures taken by the central banks to combat the financial and economic crisis – low 
policy rates, forward guidance on the expected course of short-term interest rates, and 
securities purchases – have undoubtedly increased downward pressure on the general level of 
interest rates in the short and medium term. But the decline in capital market rates, which we 
saw in the chart earlier, began long before the outbreak of the crisis. This reinforces the notion 
that when interest rates fall, it is the aforementioned powerful structural drivers which are at 
work – i.e. persistently lower inflation expectations, greater propensity to save and lower 
propensity to invest. From today’s perspective, therefore, the neutral interest rate that is 
relevant for monetary policy is also below previous empirical levels. Consequently, short-
term interest rates could remain below their usual levels even if the central banks normalise 
monetary policy again at some point in the future. 
Longer life expectancy – success story and challenge 
Ladies and gentlemen, the low interest rate environment is a challenging situation for pension 
funds. And I cannot even give you an idea of when Switzerland will be able to return to 
positive interest rates. All I can say is that the timing will greatly depend on developments in 
the global economy and the performance of the international financial markets. 
Another challenge that is sure to preoccupy you as pension fund managers is that of rising life 
expectancy – on the face of it a very gratifying development and, indeed, one of humanity’s 
success stories. Rising life expectancy is not only influencing the propensity to save but is 
also having a direct impact on the pension funds. Given an unchanged retirement age, it 
steadily lengthens the average duration of pension payments. This in turn results in higher 
payments and extra strain on the pension funds. 
The consequences of these developments are clear. Lower inflation and reduced real rates of 
interest are resulting in lower nominal interest rates and are thus diminishing the pension 
funds’ earnings prospects. On the benefits side, increased life expectancy means that pensions 
are being drawn for longer, thus increasing the volume of savings capital needed to finance 
these benefits. As a result, the system becomes unbalanced. 
Price stability – the SNB’s contribution to a healthy pension system 
What could be done to find a workable solution? Which measures would make sense and 
which would not? Let me start at home, so to speak: at the SNB. People frequently call for the 
SNB to abolish the negative interest rate in order to significantly ease the pressure on pension 
funds. But if we think things through, would that actually happen? 
If there were no negative interest rate, the franc would be even more attractive internationally 
and would appreciate. That would slow down our economy considerably, and unemployment 
would rise substantially. In this gloomy scenario, long-term interest rates would therefore 
  Page 5/8 
    barely increase at all. Instead, the downturn in economic activity would cloud the outlook for 
Swiss companies – with adverse consequences for share prices as well. So you see, under 
current circumstances the earnings outlook for the pension funds would not improve 
significantly if the negative interest rate were to be abolished. On the contrary. Higher 
unemployment would impact on the economy and the pension system, as it would have the 
effect of reducing value added and hence the contribution base. At present, it would therefore 
not be in the pension funds’ interest to abolish the negative interest rate. 
So if it is not possible in the current situation for the SNB to abolish the negative interest rate, 
could it not at least use the income derived from it to alleviate some of the pressure on the 
pension system – for example by distributing this income to the pension funds as 
‘compensation’? In our view, this would not be a good idea either. Any linking of monetary 
policy to social policy raises the issue of potential conflicts of interest with the SNB’s actual 
mandate. That would also be the case if income were committed in this way. To ensure that 
the SNB can fulfil its mandate, our decisions must be based solely on monetary policy 
considerations. 
The current arrangements for determining and distributing profits take due account of the 
individual stakeholders’ responsibilities: the SNB’s responsibility for monetary policy, and 
that of the Confederation and cantons for fiscal and social policy. The law stipulates that the 
SNB’s profits be allocated to the Confederation and cantons, which can dispose of them as 
they see fit. Transferring the income derived from the negative interest rate to the pension 
funds would not only result in a questionable mingling of monetary and social policy, it 
would also reduce the volume of funds available for ordinary distributions to the public 
sector. Ultimately, it would be a zero-sum game. 
For the negative interest rate to have the desired monetary policy effect, it must be applied 
across all sight deposit accounts held at the SNB as far as possible. Making an exception for 
such an important investor category as the pension funds would severely impair this effect. 
Moreover, it is likely that other players which also perform economically relevant and 
socially useful functions – such as charitable foundations – would promptly demand the right 
to be treated equally. It was for similar reasons that we already had to turn down a request 
from your industry association in 2015 to operate non-interest-bearing sight deposit accounts 
for the pension funds.7 Quite fundamentally, the introduction of a ‘fourth contributor’ in the 
form of the SNB would seem to depart from the rationale on which the occupational pension 
system is founded. 
So how can the SNB make any contribution to the health of the pension system? By 
consistently and credibly pursuing a policy geared to price stability, the SNB is contributing 
significantly to a solid foundation. In the long term this will facilitate economic growth and 
prosperity in Switzerland and, in particular, also safeguard purchasing power. Ultimately, this 
 7 cf. Moser, Dewet (2015), Herausforderungen der aktuellen Geldpolitik [‘Monetary policy challenges currently facing the SNB’], speech at 
the general meeting of the Association of Swiss Pension Funds (ASIP), Zurich, 8 May. 
   Page 6/8 
    is one of the decisive factors in ensuring that our country can afford a social security network 
that is resilient and remains fundable. Stable prices are thus very important for pension fund 
members. However, price stability is also of utmost importance for the socially disadvantaged 
and pensioners, as they are scarcely able to protect themselves against an inflation-related loss 
of purchasing power. Like the pension system, price stability plays a key role in the Swiss 
success story. It is an accomplishment that is greatly valued – and today almost taken for 
granted – by the general public. 
Pension funds – reacting with moderation and flexibility 
Ladies and gentlemen, the pension funds have not been idle in the last few years with regard 
to the challenges mentioned. As pension fund managers, you have shown moderation and 
great flexibility in initiating various measures to bring your pension funds’ income and 
expenditure into equilibrium over the long term as well. On the investment side, the exposure 
to fixed-income instruments has been reduced – given the persistently low interest rates – in 
favour of equities and real estate (cf. chart 4). Furthermore, the pension funds have again 
become more active abroad, and are keeping their liquid assets to a minimum. Indeed, 
liquidity as a share of total investment assets is currently at a historic low (cf. chart 5). 
You have also had to take action on the benefits side in order to balance income and 
expenditure over the longer term. These cuts are painful and have been directly reflected in 
people’s insurance certificates. One example is the sharp reduction in the conversion rate for 
non-mandatory cover.8 Moreover, the technical interest rate9 has been lowered by 40% in the 
last ten years. This took account of the probability that income from the ‘third contributor’ 
would also be greatly limited in future. 
Thanks to these measures, together with the favourable trend on the equity and real estate 
markets, the coverage ratio of the pension funds of private-sector employers has remained 
stable since 2015 – despite the aforementioned correction to the technical interest rate, which 
has the effect of reducing this ratio. These efforts are approaching their limits, however. As 
the adaptation of the portfolio structure is associated with increasing investment risks, larger 
fluctuations in value are to be expected in future. In addition, the measures implemented to 
date are not sufficient given the rise in life expectancy. All other things being equal, the 
longer average duration of pension payments calls for increased retirement assets. 
What can be done about this? Only a limited number of adjustment mechanisms can be used 
to restore the equilibrium of a pension system. The first such mechanism relates to the 
pension funds’ income – in other words, the contributions paid into these funds. Higher 
contributions by employees and employers would make it possible to accumulate more 
capital. The other adjustment mechanisms relate to pension funds’ expenditures. To reduce 
  8 Pension funds have little scope for action with respect to mandatory insurance cover, as the conversion rate is fixed at 6.8% in the BVG. 
9 Discount rate applied when calculating future benefits. The lower the technical interest rate, the larger the amount of pension capital 
required. Investment income should be sufficient to finance the technical interest rate. 
  Page 7/8 
    these outgoings, either benefits could be decreased or the period of benefit payments could be 
shortened. We do not express any preference as to which of these mechanisms is used. 
Making such a choice always involves a delicate balancing of interests, which is a matter for 
political circles rather than the SNB. 
Under these circumstances, however, it is clear that there is unfortunately no easy, universal 
solution. Adjusting to the realities of the investment world and demographic change comes at 
a price. And something else is also clear: in a pension system like ours, in which the key 
parameters are defined in nominal terms, this price will keep rising until such time as the 
problems are tackled. But holding on to the status quo also comes at a price. For example, we 
are seeing a rise in redistributions from young to older insureds, which was never intended by 
the system. This is also why the term ‘lifestyle’, as used in the relevant article of the Federal 
Constitution, targets purchasing power rather than any nominal quantity. 
Workable solutions can be found 
At the start of my talk I drew your attention to an international ranking of pension systems (cf. 
chart 6). In other countries, too, the population enjoys rising life expectancy while savers 
bemoan the low interest rates. Denmark and Sweden, for example, which are now ranked 
several places ahead of our country, have implemented far-reaching and thus painful measures 
to stabilise and modernise their pension systems. Denmark has linked the retirement age to 
life expectancy, and Sweden is making the level of pension payments directly dependent on 
demographic and economic developments. These two examples show that it is possible, even 
in this politically fraught area, to find workable solutions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the SNB is not responsible for social policy. But allow me to finish by 
stressing once again how important it is to us that Switzerland’s pension system should 
continue to perform its pivotal economic and social function as well as possible. We are also 
aware of how critical the situation is for the pension funds, given the persistently low interest 
rates. At the same time, we cannot say when the negative interest rate will no longer be 
necessary. The SNB’s contribution to a strong pension system is maintaining price stability in 
our country. 
Adapting the parameters to economic and actuarial realities is an ongoing task of both pension 
fund managers and political bodies – in normal as well as exceptional times. As pension fund 
managers, you have fulfilled your obligations and have taken action in the very challenging 
environment of the past few years. Switzerland’s political bodies, too, recognised some time 
ago that the pension system must take account of the economic realities. Some initial steps 
have already been taken along this rocky road. But there is still a way to go. 
  Page 8/8 
 Challenges confronting the pension system –
options and limitations of monetary policy
Thomas J. Jordan
Chairman of the Governing Board
Swiss National Bank
PK-Netz conference, 
Berne, 31 October 2019
Chart 1
31.10.2019      Challenges confronting the pension system – options and limitations of monetary policy |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
Chart 2
31.10.2019      Challenges confronting the pension system – options and limitations of monetary policy |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
Chart 3
31.10.2019      Challenges confronting the pension system – options and limitations of monetary policy |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
Chart 4 and 5
31.10.2019      Challenges confronting the pension system – options and limitations of monetary policy |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
Chart 6
31.10.2019      Challenges confronting the pension system – options and limitations of monetary policy |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
