   Bahamian Financial Resilience Post-Natural Disasters 
 John Rolle Governor* 
*As prepared for Delivery. 
Exuma Business Outlook 
Sandals Resort, Exuma, Bahamas 
24th October 2019 
Introduction 
It is always a pleasure to speak at the Exuma Business Outlook.  This is happening at 
a time of incredible change within our economy.  We are paying more attention to the 
immediate and long-term needs for planning and development around financial and 
economic resiliency; and on leveling the playing field of access for commercial goods 
and  services.  Post-Hurricane  Dorian  we  are  now  more  focused  on  strategies  for 
financial  resiliency  for  households,  businesses  and  the  public  sector;  and  we  are 
preoccupied  with  business  continuity  and  recovery  at  the  national  level  for  critical 
financial services.   
The  take  away  from  my  presentation  is  that  alongside  the  interventions  which  the 
Central  Bank  intends  to  make  to  increase  the  preparedness  of  the  banking  and 
payments system, serious interventions will also be needed from a policy and cultural 
perspective to tackle the household sector’s financial vulnerability. Critical evolution 
is also required in our tourism product model to make this leading foreign exchange 
earner more resilient. 
 1 
The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  take  a  progressive  approach  to  identifying  and 
promoting 
legal  and  regulatory  reforms 
to  accommodate 
financial  sector 
transformation in the direction of greater resilience. 
General Impact of Natural Disasters 
For the better part of the last two decades, The Bahamas has been experiencing the 
direct impacts of climate change, particularly as it relates to the passage of tropical 
cyclones  (hurricanes).  They  have  increased  in  both  frequency  and  intensity.    Since 
1999, there have been at least eleven named storms that had a notable impact on some 
part of the archipelago.  These storms have had the foreseeable impact of disrupting 
economic  activity  in  both  the  immediate  and  medium-term,  as  shown  in  reduced 
output, rise in unemployment; and in placing great strain on government’s finances.1  
Before Dorian, Hurricane Matthew (2016) exacted most recent high toll,  even posing 
an  obstacle  to  the  government’s  then  articulated  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation 
plan.  
The impact from Hurricane Dorian is projected to be greater than Matthew’s.  In the 
monetary  and  financial  sector,  setbacks  include  the  disruption  in  banking  and 
payment services; and a potential deterioration in banks’ credit quality indicators as 
borrowers in the impacted zones encounter a lengthy period of reduced or eliminated 
incomes. 
Policy Responses & Preliminary Estimates of the Impact of Hurricane Dorian on the 
Banking Sector 
Immediately  following  the  storm,  the  Central  Bank  –  consistent  with  actions  taken 
after other severe  encounters – relaxed lending guidelines for domestic banks on a 
temporary basis.  Specifically, in relation to hurricane relief facilities, the 15% equity 
or  down  payment  contribution  and  the  40%-45%  debt  service  ratio  (for  directly 
impacted borrowers) were waived in order to facilitate easier, flexible access to credit. 
                                                            
1 Disaster response for the Government normally included major expenditures on infrastructure rebuilding, 
social and humanitarian assistance, subsidies to un-insured and underinsured households and tax concessions 
on private sector recovery expenditures.  At the same time, base of remaining taxable commercial activities 
decreases. 
 2 
Additionally,  the  Bank  endorsed  temporarily  relaxed  due  diligence  procedures  for 
money  transmission  businesses  (MTBs),  given  the  loss  of  vital  documents  for 
customers in the impacted areas.2   
For  their  part,  commercial  banks  suspended  loan  repayments  for  borrowers  in  the 
affected areas for a period of up to 6 months.  In addition, with the absence of bank 
branches, the customary fees on ATM usage were voluntarily suspended on Abaco 
and Grand Bahama. 
Our commercial banks are not under any unmanageable financial stress because of 
the Grand Bahama and Abaco outages.  These institutions have comfortable levels of 
capital to absorb any losses that might materialize, and they are still collectively in a 
position  where  their  capital  levels  will  need  to  be  reduced  over  the  medium-term.  
Most  of  banks’  credit  exposures  are  to  New  Providence,  where  economic  activities 
remain intact.  The Central Bank’s stress testing simulations show that in a very severe, 
major  hurricane,  that  might  be  the  case  if  damages  were  concentrated  in  New 
Providence,  banks  could  face  significant  loan  losses,  but  would  still  be  able  to 
withstand  the  setback  generally,  from  their  existing  capital  buffers.3    Where  this 
picture could evolve in an unsettling fashion however, is changing expectations on 
the frequency of major shocks, since the system would need sufficient time to recover 
between  events.    This  takes  us  back  to  the  issue  of  having  overall  macroeconomic 
resilience, to contain the extent of losses for any major or successive storms. 
In  terms  of  financial  sector  exposure,  commercial  banks’  credit  portfolio  for  Grand 
Bahama and Abaco totaled approximately $830 million over the July-September 2019 
reporting  period,  which  accounted  for  around  14.8%  of  total  private  sector  credit.  
Collectively  just  over  half  of  the  exposures  were  mortgages.    Moreover,  Grand 
Bahama represented about four-fifths of the total credit—which is good in the context 
                                                            
2 It should be emphasized, however, that MTBs were made aware of the continued expectation to exercise due 
care and attention to prevent the occurrence of fraudulent activities in order to safeguard the integrity of the 
financial sector. 
3  These  simulations  were  refined  in  close  collaboration  with  the  IMF,  during  the  recent  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP) mission. 
 3 
of the faster pace at which this sub-economy is expected to recover.4  At the outset, the 
non-performing loans rate was higher in these northern islands. 
As  we  consider  the  impact  and  recovery  from  Dorian,  the  general  outlook  for  the 
Bahamian  economy  is  for  some  setback  in  the  near-term,  with  the  revised  growth 
projection  still  positive  for  2019,  but  at  less  than  the  levels  forecasted  prior  to  the 
storm’s  passage.    In  2020,  the  outcome  could  be  flat  to  negative,  with  a  return  to 
positive  territory  in  2021.    The  recovery  path  in  both  of  the  affected  islands  will 
initially  be  dominated  by  extensive  rebuilding  activities,  which  will  heighten  the 
demand for construction-related skills and services.  This should partially offset the 
contraction in activities other economic sectors. 
The  private  sector  component  of  the  rebuilding  activity  will  be  partly  financed  by 
external reinsurance  proceeds.    The  Government  will  also  rely  on  foreign  currency 
resources.5  This hints at an important element in our resilience to natural disasters:  
that rebuilding relies on imports that must be financed with foreign exchange, at the 
same timing as when the tourism earnings are disrupted.  Resiliency amounts to being 
able  to  withstand  such  shocks  without  putting  the  survivability  of  the  Bahamian 
dollar exchange rate into question.  Reinsurance payments inflows will offer a cushion 
of at least $0.5 billion to foreign exchange needs.  These will be the largest such inflows 
levels ever received (see chart).  
In reliving these experiences in the future our national savings must also stay present 
in the form of the external reserves of the Central Bank.  As The Bahamas is able to 
build up these buffers, we would create space to use more local currency resources to 
rebuild. On the projected recovery path, our foreign reserves will experience a boost 
initially  from  the  re-insurance  receipts  and  proceeds  from  government  financing.  
These are expected to be consumed in full next year, with the expectations that The 
Bahamas could end 2020 with slightly lower foreign reserves than at the end of 2018.  
                                                            
4  Credit  exposures  to  Grand  Bahama  and  Abaco  totalled  $658.8  million  and  $170.8  million,  respectively.  
Moreover, residential mortgages represented 54.8% of the aggregate portfolio ($343.9 million in Grand Bahama 
and $111.0 million in Abaco). 
5 This is a debt management strategy collectively agreed between the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance, 
in order to offset any balance of payment strain from import financing around rebuilding activities. 
 4 
The ability to see some return to activity in Grand Bahama in 2020, favors the onset of 
the  recovery of tourism earnings.  Having the Abaco tourism plant substantially back 
in production by 2021 would help to normalize return to the still positive medium-
term outlook for reserves.  Until then, the tourism marketing strategy has to succeed 
in attracting some of the displaced business from the northern islands to undamaged 
facilities elsewhere in The Bahamas. 
Resilience Post-Natural Disasters 
At this point, I would like to delve deeper into the topic of resilience.  
Drawing on the work of the IMF, the World Bank and others, a framework for building 
resilience  would  consider  three  major  elements:  the  physical  or  structural 
infrastructure, financial factors and the social, post-disaster resilience.  I will keep the 
focus  today  on  financial  resilience.6    That  said,  both  social  and  infrastructural 
vulnerabilities still reduce to financial costs that ought to be addressed in policies that 
build buffers and provide ample insurance for both  public sector interests and private 
households. 
Financial Resilience 
For the  public  sector,  the  World  Bank  and  IMF  inspired  multi-layered  approach  to 
managing the fiscal and macroeconomic risks of natural disasters focus on four areas. 
They include: 
1.  Fiscal buffers (as a means of self-insurance) 
2.  Securing direct insurance (through risk-pooling mechanisms) 
3.  Pre-arranging emergency access to credit (for rapid response) 
4.  Securing access to international financial and humanitarian assistance 
                                                            
6 Physical resilience encompasses structural measures aimed at mitigating the impacts of natural disasters.  It 
includes investment in infrastructure including new structures, upgrades to existing ones; and developing and 
fine tuning policies related to zoning, building codes, land use, early warning systems and “risk maps”.  The social 
resilience element comes into play post-disaster.  It involves the response of the government, wider community 
and relevant organizations to the various humanitarian needs that exist following the occurrence of a natural 
disaster.  The relevant authorities must be able to ensure minimal interruption in national security, emergency 
medical care services and essential utilities.  Additionally, the established frameworks must ensure  that aid to 
the adversely affected population is efficiently distributed without undue delays and abuses. 
 5 
The Bahamas has made particular recent progress in the second and third areas, with 
access to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and through a 
pre-arranged line of credit with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).7  Self-
insurance  will  likely  have  a  greater  impact  on  resilience  over  the  longer-term,  as 
evidenced  by  our  ability  to  generate  annual  budgetary  savings,  and  to  reduce  the 
public debt burden.  This would make it possible take on extra debt if necessary—and 
without concern—after natural disasters.  Fiscal  savings could also purchase larger 
amounts of insurance in the market and finance larger natural disaster funds, both of 
which  are  debt  avoiding  strategies.  Further,  buffers  accumulate  in  terms  of  how 
infrastructure is rebuilt and in some cases relocated, at greater upfront cost, to resist 
extensive future damages from major hurricanes and sea level rise.8,9  
Financial Resilience for Private Sector/Households 
Another  major  consideration  for  the  post-disaster  phase  is  the  exposure  of  private 
sector  agents  (households  and  businesses)  to  losses.    In  particular,  a  significant 
number of uninsured or under-insured homes exist in the damaged zones, which is a 
snapshot  of  a  greater  national  prevalence  of  the  same,  particularly  among  lower 
income  homeowners  who  find  it  financially  challenging  to  purchase  insurance 
coverage.   
This presents a significant financial risk to the Government!  Fiscal costs mount when 
these exposed interests require some subsidized level of recovery.  For inadequately 
insured  middle  and  upper  middle-income  families,  or  small  businesses,  public 
subsides  are  not  likely  to  provide  either  timely  or  full  restoration  of  their  former 
circumstances; and some losses may become permanent.  This is a vulnerably that still 
has to be meaningfully addressed, through households and businesses taking on more 
                                                            
7 In April 2019, the Government secured access to a contingent loan from the IADB for natural disasters in the 
amount  of  $100  million.    Access  following  the  passage  of  Hurricane  Dorian  will  finance  disaster  recovery 
expenses, including on infrastructure repair and social and humanitarian assistance. 
8 The Bahamas will also be able to continue to leverage support from the international community, of which it 
is a part and to which the country also contributes when others face tragedies.  It includes invaluable access to 
technical assistance, specialized skills that permit accelerated the rebuilding, and generous financial donations.   
9  After  the  Hurricane,  technical  assistance  materialized  from  within  the  regional  multiple  disaster  response 
agencies  within  CARICOM,  the  various  United  Nations  bodies,  the  IMF,  IDB  and  the  World  Bank.    Technical 
assistance weighted heavily in all responses. 
 6 
active  responsibility  for  it,  and  through  intentional  public  policy  to  reduce  the 
financial risk to the government. 
A  philosophy  which  stresses  that  Bahamian  households  should  prudently  manage 
their  finances  over  a  life  time  perspective  is  important—especially  with  mounting 
climate change vulnerabilities.  Just as in the case of the government, the household’s 
approach to savings should allow families to insure better against the setbacks from 
natural disasters.  Insurance has to factor into the cost of housing, just as should tax 
and  other  maintenance  obligations.    A  part  of  the  solution  is  accepting  downsized 
housing, for which families can more fully afford the insurance.  We must also be able 
to  afford  more  resilient  physical  dwellings.    Aside,  from  being  cautious  about  the 
coastline,  it  could  mean  more  acceptance  of  multi-family  condominium  style 
structures, built more elevated and able to withstand higher winds forces than single-
family  housing.    Accepting  the  premise  that  some  families  are  not  going  to  be 
voluntarily  disciplined  then  public  policy  would  have  to  cause  the  insurance  to  be 
secured.  This speaks to taxpayer funding on some direct level. 
Having  savings  buffers  also  means  that  our  families  have  to  be  more  conservative 
about their debt levels in ordinary times.  Even with the relaxed position that local 
lending institutions are now taking to accommodate borrowers after the recent storm, 
there  will  be  some  families  who  are  be  unable  to  take  on  more  debt  to  finance 
necessary home repairs or to replace lost assets.  Again, this means more scrutiny of 
the expenditure levels that families take on in ordinary times.  The policy intervention 
from  the  Central  Bank  side  would  lean  towards  tighter  lending  standards  for 
households that are not yet in distress.   
At  the  national  level,  regulation  on  lending  standards  will  also  need  to  reflect 
uniformity across entities that are not supervised by the Central Bank.  It is a macro-
prudential  concern—meaning  that  it  could  undermine  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system in a general sense, if left untreated.  In the extreme, it could affect how the 
economy in the aggregate is able bounce back from natural disasters. 
 The Central Bank’s medium-term approach will be to also explore how the incidences 
of  under-insurance  on  mortgaged  properties  could  be  suppressed.    The  financial 
 7 
distress from underinsurance can be particularly acute when debt survives that has to 
be repaid, despite major loss of the physical assets.  
For  the  business  sector,  affordable  bridge  financing  will  also  have  to  be  in  greater 
abundance post-natural disasters.  The Central Bank is already committed to studying 
this  issue  of  how  even  larger  volumes  of  resources  can  be  accumulated  for  such 
purposes.    Again,  the  outcome  is  likely  to  target  savings  in  funds  that  are  only 
accessible for lower cost financing after natural disasters. 
Enhancing Financial Resilience Through Technology 
Moving  from  households  to  financial  institutions,  technology  will  have  to  feature 
more prominently in our resilience and recovery plan.  Indeed the recovery of access 
to financial services is vital to restarting commercial activities.  Payments services have 
to  be  present  for  businesses  to  operate;  for  the  government  and  aid  agencies  to 
effectively dispense financial assistance, and even to make use of early payouts from 
insurance policies.  At present, there is still too much dependence on cash handling 
services  and  therefore  commerce  is  only  able  recover  clumsily,  when  the  physical 
support that banks provide is missing or hampered. 
Fully accessible and enabled digital mobile payments would resolve many logistical 
challenges at once.  Project Sand Dollar has the potential to deliver this longer-term 
resilience.  It would permit wireless restoration of payments connectively, avoiding 
the  cash  shipment  and  cash  handling  frustrations.    It  would  permit  electronic 
dispersing of aid; and allow families to recapture personal dignity, by restoring the 
flexibility to prioritise the elements of personal need that they prefer to satisfy post-
disasters. 
One of the impacts of the recent hurricane on the country’s banking sector was the 
significant  damage  to physical  structures  in  Abaco  and  Grand  Bahama,  which  also 
shut down operations on those islands.  Critical to restoring a sense of commerce is 
the timely resumption of banking and payments systems. 
For this reason, the Central Bank is exploring an early entry of Project Sand Dollar into 
Abaco.  It  will  allow  the  Bank  to  test  aspects  of  the  emergency  wireless 
 8 
communications features that would enable rapid financial services recovery; and to 
connect with many retail businesses early in their recovery process.  The Sand Dollar 
infrastructure is being designed to connect with bank accounts, so that remote access 
to these facilities is also quickly re-enabled for deposits and withdrawals. 
Tourism Sector Resilience for the Fixed-Exchange Rate Regime  
I started to touch on the stability of our fixed exchange rate regime and the value of 
the Bahamian Dollar earlier.  For the medium and longer-term this amounts to making 
the  foreign  exchange  earning  assets  more  resilient.    Hotels  and  other  onshore 
accommodations are The Bahamas’ most valuable and most exposed assets.  Damages 
to Abaco are most summarized by the extent to which these assets have been taken 
offline.   In 2016, Hurricane Matthew similarly resulted in the loss of much of Grand 
Bahama’s room inventory, compounding the decline in the island’s tourism output 
which had already been entrenched.   
If the Bahamas is to cope better with more frequent and intense tropical cyclones, it 
needs to be able to keep more of its income producing resources out of harm’s way.  
One way to do this is through direct ownership over more mobile infrastructure.  The 
cruise  industry  does  this  already,  and  such  capacity  exists  to  a  great  extent  with 
smaller pleasure crafts.  This ties in with taking more advantage of the blue economy, 
yachting  and  ecotourism.    Achieving  increased  direct  ownership  and  direct 
employment in the sector would expand the associated retention of economic benefits.  
The  Bahamian  exchange  control  regime  has  already  been  reformed  to  permit 
Bahamians to attract capital in foreign currency to acquire ownership in the maritime 
sector.  However, it is a strategy to which heightened entrepreneurial focus is now 
required, and potentially public policy that would provide the same tax incentives for 
maritime assets as is done for onshore tourism assets. 
Concluding Remarks 
In conclusion, Hurricane Dorian served as a reminder of the ongoing challenges facing 
The Bahamas, given our geographic and economic makeup, set against the reality of  
global warming, rising sea levels and more frequent, intense storms.  We must apply 
 9 
economic  policies  and  frameworks  for  financial  resilience  that  mitigate  the  risks 
associated  with  this  new  reality.    For  its  part,  Central  Bank  is  in  the  process  of 
developing  a  financial  sector  disaster  recovery  plan  that  will  serve  to  enhance  the 
sector’s preparedness and resilience to shocks, inclusive of the timely resumption of 
banking and payments services. To these interventions The Bahamas must also secure 
higher insurance coverage in the household sector; and the savings philosophy which 
the government is pursuing must also come across strongly within households and in 
the accumulated foreign exchange holdings. Whether the ills of climate change are of 
our own making or not, The Bahamas cannot ignore either reality or the urgency of 
protecting  itself  better;  and  accepting  that  certain  economic  and  financial  priorities 
have to be adjusted. 
   10
     Appendix of Figures and Charts 
Figure 1: Recent Hurricane Impact on Stopover Tourist Trends 
 Source: Bahamas Ministry of Tourism Data 
 Figure 2:  Recent Fiscal Balances Trends vs Hurricane Occurrences 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
  11
Figure 3: Hurricane Induced Re-insurance Inflows 
Source: Central Bank of the Bahamas and preliminary feedback from insurance industry. 
   Figure 4: Commercial Banks — Selected Credit Exposure Indicators (2019) 
 
4A:Credit Shares by Island 
4B: Non-Performing Loans (NPL) Rate 
   
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas survey. 
   12
