   14.10.2019 
Financial stability situation in Spain 
X Financial Sector Meeting/Expansión-KPMG 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Let me first  thank the organisers for inviting me to participate in this tenth edition of the 
Financial Sector Meeting. On this occasion my address will focus on the Banco de España’s 
assessment of the main factors of risk to financial stability at present, the potential impact 
on  deposit  institutions  and  the  tools  available  to  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  other 
authorities to mitigate such risk.  
Assessment of the balance of risks to financial stability  
The  balance  of  risks  to  the  Spanish  financial  system’s  stability  has  worsened 
somewhat in the past six months. This has been due in particular to the downward 
revision of the global economic outlook.  
Indeed, global GDP growth continued to ease, to a year-on-year rate of 2.8% in 2019 Q2, 
more  than  0.5  pp  lower  than  a  year  earlier.  This  slowdown is  particularly  affecting  some 
emerging economies and Europe.  
Moreover,  growth  projections  have  been  revised  downwards  in  recent  quarters  in  most 
economies. In fact, the increase in global GDP this year is expected to be the lowest since 
the international financial crisis.  
This downturn in activity has likewise affected the Spanish economy. As a result, the Banco 
de España revised its growth projections for our economy down last September, to 2% in 
2019, 1.7% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.  
In addition to this baseline projections scenario, a series of risks persist in the geopolitical 
and  economic  policy  areas.  Should  these  risks  materialise,  they  might  bear  down  even 
further on future growth.  
At the global level the US-China trade conflict, prompting increases in the maximum tariffs 
applicable  to  specific  products,  continues  to  be  the  main  source  of  uncertainty.  These 
disputes,  which  feed  through  to  all  countries  through  global  value  chains  and  which 
especially  affect  Europe  owing  to  its  high  degree  of  openness,  are  exerting  a  significant 
adverse impact on trade and putting back investment projects.  
Regionally, the risk of a no-deal Brexit has increased and Germany is on the verge of an 
economic  recession.  In  Spain,  uncertainty  persists  over  the  future  course  of  economic 
policies, a situation which should be resolved following the general elections in November.  
Flatter  economic  activity  and  the  potential  materialisation  of  geopolitical  risks  may  have 
implications for financial stability through various channels.  
Firstly, this may lead financial market players to reassess their perception of risk. That would 
mean  that  the  currently  very  compressed  risk  premia  on  financial  instruments  would 
increase, thereby reducing asset prices and, therefore, wealth and collateral values. These 
developments might affect to a greater extent the more vulnerable segments, such as that 
of debt with lower credit quality, including leveraged loans and CLOs, and markets with high 
valuations. And they might extend to other assets.  
 3/10 
 Secondly,  agents’  income  flows  may  be  affected,  with  implications  for  their  consumer 
spending and investment decisions. In the case of households, employment creation and 
wage growth might decline. As to non-financial corporations, the rise in their profits might 
diminish. The public sector would also see its balance of revenue and expenditure affected 
by  the  operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers.  That  would  all  mean  that  both  private  and 
public levels of debt might ultimately be higher than expected, with further implications both 
for spending decisions and financial markets’ perception about the debt sustainability path.  
Logically, the deteriorating macroeconomic context would also affect deposit institutions. 
Compounding the fall in the value of some of their assets would be lower demand for credit. 
Moreover, asset quality might worsen, given that the ability of their borrowers to pay would 
be negatively affected. They would also face greater difficulty in continuing to jettison their 
non-earning assets.  As a result, their income statements would be subject to downward 
pressures. This is particularly significant in a context, such as the present, in which banks 
are posting low profits. 
Against  this  background,  it  would  be  desirable  in  economic  policy  terms  that,  after  the 
elections, a stable government were formed. That would lessen uncertainty over the future 
course  of  economic  policies,  give  fresh  momentum  to  structural  reforms  and  see  a 
resumption of fiscal consolidation, with the aim of improving potential growth and reducing 
the  main  sources  of  vulnerability  in  the  Spanish  economy,  in  particular  high  public  and 
external debt levels.  
The added pressure of the economic environment on bank profitability is the second 
element  of  the  balance  of  risks  that  I would like  to  highlight.  Once  again,  this  is  not 
something specific to the Spanish financial system. Indeed, Spanish banks’ profitability is 
higher  than  the  European  average,  but  it  remains  below  the  cost  of  capital.  Maintaining 
appropriate  profitability  is  crucial,  among  other  factors,  if  banks  are  to  generate  capital 
organically and, in this way, reinforce their solvency levels.  
Spanish bank profits in the first half of the year, down by 11.5% in year-on-year terms, are 
a sign of the growing likelihood of this risk materialising. Contributing to this decline have 
been the reduction in gains on financial operations and, to a lesser extent, the increase in 
operating  expenses,  although  a  portion  of  this  was  due  to  extraordinary  expenditure 
associated with the restructuring of certain banks. 
In addition, the ongoing reduction in impairment losses that began in 2012 is showing some 
signs of exhaustion. Indeed, in terms of their year-on-year rate, impairment losses increased 
for the first time since 2012, posting a rise of 3.9%. And we should not forget that, at present, 
the NPL ratio is still significantly above that recorded before the financial crisis. Specifically, 
in terms of lending to the resident private sector, in business in Spain, the NPL ratio stood 
at  5.3%  in  June  2019,  8.7  pp  down  from  the  December  2013  high.  Foreclosed  assets 
evidenced a further decline, standing below €40 billion in June 2019.  That marks a 50% 
reduction  from  the  2011  peak.  Against  this  backdrop,  banks  should  persist  in  their 
management efforts to enhance the quality of their balance sheets, which is a fundamental 
factor for the recovery of profitability in the medium term.  
The other lever in banks’ hands is to improve their efficiency, through a more appropriate 
management of their costs that does not limit their capacity to adapt to an increasingly more 
technified  environment.  In  this  respect,  we  should  note  that,  in  business  in  Spain,  the 
4/10 
  efficiency ratio at the individual level, without taking into account severance payments, has 
increased (worsened) by somewhat over 9 pp since 2014, to 58.8%. As to the composition 
of operating expenses, the weight of personnel costs has diminished, and that of IT  and 
communications, outsourced services and amortisation has increased, reflecting to some 
extent the ongoing digitalisation and technological change at banks.  
It should be borne in mind that operating expenses are one of the most significant levers 
over which banks have direct control to increase the profitability of their business. In any 
event, it should also be stressed that Spanish banks’ efficiency ratio at the consolidated 
level, calculated as the ratio of operating expenses to gross income, is one of the lowest 
(best) in Europe. 
The actual and projected reduction in the euro area economy’s rate of nominal growth and, 
as  a  consequence,  the  fact  that interest  rates  are  going  to  be  at lower or  even  negative 
levels for longer, may ultimately affect financial institutions’ profitability. Indeed, in recent 
months the markets have lowered their expectations in terms of the growth of European 
banks’ profits. 
Low or negative interest rates restrict the unit interest margin banks can obtain. However, 
from  a  general  equilibrium  perspective,  they  also  increase  credit,  reduce  bad  debts  and 
raise  the  value of  the  financial  and  real  assets  banks  hold  on  their  balance  sheets.  As  a 
result,  the  net  aggregate  effect  on  bank  profitability  in  general  has  so  far  been  positive 
overall. That said, this effect will foreseeably diminish insofar as the situation of negative 
interest  rates  is  prolonged  over  time.  Indeed,  a  positive  note  regarding  the  most  recent 
developments  in  profitability  is  that  net  interest  income  has  increased  following  years  of 
stagnation at low levels.  
In any event, the decisions adopted by the ECB Governing Council at its meeting on 12 
September,  including  the  10  bp  reduction  in  the  deposit  facility  rate  to  -0.5%,  the 
resumption of net purchases under its asset purchase programme and the strengthening of 
forward  guidance,  have  been  accompanied  by  mitigating  measures.  These  include  the 
application of a two-tier system for reserve remuneration, designed precisely to ensure the 
effectiveness of monetary policy transmission through the bank channel.  
There is also theoretical and empirical evidence that low interest rates transmit the monetary 
impulse by encouraging banks and other financial intermediaries to take risks. Fortunately, 
we currently have various macroprudential policy instruments, which I shall refer to later, 
designed to mitigate the potential build-up of risks that may affect financial stability through 
this channel. So far, deposit institutions do not appear to be significantly increasing their 
exposure  to  risk,  although  there  are  some  factors  where  we  are  exercising  greater 
watchfulness. 
In  fact,  the  total  volume  of  lending  granted  by  deposit  institutions  in  Spain  to  the  non-
financial  private  sector  has  continued  to  fall  (-1.2%  in  June),  or  shows  muted  increases 
when the construction and real estate development sectors are excluded.  Moreover, the 
debt ratios of the non-financial private sector have continued falling, standing at levels below 
the euro area average. Specifically, the debt/GDP ratio of the non-financial private sector 
was slightly above 130%, 3 pp down on a year earlier, and 2 pp less than the euro area 
average, having declined by more than 70 pp from its peak during the crisis.  
 5/10 
 In the case of non-financial corporations, overall external financing has continued to expand 
at year-on-year rates of close to 2%, with significant growth in bond financing and a fall-off 
since  the  start  of  the  year  in  new  bank  lending  extended  to  non-financial  corporations. 
Overall, the reduction in the deleveraging of non-financial corporations exceeds 50 pp of 
GDP, from the peak reached during the crisis. Further, in recent years banks appear to be 
setting greater store by variables such as productivity in lending standards, which results in 
a more efficient allocation of credit. Nonetheless, some firms still show a certain degree of 
financial fragility. 
In the case of households, the credit terms of mortgage loans are much stricter than those 
observed pre-crisis, and in recent quarters no signs of easing have been perceptible. For 
example, in the case of the loan-to-price ratio (LTP), there has been a reduction in the weight 
of more leveraged transactions (with an LTP of over 80%) compared with the crisis years. 
Moreover, the average LTP is also lower. By way of exception, consumer lending and its 
attendant bad debts quickened once again in the final quarter to year-on-year rates of 12% 
and 26%, respectively, slightly raising the NPL ratio of this business segment to 5.6%. And 
this against the background of the considerable slowdown in private consumption in the 
economy.  
In terms of solvency, from June 2018 to June 2019 the CET1 ratio increased by somewhat 
over  30  bp to  stand  slightly over 12%.  The  rise was  based  essentially on  an  increase  in 
reserves. This improvement in solvency was concentrated in the biggest institutions which 
are, precisely, those showing lower levels. Moreover, the bulk of the capital materialises in 
instruments with the biggest loss-absorption capacity.  
Compared with the other European countries, Spanish institutions have a top-quality CET 1 
capital  ratio  almost  3  pp below  the  European  average,  whereas  in terms of  the  leverage 
ratio, Spain stands slightly above the same average.  
It  is  well-known  that  this  difference  in  Spain’s  relative  position  in  respect  of  these  two 
solvency measures is due to the fact that the density of risk-weighted assets is higher in 
Spain. This greater density is linked to the higher use in Spain of the standard approach 
when calculating risk-weighted assets and to the very risk profile of the portfolios. In fact, 
for banks and portfolios for which the IRB approach is used, no appreciable difference in 
the density of risk-weighted assets is discerned, on average, compared with other Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) banks and countries.  
In  any  event,  precisely  to  limit  variability  between  weightings  obtained  through  the  IRB 
approach and the standard approach, the final phase of the Basel III reform includes the so-
called output floor. Here, the density of the risk-weighted assets of institutions’ aggregate 
portfolio may not be lower than 72.5% of that obtained applying the standard approach. 
Accordingly, this constraint should affect Spanish banks to a lesser extent. However, the 
set of reforms pending implementation will foreseeably have some impact on banks’ capital 
requirements in  the  coming  years.  In  this  respect,  the  bigger  the  capital  buffers  Spanish 
institutions have, the greater their capacity to cushion the impact of the full adoption of the 
reforms and their pass-through to European regulations.  
Beyond  the  need  for  compliance  with  regulatory  requirements,  the  level  of  solvency  is 
particularly significant in a financially globalised world. Thus, there is empirical evidence that 
the cost of financing with instruments convertible into capital falls significantly the greater 
6/10 
  banks’  level  of  solvency.  And  we  should  remember  that  banks,  owing  to  MREL 
requirements, will have to issue a lot of these instruments in the coming years, a task that 
has been made easier in recent months by the ECB’s monetary policy. In addition, there is 
evidence  that  banks  with  higher  solvency  levels  are  those  best  adapted  to  uphold  their 
profitability against a background of negative interest rates.  
One  way  of  evaluating  the  suitability  of  banks’  solvency  levels  involves  subjecting 
them  to  stress  tests.  The  Banco  de  España  performs  such  exercises  annually  on  all 
Spanish  institutions.  To  do  so  it  takes  as  a  starting  point  highly  granular  data  from  the 
balance  sheets  of  banks  at  the  close  of  the  previous  year  and  defines  a  baseline 
macroeconomic  scenario  which  coincides  with  the  forecasts  of  the  Banco  de  España 
available at the time the exercises are performed. It then takes another, stressed scenario, 
which  seeks  to  reflect  the  effect  of  the  risks  identified  previously  materialising.  The 
difference between both scenarios reflects the degree of stress of the exercise which, in the 
test this year, is slightly higher than that of the previous year owing to the intensification of 
the risks mentioned in the first part of my address.  
While the results of these tests will be published in greater detail in the forthcoming Financial 
Stability Report, allow me to offer you in advance some of the main conclusions.  
The results obtained in relation to the resilience of Spanish banks as a whole are, in general, 
positive.  The  capital  needs  arising  under  the  adverse  scenario  are  moderate  at  the 
aggregate level, although there is considerable heterogeneity across banks. Specifically, the 
reduction  in  the  CET1  capital  ratio  for  large  institutions  with  a  significant  international 
presence is 0.4 pp, standing at 2.7 pp for other SSM-supervised banks and at 0.6 pp for 
less significant institutions. 
The  difference  obtained  between  internationally  active  institutions  and  other  institutions 
supervised by the SSM shows the significance of geographical diversification in absorbing 
shocks. The lower decline in the capital of the less significant institutions is largely due to 
their lower credit risk and the lesser weight of their exposure to the real estate sector, i.e. to 
their better asset quality. 
The results obtained are generally more favourable than last year. This is because banks 
have made use of the past year to lessen their exposure to changes in the prices of certain 
assets,  such  as  foreclosed  assets.  Specifically,  banks  have  offloaded  considerable 
packages of foreclosed assets during 2018 and in 2019 to date.  
Turning once more to the main sources of risk to financial stability, the last such source I 
wish  to  mention  relates  to  financial  institutions’  operational  risk.  Operational  risk 
accounts for 9.3% of Spanish deposit institutions’ volume of risk-weighted assets, slightly 
below the European average (10.5%). In any event, the deterioration of solvency associated 
with an operational risk event may be high based on past experience. Indeed, for European 
banks affected by big operational events, this deterioration has stood at over 1.25 pp of 
CET1 in the past five years, with a rise to 2.1 pp in 2018. 
In  Spain’s  case,  the  potential  materialisation  of  costs  associated  with  legal  risks 
continues to contribute to deposit institutions’ operational risk. The processes linked 
to past litigation such as that of the floor clauses have had an estimated cost for the sector 
 7/10 
 of over €2.2 billion to June 2019. Moreover, there are other significant legal processes still 
pending resolution.  
In  any  event,  legal  risk  and  certain  other  factors  relating  to  banks’  conduct  have  had  a 
considerable  impact on the  reputation of the  banking  sector,  and not only in  Spain.  It is 
worth  recalling  here  that  reputation  and  customer  confidence  are  fundamental  to  the 
banking business. Therefore, institutions should strive to reverse this tendency by providing 
their customers with financial products and services suited to their needs and capabilities, 
and they should likewise supply the relevant information clearly and transparently.  
Lastly, in relation to the systematic assessment of the balance of risks to financial stability 
that we regularly make at the Banco de España, we are including other elements, whose 
materialisation  could  occur  over  a  longer  horizon.  I  refer  here  to  the  potential  changes 
technological innovation may entail for the market structure of the financial sector, 
and those arising from climate change. The importance banks give to these changes 
will have to increase accordingly.  
Macroprudential policy  
As you all know, a macroprudential authority (AMCESFI) has been in place in Spain since 
the start of the year. Its main task involves contributing to the coordination and exchange 
of  information  on  financial  stability-related  aspects  between  the  Banco  de  España,  the 
Ministry of the Economy and Enterprise, the National Securities Market Commission and 
the Directorate General of Insurance and Pension Funds.  
In parallel, the supervision of the financial system as a whole has been bolstered by the 
extension  of  the  macroprudential  tools  available  to  the  sectoral  supervisory  authorities. 
Some of these new tools, in particular those of the Banco de España based on borrowers’ 
ability to pay, aim to prevent an excessive easing in lending standards on the part of banks 
and  to  contribute  to  the  sustainability  of  household  and  corporate  debt.  These  new 
instruments  complement  those  already  being  used  by  the  Banco  de  España:  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer,  the  systemic  risk  buffer  and  the  buffer  for  systemically 
important institutions, among others.  
Overall, this new institutional framework and the attendant powers mark progress and the 
strengthening  of  financial  stability  in  Spain.  In  fact,  in  my  opinion1,  the  introduction  of 
macroprudential policy instruments to complement monetary and fiscal policy is probably 
one of the most  significant  advances in the wake of  the international financial  crisis.  For 
countries  which,  like  Spain,  belong  to  a  monetary  union,  these  tools  are  particularly 
important. They are some of the few instruments available in the national realm to ensure 
the stability of the domestic financial system. 
the  so-called  Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer 
In relation to this macroprudential policy, the Banco de España is responsible for setting 
quarterly 
is  a 
macroprudential  instrument  that  leads  to  credit  institutions  building  up  a  capital  buffer 
during  expansionary  periods  so  that  this  buffer  may  be  released  during  a  subsequent 
contractionary  phase.  In  this  way,  the  CCyB  strengthens  the  banking  system’s  solvency 
(CCyB).  The  CCyB 
                                                                                              
1 See the opening address at the Second Financial Stability Conference (Banco de España/CEMFI) delivered by by the 
Governor of the Banco de España, “A framework for the CCyB”, June 2019.* 
 
8/10 
  during growth phases, which is when risks usually build up, and helps mitigate the decline 
in the flow of new lending to the economy when these risks materialise. Consequently, the 
CCyB  contributes  to  smoothing  credit  cycle  fluctuations,  and  to  increasing  credit 
institutions’ capacity to withstand potential future losses.  
During 2019 Q3 and Q4, the Banco de España has kept the CCyB percentage at 0%. This 
decision  is  underpinned  by  a  technical  analysis  of  quantitative  indicators  mixed  with 
qualitative information.  
The  set of  quantitative  indicators  shaping  decisions  on  the CCyB  include  indicators  that 
seek to capture developments in the credit cycle of the non-financial private sector and its 
excessive  growth,  the  potential  overvaluation  of  house  prices,  the  effort  entailed  for 
households and firms in paying interest and repaying the principal of loans (debt service), 
the external deficit and the macroeconomic environment.  
The technical analysis assesses the recent trend of the indicators, their current status and 
also their expected behaviour in the coming quarters consistent with the macroeconomic 
forecasts  prepared  quarterly  by  the  Banco  de  España.  The  forward-looking  analysis  is 
particularly relevant in this context since, in the event of the CCyB being activated, banks 
have 12 months to comply with the requirement.    
According to these indicators, the credit cycle continues to show values below the activation 
thresholds (having regard to the credit-to-GDP gap, which remains below its long-term trend 
value),  although  it is  progressively  converging  on the  long-term  equilibrium level.  In  fact, 
forecasts  as  to  how  it  will  trend  in  the  coming  years  indicate  that  this  indicator  will  turn 
positive towards 2021 Q1 and might exceed the activation threshold in 2021 Q2.  
Some complementary quantitative indicators are along the same lines. This is particularly 
the case for credit intensity, which shows the weight of the change in credit relative to GDP, 
and the overvaluation of house prices currently show values close to equilibrium, with an 
upward trend that is forecast to continue over the next two years. Non-financial private-
sector debt service, for its part, has maintained the reduction that marked its path at the 
start  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Foreseeably,  this  reduction  will  continue,  albeit  more 
moderately  so  over  the  coming  two  years,  given  that  the  process  of  debt  reduction  has 
eased significantly and interest rates have less margin for further cuts. Finally, the current 
account  balance  continues  to  be  slightly  in  surplus  and  is  expected  to  remain  relatively 
stable over the coming years.  
The output gap in the economy has, since the start of the year, been in positive figures, and 
forecasts about its future course retain the prospect of the gap widening. Bear in mind that, 
moreover, set against the current recovery in the Spanish economy, the business cycle has 
tended to be a leading indicator of the credit cycle.  
Overall, the analysis performed warrants holding the CCyB at 0%. However, if the baseline 
scenario forecasts for the Spanish economy hold, in early 2021 several reference indicators 
would exceed the activation thresholds. If this macroprudential instrument is activated, the 
credit  institutions  concerned  would  have  12  months  in  which  to  comply  with  the 
requirement. This analysis, however, is conditional upon fulfilment of the baseline scenario 
forecasts which, at present, as I stressed earlier, are subject to numerous downside factors 
 9/10 
 of risk. If such risks were eventually to materialise, with a significant impact on Spanish GDP, 
the former diagnosis would consequently be altered.  
Allow me to conclude. The downward revision of global economic prospects is the main 
argument warranting some deterioration in the balance of risks to the stability of the Spanish 
financial  system.  This  flatter  economic  activity  may  have  adverse  implications  both  for 
financial and real asset prices and for agents’ incomes, raising their levels of debt. Further, 
in this macroeconomic environment, which also makes the prolongation of the period of low 
interest  rates  more  likely,  banks’  profitability  will  be  subject  to  additional  downward 
pressure. Against this backdrop, financial institutions should strive to improve the quality of 
their balance sheets, to raise efficiency and solvency levels and to increase their efforts so 
as  to  enhance  their  reputation.  Economic  policies  should  focus  on  reducing  the 
vulnerabilities still in place in our economy, such as public and external debt, and on raising 
medium  and  long-term  growth  through  the  implementation  of  appropriate  structural 
reforms.  Lastly,  macroprudential  policy  should  concentrate  on  mitigating  the  potential 
generation of risks that may affect financial stability and on the accumulation of buffers for 
use, when needed, in more adverse macroeconomic scenarios. 
Thank you for your attention.  
 10/10 
 