13/11/2019 
Deputy Governor Martin Flodén 
Örebro University and Kommuninvest, Örebro 
 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
  Monetary policy in a changing world*
Over the past year it has become increasingly clear that economic growth is slow-
ing down, both in Sweden and abroad. It is not surprising that growth is slightly 
lower than during the strong years 2014-2018. But there have recently been in-
creasing signs that the slowdown will be larger and occur faster than we at the 
Riksbank have been expecting. 
To determine how monetary policy should react to this, we need to understand 
why growth is falling. Is it due to weaker cyclical economic activity, or to deeper, 
structural changes in the economy? 
Today I intend to first briefly discuss some structural changes that may have had 
significance for economic developments in recent years. These are changes that 
may have entailed lower underlying interest rates and growth and lower inflation-
ary pressures, and which may affect the conditions for the Riksbank's work going 
forward. 
After that, I will say a few words about the possibilities open to monetary policy if 
economic developments become weaker than we have forecast. In conclusion, I 
would like to say a few words about climate change, one of the structural changes 
that affects the way the economy functions. How is the Riksbank’s work affected 
by climate change and how can the Riksbank contribute to greener financial mar-
kets? 
The economy changes 
The international economic playing field has changed in many ways in recent 
years. Let me give some examples:
•  The geopolitical situation has deteriorated and nationalistic tendencies have 
become more common. This has led to increased protectionism and new 
                                                           
* Many employees have contributed valuable comments on the first draft of this speech. I would like to thank in 
particular Iida Häkkinen Skans, Björn Lagerwall, Åsa Olli Segendorf, Rebecka Hallerby and Marianne Sterner. 
  1 [7] 
   trade barriers. After many decades of increased international trade and inter-
national capital flows, globalisation has now taken a step back.1  
•  China has emerged as an increasingly important actor on the world market. 
This has led, for instance, to increased saving in the world economy and con-
tributed to lower interest rates.2 
•  Life expectancy has increased and we anticipate spending a longer period in 
retirement. Population growth is falling in the major economies. As a result, 
GDP growth and investment needs are lower, but we wish to save more. All of 
this contributes to lower interest rates. 
•  Digitalisation means that we do our shopping in new ways. E-commerce is be-
coming increasingly common and websites for price comparison are used reg-
ularly. Consumption is shifting from goods to services and experiences, often 
with low marginal costs in production. This leads to increased price competi-
tion and to inflationary pressures being lower temporarily. But despite the 
rapid technological changes, the productivity growth figures have fallen both 
in Sweden and abroad.3 
•  We are becoming increasingly aware of the problems linked to climate 
change. This also contributes to changing our consumption and production 
patterns. The adjustment to such changes may be difficult and may also lead 
to the measured GDP growth being lower. But this adjustment can also in 
many ways lead to new markets and new opportunities opening up and to 
new, large-scale investment needs arising. 
Why are economies slowing down now? 
We would normally believe that structural changes occur slowly and that they 
therefore should not be behind a rapid change in the sentiment of the economy. 
But there are nevertheless many indications that the subdued economic growth 
and the rapid fall in confidence shown by the indicators over the past year have 
several links to the structural changes. 
When the number of trade barriers increases, the opportunities to benefit from 
economies of scale and international specialisation decline. The uncertainty re-
garding the rules for international trade dampens the willingness to invest. The 
uncertainty regarding future regulations and taxation of, for instance, diesel and 
petrol driven cars reduces demand for them. The intensive discussions on the cli-
mate impact of air travel may dampen demand for air travel. In Sweden, for in-
stance, travel by domestic flight has declined. 
Monetary policy cannot affect these structural changes or ensure that we attain a 
certain level of economic growth. Some of the changes are unavoidable, for in-
stance because of technological advances. Other changes are due to political 
choices and priorities.  
                                                           
1 See Sveriges Riksbank (2019). 
2 In the United Kingdom, yields on 10-year real government bonds have fallen from 3.5 per cent on average in 
1985-1999 to -0.9 per cent in 2010-2019. The development has been similar in other countries, including the 
United States and Sweden. 
3 In Sweden, annual productivity growth has fallen from an average of 2.6 per cent a year in 1998–2007 to 1.0 
per cent in 2010–2018. 
  2 [7] 
   But the structural changes affect the conditions for monetary policy.  The low real 
interest rates have reduced the scope for monetary policy to manage economic 
fluctuations.  Policy rates in many countries cannot be cut much from the current 
levels. The possibilities to push down interest rates with further quantitative eas-
ing are limited. If policy cannot be made more expansionary in other ways, the 
structural changes, combined with a normal economic downturn may lead to the 
economies getting stuck in a situation with unnecessarily low growth.4 
Fiscal policy will play a larger role in stabilisa-
tion policy 
In the debate, and especially internationally, many suggestions have been put for-
ward on how to make monetary policy more expansionary with other means. 
There is talk of coordinating fiscal and monetary policy, “helicopter money”, 
“modern monetary theory” and the purchase of specific private assets.5 What this 
means in more concrete terms, is that central banks should start giving out money 
to individual households, to the treasury, or that they should subsidise the private 
business sector, tasks which would usually fall to fiscal policy rather than mone-
tary policy.  
To determine whether it is a good idea for central banks to step into the field of 
fiscal policy, we need to clarify the difference between the government’s and the 
central bank's finances. Is there a difference between money issued by the central 
bank and bonds issued by the government? Is there a difference between the cen-
tral bank’s and the government’s access to liquid funds? 
Although both central bank money and government bonds are a form of claim on 
the same counterpart in the same currency, there are nevertheless some differ-
ences that in certain situations can be important. The first difference concerns li-
quidity. Central banks create liquidity on their own by issuing banknotes or by in-
creasing the commercial banks’ balances in their central bank accounts. A central 
bank can thus always “pay” if it wants to. However, in a country with an inde-
pendent central bank, the government does not have access to a credit line that 
can be extended freely. To obtain access to more liquidity, the government must 
instead issue bonds and sell them on a market. 
The second difference concerns the exposure to credit risk when holding central 
bank money or government bonds. Both the central bank and the central govern-
ment can default on their payments in two ways: by not repaying the debt, or by 
inflating away the debt. It does happen that countries fail to repay their debts. If 
the debt lies with the central bank, it is more likely that it will be inflated away. 
Based on this reasoning, are there situations where the central bank should step 
into areas similar to fiscal policy? Yes, there could be such situations. One might 
be if an acute shortage of liquidity arises, for instance, during a financial crisis. 
                                                           
4 In a speech given in 2013, Larry Summers talked about “secular stagnation”. See Rachel and Summers (2019). 
5 See, for instance, Bartsch et al. (2019), Bernanke (2016), Bernanke (2019), Eichenbaum (2019), Reichlin et al. 
(2019) and Shirai (2019). 
  3 [7] 
   Central banks are better than government at creating liquidity quickly.6 Another 
situation is if the market begins pricing a higher credit risk in government bonds 
than in central bank money. If one wants the credit risk to be transformed into an 
inflation risk, it may be desirable for the central bank to step in and support the 
government's funding, for instance by buying government bonds or through direct 
transfers to the treasury. A similar situation may arise in a monetary union if there 
is no fiscal policy at union level. 
But we are not close to one of these situations in Sweden today. Our public fi-
nances are in good shape. National debt is low. Fiscal policy is then best handled 
by the government, not by the central bank. 
The Riksbank's monetary policy is already expansionary and contributing to sup-
porting demand in the Swedish economy. But there are limited possibilities to 
make monetary policy even more expansionary, in my opinion. There are, how-
ever, good possibilities to make fiscal policy more expansionary. I therefore be-
lieve that fiscal policy will play a larger role in stabilisation policy if economic activ-
ity weakens further in the coming years.  
Climate change entails new economic and fi-
nancial risks  
Climate change is one of the structural changes I have talked about today. I have 
noted that Örebro was one of the first municipalities in Sweden that issued a 
green bond. Here at Kommuninvest, in Örebro, I think that it may be appropriate 
to conclude by elaborating on what I see as the Riksbank's role in the work to 
achieve greener financial markets.  
Climate change affects the way the economy functions. Its impact is most clear in 
the insurance sector, as a direct consequence of the risks of climate-related dam-
age. The risks may also increase on the financial markets when various branches 
are forced into major changeovers as a result of demand, taxation or regulations 
being changed.7 Monetary policy can also be affected more directly, for instance if 
economic data becomes more difficult to interpret when the effects of the 
weather lead to larger fluctuations in prices and production.8  
It is important that the Riksbank understands these changes, both to be able to 
conduct an effective monetary policy and to be able to identify risks on the finan-
cial markets. In other words: the Riksbank must be able to manage the economic 
consequences of climate change. 
                                                           
6 Some people talk about central banks’ role being not just “lender of last resort” but also “market-maker of last 
resort”. See, for example, the Bank for International Settlements (2014). 
7 NGFS (2019) talk about physical impacts and transition impacts, respectively. 
8 See Cœuré (2018). 
  4 [7] 
   Should the Riksbank buy green bonds?  
Another question that is sometimes discussed is whether the central banks them-
selves should try to affect climate change. This usually involves two different di-
rections. The first is regulating the financial markets to steer investments in a 
more sustainable direction. In many countries it is the central bank that is respon-
sible for this type of regulation, but in Sweden it is the responsibility of Finansin-
spektionen (the Swedish financial supervisory authority). The Riksbank does not 
have any of these tools at its disposal. 
The second direction concerns the central bank’s own investments. After the fi-
nancial crisis, many central banks, including the Riksbank, built up large balance 
sheets through asset purchases. Shouldn't these purchases reward sustainable as-
sets, for instance by focusing on green bonds? 
This is a question faced by central banks today, and the answer is not evident. I 
shall try to describe my views on this. But I would like to point out that these are 
preliminary views. I am happy to listen to arguments against them. 
The Riksbank’s assets can be roughly divided into two parts. We have a portfolio 
of Swedish securities (almost SEK 400 billion), that has been built up through 
quantitative easing for monetary policy purposes. And we have foreign exchange 
reserves (just over SEK 500 billion) that we hold for contingency purposes.9  
The Swedish portfolio consists solely of government bonds. This is partly to hold 
down financial risks, and partly because monetary policy, apart from determining 
the general interest-rate level, should disturb pricing on the financial markets as 
little as possible. The state is the Riksbank's principal. It would therefore seem in-
appropriate to me if the Riksbank chose government bonds to attempt to give the 
government incentive to work towards a more sustainable development. I there-
fore do not think that the Riksbank should treat green Swedish government bonds 
any differently from other Swedish government bonds.10 
The conditions for active climate consideration are slightly better in our work with 
the foreign exchange reserves. To ensure that the foreign exchange reserves fulfil 
their purpose, they need to consist of assets that can be rapidly converted to 
money even when the markets are not functioning properly. Our assessment is 
that the foreign exchange reserves best correspond to this need if they consist of 
75 per cent US government bonds, 20 per cent German and 5 per cent British, 
Danish and Norwegian government bonds. 
But to attain a higher yield and reduce the financial risk, the Executive Board has 
decided that a limited part of the foreign exchange reserves can be invested in 
other assets. The condition is that these are assets with a high credit rating and 
good liquidity, issued by central governments, provinces or intergovernmental or-
ganisations.11 
                                                           
9 In addition, the Riksbank owns 125.7 metric tons of gold (worth almost SEK 60 billion). 
10 The government has given the Swedish National Debt Office the task of issuing green bonds. See the Swedish 
Ministry of Finance (2019) and SOU (2017:115). 
11 Our regulations also allow investments in US agencies and in bonds issued by local authorities or state-guaran-
teed organisations.  
  5 [7] 
   The Riksbank gives consideration to the cli-
mate in its investments 
Last year we stated in our risk and investment policy that we would also give con-
sideration to sustainability aspects when choosing assets. The Riksbank has not 
yet fully decided how sustainability aspects should be taken into consideration in 
the investment decisions. There are two main lines to choose between: either we 
choose which assets or which issuers we want to have in the foreign exchange re-
serves. 
The choice between assets would mean trying to invest some of the foreign ex-
change reserves in particularly climate-friendly assets, such as green bonds. I have 
doubts about this type of strategy, primarily as our investments are largely in 
bonds issued by central and federal governments. It is difficult to earmark money 
for special projects in government budgets. 
The Riksbank rejects issuers with a large cli-
mate footprint 
I believe it is better to instead focus on the issuers, and to make an overall assess-
ment of how they work to promote a sustainable climate. Indicators of this could 
be, for instance, their greenhouse gas emissions. This is how we are now begin-
ning to give consideration to sustainability in our new risk and investment policy. 
We will not invest in assets issued by issuers with a large climate footprint when 
we are choosing other assets than those best corresponding to our policy need. 
This has some consequences for the holdings in our foreign exchange reserves. 
The Riksbank has invested around 8 per cent of the foreign exchange reserves in 
Australian and Canadian central and federal government bonds, as they give rela-
tively high yield and a good diversification of risk, at the same time as being 
traded on liquid markets. 
But Australia and Canada are countries that are not known for good climate work. 
Greenhouse gas emissions per capita are among the highest in the world, but vary 
considerably between the different states. For instance, greenhouse gas intensity 
is more than three times higher in production in Alberta than in Ontario and Que-
bec. As a result of the new investment policy, we sold our holdings of bonds is-
sued by Alberta in the spring. For the same reason, we have recently sold our 
holdings in bonds issued by the Australian states of Queensland and Western Aus-
tralia. 
The Riksbank needs to develop its work on how to take climate change into con-
sideration in asset management. For instance, we need broader and deeper analy-
sis of the issuers’ climate footprint. At the same time, one must remember that 
the foreign exchange reserves are unavoidably dominated by US and German gov-
ernment bonds. The Riksbank's contribution to a better development of the cli-
mate will therefore remain small. This is entirely natural. The important decisions 
on how climate change should be counteracted in Sweden are political and should 
be taken by the government and the Riksdag (parliament). 
  6 [7] 
   References  
Bank for International Settlements (2014), “Re-thinking the lender of last resort”, 
BIS Papers no 79, Monetary and Economic Department, September 2014.  
Bartsch, Elga, Jean Boivin, Stanley Fischer, Philipp Hildebrand (2019), “Dealing 
with the next downturn: From unconventional monetary policy to unprecedented 
policy coordination”, Macro and market perspectives, August 2019, BlackRock In-
vestment Institute. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2016), “What tools does the Fed have left? Part 3: Helicopter 
money”, blog post, Brookings. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2019), “Monetary Policy in a New Era”, in Evolution or Revolu-
tion: Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy After the Great Recession, O. Blanchard 
and L. H. Summers (eds.), Cambridge, The MIT Press. 
Cœuré, Benoît (2018), “Monetary Policy and Climate Change”, Speech at a confer-
ence on “Scaling up Green Finance: The Role of Central Banks”, Berlin, 8 Novem-
ber 2018. 
Eichenbaum, Martin S. (2019), “Rethinking Fiscal Policy in an Era of Low Interest 
Rates”, mimeo, Department of Economics, Northwestern University. 
Swedish Ministry of Finance (2019), “Uppdrag till Riksgäldskontoret att genomföra 
en emission av gröna obligationer”(Swedish National Debt Office tasked with issu-
ing green bonds), Government decision, Fi2019/02708/S. 
NGFS (2019), “A call for action. Climate change as a source of financial risk”, Net-
work for Greening the Financial System, First comprehensive report, April 2019. 
Rachel, Łukasz and Laurence H. Summers (2019),”On Falling Neutral Real Rates, 
Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation”, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, spring 2019. 
Reichling, Lucrezia, Adair Turner and Michael Woodford (2019), “Helicopter 
money as a policy option”, VoxEU column. 
Shirai, Sayuri (2019), “Modern money theory and its implementation and chal-
lenges: The case of Japan”, VoxEU column. 
SOU (2017:115), “Att främja gröna obligationer” (Promoting green bonds), Report 
from the Inquiry into green bonds, Swedish Government Official Reports. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2019), Monetary Policy Report, October 2019. 
  7 [7] 
