Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  Charting the next financial sector
blueprint – digitisation, climate change and resilience
Speech by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Financial Market Association of Malaysia's Annual Dinner, Kuala
Lumpur, 22 November 2019.
 It is an honour and a great pleasure to be here and see many familiar faces at tonight’s Financial
Market Association of Malaysia’s annual dinner. The last time I attended this dinner was three
years ago, when I was the Assistant Governor overseeing the financial markets and the Financial
Market Committee chair. I left this role in September of 2017, unable to resist the offer and allure
of pursuing a public policy degree. Though we had done much by then to deal with the many
challenges following the financial market development measures put in place at the end of 2016, I
have to admit that I left with a sense of regret and uncertainty. The regret was from not being able
to be part of the team to see things through, and uncertainty from the fact that the stakes were
high and any measure of success then was fleeting. These concerns proved to be unwarranted.
The FMC continued to play a key role in mobilising the industry and providing a much needed
reality check and feedback from the market in terms of intelligence and insight, which helped the
Bank navigate through those challenging times. FMC members became the bridge between the
regulator and the industry at large in the implementation of the many initiatives that have seen us
through to this day. I see quite a few of the FMC members tonight and I understand that many
have continued to contribute and help Bank Negara Malaysia further shape the development of
our  financial  markets.  Thank  you  to  all,  and  especially  to  Dato’  Lee  Kok  Kwan  for  previously
leading FMAM to become the success it is today.
The fact is, three years on, we have not only weathered the volatility and challenges then. The
financial  markets  have  actually  moved  from  strength  to  strength.  Amidst  heightened  global
volatility,  not  to  mention  the  many  domestic  political  upheavals  and  uncertainty  of  the  recent
years, it is a wonder that the Malaysian financial market has continued to grow consistently. The
onshore foreign exchange market has expanded from an average daily trading volume of USD8.1
billion in 2016 to USD 12.3 billion today.  This is mirrored by the growth of the ringgit bond market
which stood at RM1.2 trillion in 2016 to reach RM1.5 trillion now. Despite our markets growing
larger,  stability  has  been  a  key  feature  as  witnessed  by  a  moderate  level  of  volatility  in  the
onshore  markets.  The  1-month  USDMYR  implied  volatility  hovers  around  3  to  4  percent
compared to a high of 12 percent in 2016, supported by a much less disconcerting level of non-
resident holdings of government bonds at 22% compared to 34% back then. In so far as financial
markets  are  concerned,  these  recent  times  have  seen  us  avoid  major  and  abrupt  market
movements or disruptions. Besides the 2016 measures that stabilised our markets, this growth
is also the result of the many initiatives implemented since then.
One key fundamental strategy has been our steps to enhance market transparency and visibility,
which  provides  us  with 
targeted  development  efforts.  The
operationalisation of the RENTAS Segregated Securities Account which enables us to observe
the activity in the Malaysian bond market has also provided investors with improved efficiency
and a reduced reporting burden, lowering the cost of investing in this area. On this topic, I am
pleased to share that on Monday this week, Clearstream launched their revamped solution which
will provide an internal settlement link to facilitate greater access to the Malaysian market. They
now  rejoin  a  host  of  International  Central  Securities  Depositories  and  Global  Custodians  that
provide such access. This is yet another positive development for our financial markets.
With greater oversight capabilities, we were able to introduce the dynamic hedging programme in
2016,  which  successfully  enabled  institutional  investors’  active  management  of  their  foreign
information  and  data 
for 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
exchange exposures in the onshore market. The programme currently records participation of
104 registered institutional investors managing USD37 billion total asset under management, and
has  led  to  the  migration  of  these  investors’  former  offshore  strategies  to  the  onshore  market
which has increased the level of transparency and orderliness of the ringgit market.
Similarly, the Appointed Overseas Office framework which was expanded in 2017 has facilitated
wider access to the Malaysian market. The launch of the AOO pilot programme in August this
year  has  further  enhanced  market  liquidity  and  reduced  transaction  costs  for  larger  volume
transactions by allowing inter-AOO squaring of positions for more efficient price discovery. With
168 AOOs  from  22  banking  groups  operating  in  36  countries,  market  access  to  the  onshore
Malaysian markets continues to grow.
To  meet  the  need  for  continuous  communications  with  investors,  market  participants  and
intermediaries  alike,  the  Bank  developed  dedicated  webpages  for  investors  interested  in  the
developments of the Malaysian financial market. There are continuous updates on what is new in
our  markets,  and  important  updates  on  Foreign  Exchange  Administration  rules  that  market
participants may use as a point of reference in their ringgit dealings.
Many of these initiatives focus on increasing efficiency, access and transparency. However, the
reality is that markets will always be imperfect. In the 1970s through to the 1990s, we were told
that financial markets can be relied upon to be efficient, that prices will reflect all available public
information  and  hence  appropriately  reflect  the  fundamentals  of  an  instrument  or  asset.
Regulators were asked to leave markets alone. Liberalisation and deregulation were the two key
themes  and  policy  push  on  emerging  markets  that  would  enable  the  development  of  liquid
financial  markets.  Then  in  the  1990s,  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  happened.  Together  with
liberalisation and deregulation came excessive speculation and destabilising capital flows. The
costs  of  adopting  developed  market  policy  approaches  to  developing  and  emerging  markets
proved high.  In dealing with the crisis, we rolled back selected liberalisation initiatives and de-
internationalised  the  ringgit.  The  latter  enabled  ringgit  trading  to  be  brought  back  onshore  and
protected it from the laissez faire offshore markets that were prone to such volatility and risks.
This non-internationalisation policy remained intact through the years. Yet markets found a way
to circumvent it through the non-deliverable forward market. The 2016 enforcement reaffirmed
the ringgit non-internationalisation and remains a strong prudential safeguard against excessive
volatility and external risks.
Based  on  our  experience  and  understanding  of  the  market  and  its  imperfections,  there  will
always thus be a need for rules, regulations and the regulator to see to that market imperfections
are not exploited or lead to instability, and that markets continue to be ‘fit for purpose’ or serve
their  functions.  In  emerging  markets,  the  industry  also  needs  to  come  together  to  work  for
continued development. Only then will we be able to continue progressively growing in a stable
and healthy environment.
Charting the upcoming Financial Sector Blueprint
While we see continued growth, a greater understanding of what is to come is key to maintain
such momentum. The operating landscape we are entering is expected to be equally challenging
and heightened with unknown risks.  Global growth outlook is forecasted to remain subdued, with
slow growth expected from advanced economies and this may inhibit advancement in emerging
economies.  Financial  market  conditions  are  expected  to  be  increasingly  complex  with  rapid
changes  in  technological  advancements.  The  ever-changing  geopolitical  positioning  also
continuously shifts investment priorities and risk appetite. Closer to home, while domestic growth
is  expected  to  remain  sustainable,  many  uncertainties  and  challenges  persist,  and  thus  it  is
critical to ask ourselves, how do we respond?
With the current 10-year Financial Sector Blueprint approaching the end of its horizon in 2020,
the time has come to chart our path for further development. At the Bank, we are in the midst of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
much research, analysis and formulating possible paths for our future. Based on this, we will be
looking to engage financial markets stakeholders to set the framework for market development
over the next five years. We have set a shorter horizon, acknowledging that in this era, changes
occur  rapidly  and  the  longer  horizon  is  rife  with  greater  uncertainty  than  before.  While  these
discussions are ongoing, I wish to share three main focus areas for the next plan as follows:
Firstly,  given  the  active  adoption  of  advanced  technology  in  all  aspects  of  our  lives,  the
digitisation of the financial markets is not only an obvious step forward but an inevitable one.
With evolving business practices and economic activities, there is urgency for us to adapt and
elevate  our  infrastructure  to  ensure  that  our  markets  remain  competitive  and  dynamic,  while
preserving  an  environment  of  financial  and  market  stability.  While  rules  and  regulations  will
certainly  be  there  to  ensure  orderliness,  fair  and  ethical  conduct,  risks  of  a  rapidly  changing
environment would require flexibility and agility in their design. This is both good and bad news.
The  good  news  is  that  the  design  of  rules  could  be  more  principle  based,  outlining  key
parameters  and  outcomes,  leaving  the  ‘how’  to  achieve  them  to  the  best  practices  of  the
industry.  The  bad  news  is  that  the  industry  will  have  to  be  independent  in  figuring  out  and
ensuring compliance. Consequently, there is a need for the industry to further elevate its capacity
and  capability  for  the  new  environment.  The  goal  is  not  only  the  greater  adoption  of  digital
technology  in  financial  services  which  will  undeniably  reshape  customer  behaviour,  business
models and the traditional structure of financial intermediation for the better. It is also the push for
the industry to adapt, innovate and change.
In the banking sphere, digital banking is just around the corner. The Bank will issue a discussion
paper on this by year end and perhaps, a regulatory framework by next year.  Digital  insurers
could be next. What about financial markets? I put this challenge to you ~ think about how your
industry could change with these developments, how you should adapt and change, and what
needs  to  be  done.  Tell  us  what  you  think  and  you  can  reach  out  to  the  FMC  to  share  your
thoughts and ideas. 
Another  area  of  focus  that  has  captured  wide  attention  is  that  of climate  change  and
sustainability. Many of our banks have embraced sustainability goals while our Islamic Banks
are  striving  actively  to  adopt  Value-Based  Intermediation;  banking  and  financing  based  on
Principles of Shariah that encompass not just sustainability but also the wider goals of Maqasid
Shariah and social economic well-being. Financial markets should not be left behind. We should
strive to work towards adopting sustainable and ethical practices where we can in the Malaysian
financial  markets.  Extra  support  can  be  given  to  market  activities  that  nudge  the  economy
towards sustainable development, inclusivity and social welfare. Again, the industry can think of
ways and means of how you can play a role in this.
Lastly,  having  experienced  heightened  uncertainties  in  recent  years,  we  continue  to  need  to
improve the financial market environment to ensure that markets are resilient against any
form  of  shock.  A  part  of  this  is  that  market  players  themselves  need  to  be  agile.  This  has
become a necessity in the landscape of the financial world today which has shorter visibility on
what we can expect due to the ever changing nature of the financial markets. The ability to adapt
and  react  immediately  is  a  must  to  thrive  in  future  years.  Data  science  analytics  and  greater
expertise will increase the agility of financial institutions to acclimatise to not only new demand
but also new regulations or developments. Alongside that, the development of talent with forward-
thinking capabilities would be instrumental in elevating the quality of financial services. This will
contribute to the elevation of our job market as a whole and pave the way for an industry that will
thrive.
Much  could  happen  in  the  next  five  years.  Technology,  the  environment,  the  economic  and
political  landscape  could  change  greatly.  Thus,  we  must  plan  well.  The  financial  sector  will
transform regardless but with proper planning and execution, we stand a chance to influence and
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
improve the outcomes.
Financial market development will be a journey within this framework which requires effort and
collaboration  by  both  regulators  and  financial  market  participants.  The  spirit  of  teamwork  and
cooperation  which  has  been  developed  over  the  years  has  paved  the  way  for  successful
endeavours and should be nurtured further, through the sharing of information and feedback for
the  greater  good  of  market  development.  Hence,  let  us  take  this  dinner  as  an  opportunity  to
strengthen  our  camaraderie,  so  we  can  also  better  achieve  this  common  goal  together.  With
that, I thank you and wish you an enjoyable night.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
