Central Bank of Chile 
October 2019 
Third Statistics Conference: “Measuring the Economy in the Digital Age” 
Opening remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
October 1-2, 2019 – Santiago, Chile 
 Good morning,  
 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to the Third Statistics Conference organized by the Central Bank of Chile 
(CBC), on “Measuring the Economy in the Digital Age” that brings together distinguished experts on macro 
statistics from many agencies and countries around the globe. This conference follows the one on “Statistics 
for Financial and Monetary Analysis” in 2015 and on “Measuring the Economy in a Globalized World” in 2017 
and it is becoming a landmark event for the CBC, and I hope for all participants as well. The conference we are 
opening today will address the opportunities and challenges that digitalization imposes on us in interpreting 
and analyzing increasingly dynamic economic and financial phenomena.  
 
The Digital Economy 
 
Digitization is progressively changing the way we understand our world, by creating new business models and 
processes, generating new smart products and services, with lower costs and more timely delivery, all of which 
is reshaping consumer behavior. 
 
Major questions are emerging about the ability of our conventional toolkit to measure economic activity in 
the face of such changes. Digital products, services and means of economic interaction are making the task of 
identifying  economic  phenomena  more  challenging,  especially  for  economic  and  financial  statistics. 
Traditionally, economic transactions were governed by the interaction between producers and households. 
In  the  digital  age,  households  have  become  firms,  and,  in  turn,  producers  hire  the  households’  services 
directly. Seemingly, free products and services have also emerged. All this calls for a revision of a number of 
assumptions behind GDP as a measure of the population’s well-being. 
  
What exactly is the digital economy is an issue still under discussion. According to the Organization for the 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the focus is on digital transactions, that is, those that order 
or deliver products using digital means. According to this definition, one important feature of digitization is 
the massiveness of peer-to-peer services intermediated by platforms such as Airbnb, Uber, or eBay, which 
facilitate transactions of goods and services. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), in turn, defines the digital 
economy as the use of digital information. Working groups of international experts are being convened to 
elaborate on these definitions and to propose a general framework for measuring the digital economy.  
 
The structural changes associated with digitization result in the emergence of new occupations and, at the 
same time, the decline or replacement of some jobs. Together with this, the costs of job search are falling, 
speeding up the process of matching demand and supply. Thus, impacts on productivity might be observed 
via the exchange of knowledge and the development of more efficient processes. 
 
In the financial area, digitization is redesigning the traditional payment systems, while drawing attention to 
concepts such as crypto-currencies and digital money. Disruptive technologies and the creation of these assets 
have potential benefits, the most important being those related to financial inclusion, reduced informality and 
tax evasion, and the promotion of safer and more efficient electronic payments. However, risks, concerns, 
and  costs  also  arise.  In  particular,  there  is  the  need to  develop  technical  capacity  and  adapt  information-
technology  resources  towards  cybersecurity.  With  regard  to  anonymity,  this  can  generate  problems  as  it 
discourages users from working with information under these constraints. Finally, if digital currencies are not 
Page 1 of 4 
  Central Bank of Chile 
October 2019 
universally  accepted  and  financially  exclude  the  population  less  integrated  into  the  new  technologies, 
reputational risks may also emerge. 
 
When we talk about the digital economy, we are referring to a wide range of economic activities, and the 
huge  volumes  of  data  they  generate.  Now  there  are  many  new,  more  timely  and  granular  sources  of 
information, but largely unstructured for statistical purposes. This imposes statistical agencies a new role in 
data management, which involves the application of efficient and secure practices for data storage, handling 
and dissemination. As the exploitation of administrative records and alternative sources that qualify as big 
data consolidates, it presents an opportunity to complement the indicators currently available. Similarly, we 
need  professionals  with  the  necessary  skills  to  exploit  these  great  volumes  of  information,  along  with  a 
technological infrastructure that allows the efficient storage and processing of such volumes.  
 
From a global standpoint, digitization has modified the perception of distance, reducing the costs of cross-
country coordination. This process has accelerated the fragmentation of production across borders, requiring 
additional efforts to adequately measure the value that each country contributes to the production chain of 
goods and services. This process of productive integration is known as Global Value Chains (GVC). 
 
In this context, the scope of idiosyncratic shocks has global repercussions, affecting the different economies 
involved  in  the  GVC.  As  we  noted  in  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report,  the  escalation  of  the  trade  war 
between  the  US  and  China  has  coincided  with  the  continuous  deterioration  of  various  indicators  of 
expectations and slowed down industrial prospects, investment and international trade figures.  In fact, global 
trade is growing at its slowest pace since the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-09.  
 
Our own calculations, using panel data of 28 economies, confirm that statement. Since the beginning of the 
confrontations, countries integrated into GVC would have had an additional slowdown in their exports, as well 
as weaker manufacturing prospect (PMI).  
 
On the side of prices, fragmented trade and digitization have been associated with both more synchronized 
global inflation and a stronger external impact on domestic prices. In addition, digitization allows prices to 
adjust rapidly to shocks to—or changes in—demand.  
 
The producers of statistics are an essential actor measuring this process and should make additional efforts 
to improve quality and timeliness while safeguarding the credibility of the statistics. International guidelines 
and recommendations are necessary, but not sufficient, to capture the particulars of each country. Estimation 
methods must  be  improved,  and the  statistical infrastructure must  be strengthened to develop additional 
indicators describing the new digitalization-driven environment.  
 
In Chile, in order to continue leading official statistics, we have taken a number of steps to respond to the 
digital economy challenge: 
 
  We  are  closely  involved  in  the  international  agenda  on  the  measurement  of  the  digital  economy, 
 conformed by various institutions, including the OECD, the United Nations, Eurostat and the IMF. 
 
In the short term, one of the main challenges we are dealing with is to have an estimation for e-commerce, 
following the international guidelines. We expect to achieve this using a combination of administrative 
data and upgraded surveys collected by our National Statistics Office.  
 Page 2 of 4 
  Central Bank of Chile 
October 2019 
  Regarding  administrative  data,  Chile  has  built  a  complete  and  secure  set  of  data  that  have  helped  to 
produce sound traditional statistics, placing the country at the forefront using this type of information. 
For example, this data is being used intensively as an input for National Accounts official statistics, namely, 
monthly indicator of economic activity, supply and use tables, regional GDP and international trade in 
services statistics. 
   Furthermore, since 2014 the CBC publishes the housing price index for Chile (HPI), which is built based on 
administrative data of the Internal Revenue Service, including actual transactions of dwellings. The index 
considers breakdowns by type of property (houses and apartments) and geographic areas.  
   In 2017 we published our first effort to measure research and development as a productive asset in the 
National Accounts.  
 In addition, we recently began to explore new administrative data such as electronic invoices from the 
Tax  Office,  which  will  complement  the  country’s  national  and  regional  statistics.  The  results  of  these 
projects will be included in the release of the 2018 benchmark compilation, scheduled for 2021. 
   This  year,  we  published  a  second  effort  to  evaluate  Chile’s  value  added  in  international  trade,  which 
identified the presence of heterogeneity among the various industries. This will allow improving the input-
output estimates and the description of the productive interrelations of the Chilean economy.  
 
During  this  Conference  we  will  consider  the  experiences  of  Germany  and  Portugal  in  having  a  microdata 
repository that gives access to third parties,  for analysis and research, with due  protection of confidential 
information.  In  a  similar  fashion,  we  are  developing  an  institutional  Data  Warehouse,  strengthening  the 
technological  architecture  and  infrastructure  that  will  allow  us  to  organize,  integrate  and  analyze  a  large 
amount  of  information,  enhancing  the  construction  of  indicators  and  applied  research  in  an  efficient  and 
timely manner.  
The Third Conference on Statistics 
 
Spaces for reflection and dialogue such as the one that this day-and-a-half provides, are essential to deepen 
and improve our understanding of the phenomena described. Throughout the sessions, we hope learn about 
the progress made by international organizations, other central banks, statistical offices and researchers in 
these areas.  
 
The  first  session  will  address  the  challenges  of  digitization  and  how  we  can  measure  its  impact  on  the 
economy. We will review how the international statistical community has had to adapt to new sources of 
information to develop indicators that account for the impact of this new age.  
 
Also,  during  the  first  session,  we  will  analyze  the  implications  of  digitalization  and  the  use  of  electronic 
invoicing  data  in  Chile  to  support  the  activities  of  central  banks,  mainly  in  the  fields  of  monetary  policy, 
economic analysis and financial stability. Finally, we will learn about the estimation of the contribution of the 
digital economy to the GDP of the US. 
 
The  second  session  will  address  how  the  globalization  of  production  has  imposed  demands  for  greater 
generation of statistics that provide information on interdependence between countries.  We will learn about 
the experience of Mexico and the US in the development of new national accounts statistics. 
Page 3 of 4 
   Central Bank of Chile 
October 2019 
 
In the third session, we will see how digitalization provides us with an opportunity to integrate databases of 
different  sources  and  sizes,  becoming  a  valuable  tool  for  the  design  and  development  of  economic  and 
financial indicators.  
 
Finally, in the last panel, we will try to find answers to questions like: What is the role of the digital economy 
in the decline of productivity estimates? How are we capturing the contribution of digital platforms in the 
labor  market?  And  how  would  current  statistics  and  macroeconomic  measurements  be  affected?  among 
others.  
 
I hope this Conference will help us benefit from the exchange of experiences, strengthening working networks 
and acquiring the necessary know-how to adapt to this new economy, in the quest to ensure confidence in 
statistical institutions.  
 
Let  me  finish  by  thanking  Erika  Arraño,  Felipe  Avilés  and  Simón  Guerrero  for  being  the  organizers  of  this 
Conference. I also thank Paloma Navarro, María José Reyes, and Alejandra Rosas for all their help managing 
the logistics challenges. 
 
Have a pleasant stay in Santiago and a fruitful discussion over the next day and half. 
 
Thank you 
 
 Page 4 of 4 
  