Opening remarks for the 13th edition of the Regional Seminar on Financial Stability  
Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania  
Bucharest, September 12, 2019 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning and welcome! 
This  is  the  thirteenth  edition  of  our  international  seminar  on  financial  stability 
organized by the National Bank of Romania together with the International Monetary 
Fund. We would like to express our gratitude for the IMF’s constant involvement and 
support in the successful outcome of this international seminar.  
Traditionally,  the  seminar  takes  place  at  the  NBR  training  center  in  Sinaia,  an 
enchanting place at the foot of the mountains, where the effects of autumn on  the 
vegetation can be admired. This year we have decided that the seminar is to be held 
in  Bucharest,  because  these  days  Bucharest  is  the  host  of  the  International  George 
Enescu Music Festival, which you will attend tonight.  
We are happy to welcome representatives from central banks in the region, from our 
Dutch-Belgian IMF Constituency, as well as academia and think tanks.   
Last year’s edition was about the lessons we drew after the global financial crisis from 
a  macroprudential  perspective,  but  throughout  time,  various  topics  have  been 
addressed, as well, like: 
-  resolution and financial intermediation;  
-  macrostability and systemic risks;  
-  macroprudential instruments and policy framework. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
 1 
The seminar makes every effort to put forward challenging topics and I hope this year’s 
edition is no exception. Over the next two days, we will cover subjects in the area of 
financial inclusion, Small and Medium Enterprises financing, climate-related risks and 
their implications for financial stability. These topics are relatively new. They were not 
on  the  agenda  of  macroprudential  policymakers  a  decade  ago.  Nowadays,  these 
subjects,  along  with  fintech,  aging  or  inequality  are  high  on  the  agenda  of  policy 
discussions,  not  only  in  the  financial  stability  fora,  but  also  in  monetary  policy 
meetings. Therefore, we consider it worthwhile to dwell more on some of these topics 
during the seminar. 
I am confident the discussions will be very interesting, just by looking at the diversity 
of  panelists:  central  bankers,  representatives  of  the  Bank  for 
International 
Settlements,  the  European  Commission,  Bruegel  or  the  Council  for  Economic  and 
Policy Research. Not to mention our partners from the International Monetary Fund 
who will also provide their perspective. 
Lower  financial  inclusion  is  an  increasing  concern  across  countries,  especially  in 
emerging economies. The topic is linked with another concern represented by income 
inequality.  The  financial  system  can  play  an  important  role  in  amplifying  or  cutting 
down both. However, macroprudential authorities might not be among the best-suited 
institutions to deal with such phenomena. The evidence we have so far shows that, in 
the  short  term,  macroprudential  policies  may  reduce  financial  inclusion  when 
implementing credit constraints, especially for borrowers that are more vulnerable to 
possible  income  or  interest  rate  shocks  (generally,  lower-income  individuals). 
Macroprudential instruments like debt service-to-income (DSTI) or loan-to-value (LTV) 
are  very  powerful  in  preserving  financial  stability,  but  the  access  to  credit  for 
households from the lower income percentile might be affected.  
 2 
However,  in  the  long  run,  these  macroprudential  policies  might  have  a  positive 
contribution  to  preserving  the  wealth  of  borrowers,  underpinning  also  financial 
inclusion. This is also the Romanian experience.  
When  we  entered  the  European  Union  in  2007,  we  had  to  get  rid  of  all  our 
macroprudential measures like LTV (loan-to-value) or DSTI (debt-service-to-income), 
because at that time such instruments were considered to hinder the free movements 
of capital. We reintroduced these measures in 2009, after the outbreak of the crisis. 
The bulk of non-performing loans we witnessed came exactly from exposures dating 
back to the time when the above-mentioned measures had been lifted (2007-2008) 
and  the  most  affected  borrowers  were  from  lower-income  buckets.  For  these 
individuals,  higher  access  to  finance  and  better  financial  inclusion  in  the  short  run 
implied  over  the  medium  and  long  term  difficulties  in  repaying  debts  and,  in  many 
cases, negative equity for their balance sheets. Our lesson is that improving financial 
inclusion  should  take  place  in  a  sustainable  manner.  Macroprudential  instruments 
might hurt this inclusion in the short term, but they will support it in the medium and 
long run. Our active involvement in raising the degree of financial education of the 
population is crucial for reaching the same objective. I am very interested to hear your 
views and experience on this matter. The first day of our seminar is dedicated to this 
topic. 
 The  second  day  of  the  seminar  targets  mainly  the  corporate  sector.  The  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises’ access to finance is also important for financial stability. Small 
and  Medium  Enterprises  constitute  the  overwhelming  majority  (99  percent)  of 
businesses  at  European  level,  with  important  contributions  both  in  terms  of  value 
added  generated  by  non-financial  corporations  (57  percent)  and  employment  (67 
percent). Increasing access to finance in this sector is among the EU priorities. It is also 
 3 
true that this portfolio accounted for the highest post-crisis NPL ratio in the European 
Union. At its peak, the average NPL ratio for Small and Medium Enterprises reached 
around  20  percent  at  European  Union  level.  In  Romania,  the  ratio  was  35  percent, 
while  the  NPL  ratio  for  microenterprises  accounted  for  53  percent.  Therefore,  the 
same lesson learnt from the household sector also applies here: the Small and Medium 
Enterpises’ financial inclusion should unfold in a sustainable way. 
 On the other hand, the experience with macroprudential instruments for companies is 
extremely 
limited  at  the  European 
level.  For  example,  France  has  recently 
implemented a measure focusing on highly indebted firms, but it applies only to large 
companies. Therefore, I think that deepening this area of research is very useful for 
macroprudential  policymakers.  In  Romania  we  have  also  tried  to  come  up  with 
solutions that might improve Small and Medium Enterprises’ financial inclusion. Our 
macroprudential authority – the National Committee for Macroprudential Oversight, 
comprising representatives from the central bank, the Ministry of Public Finance, and 
the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  –  adopted  last  year  a  recommendation  to  the 
Government, seeking to improve financial discipline in the economy and the financial 
soundness of firms. I strongly believe that addressing these structural vulnerabilities in 
the  corporate  sector  will  significantly  increase  the  number  of  bankable  firms  and 
enhance the financial inclusion of Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 Last, but not least, the climate-related topics have become more and more prominent 
worldwide. The financial system should not ignore the effects of climate risks. Central 
banks and supervisory authorities have joined the scene. There is a significant interest 
at EU level in the role of sustainable finance, a High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable 
Finance  being  established  by  the  Union.  The  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial 
 4 
System,  that  brings  together  34  members,  out  of  which  8  are  central  banks  and 
supervisory authorities,  highlighted the role of climate risks as a source of financial 
vulnerabilities. Not only the increased frequency and severity of extreme weather can 
translate  into  economic  and  financial  losses  for  the  real  economy  and  the  financial 
system, but consequences can also arise from transitioning to a low-carbon economy. 
Governments’ climate policy, new technologies and consumer preferences will be the 
main drivers influencing the developments in carbon-intensive sectors. Having in mind 
the  important  ramifications,  a  coherent  policy  mix  is  needed  in  order  to  ensure  a 
smooth transition to low-carbon economies and to preserve financial stability. This is 
a new challenge that the corporate sector should face as well.  
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
From the beginning, the aim of this seminar was to bring together experts from the 
region to discuss current financial stability challenges and to exchange knowledge in 
dealing  with  such  challenges.  A  constant,  over  the  past  three  years,  is  the  special 
session dedicated to young professionals’ research at the central banks.  
Along with the IMF’s involvement, we intend to continue and build on the tradition of 
this international seminar, bringing together experienced central bankers both from 
advanced,  as  well  as  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  for  an  open  and 
enriching exchange of views on relevant financial stability issues. 
On  this  note,  allow  me  to  stop  here  and  wish  every  success  to  the  works  of  this 
seminar.   
Thank you!  
 5 
