Burkhard  Balz:  Fintech  and  bigtech  firms  and  central  banks  –
conflicting interests or a common mission?
Speech Mr Burkhard Balz, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
German Embassy, Singapore, 11 November 2019.
*   *   *
1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Your Excellency Ambassador Dr Sante,
I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to you here today at the German Embassy. It was
in  1965  that  the  German  Embassy  in  Singapore  was  opened.  However,  German-Singapore
relations extend much further back into the past. 
As early as 1856, seven German merchants came together and founded the Teutonia Club on
North Bridge Road, not even a 30-minute walk from here. Back then, people would meet up there
to sing German songs together. We can quite happily do that today, too – perhaps a little later on
in the evening – but my speech, in any case, focuses on the future of payments in Germany and
Singapore.
Discussing the topic of payments has never been more exciting than it is now. In recent years,
emphasis  has  increasingly  been  put  on  payments  again  as  they  are  the  “gateway”  to  stable
customer relations for the banking industry. 
We are witnessing intense competition but also cooperation between banks, bigtech firms and
fintech players. At the same time, there is a wealth of innovations and new technologies  that
could be applied in payments. 
From blockchain through real-time payments to using artificial intelligence, we are experiencing a
large number of changes that have altered the way we pay – and will continue to do so.
2 Fintech landscape in Germany
These developments have an impact on the market structure by lowering the traditionally high
market entry barriers for new competitors. At the back end, for example, cloud computing can
help  to  quickly  and  flexibly  build  up  and  reduce  computing  capacity  with  low  fixed  costs,  and
without taking the IT system landscape that has evolved over time into consideration at all. 
This  landscape  is  viewed  increasingly  as  a  “burden”  and  less  and  less  as  a  strategic  asset,
particularly by established players, due to its complexities. At the front end, smartphones ensure
that companies are able to make their solutions available to a large number of users in a short
space of time. 
Costs  could  be  reduced  here,  too,  as  there  is  no  need  to  maintain  a  cost-intensive  branch
network. Moreover, these solutions are in keeping with the new digital age in terms of customer
convenience. 
It is often young companies that use these technologies intensively. In the financial sector, we
call these innovative start-ups fintech firms. There are now several hundred of them in Germany.
After  initially  focusing  on  the  front  end  and  the  interface  between  customer  and  bank,  their
provision  of  services  has  become  broader  in  the  meantime.  There  are  now  also  fintech
companies which focus their attention on business-to-business operations.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Germany we sometimes forget that success and failure are two sides of the same coin. It is
therefore  not  surprising  that  some  new  companies  have  already  ceased  their  business
activities. 
One such example is the person-to-person (P2P) payments market. This entails, for instance,
being able to send a payment quickly and easily to your email address or mobile phone number
using my smartphone. In Germany, some fintech providers in this area had to withdraw from the
market when banks and credit institutions took off their gloves and created their own range of
services.  Nevertheless,  something  good  came  about  from  this:  the  companies  ensured  that
banks  became  even  more  customer  oriented,  and  now  banks’  P2P  services  are  being  used
intensively. 
The current consolidation period is part of the process of the market maturing. This “coming of
age” of the market is evident when looking at investments and the way in which they are made. A
surge in investments was seen in Germany in the first half of the year. In the first quarter alone,
almost  €700  million  was  invested  in  start-ups  in  the  financial  sector.  Compared  with  the  final
quarter of 2018, this constituted an increase of almost 80% and a new quarterly record.  These
investments are, however, no longer being broadly diversified; instead they focus on a few large
rounds of financing.
Another  sign  of  the  maturity  of  the  market  is  the  increasing  number  of  cooperative  ventures
between  fintech  companies  and  existing  players.  The  cooperation  between  fintech  firms  and
banks offers both parties major advantages: thanks to the new companies, banks are able to
present themselves in a more agile and digital way.
“Regtech”  players  can,  for  instance,  help  credit  institutions  and  other  financial  market  agents
make  their  regulatory  reporting  systems  more  efficient  by  using  automation  potential  for
regulatory issues. Moreover, innovative solutions based on artificial intelligence are already being
implemented to detect cases of fraud and in the automation of processes. There are also high
hopes that artificial intelligence can help use credit institutions’ “wealth of data” more effectively –
that is, in a way that guarantees complete data sovereignty.
Fintech players can, in turn, benefit from expertise and from banks’ customer base. Given that
finances are a matter of trust, it can be difficult for new players to establish themselves in the
market on their own.
There are also interesting solutions for us as a regulator: supervisory technology firms – suptech
firms  for  short  –  can  support  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  in  the  digitalisation  of
supervision and oversight. Tremendous potential is waiting to be harnessed here, particularly in
2
data collection and analysis.
3 Bigtech players: partners or competitors?
1
As  you  see,  there  are  many  opportunities  to  create  innovative  products  for  financial  service
providers  and  end  customers. And  it  probably  has  never  been  as  important  as  it  is  today  for
traditional players to appear flexible in the financial industry, considering that for some time now,
new  companies  have  been  surging  their  way  into  the  payments  business.  With  their  large
customer base, technological expertise and vast financial resources, bigtech firms are serious
competitors for banks.
Some still say that fintech companies will enter the financial market soon. But the reality is that
they are already there. For example, I can now pay in shops, do online shopping and in some
cases even take out loans using bigtech solutions. PayPal already offers a solution with which
online purchases can be paid for at a later date thanks to a loan from PayPal. Apple is the first of
these companies to have introduced their own credit card (even though it is still in cooperation
with a bank).
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In doing so, these firms are also using another of their advantages: their global reach and huge
customer base. We admit that being able to use familiar procedures all over the world gives us a
certain sense of security. Globally operating brands, such as ApplePay, GooglePay and PayPal,
are one step ahead here.
But what risks arise from the increasing importance of bigtech players in the world of payments?
First, bigtech companies are usually platforms that strive to reach large closed ecosystems. This
becomes  especially  clear  if  you  look  at  the  range  of  the  services  offered  by  Chinese  bigtech
firms. You can pay in shops and simultaneously do online shopping and book your next trip using
WeChat and Alipay.
I don’t want to be misunderstood here: models like these are not a bad thing per se, as they are
convenient and useful from a customer perspective. Otherwise, they wouldn’t be so successful.
Yet  once  customers  become  “trapped”  in  one  of  these  ecosystems,  they  will  be  reluctant  to
change to a different ecosystem.
Everyone who has tried to switch from an Apple device to an Android knows what  I’m talking
about.  Thus,  the  risk  of  a  monopoly  developing  increases,  with  a  small  number  of  platforms
determining the content and offers that their users get to see.
Second, customers are often given the impression that the services provided don’t cost them
anything. And yet customers pay with the raw material that is most important to bigtech firms:
data. And if you cover as many areas as the large technology companies do, then you can obtain
large quantities of high-quality data. This, in turn, means that individually tailored products can be
offered to the consumer. At first glance this seems like a good thing, but there is the risk that
consumers  will  lose  sight  of  other  alternatives  and  the  appeal  of  other  fee-based  business
models will then be reduced considerably.
Third, by dominating the customer interface, there is a risk that banks will lose contact with end
customers and become interchangeable payment settlement providers in the background. Here,
I can already see issues of financial stability and competition being affected, for the danger exists
that the established business models of existing market participants will come under pressure as
a  result.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  here  that  it’s  not  our  job  to  simply  cement  the  existing
structures; we are interested in structures that ensure efficient and secure payments. And, for
me, this also includes banks.
They therefore need to keep their strengths in mind: their contact with customers and the trust
that has been built up between them. At the same time, a partnership with fintech players can
help overcome the challenges of digitalisation and fulfil customers’ needs in a targeted manner.
However, cooperative ventures with one another can be a further promising approach.
This cooperation between banks is becoming increasingly important and – if I may say so at this
point  –  this  must  be  enabled  by  competition  law.  Thus,  we  expressly  welcome  the  current
initiative to create a European solution, since credit institutions in Europe can only survive in the
market with their payment services if they, the European banking community, provide customers
with their own attractive solution. And the  European market as a whole is attractive to banks:
after all, it has one and a half times as many inhabitants as the United States.
Another  new  aspect  is  that  bigtech  players  have  been  extending  their  provision  of  services
beyond pure payment services for some time now. As central banks, we also have to face the
competition: with Libra, Facebook plans to introduce a product into the market that could call our
role into question.
We intentionally do not refer to Libra as a currency since in Germany, as in the euro area, the
only currency in the meaning of legal tender is the euro. By contrast, as I understand it, Libra is a
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
“stable coin” which is pegged to a currency basket and backed by suitable collateral. It therefore
requires  stable  state  monetary  systems.  At  the  moment,  however,  the  Facebook  token  still
raises too many questions that are yet to be answered. What exactly will the technology be like?
What rights and obligations do users and members have? How can money laundering and the
financing of terrorism be tackled effectively? And that is only a small selection from my list of
questions.
4 Consequences for central banks and regulators
As central banks, we are fundamentally open to innovation. And that is particularly true here in
Asia, perhaps even more so than in Europe with its, in some respects, slightly more conservative
set-up.  But  we  must  also  ensure  that  the  security  and  efficiency  of  payments  continue  to  be
guaranteed. In the case of Libra, it is therefore essential that these unanswered questions are
clarified and legal certainty is established. It might also be necessary to adjust the existing legal
framework. One thing is clear to me: a means of payment that wants to be used globally, can be
used  by  billions  of  people  and  will  be  integrated  into  a  complex  overall  system  with  many
participants must comply with high – very high – regulatory standards. This isn’t an attempt to nip
such phenomena in the bud; it is quite simply a necessity.
After all, we still follow the principle: “same business, same risk, comparable regulation”. This
ensures  that  no  company  is  given  preferential  treatment  or  is  disadvantaged,  neither  fintech
player, nor bigtech firm nor bank.
At the same time, it must be ensured that there is fair competition between all parties. In order to
achieve this goal, we have also made it possible for third parties, including fintech firms, to gain
access to account data with the introduction of PSD2. We hope that competition will intensify as
a result and payments will ultimately become even more efficient.
The challenge is developing regulation for all providers, from which banks, fintech players and,
above all, customers benefit. In this context, dialogue plays a major role, and evenings like tonight
can help us to start talking with one another. After all, unlike our predecessors in the Teutonia
Club 150 years ago, we don’t cut ourselves off and sing German folk songs; instead we want to
learn and benefit from one another. And I am certain that here in Singapore, one of the world’s
leading fintech hotspots, here is much to see that will enable us to better understand and learn.
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish you a pleasant evening with many interesting conversations.
1
2
www.handelsblatt.com/finanzen/banken-versicherungen/start-up-branche-wenige-glaenzen-viele-scheitern-bei-
fintechs-rollt-die-pleitewelle/24505994.html
BIS: FSI Insights “Innovative technology in financial supervision (suptech) – the experience of early users”.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
