ACRI
Association of Italian Savings Banks
2019 World Savings Day
Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 31 October 2019
The economic outlook
The  trade  tensions,  the  slowdown  in  China  and  the  persistent  uncertainty 
concerning  the  United  Kingdom’s  withdrawal  from  the  European  Union  have 
continued  to  affect  the  global  economy.  International  trade,  which  has  been 
declining  since  last  autumn,  seems  to  have  contracted  in  the  second  quarter  as 
well; for the year as a whole, it is expected to increase but at a rate of less than 1 
per cent, the lowest since 2009.
In  recent  weeks,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  revised  downwards  its 
growth  forecast  for  2019  and  2020  for  nearly  every  country.  Going  forward, 
global demand may benefit from the stimulus measures implemented in the major 
economies, but the risks remain significant and are aggravated by the high level of 
public and private sector indebtedness in many countries. 
In the euro area, the sharp drop in industrial activity, especially in Germany, 
has thus far been partially offset by the performance of the service sector. However, 
this sector has also started to show signs of weakness. Among the main economies, 
GDP decreased in Germany while it continued to grow in France and Spain in the 
second quarter. If the contraction in the German economy persists, it will inevitably 
spread to other countries. 
In Italy, economic activity seems to have remained substantially unchanged 
during  the  summer,  after  having  grown  just  slightly  in  the  second  quarter.  The 
manufacturing  sector  has  suffered  heavily  from  the  close  production  and  trade 
ties with Germany, as well as from the negative effects stemming from the global 
context; the sector’s weakness seems to have been offset by a slight expansion in 
services and construction.
In  the  surveys  carried  out  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  between  September  and 
October,  firms  expressed  less  unfavourable  opinions  on  the  economic  situation 
and on the trend in demand for their own products in comparison with the opinions 
expressed at the start of the year. The higher planned investment likely also reflects 
the reintroduction of tax incentives in April; instead, firms that sell in Germany 
further downsized their expenditure plans. 
Despite the contraction in world trade, exports continued to grow in the second 
quarter; Italy’s current account surplus has helped to further reduce its net foreign 
debtor position, which is now close to balance. The new tariffs applicable to the 
European  Union,  announced  by  the  United  States  administration,  will  affect  a 
limited share of Italian exports to the US but the indirect effects could be significant.
Thanks  to  the  decline  in  uncertainty  surrounding  Italy’s  economic  policy 
stance,  lessened  tensions  with  the  European  institutions  and  greater  monetary 
accommodation, yields on Italian government securities have declined significantly, 
falling to historically low levels; yields on ten-year bonds now stand at around 1 per 
cent. The spread with the corresponding German bonds has narrowed, falling from 
the peak of almost 290 basis points recorded at the end of May to approximately 130 
basis points this week (Figure 1). However, it remains higher than the spread of other 
euro-area countries such as Spain and Portugal. For Italy, the reduction in the spread 
was in part due to the fall in the debt redenomination risk premium, which came to 
almost 30 basis points, nearing the level recorded at the start of 2018.
Accommodative  financial  conditions  attenuate  the  contractionary  effects  that 
stem from the global situation; for our economy, this is an opportunity that should 
not be missed. Looking forward, the average debt burden is expected to remain on a 
downward path, reducing the effort needed to reach a primary surplus that is capable 
of ensuring balanced public accounts. The decline in interest rates on government 
securities has already significantly lowered the cost of wholesale bank funding and 
of corporate bond issues. Interest rates on bank loans to firms and households also 
fell  slightly,  though  they  ran  the  risk  of  increasing  significantly  had  tensions  not 
abated on the government securities market over the course of the year.
The fiscal stance tries to strike a difficult balance between ensuring sustainable 
public  finances  and  supporting  the  economy. To  counter  the  cyclical  slowdown 
effectively,  the  choice  of  measures  must  be  based  on  their  effect  on  aggregate 
demand;  in  addition,  guaranteeing  the  attainment  of  the  balances  envisioned  is 
essential  to  avoid  a  decline  in  private  sector  confidence.  In  order  to  reduce  the 
debt-to-GDP ratio decisively and durably, we must improve the growth outlook 
through  concrete  initiatives  that  improve  the  environment  in  which  economic 
activity takes place. Removing uncertainty on the current and future situation of 
4
the public finances is essential to protecting savings, which can only be amassed 
and increased if the economy grows at sufficiently high rates along a stable and 
sustainable path.
Monetary policy and savings
Inflation in the euro area remains at levels that are still too low, and these 
low  levels  are  pushing  down  short-term  inflation  expectations. The  risk  of  a 
de-anchoring of medium- to long-term expectations has emerged as they have 
moved  further  away  from  the  price  stability  aim  (Figure  2).  The  inflation 
expectations at the five-year horizon of the participants in the ECB’s Survey of 
Professional Forecasters have decreased by about 0.2 percentage points since 
the start of the year, to 1.6 per cent. Those implied by the prices of inflation-
linked  financial  assets,  which  also  incorporate  a  risk  premium,  fell  by  0.4 
percentage points over the five-year, five years forward horizon, to 1.2 per cent. 
Low  inflation  and  the  ongoing  economic  slowdown  must  be  countered 
decisively,  lest  they  translate  into  a  further,  progressive  reduction  in  inflation 
expectations or into a re-emergence of the threat of deflation. The ECB Governing 
Council  took  timely,  appropriate  and  proportionate  action  to  respond  to  the 
cyclical downturn and the worsening inflation outlook by adopting a very broad 
set of expansionary measures. It decided to restart, effective tomorrow, net asset 
purchases at a monthly pace of €20 billion (they had reached €80 billion per month 
between April 2016 and March 2017); to reduce by 10 basis points, to -0.5 per 
cent, the interest rates on banks’ deposits with the Eurosystem; and to lower the 
cost and extend the maturity of targeted longer-term refinancing operations.
There was unanimous agreement within the Council on the need for action, 
and  broad  consensus  on  the  package  of  measures  as  a  whole,  although  there 
were  differing  views  on  the  individual  measures.  While  the  effects  of  some  of 
them  are  uncertain,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  their  overall  effectiveness.  The 
monetary policy stance will therefore remain resolutely expansionary for as a long 
as necessary to support aggregate demand and, through this, ensure price stability. 
Our analyses suggest that the ECB’s asset purchase programme is likely the 
most effective tool under the current conditions. The effects of the purchases are 
transmitted through various channels: they have a direct impact on the yields of 
5
the securities being purchased; they help to improve credit supply conditions; and 
they strengthen the monetary stimulus to the entire economy through wealth and 
portfolio-rebalancing effects.
The  consequences  of  a  reduction  in  the  key  interest  rates  to  even  more 
negative levels – the true ‘non-standard’ instrument among those that have been 
introduced thus far, given that open market operations have always been in the 
toolbox  of  central  banks  –  should  be  assessed  more  carefully.  The  evidence 
suggests  that  reductions  in  the  key  interest  rates  have  so  far  had  significant 
expansionary  effects.  Going  forward,  however,  the  risks  of  undesirable  side 
effects may grow the longer the key interest rates remain at negative levels and, 
especially, the lower they fall.
There  is  the  possibility  that  banks’  balance  sheets  will  be  penalized  by  a 
reduction in net interest income, with repercussions on their ability to grant loans, 
especially  to  households  and  small  firms,  and  on  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. To counter this risk, we have accompanied the latest reduction in interest 
rates with the decision to remunerate part of banks’ excess liquidity holdings with 
the Eurosystem at zero per cent as opposed to a negative rate. In addition, banks’ 
balance  sheets  benefit  from  the  very  favourable  conditions  (including  negative 
interest rates) applied to loans granted by the Eurosystem.
It has been argued that, as the whole term structure of interest rates remains at 
very low if not negative levels, there could be an incentive for households, firms 
and investors to take on excessive risks, fuelling possible misalignments between 
the  prices  of  financial  and  real  assets  and  their  fundamental  economic  value. 
There are currently no signs of a generalized widening in euro-area imbalances. 
The  indicators  continue  to  suggest  that  the  weak  phase  of  the  economy  is  not 
transitory and they do not signal imminent financial risks. The Governing Council 
is constantly monitoring these developments.
In  the  years  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  Italian  households  were 
cautious  in  their  selection  of  portfolio  investments.  The  share  of  deposits  in 
their  total  financial  assets  has  continued  to  grow,  reaching  almost  30  per  cent 
in  June,  also  as  a  consequence  of  the  reduction  in  the  yields  on  other  financial 
instruments  (Figure  3).  In  addition,  households  have  significantly  reduced  their 
direct investments in bonds, especially government and bank bonds, bringing them 
to  3.3  and  1.5  per  cent  of  their  total  investments,  down  by  3  and  6  percentage 
6
points respectively compared with 2007. Purchases of asset management products 
increased  (especially  those  of  insurance  products):  their  share  in  total  financial 
assets  surpassed  31  per  cent  in  June,  some  11  percentage  points  higher  than  in 
2007. Overall, portfolio diversification has increased.
Within this context, the activities geared at protecting savers, in which the 
Bank of Italy, Consob and IVASS each play a part, are especially important. We 
carry out our role on various fronts. On the one hand, we have strengthened our 
supervision of bank products, most recently through measures on the handling of 
complaints, on product oversight and governance, and on the rights of payment 
service users. On the other hand, we are continuing to expand upon our financial 
education  initiatives  for  young  people  and  adults,  including  in  relation  to  the 
effects  of  digital  technology  on  payment  instruments:  we  are  completing  the 
update  of  the  informational  material  for  students;  we  will  soon  launch  a  new 
financial education website; and we are working very closely with the national 
financial education committee.
The main way to protect savers is through growth. This objective is currently 
being pursued by maintaining very accommodative monetary conditions. In the 
long  run,  the  return  on  savings  necessarily  depends  on  the  economic  outlook. 
The unsatisfactory level of market yields is the consequence of the insufficient 
level  of  investment  with  respect  to  the  supply  of  savings;  more  generally,  it 
is  the  result  of  the  weakness  in  demand  caused  by  negative  long-term  trends, 
such  as  demographic  trends,  and  by  cyclical  trends,  such  as  the  recent  sharp 
increase in uncertainty. If the latter is not tempered, it could further increase the 
propensity to save for precautionary purposes, leading to a downward spiral in 
economic activity that would lower, rather than increase, aggregate savings, as 
convincingly  maintained  by  Ragnar  Frisch  and  John  Maynard  Keynes  during 
the Great Depression. Policies designed to stabilize the economy, which extend 
beyond monetary policies, serve to combat this risk by stimulating investment 
and consumption.
There would be less need to maintain our monetary policy measures for an 
extended period of time − thereby also mitigating the risk of negative side effects −  
if,  in  those  countries  where  the  public  finances  permit,  fiscal  policies  were  to 
contribute  incisively  to  strengthening  aggregate  demand  and  if  Europe’s  focus 
were placed on reforming the structure and functioning of the economy so as to 
increase the growth potential, about which monetary policy can do little.
7
Banks
In Italy the upturn in economic activity recorded in recent years, even if rather 
modest, helped to improve the quality of banks’ assets, an improvement that has 
continued in recent months despite the stall in growth. In the first half of this year, 
the ratio of NPLs net of loan loss provisions to total outstanding loans fell from 
4.3 to 4.0 per cent for the banking system as a whole; it was 9.8 per cent at the end 
of 2015. According to the reduction plans submitted by both significant and less 
significant banks, this ratio should decrease further, to around 3 per cent by the end 
of 2021 (Figure 4). 
Going forward, however, NPLs dynamics could be affected by a protraction of the 
current phase of cyclical weakness. Efforts to strengthen balance sheets must therefore 
continue in an orderly but resolute fashion, especially by smaller banks, whose NPL 
ratios are higher and coverage ratios lower than those of the significant banking groups. 
The  improvement  in  the  quality  of  banks’  assets  was  facilitated  by  the 
development  of  the  market  for  NPLs:  in  the  three  years  2016-18,  NPL  disposals 
amounted to more than €120 billion, gross of provisions; so far this year they came 
to around €20 billion. This was due not just to the fact that banks can access the state 
guarantee scheme (GACS) for securitized bad loans, which was renewed in March of 
this year, but was also spurred by the early results of the reforms undertaken to reduce 
the length of credit recovery proceedings, which deters investors and affects disposal 
prices. The expected time needed to sell foreclosed property decreased from more 
than three years to around two years. The expected length of time needed to complete 
all preparatory procedures also declined, albeit by only three months, to just over two 
years. There is still room for further reductions, which can be accomplished in part 
by following the best organizational practices promoted by the High Council for the 
Judiciary, whose effects can already be seen in some areas of the country. 
Progress  can  also  be  achieved  by  turning  more  frequently  to  corporate 
restructuring and turnaround specialists (e.g. turnaround funds). This could lead 
to  some  ‘unlikely-to-pay’  loans  returning  to  performing  status,  benefiting  both 
banks’ balance sheets and the economy.
The  credit  recovery  sector  has  grown  significantly  in  recent  years.  This 
development has contributed to the reduction in NPLs in banks’ balance sheets, 
but it is not free of problems. Inefficient recovery performance can erode value, 
8
reintroduce risks to banks’ balance sheets and, in extreme cases, have repercussions 
on the guarantee provided by the State through the GACS. The Bank of Italy remains 
highly vigilant in supervising the intermediaries for which it is responsible.
Banks’  profitability  was  helped  by  low  funding  costs  and  the  drop  in  loan 
loss provisions; excluding extraordinary items, in the first six months of 2019 the 
return  on  equity  was  about  7  per  cent  on  an  annual  basis.  Net  interest  income 
remains under pressure, also due to increased competition in the market for loans 
to high-quality customers. Banks, especially small ones, must continue to diversify 
their  sources  of  revenue  and  to  contain  their  costs;  less  significant  banks  have 
reduced their operating expenses by just under 1 per cent in the first half of this 
year, compared with a drop of almost 4 per cent for the significant banking groups.
Better profitability is critical for banks, and not just Italian ones, to enable them 
to meet the challenges posed by competitive pressures, by prudential regulation, by 
the new European crisis management framework, and by technological innovation 
in the financial sector. This is essential for small and medium-sized banks which 
are still suffering from the effects of the deep and protracted economic recession, 
especially  in  the  South  of  Italy.  Among  other  things,  these  banks  face  greater 
difficulties in accessing the market for debt and equity capital. 
The heterogeneity of financial intermediaries in terms of firm size, business 
models and corporate form can play an important role in the proper functioning 
of the system. However, it must be compatible with the safety and soundness of 
banks, which is essential for them to remain in the market. From this standpoint, 
achieving various forms of integration could help significantly by unlocking the 
benefits associated with a larger operating scale, a wider range of products, and the 
adoption of innovative technologies. 
With the launch this year of two new cooperative banking groups (Iccrea and 
Cassa Centrale Banca), this sector can continue to support local economies from a 
much sounder position. As a result of the reform, the structure of the Italian banking 
system has undergone extensive change, moving towards less fragmentation. As 
of last June, the 12 significant groups (which include both cooperative banking 
groups) held almost 80 per cent of the system’s total assets.
Many of the about 90 less significant banks, with the exception of the Raiffeisen 
banks for which an institutional protection scheme is to be established, operate on a 
9
very small scale, which also impacts their ability to adapt their business models to 
technological change: more than half of them report assets of less than €1.5 billion 
and over one third of less than €1 billion. Effective integration must be pursued in 
this sector as well, especially among the smaller popolari banks, which suffer from 
the typical governance problems that stem from the cooperative banking model. 
For these popolari banks, the measures and projects we have been suggesting for 
some time for their strengthening need to be implemented quickly.
 To make the fullest possible use of the expansionary potential of the monetary 
policy measures adopted by the ECB Governing Council, the other policies also 
have to move in the same direction. Fiscal policies that support economic activity 
in the euro area can deliver a faster return to price stability. To ensure sustained 
higher growth, reforms are needed to remove any obstacles to development, foster 
innovation and help modernize the productive system. Acting in isolation, monetary 
policy can do nothing but continue along the path of ‘non-standard’ measures. This 
increases the risk of adverse side effects, which, in turn, need to be kept under 
control using instruments of an increasingly administrative nature. 
European economic and monetary union is still incomplete. As the President 
of the ECB recalled last Monday, ‘we need a euro area fiscal capacity of adequate 
size  and  design:  large  enough  to  stabilize  the  monetary  union’.  In  the  current 
circumstances, the difficulties arising from the absence of this fiscal capacity are 
manifest.  Such  difficulties  are  not  confined  to  the  impossibility  of  using  fiscal 
policy to support aggregate demand, but also include the resulting obstacles to the 
conduct of monetary policy and transmission of the related stimulus measures: the 
euro area feels the consequences of the lack of a common safe financial asset that 
plays the same role as the sovereign debt securities of other major economies. 
Yet, Member States could coordinate their policies as they did at the height 
of the global financial crisis. We should not now rule out this possibility and we 
should assess in good time, for the purposes of prevention, the scale of the risk of 
a return to an emergency scenario. Boosting the European economy’s capacity for 
growth also requires us to focus our efforts on the areas that are the most important 
today, such as new digital technologies and the protection of the environment. This 
can be done by drawing up a common public investment programme that is also 
aimed at improving and redeveloping major infrastructure − energy, transport, and 
10
urban services − to enhance service quality, reduce their environmental impact and 
unleash private investment which, in the absence of any clear strategic direction, 
today struggles to materialize. This type of programme could help to launch R&D 
projects and would thus have long-term effects on the EU’s productivity and growth 
potential. 
In the climate of mistrust that has emerged in recent years, also following the 
damage caused by the financial and sovereign debt crises, there is less inclination 
to consider coordinating national fiscal policies. While waiting for the realization 
to  take  hold  that  action  is  needed  at  European  level,  Italy  must  make  the  most 
of the favourable financial conditions to outline clearly the necessary process of 
change and initiate it decisively. This process will involve the economy’s productive 
sectors, the government sector, and the definition of and compliance with the rules. 
It will require a committed effort to develop the parts of the country that are lagging 
behind and harness the available resources, especially in terms of human capital. 
Changing the composition of the government budget to set aside more resources 
for tangible and intangible investments can stimulate economic activity beyond the 
short term.
However, collective action is required to raise the growth potential: economic 
policy must create an adequate framework, providing incentives and removing any 
brakes on productive activities; firms and banks must be prepared to invest in order 
to seize the opportunities offered by the market and by technology; and everyone 
must contribute to this change by looking to acquire new and better skills. Making 
the best use of savings, achieving sustainable economic and social development, 
protecting  the  environment  and  creating  jobs  all  depend  on  the  success  of  this 
undertaking.
11
FIGURES
Yield spreads between 10-year government bonds
(daily data; basis points)
Figure 1
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
Italy - Germany
Italy - Spain
Italy - Portugal
Jan.-18
Apr.-18
July-18
Oct.-18
Jan.-19
Apr.-19
July-19
Oct.-19
Source: Bank of Italy, based on Bloomberg data.
Indicator of downside de-anchoring of euro-area 
inflation expectations (1)
(daily data; per cent)
Figure 2
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Source: Bank of Italy, Economic Bulletin, 4, 2019 (October 2019).
(1) An increase signals an intensification of the link between sharp drops in short-term and in long-term 
inflation expectations.
Composition of Italian households’ financial portfolio (1)
Figure 3
December 200 7
8.2% 
June 201 9
7.6% 
23.5% 
6.7% 
18.7% 
27.4% 
2.2% 
21.3% 
20.0% 
29.2% 
3.7% 
31.4% 
Deposits 
Currency 
  Managed assets 
   Shares and other equity 
Debt securities  Other
Source: Bank of Italy.
(1)  ‘Managed  assets’  comprise  investment  funds,  life  insurance  reserves  and  pension  funds  (other  than 
severance pay); ‘other’ comprises trade and other payables, derivatives and stock options, severance pay, 
and any other insurance components not included under managed assets.
Ratio of non-performing loans to total loans (1)
(per cent)
Figure 4
Gross
Net
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  June-19  2021
Source: Bank of Italy.
(1) The ‘gross’ ratio measures non-performing exposures (bad loans, unlikely-to-pay loans and past-due/ 
overdrawn exposures) in relation to total loans gross of loan loss provisions; the ‘net’ ratio excludes loan 
loss provisions. The ratios for 2021 are estimates based on the NPL reduction plans that banks agreed with 
the supervisory authorities.
15
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed
