Benjamin E Diokno: Keynote message - 18th AMLC Anniversary
Keynote message by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), at the 18th AMLC Anniversary, Kuala Lumpur, 23 October 2019.
 Atty.  Jorge  S.  Brania,  head  of  AML  Desk  of  Insurance  Commission,  Anti-Money  Laundering
Council Member and Insurance Commissioner, Atty. Dennis B. Funa.
Securities and Exchange Commissioner Javey Paul D. Francisco, who is attending on behalf of
AMLC Member and SEC Chairperson, Atty. Emilio B. Aquino.
AMLC Secretariat Executive Director, Atty. Mel Georgie B. Racela.
Men and women of the AMLC Secretariat, good afternoon and welcome to the 18th Anniversary
of the AMLC.
Eighteen is a significant number. In the Philippines, like in most countries, the age of majority is
18. It is a coming of age, a transition into adulthood. And this is very fitting for the AMLC as we
are also undergoing a transformation.
We are doing so by introducing improvements in our policies and operations with the hope that
they will be beneficial to our country long after our terms have ended.
To be honest, the year has gone by fast, but it has been a productive and exciting one for the
AMLC.
First.  The  AMLC  adopted  the  2018  Implementing  Rules  and  Regulations  of  the  AMLA,  as
amended. The new rules ensure that covered persons will be held accountable for their violations
of  the  AMLA.  It  also  requires  covered  persons  to  adopt  robust  anti-money  laundering  and
terrorism financing prevention programs.
The  AMLC  also  issued  the  Guidelines  on  Identifying  Beneficial  Ownership  which  seeks  to
promote  transparency  in  the  use  of  legal  persons,  legal  arrangements,  and  nominee
arrangements. This is to ensure that these types of arrangements will be legitimately used and
not for the purpose of distancing one’s identity from the proceeds of crime.
Second.  The  AMLC  has  strengthened  its  cooperation  and  coordination  with  partner  law
enforcement agencies in the drive against money laundering and terrorism financing. The AMLC
has  conducted  various  workshops  with  its  partners  as  means  to  widen  their  awareness  of
different money laundering typologies, and to capacitate them in detecting and preventing such
activities. In turn, the AMLC continues to benefit from having established relationships with law
enforcement partners in the area of development of money laundering and terrorism financing
cases.
Third.  From  January 2018 to  July 2019, the AMLC was able to produce tangible results of its
investigation efforts and cause the freezing of assets with an estimated value of over one billion
pesos.  It  also  actively  caused  the  forfeiture  of  assets  with  an  estimated  value  of  600  million
pesos.  All  these  investigation  efforts  helped  in  the  development  of  11  money  laundering
complaints,  two  terrorism  financing  complaints,  23  applications  for  bank  inquiry  for  money
laundering, and three applications for bank inquiry for terrorism financing.
These are only possible through the unrelenting efforts of the competent men and women of the
AMLCS.
Fourth.  The  AMLC  conducted  risk  assessment  and  strategic  studies,  the  latest  of  which
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessed the Philippines’ exposure to threats linked to child pornography. It was an example of a
study  that  made  use  of  the  rich  information  contained  in  AMLC’s  database  based  on  the
submissions of covered persons.
Fifth.  The  Philippines  is  in  the  latter  stage  of  the  Mutual  Evaluation  (ME)  which  gauges  the
country’s  levels  of  technical  compliance  with  international  anti-money  laundering/counter-
terrorism  financing  or  AML/CTF  standards  as  well  as  effectiveness  of  the  country’s  existing
AML/CTF system.
Prior to the ME Report (MER), the AMLC conducted a self-assessment based on the existing
legal  framework,  operations  of  competent  authorities,  and  statistics  to  forecast  the  evaluation
results.
On effectiveness, the assessment reflected accurate ratings for seven out of the 11 Immediate
Outcomes (IOs), while on technical compliance, the assessment reflected accurate ratings for
34 out of the 40 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Recommendations.
Following the adoption of the MER, the Philippines has entered a 12-month observation period,
the completion of which requires the country to submit a comprehensive progress report to the
Asia/Pacific  Group  on  Money  Laundering  (APG)  focused  on  the  implementation  of  its
recommended actions. This 12-month observation period gives us an opportunity for the country
to remedy identified shortcomings in the MER.
As  such,  I  enjoin  everyone  to  work  even  harder  to  ensure  that  the  Philippines  is  able  to
successfully exit the 12-month observation period. We cannot afford to have the Philippines in
the Financial Action Task Force’s list of high risk and non-cooperative jurisdictions.  Hence, we
should be very strategic in our focus for the next 12 months.
With  perseverance,  a  reinforced  Secretariat  and  a  closer  link  with  partner  agencies,  I  am
confident that we will be able to address the country’s weak AML/CFT areas.
As the world continues to evolve, the AMLC and its Secretariat should expect more challenges
ahead. We should all heed the call to be better, bolder, and more committed in ensuring that the
Philippines will not be used as a money laundering site or a haven for terrorist groups.
Today,  as  we  mark  18  years  of  fighting  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing,  we
acknowledge  and  celebrate  all  the  hard  work  that  has  come  to  fruition.  Allow  me  to  thank
everyone for the steadfast support you continue to give the Council. The work before us may be
daunting, but with able and spirited people behind the AMLC, I am confident that we can remain
agile in the pursuit of our mandate.
Thank you and happy anniversary to all
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
