 15/11/2019 
 Opening remarks 
11th edition of the European SSM Roundtable/International Bankers Forum 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
    Good Morning and welcome to Banco de España for this 11th edition of the European SSM 
Roundtable, organised by the International Bankers Forum (IBF). 
 
The topic for today’s roundtable is the management of non-financial risk. This is an issue 
which is always in the spotlight and, at the same time, is quite hard to tackle.  
 
The concept of risk is continuously used in banking regulation. A quick search in the CRR1 
or CRR2 text will reveal that it is mentioned nearly 1,500 times in each.  
 
Banks are certainly familiar with the regulatory requests to  understand, measure, hedge, 
control,  assess,  address  or  mitigate  risk.  I  believe  it  is  fair  to  say  that  any  firm  that  has 
survived  the  crisis  and  its  long  aftermath,  without  public  support,  has  been  largely 
successful in fulfilling these risk-related tasks. Of course, supervisors are also permanently 
concerned about risk; to some extent, it is what we are paid for.  
 
Still, I believe both banks and supervisors tend to feel rather comfortable when we assess 
financial  risk.  Don’t  misinterpret  me.  We  are  perfectly  aware of  the  consequences  that a 
mismanagement of financial risk can entail, but we tend to look at financial risk in a more 
natural and intuitive way. Things get a lot stickier when we look at non-financial risk. 
What is the nature of non-financial risk? And what makes it different from more traditional 
financial risk? 
 
The concept of risk is always linked to a loss which is, by definition, uncertain. Any loss 
which is certain is not a risk anymore; it is simply a cost. Nevertheless, financial risk is always 
the consequence of specific financial choices; namely, the decision to purchase an asset or 
grant a loan gives rise to certain risks for the institution.  
 
Despite the uncertainty, the financial risks posed by that given transaction can generally be 
measured, in the sense that losses tend to be limited and associated with known events, 
which are likely to occur with a certain probability. 
 
The rationale of banks’ business models is to take on this financial risk and generate profit 
from it. Of course, banks should assess this profitability jointly with the level of risk assumed 
in order to take informed decisions.  
 
However,  the  nature  of  non-financial  risk  makes  it  far  more  difficult  for  banks  and 
supervisors to tackle. Non-financial risk, whether related to misconduct, non-compliance, 
IT, reputational, cybersecurity or operational challenges, is not linked directly to financial 
decisions and has only a downside.  
 
In other words, unlike credit or market risk, here there are only potential losses, which can 
be large. In addition, non-financial risk can only be reduced or mitigated, but not eliminated, 
and it is far more difficult to quantify than financial risks.  
 
Despite all these difficulties, or perhaps because of them, non-financial risk has been on 
regulators’ and supervisors’ radar for quite some time. In fact, it’s been more than 15 years 
since the Basel II capital accord included a capital charge for operational risk. 
 
2/6 
 15 years later, I believe we can draw two conclusions. First, measuring these risks is still 
challenging. Second, their importance for the banking business has not diminished a bit. On 
the contrary, it has become more relevant for banks and, certainly, supervisors.  
 
Indeed, looking at the 2020 priorities, released by supervisors worldwide, it is clear that non-
financial  risks  are  on  the  top of  the  list.  Let  me  give  you  a  few  illustrative  examples:  the 
importance of IT has soared, since it has become a key component of any viable Business 
Model, which makes  cyber risk an even greater source of concern. Second, considering 
recent  scandals  across  the  EU  I  believe  I  don´t  need  to  emphasize  that  Anti-Money-
Laundering is more relevant than ever. Finally, it is also clear that the nature of retail banking 
business means that conduct risk is a major source of concern.  
 
In this regard, it is not easy to compile all the losses stemming from the wave of fines and 
lawsuits that has swept through the financial industry during the crisis and its aftermath. 
According to a report from the ESRB1, the cumulative losses to December 2014 stemming 
solely from misconduct exceeded 200 bn € worldwide, with more than 50 bn € affecting EU 
banks.  
 
But,  despite  the  size  of  these  losses,  the  direct  financial  consequences  are  not  the only 
source of concern.  
 
Clearly, these losses generally produce second-round effects, mainly through reputational 
damage  that  tends  to  affect  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole,  rather  than  individual 
institutions. As is currently the case, these losses tend to rise, precisely, in the aftermath of 
crises, where some of the questionable commercial practices are exposed. Banks are hit by 
these  losses  at  a  time  when  customers,  shareholders  and  public  stakeholders  are 
questioning their business model, precisely because of this risk. Consequently, the upshot 
could be a clear procyclical effect. 
 
In a nutshell, we must acknowledge that non-financial risk presents certain features that can 
exacerbate or compound the effect of a crisis. It is also very hard to estimate and, unlike 
traditional risks, cannot be eliminated; at best, it may be mitigated. 
 
This would be the key question for today: what can we do to mitigate non-financial risk to 
the maximum extent?  
 
In my view, the mitigation of non-financial risk is linked to the quality of internal procedures, 
IT systems, governance structure or compliance function of a bank. In other words, it is not 
so much about what banks should do, but how they should do it.  
 
Naturally, enhancing governance, compliance or IT systems is not easy. It generally involves 
additional spending that adds pressure to the already beleaguered profitability of the sector. 
Understandably, some firms see spending in these areas as an additional cost. I believe it 
is more appropriate to see improvements in IT or governance as long-term investments.  
 
In this context, it is worth noting that we are observing adjustments in business models. 
Some institutions might need to undergo radical transformation, while others need just fine-
                                                                                              
1 https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/150625_report_misconduct_risk.en.pdf  
 3/6 
 tune their structures. In all cases, we see digitalisation and optimisation of processes, with 
potential  impact  on  the  internal  control  functions.  We  also  see  an  increased  reliance  on 
outsourcing and an attempt to implement more agile and flexible ways of working.  
 
All  these  trends  imply  changes  that  pose  additional  risks.  In  this  regard,  there  are  some 
critical elements that banks need to consider in their management of non-financial risk. Let 
me say a few words about these elements. 
 
Starting with IT, I think nobody questions by now that technological change should be part 
of deeper considerations regarding the sustainability of the banking business model in the 
long term. If we look at what has happened in recent years in other sectors, there is clearly 
a need for the banking business model to adapt to a new reality.  
 
True, technological adaptation calls in many cases for significant investment in systems to 
be made. However, such investment today will be key to fostering profitability in the future. 
A lot of people think that IT change is mainly related to the so-called front-end, namely the 
customer experience. There is a lot of talk about the interaction with the client and the quality 
of apps, but I would like to stress that it is even more important to undertake technological 
change focusing on the back-end processes. 
 
Needless to say, I am talking about client data, which is the basic commodity of this fourth 
industrial revolution. Importantly, client data is currently controlled by banks, though some 
recent developments, such as the PSD2 in the EU, might alter this situation.  
 
Accordingly,  institutions  should  strive  to  make  the  best  out  of  their  current  dominant 
position. Banks should be capable of extracting, exploiting and analysing their customers’ 
data.  Management  must  fully  consider  this  information  to  take  decisions.  Otherwise,  re-
evaluation and transformation of the business model will not be possible.  
 
Therefore, a clear conclusion would be that the business criticality of IT and cyber resilience 
has also soared, compared to the situation 20 years ago. This makes the investments and 
controls in this area a key element of the future. 
 
Let me refer briefly to business conduct. The crisis has reminded us, rather painfully, that 
conduct is another key factor to consider in any sustainable business model. I would like to 
point out that conduct change is the only means of responding to the challenge the sector 
faces to restore its image and reputation.  
 
Society has changed in terms of its demands of the financial sector, including also higher 
standards  for  AML-CFT.  The  rules  governing  customer-bank  relations  have  likewise 
changed. Banks should, therefore, move to respond to the new social and regulatory reality. 
It is worth recalling that a very positive consequence of this policy is that it increases legal 
certainty, significantly reducing potential litigation costs.  
 
In many cases, implementing these policies involves a top-down cultural change. This kind 
of change is doomed to fail unless there is full commitment and support from banks’ senior 
officers and management. Indeed, without adequate governance and a clear ‘tone from the 
top’ there is no chance of success. 
4/6 
  
As I like to point out in many of my interventions, governance is always a precondition for 
any significant change to occur within an organisation, but of course it is just a precondition. 
Evidently,  other  elements  must  be  implemented  in  order  to  tackle  appropriately  the 
management and control of non-financial risk. 
 
One  initial  element  relates  to  the  involvement  of  the  Board,  which  should  consider  non-
financial risk management as part of their regular monitoring, instead of simply reacting to 
emerging  issues  if  controls  fail.  Just  like  in  the  case  of  traditional  risks,  the  Board  must 
include  non-financial  risk  inside  their  risk  appetite  framework;  obviously  this  implies  that 
they should be able to understand the nature of these risks, in order to discriminate and 
rank their importance. 
 
Of course, the role of the Board cannot function without the right input from both first and 
second lines of defence.  
 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  that,  apart  from  owning  and  managing  risk,  the  first  line 
assesses  key  infrastructure  areas,  such  as  IT  and  operations,  where  most  operational 
failures occur. The culture of the bank should also emphasise that first-line areas should 
also take responsibility for non-financial risk management, rather than focusing entirely on 
revenue or cost management. 
 
As you know, the second line establishes the control standards and monitors adherence to 
them,  encompassing  risk  and  compliance  functions.  Nevertheless,  other  areas,  such  as 
legal, human resources or tax, may also be included, in order to ensure that their expertise 
in these areas is considered by management.  
 
There is no one-size-fits-all approach for the division of tasks between both lines; but the 
identification, assessment, validation and reporting of risks and controls should certainly be 
clearly assigned in every organisation.  
 
As I mentioned before, it is very hard to measure these kind of risks precisely; nevertheless, 
banks  should  include  qualitative  and  quantitative  key  risk  indicators  in  their  integrated 
management  information  system.  To  achieve  this  integration,  all  parties  must  speak  the 
same  language,  which  implies  applying  common  taxonomies  with  clear  definitions  and 
indicators per type of risk.  
 
Last, but certainly not least, I wanted to emphasise the importance of having an adequate 
internal audit as the third line of defense. The role of internal audit is key to challenging the 
adequacy of the first two lines, underpinning the whole framework. 
 
Let me conclude.  
 
The losses experienced during the crisis and its aftermath should act as a powerful reminder 
that we cannot relax or lower the bar. There is no room for complacency if we want to avoid 
repeating past mistakes. 
In this regard, I wanted to convey a few messages today. First, maintain your fundamentals 
and  keep  on  improving  your  three  lines  of  defense;  make  sure  that  accountability  and 
 5/6 
 ownership  for  each  risk  is  defined  and  well-understood  within  your  institution.  Second, 
remember that improving essential risk management and controls, including data quality, 
should not be seen as a cost, but as an investment for the future. Finally, keep on working 
towards appropriate balances between risk and reward, making this sustainable over the 
cycle. 
 
I believe it is revealing that the title of the conference refers to the management of non-
financial risk as ‘the next big challenge’. As I have noted today, these risks have been in the 
spotlight  of  banks  and  supervisors  at  least  since  Basel  II,  so  an  observer  may  question 
whether they can still be characterised as the ‘next big challenge’.  
 
I actually agree with the statement made in the title. The pervasive and ever-changing nature 
of non-financial risk turns it into a permanent challenge for banks and supervisors. The most 
recent and obvious example would be the emergence of environmental risk as a source of 
concern for all of us. 
 
Indeed, there is still a lot of catching up to do, so I look forward to today’s discussions. I 
wish you a very successful conference.  
 
Thank you very much. 
 
 6/6 
