    
PLATFORM FOR DISCUSSION   
Speaking note 
 
 
 
SPEAKER:               Ana Mitreska, Vice Governor 
 
DATE:                   20-22 November, 2019 
 
LOCATION:             Prague, Czech Republic 
      
NATIONAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF NORTH MACEDONIA 
 
info@nbrm.mk 
www.nbrm.mk 
    GLOBAL IMBALANCES, EXTERNAL SECTOR VULNERABILITY AND CAPITAL 
FLOWS – SELECTED COUNTRIES OVERVIEW 
 This Speaking note was prepared for the 42nd Meeting of the Governor’s Club of Central 
Asia, Black Sea and Balkan Countries, 2019 
 
 
Contributors to the Note: Dijana Janevska Stefanova, Vesna Stojchevska and Danica Unevska 
Andonova1 
 
Department: Monetary Policy and Research  
 
                                                              
1 Special thanks to Aneta Krstevska, Chief Economist, and Biljana Davidovska Stojanova, Monetary Policy and Research 
Department, for the useful comments. 
 1 
Global imbalances, external sector vulnerability and capital flows – selected 
countries overview 
  Overview of the global external imbalances  
 The discussion on the issue of global imbalances and the overall profile of the external 
sector  comes  at  a  very  proper  moment,  given  the  rollback of  the  globalisation  and 
rising trade tensions. The recent changes might affect the external imbalances globally, if not 
directly, then indirectly by affecting macroeconomic fundamentals of the economies. Tariffs can 
define productivity, output, and employment over the longer term, and thus affect the potential 
to  grow.  In  the  last  three  decades,  the  decline  of  tariffs  gave  ground  to  global  value  chains, 
enhanced competition, and improved productivity across countries.  
 Chart 1 Tariffs and Global Value Chain Participation2 
(Value added weighted average over countries and sectors percent) 
Source: Source: IMF, WEO April 2019 
 Global external imbalances have been at the forefront in the macro - discussions and 
risk assessments. One of the first steps when scrutinizing external positions and imbalances is 
the  current  account  position.  Current  account  imbalances  can  be  healthy  or  a  sign  of 
                                                           
2 Chart extracted from the IMF WEO, April 2019. 
 2 
macroeconomic and financial stress. In many cases, current account imbalances can be 
entirely  appropriate,  even  necessary.  For  instance  in  converging  economies,  with  vast 
investment opportunities, they benefit from foreign funding, and can afford to accumulate debts 
(by  running  current  account  deficits),  provided  they  can  repay  them  out  of  future  income. 
Sometimes, however, external imbalances can point to macroeconomic and financial 
stress. Economies that accumulate external liabilities on too large scale may become vulnerable 
to sudden stops in capital flows that force abrupt cuts in spending–making financial crises more 
likely. 
Before we do a stocktaking of the current external imbalances, it would be useful to 
provide for a longer-term view of their evolution. The occurrence of the global crisis had 
a strong impact on narrowing the global current account surpluses and deficits. In the aftermath 
of the global financial crisis, global current account imbalances (the absolute sum of surpluses 
and deficits) declined sharply from about 6 percent of global GDP in 2007 to about 3½ percent 
in 2013. The narrowing of aggregate current account imbalances was led by the United States on 
the deficit side and by China, Japan, and oil exporters on the surplus side. Meanwhile, the current 
account balance of the euro area moved from a close balance in 2007 to a surplus of about 2½ 
percent of GDP in 2013, driven mainly by sharp external adjustments in most euro area debtor 
economies, while surpluses in Germany and the Netherlands remained large. In key emerging 
market and developing economies, current account deficits expanded, supported by easy global 
financing conditions enabled by quantitative easing policies in advanced economies. Yet, after 
2013  this  process  stalled,  and  we  do  see  immense  concentration  of  imbalances  in 
advanced economies. These economies on aggregate have seen some increase in their current 
account deficits, led primarily by the United States, and a rise in current account surpluses, mainly 
in the euro area and Japan. 
   3 
Chart 2 Change in Global Current Account Imbalances, 2006 -183 
(Percent of world GDP) 
Change in Global Current Account Imbalances, 2006-18 
(percent of World GDP)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
USA
GBR
Other
EMDEs
EA
Other
AEs
JPN
CHN
Oil
exporters
Source: IMF, External sector report, 2019 
2006-2007
2013-2014
2017-2018
 The decline of current account balances over the past decade reflects a combination 
of  macroeconomic  policies  and  terms-of-trade  effects.  Fiscal  policy  and  credit 
conditions  have  been  key  drivers  of  current  account  dynamics  since  the  crisis,  such  that 
economies  with  tight  (easy)  fiscal  policies  and  credit  contractions  (expansions)  have  generally 
experienced  an  increase  (decline)  in  their  current  account  balances.  However,  the  policy 
drivers have shifted. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the narrowing of 
deficits  in  advanced  economies  was  driven  mainly  by  private  sector  demand 
compression and deleveraging, and despite countercyclical fiscal policy efforts. This 
was mirrored by lower current account balances in surplus economies, largely reflecting a collapse 
in global demand and trade. Since 2013 divergent fiscal policy stances and credit conditions in 
key  economies  have  contributed  to  the  rotation  of  imbalances  toward  advanced  economies. 
Advanced  economies’  aggregate  current  account  surpluses  (euro  area,  Japan)  have  remained 
large or risen further since 2013, reflecting a combination of lower energy prices, tighter fiscal 
policy, and continued private sector deleveraging in some cases. Meanwhile, aggregate current 
account deficits of advanced economies rose slightly, underpinned by renewed fiscal easing in 
the United States.  
                                                             
3 Chart extracted from the IMF External Sector Report, 2019. 
 4 
Chart 3 Current account and fiscal balances in Euro Area and USA 
 Source: IMF, WEO October 2019, database 
The dynamics of the balances is not always indicative on how appropriate the external 
position is. The deviation of the current account from its fundamentals and desirable 
policies  provides  for  additional  substantial  information  on  the  correction  needed. 
According to the IMF (2019), 35–45 percent of overall current account surpluses and 
deficits  were  deemed  excessive  in  2018.  Higher-than-warranted  balances  remained 
centered  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  (driven  by  Germany  and  the  Netherlands)  and  in  other 
advanced  economies  (Korea,  Singapore),  while  lower-than-warranted  balances  remained 
concentrated in the United Kingdom, the United States, and some emerging market economies 
(Argentina, Indonesia). China’s external position was assessed to be in line with fundamentals 
and  desirable  policies,  as  its  current  account  surplus  narrowed  further,  although  achieving  a 
lasting external rebalancing will require gradual reining in expansionary macroeconomic policies 
and adopting further structural reforms.  
 The  mirror  image  of  the  current  account  balances,  are  the  financial  flows.  After  the 
crisis,  global  map  of  financial  flows  changed,  mostly  due  to  the  shift  in  the  global  financial 
conditions  and  relative  growth  differentials  between  emerging  and  advanced  economies. 
Following  quantitative  easing  programs  in  advanced  economies  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global 
financial crisis, portfolio and other investment capital flows to emerging market and developing 
economies intensified, which, together with accommodative macroeconomic policies, contributed 
to currency appreciation pressures and larger current account deficits. These trends, however, 
 5 
started to reverse beginning with the 2013 taper tantrum episode as growth differentials 
between  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  narrowed  and  the  prospects  of monetary 
policy  normalization  in  advanced  economies  gathered  strength.  Direct  investment  remained 
relatively  stable  and  less  sensitive  to  changes  in  global  financial  conditions  and  US  dollar 
movements. 
 Despite the narrowing of global current account imbalances, stock imbalances have 
continued to widen to reach record levels. At 40 percent of world GDP, the world’s 
net international investment position—the sum of net creditor and net debtor positions—is 
now at a historical peak and four times larger than in the early 1990s. Among the top 
debtors, the net international investment position of the United States is now close to –50 percent 
of GDP, down about 40 percentage points since 2007. 
 Chart 4 Net International Investment Position (NIIP), 1990-20184 
 
(Percent of world GDP) 
Source: IMF, External sector report, 2019 
  The snapshot of the global external profile reveals narrowing of the imbalances after 
the  global  crisis,  and  concentration  in  the  advanced  economies.  Despite  the  lower 
magnitude, large part of the current account imbalance seems not to be aligned with 
the fundamental and desirable policies. Furthermore, lower flow gaps, visible through 
                                                           
4 Chart extracted from the IMF External Sector Report, 2019. 
 6 
lower current account and financial flows, were not sufficient to curb stock imbalance 
visible through the historically highest global NIP. Given the uncertain global environment, 
driven by the rising trade tensions, external flow and stock imbalances could widen again, 
although this will much depend on the assumed policy response in different countries. 
Further disruptions to trade and supply chains are one of the major risks that can affect the 
external imbalances, as well. Higher tariffs on bilateral trade can come at significant economic 
cost, not only for the countries involved, but also for others. These effects are greatly amplified 
by global supply chains, which transmit spillovers from bilateral tariffs, affecting countries up and 
down the value chain.  An intensification of trade tensions or a disorderly Brexit outcome—with 
further repercussions for global growth and risk aversion—could, however, affect other economies 
that are highly dependent on foreign demand and external financing. Over the medium term, in 
absence of corrective policies, trade tensions could become entrenched, and further divergence 
of external stock positions could trigger costly disruptive adjustments in key debtor economies 
that  could  spill  over  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  According  to  Bloomberg  analysis,  the  strongest 
negative impact from the trade tensions could be felt in 2021, affecting the global GDP negatively 
by  0.6  p.p.,  with  several  scenarios  in  place  -  failure  of  reaching  an  agreement  and  limited 
escalation of the trade tensions; failure of reaching an agreement and trade war; and reaching 
an agreement in 2020. It is imperative that all countries avoid policies that distort trade. Recent 
trade policy actions are weighing on global trade flows, investment and growth, including through 
confidence  effects  and  the  disruption  of  global  supply  chains,  with  no  discernible  impact  on 
external imbalances thus far, but risks remain. 
 External imbalances in the CESEE region countries 
In the following section, we provide for a short overview on the external position of the region5, 
analyzed  through  the  current  account  position  of  the  individual  countries  and  the  region  as  a 
whole, as well as the international investment position.  
The  pre  –  crisis  global  context  was  marked  with  low  aversion  to  risk,  strong 
confidence and global liquidity glut. The environment was conducive to rising cross –
border capital flows, which underpinned demand and led to significant deterioration 
of current account balances. The burst of the crisis brought sudden reversal of capital flows, 
                                                           
5 This part of the presentation in focused on eleven counties, part of the CESEE region: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, 
Croatia, Hungary, Czech Republic, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia.   
 7 
loss  of  confidence  and  risk  appetite,  demand  contraction  and  sharp  correction  of  external 
imbalances.  A  decade  after  the  crisis,  current  account  balances  seem  to  be  moderate  across 
board,  with  many  of  the  countries  even  exhibiting  surplus. The  initial post  –  crisis  adjustment 
might have been cyclical in nature, and a correction process of unsustainable excesses. 
Observing the dynamics, before the crisis the average CAD for the region6 equaled around 7% of 
GDP. High deficits were present across the board,  with the new EU member states like Czech 
Republic (average current account of 3,9% of GDP), Poland (4,4% of GDP) and Slovenia (2% of 
GDP) performing significantly better than some of the Western Balkans countries (Montenegro 
with  average  current  account  of  44,6%  of  GDP,  Serbia  18,8%  and  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina 
13,5%). With the emergence of the crises adjustment in the current account occurred. The larger 
the pre-crisis deficit, the larger the adjustment. On average the 2018 data shows around 10 p.p. 
improvement in the current transactions balance. Strengthening of the current account position 
is continuous, with gradual closing of the deficits. Some countries even exhibit surplus, such as 
the case of Slovenia, Czech Republic, Croatia, Bulgaria and Hungary. 
Chart 5 Current account 
Source: IMF, BOP database 
                                                                
6 The averaged numbers exclude data for Montenegro and Serbia due to the shorter time span of their BOP series. 
 8 
Current account adjustment 
Source: IMF, BOP database 
 Observing  the  adjustment,  through  structural  lenses,  one  can  notice  that  the 
adjustments  in  the  current  account,  was  predominantly  driven  by  the  balance  of 
goods and services. The deficit in the balance of goods narrowed from an average of 15.6% 
of GDP in the 2000-2008 period to 10.6% of GDP, and in the following 2009-2013 sub-period to 
even lower share of GDP in the last four years of 8.2% of GDP. Additionally, the surpluses in the 
services shows steady increase, a dynamic that is more visible in economies with more developed 
tourism  sector.  While  the  initial  adjustment  in  the  acute  phase  of  the  crisis  was  through 
compression of imports, what followed afterwards was remarkable shift in export, which kept the 
trade  deficit  markedly  bellow  the  pre  –  crisis  level.  Hence,  in  2018  the  average trade  balance 
hovered around 8% of GDP, compared to 17% of GDP before the crisis. Imports is close to its 
pre-crisis level, while the level of exports surpasses it by close to 10 p.p. of GDP. It indicates that 
most of the countries managed to proceeds with their reforms on the external front, elevating 
their export potential and enabling “quietness” of current accounts. Furthermore, looking into the 
geographical direction of trade for the region, several countries,  are heavily exposed to Germany 
with a share of exports to Germany in total exports of around 30% or above. North Macedonia 
alone  has  the  largest  increase  of this share  in  the  last  decade (2008-2018) of around  33  p.p. 
reaching 47% of total exports in 2018. The rising trade integration, indicates larger dependence 
on external developments, and hence exposure to potential shocks. 
   9 
 Chart 6 Trade balance 
Source: IMF, BOP database 
 The rising current account imbalance prior to the crisis reflected the strong economic 
growth, supported by increased financial inflows, mostly in form of FDI and private 
sector borrowing. Domestic private sector credit intensified, thus fueling domestic demand. As 
for the fiscal position, as important driver of the current account  dynamics, the reveals that in 
most  of  the  countries  (except  Hungary,  Albania,  Croatia)  before  the  crisis  fiscal  stance  was 
prudent  and  with  fiscal  space  was  in  place.  The  fiscal  response  to  the  crisis  was 
countercyclical, with fiscal position strengthening afterwards, but yet its impact on 
the  current  account  gap  does  seem  to  be  consistent  and  visible  across  the  time, 
suggesting predominant role of the private domestic demand. Observing the data, one 
can notice very strong growth of domestic demand before the crisis, on average of around 6%, 
while as of 2009 until 2013 domestic demand was contracting. In the last couple of years it was 
brought on a solid grounds, but yet the average growth is more modest at around 3.5%. 
      10 
Chart 7 Domestic demand and fiscal balance 
  Source: Eurostat and NBRNM calculations.                                         
  
Source: IMF and NBRNM calculations.                                         
Financial flows to and from advanced economies have been much weaker since the 
global  financial  crisis.  In  particular,  portfolio  debt  flows  have  weakened,  reflecting  a 
combination  of  factors:  large  government  debt  asset  purchases  by  central  banks,  increased 
fragmentation  in  euro  area  debt  markets,  and  much-reduced  accumulation  of  reserves  by 
emerging market and developing economies. Other investment flows have also fallen sharply as 
global  banks  reduced  the  size  of their  balance  sheets  after  dramatic  expansion  of  their  cross-
border activities during the pre-crisis boom. On the other hand, foreign direct investment (FDI) 
flows had actually increased slightly relative to the pre-crisis period.  
The same notion holds for the region as well. Financial flows from the region have been 
much weaker since the global financial crisis. In particular, other investment inflows have fallen 
sharply and turn into small outflows due to the process of deleveraging. Foreign direct investment 
(FDI)  inflows  also  experienced  slowdown,  however  the  role  of  the  direct  investments  in  some 
countries is still strong as they were still going through the "expansion phase" when it comes to 
this type of flows. Portfolio debt flows have increased, reflecting a combination of factors, but 
mostly as a result of government borrowing abroad by issuing government bonds.  
   11 
Chart 8 Financial flows and their structure 
Source: IMF BOP data. 
  Financial  integration  in  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  has  risen 
substantially  over  the  past  two  decades,  delivering  benefits  but  also  posing  new 
challenges. Guarding against a sudden stop or external crisis requires carefully monitoring of 
different aspects of flow and stock imbalances. Although it seems that flow imbalances narrowed 
in the region, for completing the picture it is essential to observe the stock positions, as well. 
In  the  last  couple  of  decades,  the  dynamics  of  the  external  balance  sheet  of  the 
region, examined through the net international investment position, pointed towards 
a  process  of  significant  widening  of  the  negative  gap,  in  the  run  up  to  the  global 
financial crisis. Although, this trend to some extent slowed, IIP reached its peak in 2012 and 
with the beginning of 2013 taper tantrum episode started to reverse.  Despite the reversal, on 
average  it  is  still  above  the  some  of  the  benchmarks,  such  as  the  norm  of  the  EC  within  the 
macroeconomic imbalances procedure, that equals -35% of GDP. 
     12 
Chart 9 Net International Investment Position 
 Source: IMF BOP data. 
 In  order  to  have  the  complete  picture,  more  granular  view  is  important,  as  it  can 
reveal  whether  the  pre-crisis  mode  of  the  rising  financial  exposure  elevated  the 
external  vulnerability  of  the  region,  and  hence  whether  the  adjustment  which 
followed was more abrupt and costly in economic terms. For instance, the larger weight 
of direct investment (including the intercompany lending) should in principle improve the external 
risk profile of the country, as the probability for sudden reversal is low, and in general it does not 
yield future financing requirements for repayment of the obligations due. This is not the case with 
portfolio investments, or the other investments, as debt creating flows, where the risk is higher, 
both in terms of sudden reversals and rising future payment burden. Thus the structural analysis 
reveals that for the region as a whole, before the crisis in 2007 the role of the direct investments 
was  significantly  larger  than  that  of the  debt  creating  flows  in  creating  international  liabilities, 
whereas  it  turned  balanced  in  2013.  By  the  end  of  2018  as  expected,  mostly  through 
deleveraging, the level of debt creating flows decreased.  
      13 
 Chart 10 Structure of NIIP 
 Source: IMF BOP data. 
 The simple analysis of the external sector profile in the region, reveal compression of 
the  current  account  gaps,  slowdown  in  financial  flows,  and  adjustment  of  the  IIP 
position.  Some  of  the  adjustments  might  be  a  reflection  of  the  unsustainable  pre-crisis 
imbalances, some of them are cyclical, and some might be a result of structural shifts that boost 
competiveness, enable export to grow and gaps to be narrowed. Whichever the cause, it is 
critical to assess whether the adjustment and the current level are in line with what 
the fundamentals and policies would suggest. For this reason, we use the latest available 
results from the IMF external sector assessment and we construct a heat map to have broader 
vision  of  where  the  region  stands  in  terms  of  the  external  sector  imbalances.  The  current 
account  focus  offers  a  general  conclusion  that  the  region  is  broadly  in  line  with 
fundamentals, with five out of eleven counties have current account in line with fundamentals 
according  to  the  IMF  estimations,  and  four  have  stronger  position,  while  three  show  weaker 
position  than  what the  fundamentals  suggest.  The vulnerabilities are more visible, when 
financial and NIIPs are observed, with several countries having moderately weaker 
positions.  This  indicates  necessity  for  further  policy  changes,  or  bold  structural  reforms  to 
improve the productivity and correct for the imbalances on the external front. The focus must be 
even stronger, given the subdued global outlook and rising risks on global trade and GVCs. Most 
of these countries are small and open, included in GVCs as well, indicating rising risks and need 
for policies to reduces vulnerabilities, and prevent adverse spillovers. 
  14 
Table 1 
External sector assessment – latest Article IV reports 
Source: IMF, latest Article IV 
  Conclusion 
  The snapshot of the global external profile reveals narrowing of the imbalances after the global 
crisis,  and  concentration  of  the  imbalances  in  the  advanced  economies.  Despite  the  lower 
magnitude, close to half of the current account imbalance does not seem to be aligned with the 
fundamentals and desirable policies. Furthermore, lower flow gaps, visible through lower current 
account  and  financial  flows,  were  not  sufficient  to  curb  stock  imbalances  visible  through  the 
historically highest global NIIP. As far as CESEE the region is concerned, a simple analysis of the 
external sector profile reveals compression of the current account gaps, slowdown in financial 
flows, and adjustment of the IIP position. Some of the adjustments might be a reflection of the 
unsustainable pre-crisis imbalances, some of them are cyclical, and some might be a result of 
structural shifts that boost competiveness, enable export to grow and narrow the gaps. Latest 
available results from the IMF external sector assessment points to a general conclusion that the 
region’s  current  account  balances  are  broadly  in  line  with  fundamentals  (five  out  of  eleven 
counties have current account in line with fundamentals, four have stronger position, while three 
 15 
show weaker position than what the fundamentals suggest). The vulnerabilities are more visible, 
when financial and NIIPs are observed, with several countries having moderately weaker positions 
that  indicates  necessity  for  further  policy  changes,  or  bold  structural  reforms  to  improve  the 
productivity and correct for the imbalances on the external front. Looking into the future, given 
the uncertain global environment and the rising trade tensions, external flows and stock 
imbalances could widen again, although this would depend on the assumed policy responses in 
different countries. Further disruptions to trade and supply chains are one of the major risks that 
can  affect  the  external  imbalances.  Higher  tariffs  on  bilateral  trade  can  come  at  significant 
economic cost, not only for the countries involved. These effects are greatly amplified by global 
supply chains, which transmit spillovers from bilateral tariffs, affecting countries up and down the 
value chain. Thus now more than ever there is an urgent need for policies that reduce external 
vulnerabilities, and prevent adverse spillovers.  
   Bibliography 
 
1.  IMF (2019), Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery, World Economic Outlook, April 2019 
2.  IMF  (2019),  Global  Manufacturing  Downturn,  Rising  Trade  Barriers,  World  Economic 
Outlook, October 2019 
3.  IMF (2019), The Dynamics of External Adjustment, External Sector Report, July 2019 
4.  IMF Country Report No. 19/29, Albania 2018 Article IV Consultation, January 2019 
5.  IMF  Country  Report  No.  18/39,  Bosnia  And  Herzegovina  2017  Article  IV  Consultation, 
February 2018 
6.  IMF Country Report No. 19/83, Bulgaria 2019 Article IV Consultation, March 2019 
7.  IMF Country Report No. 19/46, Republic Of Croatia 2018 Article IV Consultation, 
February 2019 
8.  IMF Country Report No. 19/160, Czech Republic 2019 Article IV Consultation, June 2019 
9.  IMF Country Report No. 18/252, Hungary 2018 Article IV Consultation, August 2018 
10. IMF Country Report No. 19/32, FYR Macedonia 2018 Article IV Consultation, January 
2019 
11. IMF Country Report No. 19/293, Montenegro 2019 Article IV Consultation, September 
2019 
12. IMF Country Report No. 19/37, Republic Of Poland 2018 Article IV Consultation, 
February 2019 
13. IMF Country Report No. 19/278, Romania 2019 Article IV Consultation, August 2019 
 16 
14. IMF Country Report No. 19/238, Republic of Serbia Staff Report for The 2019 Article IV, 
July 2019 
15. IMF Country Report No. 19/58, Republic of Slovenia 2018 Article IV Consultation, 
February 2019 
  17 
Appendix 
Long- term challenges for current account balance 
 18 
                     19 
Net International Investment Position, by countries 
 20 
     21 
