Mr.  Stals  considers  the  issues  of  the  relaxation  of  exchange  controls  and
raising  finance  on  the  foreign  bond  market      Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  South
African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  Chris  Stals,  at  a  luncheon  of  the  Institute  of  Directors  in  Southern
Africa in Pretoria on 16/7/97.
The  extension  of  the  relaxation  of  exchange  controls  to  private  individuals  as
from  1  July  1997,  marked  a  further  step  in  the  Government’s  committed  programme  of
gradually phasing out all  restrictions  on  the  movement  of  funds  between  South  Africa  and  the
rest of the world.
The  present  system  of  exchange  controls  was  introduced  in  South  Africa  over
many  years,  starting  from  1961,  and  was  mainly  intended  to  provide  some  protection  to  the
domestic economy against  the  adverse  effects  of  non-economic  developments  in  South  Africa,
and  international  reactions  that  followed  internal  developments.  Since  these  non-economic
factors were removed during 1993 and 1994, following the major social and political reforms in
our country, justification for the retention of the exchange controls also disappeared. In the new
situation, the retention of exchange controls became counter-productive and, in a more open and
freer economic environment, created undesirable distortions in the allocation of resources.
There  was,  therefore,  general  consensus  that  South  Africa  should  remove
exchange controls as quickly as possible, and some advisers even thought that it should be done
in a one-off “big bang” approach. How desirable such an approach might have been, particularly
for  financial  operators  in  the  market,  realism  forced  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  to
opt for a gradual but determined phasing-out programme. The major constraint on the authorities
had  been  the  limited  amount  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  available  to  the  country  that  were
required for the conversion of South African rand assets into foreign currencies.
Developments  over  the  past  few  years  enabled  us  to  move  rather  fast  with  the
removal  of  the  exchange  controls.  Large  inflows  of  foreign  funds,  mostly  in  the  form  of
portfolio investments made by non-residents in South African equities and bonds, and inflows of
short-, medium- and long-term loan capital made it possible not only to replenish the country’s
net foreign reserves from a zero-level in April 1994 to more than R20 billion now, but also  to
remove  more  than  50  per  cent  of  the  exchange  controls  that  existed  three  years  ago.  These
relaxations  required  large  amounts  of  funds,  for  example  to  enable  South  African  resident
companies  to  invest  about  R20  billion  in  foreign  direct  investment  projects,  and  to  enable
institutional  investors  to  diversify  about  R30  billion  of  their  investments  in  foreign  currency
denominated  assets.  Over  the  three  year  period  from  the  beginning  of  1994  up  to  the  end  of
1996,  the  total  net  inflow  of  capital,  that  is  taking  account  of  non-resident  capital  inflows  and
resident  capital  outflows,  showed  a  net  gain  for  South  Africa  of  almost  R30  billion.  The
substantial capital inflows into South Africa therefore enabled us to achieve our objectives with
the  replenishment  of  the  official  foreign  reserves,  and  the  gradual  relaxation  of  the  exchange
controls.
The future programme with the removal of the remaining exchange controls will,
as  over  the  past  three-and-a-half  years,  be  very  dependent  on  a  continuation  of  net  capitalinflows  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  capital  inflows  will,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  not  only
determine  the  pace  of  the  removal  of  the  remaining  exchange  controls,  but  also  the  rate  of
economic  growth  and  development  in  the  country.  For  South  Africa  it  is  of  vital  importance
BIS Review 69/1997
- 2 -
therefore  that  we  shall  continue  to  make  our  markets  and  our  economy  attractive  to  foreign
investors.
We may ask ourselves what foreign investors are looking for before they  decide
to  invest  in  a  country.  What  prompted  them,  over  the  past  few  years,  to  make  such  huge
investments  in  South  Africa?  They  are  obviously  looking  for  stable  political  and  social
conditions  in  a  country.  The  ANC  Government  has  certainly  established  itself  as  a  stable
government  and  has  founded  a  credible  track  record  with  the  management  of  the  economy.
Crime and violence remains a worrying aspect of the social system, and many foreign investors
still prefer not to commit themselves for too long a period in making their investments here.
On  the  economic  side,  the  globalisation  of  the  world  financial  markets  is  a
process that countries such as South Africa cannot stay out of. Operators in these global markets
are defining their own economic criteria for the assessment and comparison of countries where
they  can  invest  huge  amounts  of  funds  administered  by  them.  These  criteria  may  sometimes
seem  to  be  rather  superficial,  but  they  are  basic.  For  example,  the  Maastricht  criteria  require
members of the European Union to maintain  a  deficit  on  their  budgets  of  not  more  than  3  per
cent of gross domestic product. Total government debt should not be more than 60 per cent of
gross domestic product. The rate of inflation in each participating member country should not be
too far out of line with the average rate of inflation in all the participating member countries.
These  criteria  are  now  being  applied  very  generally  across  the  board  by  many
global fund investors when they assess the attractiveness of countries for investment purposes. It
is therefore not just a whim of the South African Minister of Finance to reduce the deficit on the
Budget  of  the  South  African  Government  to  4  per  cent  this  year.  Likewise,  it  is  not  just  an
over-ambitious target of the Reserve Bank to bring inflation in South Africa more  in  line  with
the average rate of inflation in the economies of our major trading partners. These are directives
and requirements from the international investor community -- those investors that enabled us to
achieve the results of the past three years with the exchange control relaxation and the improved
economic conditions in general. They will also determine the course of the further relaxation in
exchange controls and in the economic development of our country over the next few years.
Because of the importance of foreign investment for South Africa, it is  essential
that  foreign  investors  shall  also  be  well-informed  of  the  South  African  economy,  and  its
potential to absorb new foreign investment. The recent decline in the gold price created a lot of
nervousness  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange.  This  is  an  unfortunate  development  that  can
have  serious  adverse  implications  for  the  gold  mining  industry.  Its  effect  on  the  balance  of
payments, however, should be judged against a total level of exports of goods and services that
now exceeds R150 billion per annum, with gold contributing less than 18 per cent of the total,
and  a  total  capital  inflow  through  the  Bond  Market  and  Stock  Exchange  that  was  double  the
value of the gold production in the first six months of 1997.
The average gold price last year was equal to US $388 per fine ounce, and South
Africa’s total gold exports amounted to 15.75 million ounces. Should the present price of $320
be  maintained  for  a  full  year,  the  loss  in  foreign  exchange  on  the  balance  of  payments  will
amount to R4.5 billion, or less than 3 per cent of total exports. Relative to the volatility of the
net  capital  movements,  the  amount  should  not  create  any  undue  pressure  on  the  rand/foreign
currency exchange rate. Part of this loss can also be made up with an increase in the volume of
production  and  with  increases  in  other  exports.  We  should  also  not  be  too  negative  for  some
recovery of the gold price before the end of this year. If anything, the recent decline in the gold
price  provides  further  evidence  of  how  important  it  is  for  South  Africa  to  continue  to  attract
BIS Review 69/1997
- 3 -
more  foreign  investment  into  the  country,  particularly  in  the  form  of  long-term  direct
investments.
2. Raising finance on the foreign bond market
The South African Government recently made two further very successful issues
in  international  capital  markets.  An  issue  in  the  Samurai  Yen  market  raised  the  equivalent  of
$357 million for seven years, and an issue in the American Yankee market provided an amount
of  $500  million  for  a  twenty-year  period.  Both  these  loans  were  raised  at  relatively  attractive
interest rates.
The international private financial markets have developed very rapidly in recent
years,  and  now  provide  for  the  needs  of  many  types  of  borrowers.  Only  sovereign  borrowers,
however, and large multinational corporations will be able to raise funds through public issues in
these markets.
Many  other  types  of  foreign  loan  facilities  are,  however,  available  to  other
borrowers. It is known that the Reserve Bank is at present busy negotiating for a syndicated loan
with a group of foreign banking institutions for $1½ billion. Smaller borrowers can, of course,
also negotiate loans on  a  bilateral  basis  with  one  of  the  many  foreign  banking  institutions  that
provide their services in the South African markets.
It is fairly easy for reputable and  established  South  African  organisations  at  this
stage  to  raise  foreign  funds.  Non-residents  are  no  longer  affected  by  the  remaining  exchange
controls,  and  accept  the  credibility  of  the  South  African  authorities  in  their  determination
gradually to remove the remaining controls. One major constraint, however, is provided by the
volatility of exchange rates, even amongst the major currencies of the world. It is not only  the
South  African  rand  that  showed  great  volatility  over  the  past  year,  but  also  many  other
currencies.  The  exchange  rate  between  the  Deutsche  Mark  and  the  US  dollar,  for  example,
changed from $1=1.54DM at the beginning of January 1997, to $1=1.79DM today, i.e. a change
of 16.2 per cent. At this stage, the Malaysian ringgit, the Thai baht, the Indonesian rupiah, the
Philippine  peso  and  the  Czech  koruna  are  all  under  pressure  from  international  currency
speculators.
South African borrowers of foreign funds will therefore most probably  prefer  to
cover  foreign  borrowings  with  forward  exchange  contracts,  which  will  eliminate  any  cost
advantages from lower interest rates in other countries. We nevertheless believe that it is in the
interest  of  the  South  African  economy  to  make  use  of  foreign  finance  where  available,  as  this
will  enable  the  country  to  maintain  a  higher  rate  of  economic  development.  We  are  indeed
confident  that,  if  carefully  managed,  the  relaxation  of  exchange  controls  for  residents  will  not
lead  to  an  overall  net  outflow  of  capital  from  the  country.  New  investments  by  non-residents
should continue to exceed the outward investment by residents.
BIS Review 69/1997
