Mr.  Sheng  looks  at  questions  relating  to  financial  regulation    Lecture  by
Mr. Andrew  Sheng,  a  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  to  the
Macquarie University MA (Finance) Programme in Hong Kong on 8/5/97.
“A  state  is  better  governed  which  has  but  few  laws,  and  those  laws  are  strictly
observed”...René Descartes (1596-1650)
Introduction
Financial  markets  today  are  the  biggest  markets  in  the  world.  The  foreign
exchange market turns over US$ 1.2 trillion daily, roughly one quarter of annual world exports.
The regulation of financial markets therefore concerns us all. This paper covers the What, Why,
Who and How of financial regulation.
Financial markets engage in the exchange of property rights. Financial assets are
derivatives of physical or real assets, derivatives being property rights of property rights that are
not “lumpy” or asset specific, and transactions costs in them being lower than transactions in real
assets.
The first thing to remember about financial products is that they are all defined by
the  law.  Therefore,  all  financial  transactions  are  about  transactions  in  legal  products,  under
procedures  regulated  by  rules  or  laws.  Even  financial  institutions  are,  strictly  speaking,  legal
constructs.  To  paraphrase  another  French  philosopher:  Man  is  born  free,  but  after  that  he  is
bound by the law.
What is Financial Regulation?
The  Dictionary  of  Finance  defines  regulation  as  actions  that  ‘command  and
control’  the  individual  decisions  of  firms,  in  an  effort  to  prevent  private  decision-making  that
would take inadequate account of the ’public interest’. Regulation may be self-imposed, or, as is
usual, by a third party. The  Government  may  intervene  in  a  market  or  industry  in  the  form  of
law,  administrative  rules,  taxation  or  moral  suasion.  Self-regulation  could  be  imposed  through
industry associations and codes of conduct.
The regulatory framework will shape market behaviour. Therefore, the design and
practice of the regulatory framework determines the efficiency and performance of the regulated
market.
Why Regulations?
There  are  a  few  theories  that  attempt  to  explain  the  existence  and  forms  of
regulation, including:
-  the  competition  for  regulation  theory  suggests  that  there  exists  a  market  for
regulation,  in  which  consumers  and  producers  compete.  Regulation  will  serve  the  interests  of
those who are willing to offer the most for the regulation. Since regulation can be regarded as a
public good, the free-rider problem suggests that the benefit to the individual consumer is likely
to  be  small  relative  to  the  producer.  Therefore,  producers  will  have  more  incentive  to  try  and
obtain  favourable  regulation  through  industry  associations.  A  countervailing  force  is  therefore
the consumer lobby; and   capture theory suggests that producers capture regulatory agencies and
control  them  in  their  own  interests.  Vested  interests  reinforce  the  regulatory  framework  to
BIS Review   55/1997
- 2 -
support their interests, but the danger is that such behaviour would result in non-competitiveness
in the international market, leading to long-run social loss.
If we believe the above theories, and assume that regulations impose ultimately a
cost  on  the  consumer  or  taxpayer,  it  may  be  in  the  public  interest  to  remove  regulations  and
allow greater competition. This is the primary driving force behind current market deregulation
policies prevalent in OECD markets.
A recent example of the deregulation drive to “make markets work better” is the
report of the Australian Financial System Inquiry (Wallis Report), whose recommendations seek
to:-
create a flexible regulatory structure which will be more responsive to the forces
for change operating on the financial system;
clarify regulatory goals;
increase the accountability of the agencies charged with meeting those goals;
ensure  that  the  regulation  of  similar  financial  products  be  more  consistent  and
promote competition by improving comparability;
introduce greater competitive neutrality across the financial system;
establish  more  contestable,  efficient  and  fair  financial  markets,  resulting  in
reduced costs to consumers;
provide  more  effective  regulation  for  financial  conglomerates  which  will  also
facilitate competition and efficiency; and
facilitate the international competitiveness of the Australian financial system.
On the other hand, a market without regulation also does not work. Free banking
and frontier capitalism results in control by the Mafia, with huge losses inflicted on the innocent
and unwary. The public interest theory argues that regulation is an attempt to correct for market
failures, such as monopoly, externalities and lack of information. For example, the social cost of
the failure of a financial institution may be much higher than the private cost to the  institution
itself.  Therefore,  financial  institutions  left  to  themselves  will  accept  more  risk  than  is  optimal
from a systemic point of view, thus forming the basic case for government regulation of banking
activity and the establishment of capital requirements (Martin Feldstein, quoted in Dale, 1996).
On  this  basis,  we  can  justify  the  case  for  external  regulations  on  private  sector
behaviour on four broad grounds which all relate to market failure:-
first, the moral hazard argument. If a market participant believes that the state will
underwrite  his  losses,  then  behaviour  will  change.  A  good  example  is  how  deposit  insurance
encourages depositors and bankers to engage in risky behaviour that forces the state to pay in the
end, thus undermining market discipline and entailing regulation.
second, the widows and orphans argument.  These  regulations  provide  protection
to  poorly  (asymmetrically)  informed  clients,  based  on  the  view  that  small  depositors  and
investors cannot assess properly the riskiness of financial institutions they deal with.
third,  the  public  policy  argument.  In  free  market  economies,  public  policy
arguments  call  for  competition  and  free  trade.  An  example  would  be  anti-trust  laws  in  some
countries to prevent monopolisation of certain markets.
fourth, the systemic risk issue, which allows the state to prevent the failure of one
participant  to  destabilize  the  whole  system.  This  justifies  the  regulation,  for  example,  of  the
payment system and the banking sector.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 3 -
Regulation therefore has two important dimensions that must always be borne in
mind. First, regulation is a cost that is like taxation: someone bears the cost of regulation. The
public must always ask whether the benefits outweigh the costs.  Second,  regulation  has  a  time
element  -  regulations  must  change  with  the  times.  Old  regulations  may  prevent  or  impede
market growth. As markets change, so must regulations. Third, regulation should not prevent the
effective working of market forces. For example, we should avoid bank failures, but not prevent
all bank failures. Chairman Alan Greenspan of the US Fed (1997), said “our goal as supervisors
should not be to prevent all bank failures, but to maintain sufficient prudential standards so that
banking problems that do occur do not become widespread.”
What are we regulating?
We can regulate products, functions or institutions or a combination of all three.
Problems arise when we have overlapping regulatory terrain, competing regulatory agencies and
confused regulatory objectives. There are also arguments for and against the concentration and
competition  in  regulatory  agencies.  A  good  example  of  a  one-stop  regulatory  agency  is  the
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  which  combines  the  regulation  of  the  banking  system,  the
securities market and the insurance industry in one institution. At the other end of the spectrum,
the  US  banking  sector  is  regulated  by  at  least  four  different  agencies,  the  Federal  Reserve
system,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (OCC),  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance
Corporation  (FDIC)  and  the  state  banking  commissioners.  Since  US  banks  are  increasingly
engaged  in  securities  areas,  their  functions  are  also  subject  to  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission (SEC) and consumer lobbies. Regulation may be based on product types such that
each regulatory authority specialises in one financial product. Under this framework, a securities
regulator  will  concentrate  in  the  oversight  of  securities  activities,  irrespective  of  the  type  of
financial institutions that are carrying out this business.
Functional  regulation  is  generally  conducted  by  two  separate  regulatory  bodies,
an investor protection arm and a systemic stability arm. The investor protection arm deals with
retail depositors and small investors to ensure fair conduct, equitable competition and customer
protection.
The systemic stability agency, on the other hand, looks at the  larger  players  and
wholesale activities. It would also be responsible for the safety, structure and functioning of all
payment  systems  and  financial  markets.  Preventive  measures  include  capital  adequacy
requirements; constraints on connected lending and other rules aimed at preventing insolvency;
and an official safety net such as lender of last resort or deposit insurance.
This  approach  follows  the  Goodhart  (1995)  model,  which  suggests  that  the
difference in focus and function of investor protection and systemic stability is large enough to
justify  two  separate  regulatory  bodies  in  each  country  to  share  the  regulatory  responsibilities.
According  to  Goodhart,  the  formulation  of  rules  for  the  safety  of  the  system  should  be  the
responsibility of the systemic stability arm. On the other hand, the monitoring and operation of
the system should be divided between the two arms on the basis of their size, e.g. balance sheet.
Another  regulatory  framework,  which  developed  historically,  takes  the  form  of
institutional regulation. It reflects institutional segmentation within each country, with insurance
companies, securities houses, mortgage lending companies and banks becoming the concern  of
differing  regulatory  bodies.  Institutional  regulation  becomes  less  practicable  as  the  barriers
between operating in differing functional and geographical financial markets have been eroded.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 4 -
the 
In  between, 
regulatory  system  may  be  organised  along  mixed
functional/institutional  lines.  As  banks,  securities  houses  and  insurance  companies  compete  in
each other’s turf, there is now a less  meaningful  difference  between  institutions  and  functions.
One model, colloquially known as “Twin Peaks”, consists of a Financial Stability Commission,
with  responsibility  for  systemic  risk,  the  prudential  supervision  of  all  major  institutions,  and
conduct of business regulation of wholesale activities, and a Consumer Protection Commission,
which could be in charge of conduct of business regulation in retail markets, as well as detecting
market manipulation and insider dealing. It would also carry out prudential supervision of those
stock  brokers  and  fund  managers  who  deal  with  private  clients,  and  of  independent
intermediaries. This is essentially the model adopted by the Wallis Commission.
Approaches to Regulation
The  latest  mantra  on  financial  regulation  is  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s
for  “Internal  Governance,  Official  Oversight,  and  Market
approach,  which  calls 
Incentives”(Lindgren, 1996). To this, I would add, “Robust Financial Infrastructure”.
The  first  line  of  protection  against  bank  failure  must  be  internal  management’s
own risk controls. The growing complexity and variety of banking business suggests that neither
the authorities nor informed customers can prevent internal management from making mistakes
if internal controls do not work. The best defense against mistakes and fraud are proper internal
governance,  or  checks  and  balances.  Internal  dual  controls,  together  with  both  internal  and
external  auditors,  plus  a  proper  disclosure  policy  would  give  the  best  incentives  for  internal
management to perform according to proper rules of behaviour.
Public  disclosure  rather  than  private  channels  of  information  would  be  cheaper
and  reduce  unwarranted  expectations  of  what  a  regulator  or  supervisor  can  actually  achieve.
However, it is difficult, if not impossible, to guarantee full disclosure. It is doubtful whether free
markets  work  well  enough  in  conditions  where  information  is  partial  and  asymmetrically
distributed  and  externalities  exist.  Thus,  it  is  not  really  possible  for  the  authorities  to  shift
entirely to reliance on disclosure and to abandon their specialised supervisory function.
Increasingly,  therefore,  the  public  oversight  function  is  one  of  monitoring  and
surveillance, to ensure that systemic risks are not incurred at excessive public costs. When best
practices  and  market  standards  are  applied,  any  behaviour  by  regulatees  that  deviate  from  the
norm  would  be  subject  to  public  scrutiny.  There  is  therefore  greater  pressure  for  establishing
international  norms  of  performance,  such  as  capital  adequacy  standards  and  risk  management
tools. The Basle Committee has recently established “Core Principles” to guide the regulation of
banks.
The  application  of  certain  regulatory  tools,  such  as  required  capital  ratios,
exposure  limits,  constraints  on  self-dealing  and  CAMEL  ratings  are  designed  to  ensure  that
market  participants  comply  with  minimal  standards  of  capital  and  risk  exposures.  It  should  be
emphasised  that  effective  regulation  requires  proper  compliance  and  enforcement.  This
embodies the idea of “bark versus bite”. Teeth must also include sound exit policies - non-exit
implies no enforcement, which is the case of state-owned enterprises in the Mainland of China.
However, increasingly it is recognized that such rules should be kept simple and broad-brushed,
in  order  to  allow  a  rule-based  environment  to  function.  Too  many  rules  impose  too  heavy  a
regulatory cost, with redundant or excessive information burdens.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 5 -
However,  given  very  rapidly  changing  market  conditions,  some  degree  of
discretion can be more practical than rigid rules. On the other hand, excessive discretion can lead
to systematic forbearance (time inconsistency) that undermine rules and could even be subject to
corruption  and  abuse.  Therefore,  the  time  inconsistency  problem  can  be  solved  by  authorities
pre-committing themselves to a sequence of automatic, graduated responses, giving  the  market
time to adjust to rule changes or rule application.
However, it must be true that the  incentive  or  pay-off  structure  is  one  that  must
not  be  overlooked.  One  of  the  main  reasons  why  agents  do  not  abide  by  established  control
procedures  is  because  it  is  not  in  their  own  perceived  interest  to  do  so  (Goodhart,  1996).  The
best way to control risks is the market incentive to do so. For the market to work, there must be
adequate  information  transparency,  and  an  adequate  pay  (or  penalty)  structure  that  causes  the
private sector or market to regulate itself. For example, excessive bonuses may have caused the
Barings  management  to  overlook  the  risks  assumed  by  Leeson.  Low  pay  for  internal  auditors
relative  to  dealers  may  prevent  them  from  raising  the  alarm  bell.  Internal  audit  committees  of
financial  institutions  should  signify  that  they  have  considered  the  implications  for  the  risk
preferences of key personnel of their pay structures.
It is now better recognized that a robust financial infrastructure is also a form of
regulator  on  market  participant  behaviour.  Modern  financial  infrastructure,  such  as  automated
payment  systems,  impose  on  market  participants  certain  minimum  standards  of  performance,
such as time compliance in payments. Failure of one participant to perform would immediately
expose  the  participant  to  market  discipline.  There  is  therefore  peer  pressure  on  market
participants to comply with the standards demanded by international payment systems.
Costs of Regulation
Regulation  is  not  without  costs.  The  US  estimates  that  regulation  costs  the
consumer  roughly  7%  of  GDP  annually,  both  directly  or  indirectly.  Bank  regulation  can  be
likened  to  deposit  insurance  -  the  higher  the  regulation  and  safety,  the  higher  the  insurance
premium.  One  theory  suggests  that  banks  can  elect  to  be  one  of  three  categories:  super-safe
banks, safe or normal. Super-safe banks are only allowed to hold super-safe assets, but in return
have 100% deposit insurance. Normal banks are allowed to hold any asset, but depositors get no
protection  at  all.  But  super-safe  assets  offer  a  lower  yield  than  normal  assets,  so  the  safer  the
bank the lower the interest rate offered to the depositors.
The cost of regulation lies not only in the cost of preventing bank failure, but also
the opportunity costs of foregone innovation. Excessive or outmoded regulation results in loss of
international  competitiveness,  thus  imposing  future  adjustment  costs  on  the  economy.  Hence,
there is a need to review regulations constantly and to de-regulate or re-regulate.
Why are we deregulating?
There are four major reasons why deregulation is occurring:
Globalisation
Financial innovation and disintermediation
Changing consumer behaviour, e.g. aging population
Excessive costs
BIS Review   55/1997
- 6 -
The  globalisation  of  financial  markets  can  be  demonstrated  by  the  tremendous
increase in cross-border transactions. For instance, at the end of 1994 the stock of cross-border
bank assets was more than 4.5  times  its  level  of  15  years  earlier,  which  represents  an  increase
from 20% of the combined GDP of OECD countries in 1980 to around 35% in 1994. Between
1980  and  1994  cross-border  securities  transactions  in  industrial  countries  expanded  from  less
than  10%  of  GDP  to  well  above  100%  of  GDP.  Within  the  equity  sector,  cross-exchange  and
cross-border transactions have increased rapidly as a percentage of world equity turnover to the
point  where  one  in  four  stock  market  trades  conducted  world-wide  involves  either  a  foreign
security or a foreign counterparty.
The  globalisation  of  financial  markets  may  increase  systemic  risk,  through
contagious  financial  disorders  originating  in  poorly  regulated  financial  centres.  As  Alan
Greenspan  (1997)  mentioned,  ’the  efficiency  of  global  financial  markets,  engendered  by  the
rapid proliferation of financial products, has the capability of transmitting mistakes at a far faster
pace throughout the financial system in ways that were unknown a generation ago, and not even
remotely  imagined  in  the  19th  century.’  Depositors,  investors  and  counterparties  may  be
exposed  to  foreign  jurisdiction  risks  which  they  are  not  in  a  position  to  monitor  or  control.
Besides,  the  co-  existence  of  uneven  national  regulations  and  global  markets  may  severely
distort competition between financial institutions.
The  growing  integration  of  markets  calls  for  international  cooperation  among
supervisors. Accordingly, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision was established in 1974
and is involved in establishing a common regulatory framework. The Basle Committee and the
International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  issued  co-ordinated  guidelines
on  risk  management  on  OTC  derivatives  business.  IOSCO  also  adopted  the  so-called  Windsor
Declaration  on  co-operation  between  supervisors  of  futures  and  options  markets.  Industry
initiatives  also  aimed  at  strengthening  prudential  standards  in  international  financial  markets.
The  Group  of  Thirty  has  proposed  minimum  standards  relating  to  netting  arrangements,
settlement procedures and managerial oversight of derivatives risks. The International Securities
Dealers  Association  (ISDA)  has  established  good  practice  guidelines  for  the  management  of
derivatives  and  FX  business  globally  by  broker-dealers.  And  in  early  1996,  49  exchanges  and
clearing  houses  announced  an  agreement  to  exchange  information  on  their  members’  risk
exposures in different markets.
Another  key  development  in  international  financial  markets  is  the  emergence  of
financial conglomerates which provides a wide range of services including insurance, securities,
mortgage  lending  and  banking  services  etc..  The  fusion  of  different  types  of  business  is  made
possible by deregulation initiatives in major financial centres. In London, the rules of the Stock
Exchange were amended in 1986 to allow acquisition of member firms by outsiders,  including
banks,  thereby  ending  the  separation  of  banking  and  securities  businesses  which  had  been  a
feature of the UK financial services industry for some 300 years.
In  the  US,  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  of  1933  still  formally  separates  banking  from
securities  businesses,  but  through  liberal  interpretation  of  this  statute  the  US  regulatory
authorities  have  in  recent  years  permitted  the  US  banks  to  develop  significant  securities
operations  through  special-purpose  affiliates.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  widespread  consensus
within  the  US  that  Glass-Steagall  should  be  repealed.  In  Japan,  the  Financial  System  Reform
Law that came into effect in 1993 allowed commercial banks and securities firms to expand into
each others’ business territory by establishing separate subsidiaries. In the European Union, the
capital adequacy directive’s trading-book approach permits banks to engage freely in securities
activities.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 7 -
The  revolution  in  information  and  data  processing  technology  has  transformed
our  financial  markets  and  the  way  our  financial  institutions  conduct  their  operations.  In  most
respects,  these  technological  advances  have  enhanced  the  potential  for  reducing  transaction
costs,  to  the  benefit  of  consumers  of  financial  services,  and  for  managing  risks.  But  in  many
respects they highlight the inadequacies of existing regulations.
The  ease  and  cheapness  of  gathering,  processing  and  disseminating  information
has  encouraged  financial  innovation  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  the  development  of
screen-based trading systems, securitisation and the proliferation of derivative products.
One  of  the  regulatory  responses  to  financial  conglomerates  is  the  adoption  of
consolidated  supervision.  Regulators  should  consider  whether  various  businesses  within  a
conglomerate (banking, securities, insurance, etc.) should be consolidated in an accounting sense
for the purpose of calculating capital adequacy and other prudential ratios, and for assessment in
general. The more general view expressed, for instance, in European financial market directives
and Basle regulatory guidelines is that like activities should be treated identically for supervisory
purposes,  regardless  of  the  category  of  institution.  It  is  also  important  that  bank  and  securities
regulators co-operate at the international level.
Financial  innovation,  e.g.  derivatives  trading,  creates  transparency  problems  for
regulators, because of the speed and complexity of risk transformation. The appropriate response
of market transparency is more extensive disclosure of financial information. But in the context
of fast-moving derivatives business  the  difficulty  is  to  formulate  effective  disclosure  rules  that
do  more  than  provide  an  outdated  snapshot  of  risk  exposures.  For  management  of  financial
institutions,  the  main  emphasis  must  be  on  internal  controls.  External  regulators,  such  as  the
Basle  Committee  and  IOSCO,  have  responded  and  issued  detailed  guidelines  on  risk
management. As trading position can be transformed swiftly through the use of derivatives and
hence may not be reliable, regulatory focus has shifted to assess internal risk models, rather than
the instruments held at a point in time. In addition to external regulation, the Group of Thirty in
its  1993  study  of  derivatives  made  recommendations  at  strengthening  risk-management
techniques  and  procedures.  Another  industry  initiative  was  JP  Morgan’s  decision  to  release  its
own proprietary risk-management model for general use.
In  addition,  changing  consumer  behaviour  resulting  from  aging  population,  for
example,  calls  for  new  and  sophisticated  products  like  pension  funds  and  long-term  debt
instruments.  Also,  consumers’  expectations  are  likely  to  be  higher  as  they  now  have  access  to
more choices from more diversified markets.
Finally, de-regulation has occurred because old regulations have not prevented the
massive  losses  incurred  by  worldwide  bank  failures.  In  many  countries,  the  losses  caused  by
bank  failures  have  been  as  high  as  15%  of  GDP,  with  bank  losses  in  Japan  and  France  at  an
estimated  8%  of  GDP.  In  the  light  of  these  heavy  costs,  governments  around  the  world  have
begun to look seriously at  the  cost  of  regulation.  The  latest  initiative  include  the  Japanese  Big
Bang, which would be complete by 2000.
Should the Central Bank also act as the Supervisor?
There are several arguments in support of the assumption of the supervisory role
by  the  central  bank.  The  first  is  efficiency  consideration.  There  is  huge  overlap  between  the
areas of interest  of,  and  information  required  by,  and  available  to,  both  the  supervisor  and  the
central bank. Second, rescue or liquidity crisis will normally involve and require the immediate
BIS Review   55/1997
- 8 -
provision  of  liquidity,  which  can  only  be  done  by  the  central  bank.  This  is  facilitated  by
internalising the supervisory body within the central bank.
Others  argue  the  reverse.  First,  since  the  finance  of  any  large  rescues  involves
government  funding,  the  politicians  have  a  direct  interest  and  involvement  in  financial
regulation. This may undermine the independence of a central bank if it also plays a supervisory
role. Second, it is argued that an independent central bank in its conduct of monetary policy and
being responsible for banking supervision may be perceived as too powerful. Third, the failure
of  a  central  bank  in  its  supervisory  duties  will  harm  its  credibility  in  its  conduct  of  monetary
policy.  There  is  an  inherent  conflict  between  supervision  and  monetary  policy.  Central  bank
assistance to bail out problem banks tends to be inflationary on the money supply.
The  arguments  are  finely  balanced.  Whether  the  regulatory  power  should  be
centralized  or  diffused  will  depend  very  much  on  the  legal,  constitutional  and  historical
background for each financial system.
Conclusion
Regulation  is  an  art,  not  a  science.  It  involves  complicated  trade-offs  between
competing interests. As Walter Bagehot said over 120 years ago, money will not manage itself.
The regulation of money will be debated in the years to come.
References:
Bank  for  International  Settlements,  “Report  on  Financial  Stability  in  Emerging
Market Economies”, April, 1997
Bullock, Alan, Stallybrass Oliver and Trombley Stephen, The Fontana Dictionary
of Modern Thought, Fontana Press, 1988
Commonwealth of Australia, “Financial System Inquiry: Final Report Overview”
- the Wallis Report -, Australian Government Publishing Service, March 1997
Dale,  Richard,  Regulating  the  New  Financial  Markets,  Proceedings  of  a
conference “The Future of the Financial System” held at the H.C. Coombs Centre for Financial
Studies, Kirribilli on 8/9 July 1996, Economic Group, Reserve Bank of Australia
Davies,  Howard,  Market  and  Regulatory  Structures  in  a  Global  Environment,
speech at the Federal Receive Bank of Atlanta’s Financial Markets Conference, February 1997
Goodhart, Charles, Some Regulatory Concerns, LSE Financial Market Group, An
ESRC Research Centre, Special Paper No. 79, December 1995
Greenspan, Alan, Remarks at the Spring Meeting of the Institute of International
Finance, Washington DC, April 1997
Hoenig, Thomas M., “Rethinking Financial Regulation”, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, Economic Review , Second Quarter 1996, Vol.81, No.2
BIS Review   55/1997
- 9 -
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Gillian Garcia, and Matthew I. Saal, “Bank Soundness and
Macroeconomic Policy”, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC , 1996
Sheng,  Andrew,  “Bank  Restructuring:  Lessons  from  the  1980s”,  World  Bank,
1996
Sheng,  Andrew,  “Managing  Derivative  Market  Risks”,  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, January, 1997
The Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
Footnote:
I  am  grateful  to  Carmen  Chu  for  research  assistance  in  the  preparation  of  this
paper and to Raymond Li and Osbert Lam for useful comments.
BIS Review   55/1997
