Bank of Japan’s February review of monetary and economic trends in Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, MONTHLY ECONOMIC REVIEW, 18/2/97.
A  moderate  economic  recovery  continues  in  Japan  as  private  demand  shows
increasing firmness.  With respect to final demand, public-sector investment has decreased while
net  exports  are  on  an  increasing  trend.    Housing  investment  has  remained  at  a  high  level  and
business  fixed  investment  is  increasing  steadily.    While  growth  in  personal  consumption  has
been moderate on the whole, passenger car sales, which have a strong influence on production,
have  accelerated  significantly.    Meanwhile,  inventories  on  the  whole  are  at  appropriate  levels.
In these circumstances, industrial production has recently increased at a somewhat fast pace and
labor market conditions have continued to improve moderately.  Meanwhile, prices have stopped
declining, and monetary aggregates continue to grow at 3.0 - 4.0 per cent.
With regard to personal consumption, sales at department stores and supermarkets
are improving moderately, albeit with some fluctuations.  Outlays for travel have remained firm.
Growth  in  sales  of  electrical  appliances  has  become  somewhat  moderate  as  the  pace  of
expansion in personal computers and cellular telephones decelerated.  Passenger car sales  have
recorded  buoyant  two-digit  growth  year-to-year  for  four  consecutive  months  since  October
1996.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders  are
increasing steadily on average, although they are expected to show a decline in the first quarter
of  1997  as  a  reaction  to  the  large  increase  recorded  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1996  in  both  the
manufacturing  and  non-manufacturing  sectors.    Construction  floor  area  has  also  continued  to
pick up moderately.
With  respect  to  housing  investment,  housing  starts  have  remained  strong
reflecting  low  interest  rates  and  reasonable  housing  prices. 
  They  recorded  a  high
seasonally-adjusted  annual  rate  of  over  1.7  million  starts  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1996,  partly
reflecting the rise in orders ahead of the consumption tax rate hike.
Regarding  public-sector 
showing
developments  in  orders  have  decreased  significantly  since  autumn  1996  compared  to  the  high
level recorded in the previous year which reflected the large economic stimulus package.  As for
actual implementation of public works, with a time lag after orders, the seasonally adjusted level
of  shipments  of  related  goods  has  been  decreasing  since  autumn  1996  after  having  increased
until the summer.
investment,  public  works  contracted 
Real exports have recently shown an  increasing  trend  as  the  effects  of  the  yen’s
depreciation  since  summer  1995  have  gradually  permeated.    Meanwhile,  the  increase  in  real
imports has slowed, also reflecting the depreciation of the yen.  As a result, the real trade surplus
turned to an increase in autumn 1996.  The nominal current account surplus is also beginning to
rise, although the pace of increase is slower than that of the real trade surplus, partly because the
rise in oil prices is pushing up import volume.
Industrial production has increased significantly by an annual rate of over 10 per
cent  quarter-to-quarter  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1996.    This  increase  was  caused  by  the  rise  in
final  demand,  particularly  in  demand  conducive  to  production,  such  as  passenger  car  sales,
machinery  orders,  and  net  exports,  in  addition  to  the  completion  of  inventory  adjustments.
Industrial  production  is  expected  to  continue  increasing  significantly  in  January  and  February
1997, reflecting the rise in demand ahead of the consumption tax rate hike.
BIS Review   20/1997
- 2 -
Labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve  moderately  on  the  whole.
Although  the  unemployment  rate  remains  at  a  high  level  and  employment  growth  has  been
moderate, overtime working hours have significantly exceeded the level of the previous year in
line with production growth, and the ratio of job offers to job applications has continued its rise.
With  respect  to  price  developments,  domestic  wholesale  prices  (adjusted  for
seasonal  electricity  rates)  have  stopped  declining,  although  downward  pressures  such  as  from
competition  with  imports  and  technological  innovation  in,  e.g.,  electrical  machinery,  remain
strong.  This development has been supported by the yen’s depreciation to date, the rise in crude
oil prices and the moderate improvement in domestic supply and demand conditions.  Corporate
service  prices  have  declined,  particularly  in  rents  and  leasing  charges,  but  the  year-to-year
decrease  has  become  smaller.    Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding  perishables)  have
exceeded the level of the previous year, as the decline in commodity prices has slowed against
the background of the yen’ depreciation and the halt in the decline in domestic wholesale prices.
Growth  in  monetary  aggregates,  measured  in  terms  of  the  year-to-year  growth
rate of M2 + CDs average outstanding, has remained stable on the whole at 3.0 - 4.0 per cent.
Although  lending  by  private  financial  institutions  has  been  weak,  that  by  public  financial
institutions has been firm.
Regarding  money  market  rates,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  on  the
whole has stayed somewhat below the official discount rate of 0.5 per  cent.    The  3-month  CD
rate  has  moved  at  0.50  -  0.55  per  cent.    Meanwhile,  with  regard  to  the  market  ’s  interest  rate
expectations, 3-month Euro-yen futures are showing relatively minor movements after declining
at  a  brisk  pace  between  summer  and  autumn  1996.    In  these  circumstances,  the  long-term
government  bond  yield  had  been  declining  since  summer  1996,  and  has  recently  moved  at
around 2.4 per cent.
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained at a record low level of 1.625 per  cent  since  September  1995.    The  long-term  prime
lending rate was lowered three times by a total of 0.8 percentage points since September 1996 in
response to the developments in the long-term interest rates, and has been moving at the record
low of 2.5 per cent since December.  In these circumstances, short-term and long-term average
contracted interest rates on new loans and discounts have moved at around record low levels.
On the stock exchange, the Nikkei 225 stock average plummeted between the end
of  1996  and  early  1997  reflecting  market’s  uncertainties  about  Japan’s  economic  outlook  and
balance-sheet problems.  It became  stable  in  late  January  1997  and  has  recently  stayed  around
¥18,000 - 19,000.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  depreciated  moderately  on  the  whole
against  the  U.S.  dollar  in  1996,  but  the  pace  of  depreciation  has  accelerated  since  the  end  of
1996.  The yen has recently moved at around ¥123 - 124 to the U.S. dollar.  Meanwhile, the yen
has been relatively stable against the deutsche mark at around ¥73 - 74.
BIS Review   20/1997
