Mr. Trichet discusses Franco-German  monetary  cooperation  and  monetary
union   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of France, M. Jean-Claude Trichet, on the occasion
of the fiftieth anniversary of the Land central bank of Rheinland-Palatinate and the Saarland in
Mainz on 2/6/97.
It  is  a  great  honour  to  speak  in  Mainz  today  and  to  celebrate  the  fiftieth
anniversary  of  the  Land  central  bank  of  Rheinland-Palatinate  and  the  Saarland.  Everybody
knows that Mainz played a decisive role in spreading culture and ideas in Europe, in particular
thanks to the invention of printing by Gutenberg.
And  the  celebration  of  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  your  institution  gives  me  the
opportunity  to  underline  once  again  the  prominent  role  played  by  the  Bundesbank  for  the
stability, credibility and prosperity of the German economy. As you know, the Banque de France
deeply supports this culture of stability, which sets the basis for monetary cooperation between
France and Germany, the basis for European monetary union. The celebration of an anniversary
is a good opportunity to draw lessons from the past and to foresee the future. That is why I have
decided  today  to  speak  about  Franco-German  monetary  cooperation  during  the  last  fifty  years
and  the  prospects  for  monetary  union.  In  this  respect,  the  creation  of  the  single  currency  on
January 1st,  1999  is  a  major  event  for  our  respective  countries.  Far  from  being  a  breaking  off
with  the  past,  the  creation  of  monetary  union  is  the  logical  crowning  of  Franco-German
monetary cooperation. Indeed:
- Franco-German  monetary  cooperation  is  based  on  solid  foundations  and  has
steadily developed during the last fifty years (1)
- this cooperation will be crowned by the creation of monetary union in 1999 (2).
FRANCO-GERMAN MONETARY COOPERATION IS BASED ON SOLID FOUNDATIONS
AND HAS STEADILY DEVELOPED DURING THE LAST FIFTY YEARS
In order not to bother you by an unduly long speech, I will focus on the last fifty
years  only!  Nevertheless,  one  could  easily  demonstrate  that  our  respective  monetary  histories
have  been  deeply  linked  since  the  Middle  Ages.  Indeed,  Emperor  Charlemagne  enacted  a  bill
creating  a  unit  of  account  common  to  its  whole  empire,  which  enshrined  most  of  the  present
territories  of  France  and  Germany.  The  global  features  of  the  system  (in  particular  the
subdivisions) experienced an exceptional longevity of almost 1000 years.
The  last  fifty  years  constitute,  however,  a  rather  homogeneous  period,  during
which Franco-German monetary cooperation really developed. First, it is useful to underline the
solid  roots  and  foundations  of  this  cooperation.  These  foundations  paved  the  way  for  the
emergence  of  a  common  destiny,  which  is  best  illustrated  by  the  creation  of  the  EMS.  This
community  of  views  and  interests  have  been  crucial  in  the  decision  to  create  a  European
monetary union and a single currency.
I  will  first  explain  the  solid  roots  and  foundations  on  which  Franco-German  monetary
cooperation is based
Franco-German  monetary  cooperation  is  based  on  historical  and  economic
foundations.
identified.
The  historical  roots  of  Franco-German  monetary  cooperation  can  easily  be
BIS Review   63/1997
- 2 -
Both countries had first to rebuild the whole economy in 1945, in a period when
sacrifices  were  difficult  to  impose  on  populations.  Germany  tackled  these  disturbances  rapidly
and  efficiently.  The  monetary  reform  implemented  in  1948,  aimed  at  definitively  eradicating
inflation, paved the way for monetary stability and economic prosperity. A new currency  - the
Deutschemark - was introduced, and a strong and independent central bank was founded.
France  followed  a  similar  strategy  with  the  creation  of  the  “nouveau  franc”  or
“new  franc”,  whose  nominal  value  was  100  “anciens  francs”  or  “old  francs”.  This  reform
contributed to stabilizing the French currency, which did not experience any devaluation for ten
years.
In  1971,  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  and  the  currency  instability
which followed convinced European Governments that an exchange rate system had to be set up.
The first experience, known as the Snake, was not completely successful, but was the first step
towards a common monetary destiny between European countries.
As  far  as  economic  foundations  are  concerned,  our  two  economies  have  been
increasingly interlinked for decades.
First  of  all,  the  various  obstacles  to  foreign  trade  in  Europe  have  been
progressively  lifted.  Indeed,  the  Treaty  of  Rome  signed  in  1957  aimed  at  creating  a  common
market.  The  removal  of  all  sorts  of  barriers  to  trade  proved  nevertheless  difficult  to  achieve.
That  is  why  the  European  authorities  felt  that  another  step  was  indispensable,  and  signed  the
Single Act in 1987. By now all persons, goods, services and capital can move freely  from  one
country to another. This is the case for France and Germany.
Trade is a good example of this integration. The share of French imports coming
from Germany is currently about 19%, while the share of German imports coming from France
is about 15%. Each country is the other's first trading partner. Beyond these gross figures, it is
interesting  to  note  that  this  trade  is  largely  made  of  complementary  goods  as  opposed  to
substitutable goods, thus increasing interdependence.
This 
interdependence 
is  more  generally
macroeconomic. Econometric work has indeed shown that French and German GDPs are closely
correlated.  This  means  that  national  economic  policies  cannot  deviate  excessively  from  each
other.
is  not  only  commercial, 
it 
These  foundations  progressively  convinced  France  and  Germany  that  they  needed  a  common
monetary destiny
As  I  said  earlier,  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  led  European
Governements  to  organize  monetary  relations  between  each  other.  France  and  Germany  were
among  the  most  prominent  actors  in  this  strategy.  I  personally  see  two  main  elements  in  this
common  destiny:  the  creation  of  the  European  monetary  system  (EMS)  in  1979  and  the
emergence of a conceptual convergence between our two countries as regards monetary issues.
The  creation  of  the  European  Monetary  System  in  March  1979  highlights  best
the  cooperation  between  France  and  Germany.  The  EMS  not  only  provided  exchange  rate
stability through the setting-up of formal fluctuation bands between currencies; it also organized
a  monetary  solidarity  between  countries,  by  providing  compulsory  interventions  and  related
financing facilities.
BIS Review   63/1997
- 3 -
Although the very first years of the EMS were characterized by several currency
realignments,  due  to  insufficient  nominal  convergence  between  countries, 
the  system
progressively contributed to exchange rate stability. German monetary policy, based on stability
and credibility, proved to be efficient. In this context, the French authorities fully endorsed the
objectives and disciplines of the EMS and embarked on monetary and exchange rate stability.
The  years  that  followed  were  characterized  by  increasing  convergence  between
countries  and  fewer  realignments.  All  countries,  including  new  participants  in  the  system,
adopted similar strategies. Although satisfactory in theory, this stance was nevertheless difficult
to  follow  for  some  economies  still  facing  imbalances,  and  in  particular  a  lack  of
competitiveness.
This  explains  partly  the  crises  that  occurred  in  1992  and  1993.  I  cannot  forget
how efficient Franco-German cooperation was during this difficult period.
This  concrete  cooperation  has  also  been  made  possible  by  the  emergence  of  a
conceptual convergence as regards monetary issues. Since 1987, the central rate of the French
franc within the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) has been unchanged, and a virtuous
disinflation  process  has  been  taking  place.  This  policy  has  allowed  French  short-term  and
long-term interest rates to decline steadily and to stand at similar levels to those reached by the
best performers within the EMS. And a consensus has emerged in France that monetary policy
should  be  shielded  from  short-term  influences  and  short-termist  strategies  and  placed  in  the
framework of a medium and long-term strategy of credibility.
In  this  respect,  a  decisive  step  was  the  decision  to  grant  independence  to  the
Banque  de  France  in  late  1993.  This  reform  was  based  on  a  new  perception  by  the  French
populace of the role of a central bank in a developed country. The last three years have shown
that independence  was  not  merely  a  theoretical  concept;  the  Banque  de  France  has  adopted  its
monetary policy and has made its own decisions, according to the law without any interference
from the Government. The Banque de France has steadily increased its credibility among market
participants and other observers.
The stability culture that has developed in France during the last decade is deeply
rooted  in  French  society  itself.  A  strong  consensus  now  exists  in  favour  of  a  stable  currency
backed by an independent central bank and contributing to preserving the purchasing power of
the currency, and thereby the purchasing power of citizens.
That is why Franco-German monetary cooperation made the case for European monetary union
more obvious
Indeed  it  is  clear  that  a  single  market  is  more  efficient  if  it  is  backed  by
exchange-rate  stability.  Excessive  exchange-rate  volatility  and  misalignments  are  invisible
barriers to trade, since they increase uncertainty and create inappropriate and erratic competitive
fluctuations.  Moreover,  in  an  environment  characterized  by  free  capital  movements,  isolated
monetary  strategies  are  made  more  difficult.  There  is  thus  a  need  for  monetary  coordination,
whose  ultimate  form  is  the  creation  of  a  monetary  union  and  a  single  currency.  France  and
Germany have had no difficulty in understanding  this  development  and  are  deeply  involved  in
the preparatory work for EMU.
The Maastricht Treaty contains clear and efficient monetary provisions by setting
specific deadlines for the creation of  a  single  currency  and  by  organizing  three  separate  stages
BIS Review   63/1997
- 4 -
for this process. These stages allow for a progressive but logical move to monetary union, which
ensures that the single currency will rest on solid foundations.
Moreover, the independence of the European System of Central Banks, made up
of the European Central Bank and national central banks which is fully warranted by the Treaty,
will guarantee price stability and the credibility of the single currency.
Last,  the  Treaty  allows  for  a  balanced  policy  mix  based  on  an  independent
monetary policy and appropriate fiscal discipline (in this respect, the stability and growth pact is
a  useful  “user  guide”  to  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty  and  not  a  new  constraint  coming  from
nowhere).
We  are  now  in  the  implementation  phase  of  the  monetary  provisions  of  the
Maastricht  Treaty.  The  concrete  preparations  of  monetary  union  are  the  responsibility  of  the
European Monetary Institute. The preparatory work is well on track and will allow the ESCB
to perform its tasks right from the start of  Stage  Three  in  January  1999; moreover,  the  EMI  is
often  consulted  by  other  European  authorities,  who  pay  careful  attention  to  the  advice  it
provides; this  was  notably  the  case  for  the  changeover  scenario  adopted  by  the  Heads  of  State
and  of  Government  in  Madrid  in  December  1995,  and  for  the  elaboration  of  draft  regulations
concerning  the  legal  framework  for  the  use  of  the  euro.  Here  again,  France  and  Germany  are
playing a very active role in these preparations, and as early as tomorrow I will meet President
Tietmeyer  in  Frankfurt,  together  with  our  colleagues,  to  attend  the  monthly  EMI  Council
meeting.
FRANCO-GERMAN  MONETARY  COOPERATION  WILL  ULTIMATELY  BE  CROWNED
BY THE CREATION OF A EUROPEAN MONETARY UNION IN 1999
I  am  personally  convinced  that  the  creation  of  monetary  union  in  1999  is  the
logical  consequence  of  economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments  that  have  been  taking
place  during  the  past  years.  The  increasing  integration  of  the  European  economies  -  and  in
particular  those  of  France  and  Germany  -  called  for  a  single  monetary  policy  and  a  single
currency.
I am also convinced that monetary union will successfully go through, right from
1999 since:
- it is a credible process;
- it will create an environment of stability.
EMU is a credible process
Indeed,  the  case  for  a  European  monetary  union  is  based  on  solid  economic
grounds, and it will be implemented in a realistic way.
EMU is not just some abstract concept dreamed up by a few people. It is based on
solid  economic  grounds.  When  the  exchange  rate  stability  provided  by  the  Bretton  Woods
system  and  by  the  barriers  between  national  financial  markets  disappeared  in  the  1970s,  a
number  of  European  governments  became  progressively  convinced  of  the  need  for  a  single
currency. The Maastricht Treaty is indeed the result of past major initiatives, such as the Werner
Report in 1970 and the Delors report in 1989.
BIS Review   63/1997
- 5 -
The  removal  of  all  tariff  and  non-tariff  barriers  to  trade  has  made  Europe  the
largest market in the world. The EU accounts for 21% of total world trade, against 17% for the
US and 10% for Japan. The benefits of the sheer size of the Single Market are plain to see. The
allocation of savings and investments is more efficient, competition is stronger, and the greater
liquidity  of  financial  markets  makes  more  capital  available  at  lower  cost  to  finance  profitable
ventures.
No doubt the European Monetary System and its Exchange Rate Mechanism have
helped  curb  exchange  rate  instability  and  eradicate  the  inflation  culture  that  prevailed  in  some
countries; yet the current level of economic and business integration calls for  the  Europeans  to
take a further step towards monetary integration, for the benefit of all European economic agents
and citizens.
The  benefits  of  the  single  currency  are  clear.  It  will  reduce  uncertainty  and
facilitate  production  and  investment decisions.  It  will  make  price  comparisons  across  Europe
more  transparent  and  reduce  transaction  costs.  In  addition,  the  single  currency  area  will  enjoy
price  stability  and  sound  public  finances,  which  will  lead  to  a  high  level  of  confidence  and  to
low market interest rates. Last but not least, the euro will be a major international currency and
this will facilitate international monetary cooperation.
EMU is not only based on solid economic grounds. It is also a realistic economic
process. EMU is based on convergence criteria which have to be met on a sustainable basis. The
fulfilment of the convergence criteria is not only a legal condition for participating in EMU but,
of course, corresponds to the sound policy management which is  in  the  interest  of  all  Member
States.
I am convinced that EMU will create an environment of stability
I  know  how  important  the  concept  of  stability  is  to  the  German  people.  This
culture  of  stability,  which  explains  to  a  large  extent  the  economic  success  of  your  country,  is
shared by many Governments, central banks and citizens all over Europe, not least in France.
I  know  that  the  German  people  have  expressed  some  qualms  about  the
disappearance of the Deutschemark and its replacement by the euro. But I will  try  to  convince
you that the euro will be as stable as the Deutschemark, as stable as the French franc today, for
the  sake  of  European  economic  prosperity  and  growth.  Indeed,  EMU  will  contribute  to
reinforcing stability in Europe. EMU will bring legal, fiscal and monetary stability.
EMU requires a sound legal basis to foster the credibility of the changeover to the
single currency. The Madrid European Council asked the Commission to prepare a draft Council
regulation on the legal framework for the use of the euro.
This  regulation  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  Market  participants  need  legal
certainty, not only as regards the  new  instruments  in  euro,  but  also  as  regard  the  continuity  of
instruments denominated in the former national currencies or in ECU. Besides financial markets,
legal certainty is also important for citizens, as the emergence of a new currency is inevitably, at
the first stage, a source of uncertainties.
 In this respect, technical preparatory work on the legal framework for the
use of the euro is almost achieved. The European regulations that have been drafted and should
be  endorsed  by  the  European  Council  in  Amsterdam  clearly  state  that  the  euro  will  be  the
BIS Review   63/1997
- 6 -
currency of the European monetary union as from the 1.1.1999 . As a consequence, the national
currencies, in particular notes and coins, will continue to circulate during a transitional period, as
subdivisions  of  the  euro.  Two  other  key  elements  are  that  the  changeover  will  ensure  the
continuity of existing contracts denominated either in national currencies or in ECU and that the
ECU will become the euro at a rate of 1 to 1.
Besides legal security, EMU will reinforce monetary stability in Europe.
The  Maastricht  Treaty  provides  for  a  monetary  framework  very  similar  to  that
prevailing in Germany and in France. The primary objective of the European System of Central
Banks (made up of the European Central Bank and national central banks) will be price stability.
The  ECB  Council  of  Governors  (only  those  of  countries  participating  in  monetary  union)  will
decide independently the level of official interest rates. Representatives of the European Council
may attend the ECB Council meetings, but they will not participate in the voting procedure.
Monetary  union  will  be  characterized  by  a  single  monetary  policy  and  national
fiscal policies. In this context, the issue of fiscal discipline and coordination is crucial. Sound
fiscal  policies  will  help  the  ESCB  to  maintain  price  stability.  Coordinated  fiscal  policies  will
contribute to a balanced policy mix in Europe. Fiscal discipline will prevent free-rider strategies
by  countries  running  large  deficits  and  raising  funds  at  low  interest  rates,  thanks  to  the
credibility and stability of other countries.
This question of European fiscal discipline is important in the context of the main
criticisms which are presently enumerated, particularly from outside Europe, in the analysis of
the  concept  of  EMU.  Without  being  exhaustive  in  this  listing,  I  personally  see  four  major
criticisms:
First, it is sometimes argued that EMU will lead to greater rigidity, in  diverting
attention  from  the  necessary  structural  reforms  and  inducing  an  inward-looking  posture  over
Europe at the very moment when global competition is of the essence.
Secondly,  the  difficulty  of  delivering  an  appropriate  “policy-mix”,  the  monetary
policy  being  by  definition  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  the  ECB  and  the  ESCB  when,  at  the
same  time,  the  absence  of  a  federal  government  and  therefore  of  a  federal  budget  leaves  the
fiscal policy of the Union in the hands of 15 different governments.
Thirdly,  the  difficulty  of  absorbing  “shocks”  in  a  particular  member  economy,
whether this shock is of a domestic or an external nature. This difficulty stems in particular from
the absence of the automatic stabilizers of fiscal transfers because there is no federal budget.
Fourthly, it is stressed that there are important costs associated with the transition
towards EMU, namely the necessity to reduce overall fiscal deficits in the run-up  to  the  single
currency  in  accordance  with  the  Maastricht  fiscal  criteria  and  the  necessity  to  embark  on  an
excessively tough monetary policy after the creation of the single currency to ensure the global
credibility of the ECB, which in this view will start from scratch.
Let me respond to these criticisms and try to demonstrate that the Europeans have
embarked upon a coherent economic and monetary strategy, responding as accurately as possible
to the various questions I  have  just  listed  and  paying  due  attention  to  the  special  nature  of  the
European endeavour.
BIS Review   63/1997
- 7 -
As regards the first criticism, which I call the “diverting from structural reform”
argument, I really think that it rests on a misunderstanding of the very  nature  of  the  Monetary
Union: the essence of EMU is the completion  of  the  single  market,  which  has  been  one  of  the
boldest  structural  reforms  ever  launched  in  industrialized  countries.  On  top  of  the  common
market which was the initial concept of the Treaty of Rome, the single market is marshalling the
elimination of all non-tariff barriers, of all those barriers that are of a structural nature and  are
hampering the smooth circulation of goods, services and capital throughout the European Union.
In order to meet the single market targets, workshops have been set up everywhere in Europe in
all sectors of the economy and in all capitals to embark on the modernization and harmonization
of regulations of all kinds. It is a major medium-term endeavour and an indispensable economic
impetus to foster competition, economic growth and job creation throughout the single market.
In this perspective, the single currency appears as the last decisive messier for the
completion of the single market, eliminating the last barriers that still exist within the European
Union: no  more  additional  costs  for  transactions,  no  more  exchange  risks,  either  justifiable  or
not  amenable  to  appropriate  hedging,  and  no  more  costs  associated  with  these  hedging
mechanisms. Throughout the single market,  there  will  be  the  same  visibility  of  all  prices,  thus
permitting  immediate  price  comparisons,  cost  comparisons  and  therefore  fostering  competition
in all markets.
My  conclusion  on  this  point  is  that  the  single  currency  will  not  prevent  Europe
from embarking on eliminating economic rigidities, inducing market flexibilities and generating
measures  to  cope  efficiently  and  successfully  with  global  competition.  On  the  contrary,  the
single  currency  endeavour  will  help  foster  the  structural  reforms  that  are  needed  in  Europe  to
improve growth prospects and job creation and counter unemployment.
The second and third criticisms are based upon the argument that the Europeans
will  not  set  up  an  optimum  currency  area  like  the  US  because  of  the  absence  of  a  federal
government  and  a  federal  budget  and  therefore  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  ensuring  an
appropriate  consolidated  fiscal  policy  and  ensuring  shock  absorption  through  automatic
stabilizing transfers.
In  my  eyes,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  gives  a  pertinent  response  to  these  pertinent
questions.  The  thrust  of  the  spirit  and  of  the  letter  of  the  Treaty  is  that  everything  is  done  to
construct the euro area as an optimum currency area.
First  by  ensuring  that  it  incorporates  economies  that  have  already  proved  being
convergent  in  the  fiscal  field  as  well  as  in  the  monetary  and  financial  fields.  This  is  why  the
so-called  five  Maastricht  criteria  are  important.  Not  only  can  one  expect  that  a  particular
economy meeting the five  criteria  is  clearly  eligible  to  belong  to  a  currency  area  composed  of
other economies  with  the  same  fiscal,  monetary  and  financial  features  but  one  can  also  expect
that the business cycles in these economies are likely to be largely synchronized.
Convergence  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  single  currency  is  a  necessary
condition  to  create  an  optimum  currency  area.  But  convergence  is  not  only  necessary  at  the
moment of the selection of member economies. It is also necessary afterwards in what we could
call the permanent regime of the euro. And then the stability and growth pact is of the essence. It
calls for each country to remain in a sound position as regards its fiscal behaviour.
There  is  a  paradox  enshrined  in  the  stability  and  growth  pact: implementing  the
Maastricht Treaty provisions, including sanctions vis-à-vis past behaviour, it places more power
BIS Review   63/1997
- 8 -
in the hands of the „centre“, which  is  in  that  case  the  Council,  say  Brussels,  vis-à-vis  member
states than is the case, for example, for the US government vis-à-vis Texas or California.
The  absence  of  a  significant  federal  budget  and  the  absence  of  a  federal
government have driven the  Europeans  to  embark  upon  a  direct  coordination  of  their  national
fiscal postures, through direct peer pressures and decisions within the Council of Ministers.
This very bold construction, which has no worldwide equivalent in the world, will
simultaneously permit through the decision-making process that has been decided in Dublin:
- to ensure that we have a sound consolidated fiscal policy at the level of the euro
area even without a federal budget,
- and to ensure that each particular economy reloads the fiscal cannon in order to
be able  to  cope  with  domestic  or  external  shocks  even  without  the  automatic  stabilizers  of  the
transfers built into a federal budget.
Ensuring  a  sound  consolidated  fiscal  policy  at  the  level  of  the  Union  and
reloading  the  fiscal  cannon  at  the  level  of  national  economies  are  the  two  major  goals  of  the
stability and growth pact monitored by the Stability Council and decided, in accordance with the
Treaty, by the Council itself.
As regards the costs associated with the transition  towards  the  euro,  which  were
the fourth major criticism, I will confine myself to two main remarks relating to the fiscal side as
well as to the monetary side.
From a European perspective, the strategies of fiscal retrenchment that have been
decided within the European Union are to be implemented in any event, whether the Maastricht
Treaty existed or not. There is no doubt that even in a pure, selfish, domestic approach in each of
the  European  countries,  meeting  the  fiscal  criteria  would  be  welcome  for  the  sake  of  the
economy, for the sake of the appropriate financing of the competitive sector, for the sake of the
credibility  of  the  signature  of  the  State,  for  the  sake  of  the  confidence  in  the  currency  and
therefore for the sake of growth, job creation and the fight against unemployment. All European
governments are saying that  Maastricht  or  no  Maastricht,  they  would  pursue  their  sound  fiscal
policies and strategies.
In the case of France, the proof is even easier. For it was in June 1982 that France
adopted  the  3 %  rule,  on  the  basis  of  a  multipartisan  consensus  and  for  domestic  reasons,  ten
years before the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
As regards the monetary side of the coin, shall I also say that we in the Banque de
France would pursue exactly the same kind of monetary policy based on low inflation, exchange
rate stability, a high level of credibility and confidence, and therefore a low level of long-term
interest  rates.  Implementing  what  our  law  says,  namely  price  stability,  through  exchange  rate
stability  and  the  monitoring  of  our  domestic  monetary  aggregates,  the  French  independent
central  bank  would  meet  spontaneously  on  pure  domestic  considerations  the  three  Maastricht
criteria  that  are  in  our  monetary  and  financial  domain,  namely  a  low  level  of  inflation,  a  low
level of long-term market rates and exchange rate stability.
For  these  reasons,  I  see  no  extra  cost  associated  with  the  fiscal  and  monetary
policies that are consistent with progress towards monetary union.
BIS Review   63/1997
- 9 -
The question of the costs associated with the launching of the ECB and the ESCB
is also important. The question arises only to the extent that the ECB is supposed to start from
scratch and has to build credibility on its own. But it is certainly not the spirit nor the letter of
the  Maastricht  Treaty; it  is  certainly  not  the  very  nature  of  the  monetary  concept  of  the  single
currency.
The single  currency  is  neither  supposed  to  start  from  scratch,  nor  to  result  from
the averaging of the various currencies that exist within the European Union. It must clearly and
it  will  according  to  the  convergence  concept,  have  the  legacy  of  the  most  credible  and  solid
currencies  participating  in  the  ERM  mechanism.  The  euro,  in  any  case,  must  be  as  solid  and
credible as are the most credible currencies in Europe.
  In conclusion, I would like to make three points
- Firstly,  it  is  not  only  monetary  union  that  we  are  preparing  actively,  but  also
economic union, i.e. political union in the economic field. We should not forget that the Treaty
itself  provides  for  a  higher  degree  of  political  union  than  is  usually  acknowledged,  with  the
concept  of  coordination  of  economic  policies  and  the  provisions  for  fiscal  discipline  and
sanctions. The stability and growth pact grants important powers to the Council - i.e. the Council
of national Governments which is the equivalent in Europe of a federal government in a political
federation.
- Secondly, one should not underestimate the degree of monetary stability already
achieved  by  European  countries.  Monetary  stability  is  not  only  a  project  for  the  future,  it  is
already  a  major  achievement  in  many  European  countries.  For  example,  seven  countries  have
been  participating  in  the  ERM  without  any  change  in  their  central  parities  for  more  than  ten
years.
- Thirdly,  it  is  a  false  perception  to  view  the  necessary  fiscal  consolidation  and
monetary stability as constraints imposed by the Maastricht Treaty against the very interests of
European  countries.  We  would  be  implementing  the  same  economic  policies  if  there  were  no
Maastricht  Treaty,  since  they  are  based  on  some  principles  of  sound  economic  management
which are necessary to create jobs and tackle the problem of unemployment.
Finally,  economic  and  monetary  union  and  the  creation  of  the  euro  will  crown
economic and monetary cooperation between European countries, notably France and Germany
which  are  the  two  pillars  of  it,  and  will  foster  prosperity,  stability  and  peace  in  the  European
Union.
BIS Review   63/1997
