Mr. Tietmeyer  emphasises  that  monetary  stability  is  a  perpetual  challenge
Speech  given  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  at  the
1st European  Equity  Traders  Convention  of  the  Federation  of  European  Stock  Exchanges  in
Frankfurt/Main on 19/6/97.
I
The  old  German  folk  tale  about  the  stars  that  fall  from  the  sky  as  thalers  is  a
dream that, on the European stage, has largely come to an end. The single currency will not fall
into the lap of the nations of Europe - at least not as a stable payment medium.
The  arduous  struggle  for  strict  and  lasting  compliance  with  the  convergence
criteria  -  precisely  here  in  Germany,  too  -  shows  that  a  stable  euro  is  more  like  a  valuable
treasure buried in a field. At present, some work is still needed to uncover it. And it will require
further energy to guard the euro’s stability on a lasting basis. In saying that, the realisation that it
is not possible to make good policy with bad money has, in fact, gained some ground over the
past few years.
There has been a growing general recognition of the fact that as stable a general
price  level  as  possible  is  an  indispensable  precondition  for  long-term  growth  which  promotes
employment and fosters social cohesion. Stability and employment  are  not  mutually  exclusive.
Indeed, I am pleased that the Amsterdam summit seems to have realised this.
The  encouraging  increase  in  price  stability  in  Europe  is  also  a  result  of  the
preparations  for  monetary  union,  however.  In  1996,  the  average  rate  of  inflation  in  the  EU
countries  was  no  more  than  2.5 %,  for  example,  and  is  likely  to  be  even  less  in  1997.  The
financial markets react very sensitively nowadays to political and economic changes that herald
risks  of  inflation.  It  is  possible  that  higher  interest  rates  and  exchange  rate  reactions  will  then
quickly  follow.  As  a  consequence,  the  globalised  financial  markets  are  increasingly  also
becoming  guardians  of  stability.  Since  price  stability  is  simultaneously  making  headway
worldwide, too, there are some commentators who already go as far as pronouncing inflation to
be “dead”. Does that mean that safeguarding monetary stability is not a perpetual challenge after
all?
II
An animated debate is taking place, not only in the United States, on the question
of  whether  moving  even  closer  to  a  stable  price  level  might  do  more  harm  than  good  in
macroeconomic  terms.  The  losses  in  output  and  employment  during  the  course  of  a  further
reduction in inflation might, in the view  of  some,  be  higher  than  the  gains  in  stability  that  are
still to be achieved. It is also argued that a moderate inflation rate might promote employment,
given, say, that the labour markets are not very flexible and that nominal wages show a certain
ratchet effect. It might additionally contribute to lower real interest rates.
From my point of view, these arguments point in the wrong direction. Firstly, the
rightly deplored distortions due to time-lags in wage and price formation are seldom long-term
in  nature.  And,  secondly,  attempting  to  use  monetary  means  to  solve  problems  in  the  real
economy  inevitably  leads  to  an  inflationary  dead  end.  Such  an  attempt  overrates  the  ability  of
economic policy to control real processes and, at  the  same  time,  unwarrantably  underestimates
the controllability of inflationary processes once they have been set in motion.
BIS Review   64/1997
- 2 -
The  advantages  of  lasting  price  stability  are  obvious,  however.  Fundamentally,
they  accrue  without  any  time  limit  and  every  year.  That  is  also  true  when  a  high  degree  of
stability has already been  achieved.  Overall  economic  costs  arise,  even  in  the  case  of  inflation
that  is  fully  anticipated.  That  is  because  any  monetary  erosion  has  the  effect  of  a  tax  on  cash
held. Prices and contracts, too, have to be adjusted regularly. Even a moderate rise in the general
price level may imply appreciable uncertainty for economic agents. It is only with difficulty that
the  future  rate  of  inflation  can  be  assessed.  The  risk  involved  in  long-term  nominal  contracts
increases. An inflation premium is added to interest rates in the capital market.
In  a  system  of  taxation  that  is  based  on  nominal  variables,  moderate  monetary
erosion also makes the tax burden rise. With increasing rates of taxation, even growth in revenue
that  is  merely  inflation-induced  is  subject  to  increasingly  higher  taxation  (so-called  “cold”
progression). And the nominally constant exemption limits lose their value in real terms. Above
all,  that  places  a  strain  on  capital  income  and  leads  to  significant  growth  losses  as  a  result  of
lower savings, as has been established by Martin Feldstein, for instance.
The costs associated with hedging financial transactions against inflationary risks
is  likewise  considerable.  For  you,  as  players  in  the  financial  markets,  that  may  be  a  lucrative
business. You will probably agree with me, however, that - in macroeconomic terms - there are
definitely  more  productive  ways  of  investing  money.  In  addition,  stable  money  avoids  the
negative consequences for income and wealth distribution and hence the risk of societal conflict.
Whereas,  given  inflation,  creditors  make  arbitrary  and  unearned  gains,  it  is  the  recipients  of
transfer  income  and  the  owners  of  monetary  assets  who  are  the  losers.  I  am  thinking,  in
particular,  of  the  small  savers  who  wish  to  make  additional  provision  for  old  age.  Given  3 %
inflation over a period of ten years, their monetary assets lose no less than one quarter of their
purchasing power, for example.
Thus, looked at over a longer period of time, attempts to moderate a high standard
of  stability  are  not  at  all  worthwhile.  Internal  stability  is  and  remains  the  sole  genuine  seal  of
approval for a good currency. That is the sole basis on which confidence in the monetary system
will  grow,  on  which  millions  of  efficient  processes  of  exchange  in  the  goods,  factor  and
financial  markets  can  be  organised  every  day,  and  on  which  economic  relationships  that  are
sustainable in the long term can be established. For that reason, monetary stability is - and will
remain - a perpetual challenge even in the age of moderate rates of inflation.
III
That  applies  quite  particularly  with  a  view  to  European  monetary  union.  If  the
euro is not  given  the  stability  seal  of  approval  by  the  financial  markets  and  the  general  public
from the outset, the project of monetary union will be standing - economically and politically -
on feet of clay. But how can the euro be given stability from the start, apart from the future ECB
pursuing a consistent and stability-oriented monetary policy?
I wish to highlight three aspects.
1.
Fiscal  policy  in  the  participating  countries  must  regain  its  room  for
manoeuvre.
A glance at the public sector budgets in the majority of member states shows how
narrow  the  financial  scope  has  become  everywhere  following  the  many  years  of  accumulating
debt and the expansion of the public sector. The vicious circle of growing indebtedness and of
ever-higher  interest  burdens  pushes  other  tasks  into  the  background  and  calls  for  higher  and
BIS Review   64/1997
- 3 -
higher taxes and levies. That is especially the case in those countries with retirement provision
and health care based on the “pay as you go” principle, and which are faced with considerable
demographic challenges. In a large number of European countries, the government ratio and the
taxes  and  social  security  ratio  have  now  reached  such  orders  of  magnitude  that  they  are
threatening to strangle the economy’s power of innovation, and putting more and  more  jobs  at
risk. This process must be corrected if prospects for growth and employment are to be improved
on a lasting basis.
For  that  reason  -  irrespective  of  monetary  union  -  sustained  consolidation  is  a
pressing need. Short-term one-off actions or a relaxation of the Maastricht fiscal criteria would,
in may view, give the wrong signals. That would only encourage the disastrous illusion that the
financial position is still bearable or that it will improve automatically at a later date. Moreover,
it  would  reduce  the  salutary  pressure  to  reform  exerted  by  the  Maastricht  process.  Urgent
adjustments would then probably continue to be put on hold - and place an even heavier burden
on the future.
An  unsound  fiscal  policy  and  a  strict  monetary  policy  do  not  go  together  in  the
longer  term.  The  distortions  in  the  shape  of  economic  costs,  due  to  higher  interest  rates,
employment and growth losses, may become very large. That is the  reason  why,  under  Article
109j  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  all  the  European  countries  must  make  efforts  to  achieve  “the
sustainability of the government financial position” beyond the starting date. In all probability,
the  supranational  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  will,  in  the  event  of  a  conflict,  find  it  difficult
enough as it is to withstand the political pressure of fiscal, economic and pay-rate policies which
remain national in Europe.
For that reason,
2.
the independence of the European System of Central Banks enshrined in the
Maastricht Treaty must not be infringed.
By  dispensing  with  the  exchange  rate,  the  participating  countries  will  be  doing
without the mechanism which they were previously able to use to cushion differences between
countries  in  terms  of  inflation,  productivity  or  the  growth  of  government  debt.  In  the  euro
currency  area,  there  will  be  no  comprehensive  financial  adjustment  scheme  in  support  of
economically weaker countries. The countries lack the money and probably the willingness for
large-scale transfer payments. The burden of adjustment in the  case  of  changes  in  productivity
and  demand  will  lie  almost  exclusively  with  national  labour  costs.  Wages  and  wage-related
levies must be geared to differences in productivity, otherwise unemployment will easily occur.
If  wages  are  not  sufficiently  flexible,  however,  there  will  be  a  great  danger  that  pressure  for
actionism will soon be directed to the single monetary policy. That is because experience teaches
us  that  policy  makers  easily  fall  prey  to  the  temptation  to  side-step  the  pressure  of  structural
problems by means of a little extra inflation. Given differing trends between countries, however,
that could also easily lead to conflicts between them.
In Germany, the Bundesbank has always been able to rely on its anti-inflationary
policy  having  the  broad  support  of  the  general  public,  and  to  defend  its  independence  against
any  political  pressure.  That  has  become  apparent  again  during  the  past  few  weeks.  And  the
confidence  which  the  markets  have  always  shown  in  the  Bundesbank  is  based  on  such
experience.  The  European  Central  Bank  still  has  to  earn  that  confidence,  however.  As  I
understand things, this will be all the easier, the greater is the stock of confidence introduced by
the national central banks from their own countries. In other words: the more persistently policy
BIS Review   64/1997
- 4 -
makers  in  all  the  participating  countries  champion  the  independence  of  the  European  Central
Bank and then also respect its monetary policy decisions.
For the euro to be successful, however, it is also important for
3.
the European countries to solve their structural problems and to face up to
the new challenges.
The resolution of the European Council on growth and employment states that
“...  it  should  be  a  priority  aim  to  develop  a  skilled,  trained    and  adaptable
workforce  and  to  make  labour  markets  responsive  to  economic  change.
Structural reforms need to be comprehensive in scope ...”
That statement is actually true. Apart from that, it has little to do with monetary
union per se. Those problems and challenges exist anyway:
    persistently high unemployment, for example, which - even with a cyclical
upturn - is unlikely to fall significantly without structural changes;
in a large number of countries, the welfare state is increasingly reaching - or
has  already  reached -  the  point  where  it  cannot  go  any  further  in  terms  of
funding;
demographic trends call for timely adjustments in health care and retirement
provision;
advancing  economic  globalisation  is  intensifying  competition  and  calls  for
new thinking and action.
Those are undoubtedly only some of the tasks. We are  all  aware  of  the  pressing
problems in our own countries.
Each country must find its own, nationally appropriate  solution. For it is certain
that  the  euro  will,  if  anything,  further  intensify  competition  to  win  inward  investment  within
Europe.  At  the  same  time,  Europe’s  structural  weaknesses  will  be  revealed  more  starkly  in  an
international comparison. No one should indulge in any illusions. The euro cannot pay off past
debts  nor  can  it  eliminate  unemployment  that  has  already  been  created.  On  the  contrary,
increasing demands will be placed on the participating countries as a result of them dispensing
with their own exchange rate and interest rate policies. The problems that exist must therefore be
solved, if possible, before entry into monetary union.
It  is  precisely  in  the  case  of  economic  divergence  in  the  euro  area  that  each
participating country must be adaptable enough to manage without the emergency escape route
of altering the exchange rate. It  is  only  if  each  participating  country  is  competitive  on  its  own
terms that the single Europe will be able to assume a leading role as an economic region in the
future.
In  Germany,  the  realisation  that  change  is  necessary  is  gradually  beginning  to
gain  acceptance.  The  road  which  leads  from  realising  that  to  the  necessary  reform  is  still  an
arduous one at times, however - especially during the run-up to the elections:
“We do not have a problem of perception,
but rather a problem of implementation.”
BIS Review   64/1997
- 5 -
That statement by the Federal President, Roman Herzog, puts the present situation
in Germany in a nutshell.
What  we  now  need  more  than  anything,  therefore,  is  the  courage  and  the
determination to redefine the priorities of government and the public sector. Reliable underlying
conditions  politically  in  the  longer  term  are  important  for  giving  investors  certainty.  Further
steps must also be taken towards labour markets that are more flexible, even if management and
labour have already made some moves in that direction. And, overall, we need a greater degree
of personal responsibility and private initiative in order to find innovative solutions to structural
rigidities.
Without  doubt,  those  countries  under  the  umbrella  of  a  single  currency  that  act
quickly  and  fully  on  the  basis  the  lessons  that  have  been  learned  will  be  those  which  are  best
able to hold their own. Anyone who puts off the necessary reforms might easily fall behind even
further in competing as an industrial location. I hope that all the countries which are pushing for
entry into monetary union are aware of that fact.
IV
The European financial markets are under pressure to adjust, too, of course. Some
countries  -  such  as  Germany  with  the  D-Mark  as  the  second  most  important  reserve  and
investment currency in the world - will lose their currency-related “bonus”, whereas others will
strengthen their position, which was weaker hitherto because of their currency.
In the monetary union, the formerly national European capital markets will draw
much closer together. Currency and interest rate differentials will no longer matter.
Despite  that,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  completely  uniform  market  will  come  into
existence.  Certain  special  national  regulations  will  still  be  in  force  -  in  the  case  of  taxation  of
investment  income,  for  instance.  Nevertheless,  I  still  hope  that  there  will  be  a  growing
recognition  that  further  progress  in  harmonisation  is  an  urgent  necessity.  In  practice,  issues
having  the  same  terms  are  still  likely  to  show  limited  differences  in  yields.  Yield  differentials
will  then  mainly  be  due  to  the  differences  in  the  standing  of  the  issuers  and  the  differing
liquidity of the issues.
Higher  demands  will  be  placed  on  public  sector  national  debt  management
because currency will no longer act as a “screen”. Even now, the globalisation of the  financial
markets is calling for a widespread application of international standards. The  euro  is  likely  to
encourage that trend. A reliable political regulatory framework and an efficient structure in the
national financial markets will then become crucial assets in competing for capital that is in short
supply.
What  implications  do  these  developments  have  for  the  European  financial
markets? At present, there are still a large number of stock markets and futures exchanges in the
European  Union  which  have  a  wide  variety  of  market  models  and  trading  systems.  As  in  the
financial  industry  as  a  whole,  the  pressure  of  competition  and  advances  in  communication
technology will lead to a process of adjustment and concentration. But the debate on the future
of Europe’s financial centres is also connected with questions concerning the set of instruments
that the European System of Central Banks will have at its disposal.
BIS Review   64/1997
- 6 -
The  Bundesbank  attaches  great  importance  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy  -
including the instruments belonging to it - being implemented in a way that leaves competition
unaffected, and which does not discriminate against any financial centre in the euro area. We do
not want any privileges for Frankfurt, but we do not want any disadvantages either. Along with
the  national  central  banks,  which  will  carry  the  main  weight  of  operational  activities,  the
European  Central  Bank  must  itself  have  its  own  limited  field  of  operations.  That  is  because,
from our point of view, competition between the stock market centres and trading systems which
are not bound locationally is the best means of finding the appropriate financial market structure
for the larger currency area.
The  greater  breadth  and  depth  of  the  euro  market  compared  with  the  former
national markets can also bring new business, of course. The euro - especially if it is enduringly
stable  -  is  likely  to  be  particularly  attractive  for  internationally  operating  demanders  and
suppliers of capital. The euro, however, will still first have to earn its position in the portfolio of
public  and  private  investors  by  competing  with  other  currencies.  In  saying  that,  it  ought  to  be
beyond dispute that a euro which is weak inwardly in terms of its purchasing power will not be
able to take a leading position externally. For that reason, too, safeguarding monetary stability is
a perpetual challenge for the euro.
V
Policy makers must now create confidence by taking credible decisions so that the
general  public  and  the  markets  accept  the  future  euro.  The  aim  must  be  a  smooth  changeover
from  the  national  currencies  to  the  euro.  Turbulence  in  the  financial  markets  due  to  volatile
exchange  rates  or  to  institutional  investors  abruptly  adjusting  their  portfolios  might  place  a
considerable strain on the euro at its inception.
In Dublin, the European Council made a major contribution to planning and legal
certainty  for  all  concerned  with  the  two  regulations  on  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  Happily,  the
Amsterdam  summit  endorsed  those  drafts.  But  it  is  also  necessary  for  the  markets  to  know  in
good  time  how  the  final  exchange  rates  are  fixed.  That  is  something  which  is  still  under
discussion  at  present.  It  is  very  much  my  hope  that  the  ministers  of  finance  and  central  bank
governors  will  arrive  at  a  common  opinion  on  this  question  at  the  next  Informal  Ecofin  in
Luxembourg in September.
The  choice  of  the  countries  starting  with  monetary  union  will  naturally  be  of
crucial importance. In accordance with the schedule, that decision will be taken in spring 1998
on  the  basis  of  the  economic  data  for  1997.  In  my  view,  speculating  now  about  the  group  of
participants  is  inappropriate.  Such  speculation  could  ultimately  do  more  harm  than  good,
because  it  increases  overall  uncertainty.  For  that  reason,  I  shall  also  continue  to  refrain  from
engaging in it. In my opinion, neither political calculation nor short-term success in meeting the
criteria should decide the choice of participants to be made, ultimately, by the heads of state and
of government acting by a  qualified  majority.  Rather,  sustained  convergence  and  credibility  in
terms  of  anti-inflation  policy  will  be  crucial.  It  will  undoubtedly  be  possible  to  gauge  how
credible that decision is by how the financial markets behave, too.
VI
A  stable  euro  will  indeed  be  a  valuable  treasure.  That  is  why  the  architects  of
monetary  union  must  not  forget  that  monetary  stability  is  a  perpetual  challenge.  And  on  no
account  must  they  forget  that  confidence  in  a  currency  is  established  only  with  difficulty,  but
BIS Review   64/1997
- 7 -
squandered incredibly quickly. Even if the euro will not fall into the European nations’ lap like a
star  falling  as  a  thaler  from  the  sky,  at  least  the  efforts  undertaken  to  obtain  it  must  not  be  in
vain. Monetary union must not be achieved by gaining the euro and losing stability. Instead, we
need a euro which - like the D-Mark now - is a byword for lasting stability.
BIS Review   64/1997
