Mr.  Duisenberg  comments  on  the  importance  of  the  European  pact  for
stability and growth   Address by Dr. W.F. Duisenberg, President of the Netherlands Bank and
the Bank for International Settlements, on the occasion of his acceptance of the Business Week
Award, awarded by the Business Week Committee of the Economische Faculteitsvereniging of
the Erasmus University in Rotterdam on 20/3/97.
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  accept  one  of  the  two  Business  Week  Awards  of
1997.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Business  Week  Committee  for  awarding  me  this  prestigious
prize. Also, I would like to congratulate my fellow award-winner professor Franco Modigliani,
whose  work  has  covered  many  fields  in  economics  in  general,  and  in  the  theory  of  monetary
policy and finance in particular.
As  the  theme  of  this  year’s  Business  Week,  the  organising  Committee  chose
“IMPACT: all things are in a flux and nothing remains”. The first part of the theme, “impact”, is
certainly  valid  for  the  world  of  banking  and  finance.  Shifts  in  international  capital  flows  have
important repercussions on economic developments in individual countries and regions. Changes
in  interest  rates  influence  economic  decisions  by  private  companies  and  households,  and
consequently  have  an  impact  on  our  daily  lives.  Furthermore,  the  establishment  of  European
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  will  drastically  change  the  institutional  setting  of  money  and
monetary  policy  in  the  member  states  of  the  European  Union,  and  will  have  a  strong  positive
impact  on  the  economic  development  of  Europe  in  the  next  century.  The  second  part  of  this
year’s theme, “all things are in flux and nothing remains”, is somewhat more difficult for me to
subscribe  to.  Being  a  central  banker,  it  is  almost  against  my  basic  instinct  to  see  all  things  as
being  in  flux  and  that  nothing  remains.  By  nature,  central  bankers  are  strongly  in  favour  of
smooth and stable developments. However, this does not imply that we are against change. For
example,  the  movement  towards  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  is  a  fundamental
change  from  the  past.  What  is  important  is  that  changes  which  have  a  significant  impact  on
monetary and economic developments are embedded in structures of stability. The combination
of  policy  impact  and  stability,  that  is  the  crucial  issue  for  central  bankers.  Therefore,  in  the
European Economic and Monetary Union, the policy impact and stability will be provided by an
independent  European  Central  Bank,  the  primary  objective  of  which  is  to  maintain  price
stability.  To  support  this  objective,  the  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  will  have
several institutional features which are aimed at providing an underlying framework of stability
for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  For  example,  a  mechanism  for  exchange  rate  stability  is
presently being designed to ensure that the countries which do not meet the convergence criteria
in time can retain close links with the core group.
Moreover, a mechanism is presently being developed that aims at realising fiscal
stability in EMU as well. This mechanism is the pact for stability and growth,  and  was  agreed
upon  during  the  summit  of  the  European  Council  in  Dublin  last  December.  Given  the
importance of fiscal stability for achieving monetary and price stability in EMU, I would like to
touch upon three issues related to the pact  for  stability  and  growth.  First,  why  do  we  need  the
pact as a fundamental characteristic of EMU? Second, what are the elements of the pact? Third,
what are the misunderstandings about the pact?
The  first  issue  – the  reasons  why  we  need  a  pact  for  stability  and  growth  in
EMU – may  be  explained  by  my  fundamental  belief  that  a  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  would
negatively  affect  the  ability  of  the  European  Central  Bank  to  achieve  its  primary  objective  to
maintain  price  stability.  First,  if  the  ECB  is  to  be  able  to  pursue  a  price  stability-oriented
monetary  policy,  loose  fiscal  policies  in  Member  States  must  be  avoided,  as  such  a  situation
would  endanger  the  credibility  of  the  ECB  and  would  place  a  heavy  burden  on  the  ECB’s
BIS Review   36/1997
- 2 -
monetary policy. Loose fiscal policies might push up interest rates, with the ECB being blamed
for pursuing an overly strict monetary policy. Although a central banker is used to being blamed
for all kinds of  unsatisfactory  economic  developments,  it  is  better  to  prevent  this  to  the  extent
possible.  The  pact  aims  at  ensuring  that  fiscal  discipline  will  be  achieved,  not  only  before  the
start  of  EMU,  but  thereafter  as  well.  Member  States  have  agreed  to  pursue  medium-term
objectives for a budget close to balance or even in surplus. The likelihood of interference with
monetary  policy  is  thus  reduced.  As  a  result,  the  foundation  for  a  stable  and  sound  economic
development in Europe is established. Not without reason is the pact referred to as the pact for
stability  and  growth.  Second,  because  of  fiscal  imbalances,  aggregate  demand  can  expand  and
may directly cause upward pressure on prices. As a result, given its primary  objective  of  price
stability,  the  ECB  will  be  obliged  to  offset  this  expansion  by  implementing  a  restrictive
monetary policy. In the end, the European economy will be confronted with higher fiscal deficits
and higher interest rates, similar to the bad experiences of the seventies and early eighties. Third,
high and persistent fiscal imbalances indirectly fuel inflationary expectations, because they raise
the  issue  of  sustainability.  Fourth,  an  additional  reason  for  the  establishment  of  a  pact  for
stability  and  growth  is  the  possible  danger  of  “free  rider”  behaviour  by  individual  Member
States.  If  national  fiscal  policies  would  not  be  governed  by  certain  explicit  and  clear  rules,
individual Member States could implement unbalanced fiscal policies and to a large extent pass
on the negative consequences  to  the  other  Member  States.  Fifth,  the  introduction  of  a  stability
and  growth  pact  will  safeguard  the  fiscal  convergence  that  has  been  achieved  during  recent
years,  when  EU  Member  States  started  to  bring  down  fiscal  deficits  in  order  to  meet  the
Maastricht criteria. Sixth, against the background of growing government fiscal deficits, both in
Europe  and  the  United  States  the  fiscal  situation  of  the  government  has  become  an  issue  of
growing  academic  concern.  As  a  result,  a  substantial  number  of  important  studies  on  the  need
for  balanced  budget  rules  have  been  published,  establishing  the  theoretical  framework  for  the
necessary  change  towards  fiscal  consolidation.  It  should  be  noted  that  fiscal  imbalances  of  the
government are a relatively recent phenomenon. As has been stated regarding the United States
by  Nobel  prizewinner  professor  James  Buchanan,  who  is  one  of  the  strongest  supporters  of
balanced budget rules:
“Traditionally, before the 1960’s, governments had resorted to debt as a means of
financing only extraordinary expenditures, for the most part expenditures that were necessary to
finance  wars  and  other  short-lived  emergencies.  Public  debt,  so  created,  was  always
substantially reduced, or paid off, after most wars for most countries”. 1
Also  in  Europe,  during  the  sixties  and  the  early  seventies,  budgets  close  to
balance or even in surplus were regarded as normal. It will not be a surprise that I think that we
should  go  back  to  normal.  For  example,  the  average  of  total  government  gross  debt  for  the
present  15  EU  Member  States  in  1970  was  34.6%  of  GDP.  In  1995,  this  figure  had  risen  to
71.7% of GDP, a doubling in 25 years. In the case of the Netherlands, the figure for government
debt rose from almost 47% of GDP in 1980 to around 80% of GDP in 1995, an increase of 70%
in  just  15  years.  However,  the  rapid  growth  of  government  debt  did  not  result  in  a  significant
reduction of unemployment. On the contrary: the doubling of the average EU government debt
level  in  25  years  was  accompanied  by  a  more  than  quadrupling  of  the  average  unemployment
level. Also in the Netherlands, rapid increases in government debt were attended by increasing
unemployment levels. These recent experiences show that accommodative fiscal policies are not
a guarantee for reducing unemployment.
                                                  
1
George Mason University, 1984, Mimeograph, pp.8-9.
J.M. Buchanan, “The Deficit and American Democracy, Center for Study of Public Choice”,
BIS Review   36/1997
- 3 -
Let me now briefly discuss the second issue – what  are  the  elements  of  the  pact
for stability and growth? The pact for stability and growth will take the form of two regulations,
and  a  political  resolution  from  the  European  Council.  The  resulting  regulatory  framework
represents a judicious balance between prevention – via the strengthening of the surveillance of
budgetary policies - and deterrence – via the establishment of a dissuasive set of rules. The pact
will oblige Member States (or the “ins”) to submit stability programmes. In these programmes,
medium-term budgetary targets will be stipulated, which should be set close to balance or even
at  a  small  surplus.  Non-euro  Member  States  (or  the  “pre-ins”)  will  submit  convergence
programmes.  Furthermore,  the  pact  will  include  a  sanction  mechanism  that  will  be  used  when
countries fail to meet the 3% reference value. If the Council of Ministers judges that a Member
State  has  an  excessive  deficit,  sanctions  would,  as  a  rule,  be  imposed  in  the  calendar  year
following the year in which the excessive deficit was recorded or identified. The sanction would
consist  of  a  non-interest-bearing  deposit  between  0.2%  and  0.5%  of  GDP.  In  the  case  of  the
Netherlands, this would imply a maximum fine of somewhat over 3 billion  guilders.  The  third
element of the pact, the European Council resolution, will reflect the political commitment to a
strict and timely application of all the provisions of the  pact.  Thus,  the  resolution  will  provide
firm political guidance to the parties who will implement the pact for stability and growth. Both
regulations, together with the resolution, constitute an important framework for stability. If the
countries adhere to the provisions of the pact, they will observe a safety margin in respect of the
fiscal deficit to make sure that, even in times of cyclical adversity, the deficit will not exceed the
3%-reference value of the Maastricht Treaty. The stability pact aims at ensuring that countries,
once they have joined EMU, will continue to abide by the rules for sound public finance.
Finally, I would like to address some misunderstandings about the pact. It is often
said  that  the  major  drawback  of  the  pact  for  stability  and  growth  is  that  it  takes  away  all
flexibility  and  sovereignty  in  the  budgetary  area.  This  is  not  correct.  As  soon  as  a  structural
budgetary position of close to balance is reached, any negative cyclical development is allowed
to feed into the deficit, that is, up to the 3% limit, agreed upon in the Maastricht Treaty six years
ago. Calculations show that this gives ample room for  the  so-called  automatic  stabilisers  to  do
their  job.  That  is  to  say,  if  in  times  of  economic  fortune  Member  States  establish  sound  fiscal
positions, they will have sufficient budgetary room to react adequately to economic downturns.
In this respect, the pact for stability and growth is nothing more than the communal equivalence
of the Dutch saying ”Save first, spend later”. Thus, budgetary flexibility is explicitly part of the
pact.  As  regards  sovereignty,  it  has  to  be  recalled  that  only  the  level  of  the  deficit  will  be
restricted. No limits or guidelines will apply to the size or composition of government receipts
and expenditures. The sovereignty of national parliaments will remain fundamentally  intact.  In
my opinion, it is  even  of  the  utmost  importance  that  this  sovereignty  will  remain  intact:  if  the
stability  and  convergence  programmes  are  to  be  credible,  they  have  to  be  supported  by  the
national  parliaments.  Some  critics  of  the  pact  claim  that  it  allows  for  too  much  flexibility.  To
them,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  pact  for  stability  and  growth  will  introduce  a  high
degree  of  automaticity  in  the  assessment  of  Member  States’  budgetary  policies.  Only  under
exceptional circumstances – such as occurred in less than 6% of the cases in the past 35 years –
may Member States be allowed a budget deficit above the 3%-reference value of the Maastricht
Treaty; even then this excess will need to be temporary and limited. Thus, the pact constitutes a
careful balance between flexibility and automaticity, and between prevention and deterrence. As
you  might  know,  the  details  of  the  pact  for  stability  and  growth  are  now  being  worked  out.  I
expect that at its June 1997 meeting in Amsterdam, which will be hosted by De Nederlandsche
Bank, the European Council will reach full agreement on this most important issue.
To conclude, from a central banker’s perspective, the crucial issue for stable and
sound economic developments is the impact of stability. More specific, what is important is the
BIS Review   36/1997
- 4 -
impact  of  price  stability,  achieved  through  the  interrelated  set  of  monetary  stability,  exchange
rate  stability  and  fiscal  stability.  That  is  why  the  pact  for  stability  and  growth  is  one  of  the
cornerstones of the EMU. It will establish a foundation of fiscal stability under the operations of
the European Central Bank, and thereby contribute to the impact of its policies.
BIS Review   36/1997
