Ms. Phillips examines whether national financial market regulatory systems
should be harmonised in the light of international competition   Remarks by Ms. Susan M.
Phillips, a member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Seminar
on Banking Soundness and Monetary Policy in a World of Global Capital Markets sponsored by
the International Monetary Fund and held in Washington on 28/1/97.
It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss a topic that has become more important
in a world of global financial markets -- the matter of coordinating and harmonizing our national
regulatory  systems.  On  the  conference  agenda,  the  topic  was  phrased  as  a  question,  that  is,
whether  we  should  harmonize  our  systems.  In  a  sense,  the  question  is  somewhat  moot  --  the
globalization of the markets and the breadth of international conglomerate financial institutions
is forcing us in that  direction.  But  I  would  quickly  add  that  one  definition  of  “harmony”  is  “a
pleasing  combination  of  elements.”  We  can  sing  compatible  and  pleasant-sounding  notes,
without singing the same note. It is in that sense that I believe harmonization of our regulatory
systems will develop.
In my comments this  afternoon,  I  will  mention  some  of  the  efforts  underway  in
which the United States is working with other countries to develop more consistent supervisory
and  regulatory  systems,  particularly  for  large  financial  conglomerates.  That  experience  may
provide  others  with  ideas  about  how  they  might  pursue  similar  efforts,  either  on  a  bilateral  or
multilateral  basis.  Perhaps  more  importantly,  though,  I  will  also  offer  my  views  on  where  our
interests are likely to be most similar and why and how regulators around the world are likely to
continue  working  toward  compatible  or  “harmonized”  systems.  Let  me  begin  with  those
thoughts.
The Importance of Compatible Regulatory Regimes
One cannot have dealt with U.S. and world financial markets during the past few
decades  without  being  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  rapid  pace  of  change  and  the  manner  in
which technology and financial innovation have affected market practice. The improvements in
communications  and  transportation  and,  importantly,  the  gains  from  technology  and  the
miniaturization  of  the  goods  we  produce  have  fueled  a  growing  volume  of  international  trade.
Our  financial  institutions,  in  turn,  have  sought  constantly  to  find  more  effective  and  efficient
ways to facilitate and finance these activities, and at the same time manage the related risks. As a
result, we have seen dramatic growth in financial derivatives, strong support within the industry
for new clearinghouses and netting procedures to reduce counterparty credit risk, a growing need
to clarify our laws and regulations regarding financial contracts, and  financial  markets  that  are
far more closely linked today than they were even a decade ago.
In the area of bank regulation and supervision, substantial progress has been made
in developing capital standards that help to ensure the financial strength of internationally active
banks and that promote greater competition. Simply put, firms in need of international financial
services  will  utilize  domestic  or  foreign  financial  institutions  to  the  extent  their  prices  are
competitive  and  their  financial  stability  can  be  assured.  As  a  result,  regulators  are  recognizing
the  need  to  harmonize  laws  and  regulations  in  order  to  promote  economic  growth  and  to  deal
with  important  and  oftentimes  increasingly  complex  matters  that  are  of  common  interest  to  us
all.
We  are  recognizing  also  the  need  to  enhance  financial  systems  --  including
supervision and regulation -- in the emerging market economies, primarily for the sake of those
economies, themselves, but also because of their increasing importance in international financial
BIS Review   11/1997
- 2 -
markets. Indeed, G-7 leaders at their summit meeting in Lyon last summer identified this goal as
an important element in efforts to promote international financial stability.
That we need some level of  conformity  seems,  I’m  sure,  quite  clear.  Otherwise,
the  inconsistency  and  incompatibility  of  rules  and  regulations  across  countries  may  make  it
difficult, if not impossible, for some firms to engage in global business activities. Such barriers
are detrimental to the efficiency of international trade and finance, generally.
The  difficulty,  of  course,  is  the  precise  nature  and  level  of  conformity  that  is
necessary  to  maintain  an  efficient  and  equitable  world  financial  system.  Here  I  submit  that  it
may be less important that we standardize particular banking laws and regulations, than it is for
us to pursue similar goals, as we independently develop our domestic regulation and supervisory
structures.  Specifically,  if  we  apply  market-based  incentives  in  our  regulatory  structures,  that,
alone, should keep our rules sufficiently similar and compatible.
We  must  also  recognize  that  technology  and  financial  innovation  are  permitting
banks today to become ever-more adept at avoiding regulatory barriers and other restrictions that
artificially constrain their activities. Moreover, to the extent they are effective, such restrictions
can work against local institutions, businesses, or consumers by making banks less competitive
internationally or by withholding from their customers the  benefits  that  competition  can  bring.
Regulatory regimes are likely to be more effective in the long run for financial institutions and
for domestic economic growth if they are market-compatible.
Areas of Common Interests
In  our  roles  as  central  bankers,  bank  supervisors,  and  regulators,  what  are  the
areas  of  greatest  common  interest  to  us  for  which  we  should  develop  compatible  rules  and
regulations? To keep it simple, let me suggest two. First, to maintain a healthy, responsive, and
financially strong banking and financial system will facilitate the growing needs of our domestic
economies. Second, to build and maintain an adequate legal and regulatory structure will permit
our  institutions  to  compete  safely  on  an  equal  and  nondiscriminatory  basis,  both  domestically
and  abroad.  These  thoughts  may  not  sound  original;  they’re  not.  They  are  essentially  the  two
reasons the Basle Committee on Supervision exists, and they underpin most other international
efforts to coordinate banking issues.
When I consider the past successes in coordinating international bank supervisory
or regulatory policies, I think first of the Bank for International Settlements and the work of the
supervisors’  committee.  After  all,  the  BIS  has  been  the  principal  forum  for  developing
international supervisory standards for banks in industrialized countries and, by their voluntary
adoption,  for  banks  and  bank  supervisors  in  other  countries  throughout  the  world.  Bilateral
discussions can also serve useful functions either where particular issues are of concern or as a
basis for subsequent broader dissemination.
Nearly a decade ago, such bilateral and -- through the BIS -- multilateral efforts
produced  the  risk-based  capital  standard,  known  as  the  Basle  Accord.  Since  then,  we  have
produced  numerous  other  policy  statements  dealing  with  sound  risk  management  practices  for
banks.  These  statements  related  first  to  derivatives  activities  and  most  recently  involve  the
management of interest rate risk. Dr. Padoa-Schioppa, chairman of the supervisors’ committee,
has probably already discussed these initiatives with you.
BIS Review   11/1997
- 3 -
One  of  the  Committee’s  most  recent  accomplishments,  however,  is  the
development  of  new  capital  standards  for  market  risk  in  trading  activities.  That  standard  is
notable  because  it  reflects  a  new  approach  for  constructing  international  banking  standards.  In
particular,  the  internal  models  approach  contained  within  that  standard  builds  on  leading
industry practices and helps supervisors to promote risk management in banks.
Promoting  sound  risk  management  is  a  goal  we  should  all  pursue  more
aggressively in considering new banking policies and regulations. It is also the type of approach
I  had  in  mind  when  I  said  earlier  that  our  laws  and  regulations  should  be  compatible  with
underlying economics and market demands. To the extent we can continue building on “best” or
sound  banking  practices  in  designing  our  rules  and  regulations,  we  will  be  working  toward  a
common end. As we work together identifying those practices and deciding how to apply them
as supervisory or regulatory standards, we will also be strengthening relations among ourselves
that can prove invaluable in times of market stress.
Not to over-use the example of the market risk standard, but it illustrates another
useful  point,  as  well.  Reliance  on  a  bank’s  own  risk  measurement  and  modeling  process  in
determining regulatory capital standards also acknowledges that no single or specific technique
is best for everyone. Each institution should tailor its risk measurement and management process
to  its  own  needs.  While  adhering  to  basic  principles,  each  institution  must  determine  for  itself
the proper incentives and techniques for managing its affairs. No two banks or banking markets
are  identical  in  their  operations,  structure,  or  historical  development.  Permitting  a  range  of
compatible responses to similar situations encourages experimentation, innovation, and growth.
Accommodating  a  certain  level  of  flexibility  is  necessary  for  banks,  and  it  is  necessary  for
regulators, too.
Indeed, flexibility may be even more important for non-G-10 countries than it is
for  those  of  us  with  large,  developed  financial  systems  because  of  the  greater  range  of  capital
market and economic infrastructures among developing countries. Materially different situations
typically  require  different  solutions.  Accommodating  differences,  though,  does  not  reduce  the
need  for  minimum  regulatory  or  supervisory  standards  based  upon  well-known  principles  of
sound banking. It is up to supervisors and, if necessary, legislators to craft regulations and laws
consistent  with  internationally  recognized  standards,  but  accommodative  to  local  customs  and
economic needs.
In  developing  sufficiently  flexible,  market-compatible  regulations,  I  believe  we
should rely as much as prudently possible on market discipline and on banks’ internal incentives
to  perform  well.  This  approach  requires  that  the  public  have  information  about  the  risk
exposures of banks and about their procedures for managing those risks. As regulators, we can
encourage  this  process  by  requiring  or  prodding  banks  to  disclose  information  to  the  markets
that is both relevant and comparable among institutions.
Whether  such  disclosures  are  imposed  by  official  regulations  or  evolve  through
more subtle efforts, supervisors can help guide the process by considering carefully the kinds of
information the private sector needs and that banks use -- or should use -- to manage risk. Even
in  the  United  States,  where  surveys  show  disclosure  is  relatively  good,  supervisors  make
available to the public data collected on Call Reports.
In countries where disclosure practices are minimal at best, bank regulators may
be able to perform a particularly important role by publicly disclosing some, if not much, of the
information  banks  report  to  them.  By  fueling  market  information  in  this  way,  regulators  may
BIS Review   11/1997
- 4 -
stimulate  greater  investor  interest  in  banks  and  the  growth  of  local  capital  markets.  Improved
disclosure practices by banks may, in turn, also spill over to other industries. One thing we know
for sure is that investors dislike uncertainty. By shedding light on a bank’s condition and future
prospects, some of that uncertainty should disappear.
While  it  is  important  that  key  prudential  standards  be  sufficiently  robust  and
consistent among countries, certain variations in the details  and  applications  of  these  standards
can  be  useful.  As  with  private  markets,  some  level  of  competition  among  regulators  can
stimulate  improvements  and  change.  I  will  grant  that  the  United  States  may  take  regulatory
competition to an extreme, but it  also  demonstrates,  I  believe,  the  advantages  that  derive  from
accommodating  different  views  and  permitting  financial  institutions  alternative  ways  to  do
business. In my view, and considering the political difficulties we have faced in trying to change
U.S.  banking  laws,  our  current  regulatory  structure,  offering  some  choice  in  charter  that  is
administered by multiple regulators, has provided financial institutions with more freedom  and
expanded powers than they would likely have received with a single regulator.
Supervisors  must  be  careful,  however,  as  they  try  new  or  different  techniques,
that  they  do  not  impair  their  oversight  efforts  or  relax  them  beyond  prudent  bounds.  In  such
global  markets  as  we  have  today,  weak  or  ineffective  supervision  in  either  large  or  small
countries can have far reaching consequences. Those concerns were at the heart of early work of
the Basle Committee and its efforts to identify the respective roles and responsibilities of home
and host authorities for internationally active banks. It is important for supervisors to be able to
rely  on  their  counterparts  in  other  countries  to  administer  agreed-upon  standards  of  financial
institution safety and soundness.
Whether we conduct our own on-site examinations,  rely  on  external  auditors,  or
use combinations of other supervisory techniques, we need to assure ourselves that all banking
offices are adequately managed and supervised. I would note here that among G-10 countries a
more consistent approach may begin to emerge. We in the United States are making greater use
of  the  findings  of  a  bank’s  internal  and  external  auditors  to  guide  or  supplement  our  on-site
examinations, while  some  of  our  counterparts  abroad  are  recognizing  more  the  benefits  of  on-
site exams.
Financial Conglomerates
Some of the greatest challenges to bank supervisors may arise when organizations
link  banking  activities  with  other  financial  or  nonfinancial  businesses.  Such  financial
conglomerates,  which  often  combine  banking,  insurance,  and  securities  activities,  are  not
currently allowed to provide a full array of financial services in the United States, but they may
do so abroad.
The existence of such firms -- and the fact that some of them are headquartered in
this  country  --  have  required  regulators  and  supervisors  in  the  United  States  to  work  with
counterparts abroad to discuss oversight arrangements and develop ways to deal with matters in
times of crises. This very issue is one of our current challenges. I have to say that this is not a
particularly quick or easy process and is further complicated by the diverse regulatory structures,
both here and abroad, involving banking, securities, and sometimes insurance regulators.
These discussions often raise difficult issues, since they tend to break new ground
in  supervision.  For  example,  what  approach  should  be  taken  regarding  nonbank  --  or  even
nonfinancial -- activities  of  companies  that  own  banks?  In  the  context  of  these  conglomerates,
BIS Review   11/1997
- 5 -
what  does  or  should  “consolidated  supervision”  mean?  Within  the  context  of  consolidated
supervision, how can the traditional safety-and-soundness approach used by bank supervisors be
reconciled  with  the  disclosure/self-regulatory  approach  used  by  many  securities  regulators?
Moreover, do the diverse operating structures of conglomerates imply an extension of the safety
net that virtually all governments currently  extend  to  banks?  One  thing  is  clear:  as  we  address
the  challenges  of  promoting  a  more  consistent  bank  supervisory  and  regulatory  process
worldwide,  we  cannot  always  take  official  descriptions  of  regulatory  and  oversight  regimes  at
face  value.  We  need  to  dig  deeper  to  understand  how  laws  are  interpreted  and  how  individual
banking agencies monitor and enforce safe banking.
Different countries necessarily have different  banking  and  financial  systems  that
face  unique  combinations  of  exposures  and  business  risks.  Even  within  the  United  States,  for
example,  we  have  a  relatively  uniform  supervisory  approach  for  all  banks  and  a  risk-based
capital standard that applies to them all. In practice, however, the activities  of  our  banks,  their
capital levels, and their operating practices are quite diverse, and our oversight efforts take those
differences  into  account.  Small  banks,  themselves,  recognize  the  greater  risks  they  face  from
their  lack  of  size  and  diversity,  and  have  consistently  maintained  higher  capital  ratios  than  do
money  center  banks.  But  they  also  have  less  formal  procedures  and  internal  controls,  simply
because their staffing and operations are so much smaller. The point is that even a uniform set of
rules within a given country can and should be implemented differently as conditions demand.
Conclusion
It seems clear that as  financial  markets  become  more  and  more  integrated,  bank
regulators around the world will be seeing more of each other than they have in the past. Even in
countries that have no internationally active domestic banks, authorities need to ensure that the
banks  operating  in  their  markets  are  sound  and  subject  to  adequate  supervision,  whether  by
home  or  host  authorities.  Banks  operating  imprudently  and  without  proper  supervision  are  the
ones  most  likely  to  mismeasure  their  risks,  misprice  their  products,  and  disrupt  the  markets.
Detecting  and  deterring  such  institutions  does  not  require  us  to  have  uniform  regulatory  or
supervisory  systems,  but  it  does  require  a  certain  level  of  cooperation  and  coordination  and  a
material  level  of  consistency  in  our  regulatory  regimes.  Our  experience  in  the  United  States
suggests  that  achieving  an  appropriate  convergence  takes  time,  not  only  to  develop  but  to
maintain.  Progress  we  have  seen  through  the  European  Union  and  the  BIS  goes  far  in
coordinating, or harmonizing, banking laws, regulations, and operating standards, but that’s just
a  start.  As  managers  of  large  financial  institutions  develop  more  sophisticated  and  more
comprehensive risk management systems, they are paying less attention every day to the peculiar
legal  structure  of  their  organizations.  As  regulators,  we  need  to  understand  how  banking
organizations  manage  and  control  risks  and  the  full  implications  of  their  practices  for  the
financial  safety  of  depository  institutions.  By  doing  so,  we  can  do  much  to  protect  our  own
interests while still recognizing and accommodating the business needs of banks.
In  developing  our  laws  and  regulations  we  need  to  work  together,  for  sure.  But
perhaps  more  importantly,  we  need  to  understand  the  market  forces  and  incentives  that  banks
face.  If  we  keep  those  factors  in  mind  in  developing  our  individual  rules,  we  may  go  far  in
developing regulatory systems that are both compatible among countries and less intrusive to the
institutions we oversee.
BIS Review   11/1997
