Mr.  Stals  examines  the  role  of  financial  cooperation  in  the  development  of
the  Southern  African  Development  Community      Lecture  by  the  Governor  of  the  South
African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  C.  Stals,  presented  to  the  Harvard  Institute  for  International
Development in Boston on 1/5/97.
1. Background to the formation of SADC
The  Southern  African  Development  Community  found  its  origin  in  1980  when
nine1  countries  in  Southern  Africa  decided  jointly  “to  pursue  policies  aimed  at  economic
liberation and integrated development of our national economies”. One of the main objectives of
the  association  at  that  stage  was  to  make  the  economies  of  these  countries  less  dependent  on
South  Africa  --  a  country  that  was  then  an  unwanted  ally  because  of  its  unacceptable  internal
political and social policies.
After  major  political  and  social  reforms  in  South  Africa  led  to  the  fully
democratic election of a Government of National Unity in April 1994, South Africa also joined
SADC,  to  become  the  eleventh  member,  after  a  newly-independent  Namibia  already  joined  in
1990. Mauritius was the next country to join SADC, which now has twelve members with a total
population of about 136 million people.
In August 1992, a revised Treaty for SADC was approved by a Summit Meeting
of  the  Heads  of  State  of  the  participating  countries.  Included  in  the  main  objectives  of  the
Community are the following economic goals:
To  achieve  development  and  economic  growth,  alleviate  poverty,  enhance  the
standard  and  quality  of  life  of  the  peoples  of  Southern  Africa,  and  support  the  socially
disadvantaged through regional integration;  To  promote  and  maximise  productive  employment
and  utilisation  of  resources  of  the  region,  and  to  achieve  sustainable  utilisation  of  natural
resources and effective protection of the environment.
To achieve its objectives, SADC shall
    Harmonise  political  and  socio-economic  policies  and  plans  of  member
States.
Mobilise the peoples of the region and their institutions to take initiatives
to  develop  economic,  social  and  cultural  ties  across  the  region,  and  to
participate fully in the implementation of the programmes and operations
of SADC and its institutions.
Develop policies aimed at the progressive elimination of obstacles to free
movement of capital and labour, goods and services, and of the peoples of
the region generally among member States.
Promote the development of human resources.
Promote the development, transfer and mastery of technology.
Improve  economic  management  and  performance  through  regional
co-operation.
The  Treaty  provides  for  other  political,  social  and  cultural  objectives  which  are
not of direct relevance for the enhancing of financial co-operation in the region.
                                                  
1
Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
BIS Review   52/1997
2. South Africa’s position within SADC
- 2 -
The South African economy is by far the most advanced in the region. Although
the total South African population of 42 million people accounts for but 31 per cent of the total
population of all SADC countries together, the South African economy contributes about 80 per
cent of the  total  gross  domestic  product  of  about  $170  billion  produced  in  the  twelve  member
states. South Africa also accounts  for  almost  70  per  cent  of  the  combined  total  exports  of  $43
billion of the SADC region.
South  Africa’s  dominance  is  even  more  pronounced  in  the  financial  markets.
South  Africa  is  about  the  only  country  in  the  region  with  well-functioning  and  independent
specialised  financial  institutions  such  as  banks,  long-  and  short-term  insurers,  private  sector
pension  funds,  mutual  funds,  participation  mortgage  bond  schemes  and  mining  and  industrial
finance houses. With a total market capitalisation of about $280 billion, the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange  dominates  the  capital  markets  of  the  region,  and  with  a  daily  turnover  of  about  $7
billion,  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  Johannesburg  is  providing  an  increasing  service  for
international settlements for a number of other countries of the region. With a turnover of more
than  $700  billion  last  year  in  the  South  African  bond  market  and  a  growing  market  for
derivatives, South  Africa  is  in  a  favourable  position  to  provide  sophisticated  financial  services
for the whole SADC region.
This  dominating  position  of  the  South  African  economy  has  certain  advantages,
but at the same time makes harmonious regional co-operation more complex. Some of the other
partners  in  SADC  hold  an  understandable  fear  that  their  economic  independence  will  be
jeopardised by a too aggressive policy of economic integration of the region.
The role that South Africa plays within SADC must therefore be approached with
tact and ingenuity. South Africa was given the responsibility for  managing  and  developing  the
Finance and Investment Protocol2. For this purpose, there is a Council of Ministers of  Finance
that meet from time to time under the chairmanship of the South African Minister of Finance to
give  guidance  to  a  programme  for  closer  financial  co-operation  amongst  the  participating
countries  in  SADC.  Two  sub-committees  were  also  established,  one  a  Committee  of  Treasury
Officials,  and  the  other  a  Committee  of  Governors  of  Central  Banks  and  their  officials,  with
clearly defined terms of reference for each one of these Committees.
3. The work and functions of the Committee of Governors of Central Banks
When South Africa  was  given  the  special  task  of  administering  the  Finance  and
Investment Protocol for SADC, the South African Reserve Bank saw in this arrangement a great
opportunity  for  closer  co-operation  amongst  the  central  banks  of  the  region.  In  the  beginning,
however, it proved a major task to get recognition from the political leaders for the need of an
independent Committee of Governors of Central  Banks.  In  many  of  the  participating  countries
the  central  bank  is  regarded,  and  often  unfortunately  also  used,  as  just  an  extension  of  the
Treasury  Department  of  the  central  government.  In  succeeding  to  get  the  approval  for  the
establishment of this Committee of Governors an important seed was sown in each one of these
                                                  
2
There  are  a  number  of  other  Protocols,  co-ordinated  by  other  countries,  for  example:  Inland  Fisheries
(Malawi), Marine Fisheries and Resources (Namibia), Livestock Production and Animal Disease Control
(Botswana), Environment  and  Land  Management  (Lesotho),  Energy  (Angola),  Mining  and  Labour  and
Employment  (Zambia),  Tourism  (Mauritius),  Industry  and  Trade  (Tanzania),  Food,  Agriculture  and
Natural  Resources  (Zimbabwe),  Human  Resource  Development  (Swaziland),  and  Culture  and
Information as well as Transport and Communication (Mozambique).
BIS Review   52/1997
- 3 -
countries  for  the  acceptance  of  the  undeniable  advantages,  also  for  the  politicians,  of  an
independent central bank.
A  second  major  obstacle  was  overcome  when  approval  was  granted  for  the
establishment of a small specialised Secretariat and Research Facility within the South African
Reserve Bank to serve the Committee of Governors. This avoided the need for adhering to the
cumbersome  procedure  of  communicating  within  the  central  banking  fraternity  through  the
conduit of the SADC Secretariat, based in Gaborone, the capital of Botswana.
The SADC Finance and Investment Sector was formally established only in 1995,
and the Committee of Governors held its first meeting on 24 November 1995 in Pretoria. Now,
eighteen months later, this Committee can already look back on a number of accomplishments,
and  can  report  good  progress  with  a  number  of  projects  being  pursued  in  the  interest  of
promoting  economic  development  in  the  Southern  African  region.  A  number  of  Technical
Subcommittees  and  Working  Groups  have  been  formed,  consisting  mainly  of  officials  of  the
SADC central banks, to work on specialised projects.
4. The basic philosophy behind financial co-operation in the region
Before  the  Governors’  Committee  was  established,  SADC  approached  financial
co-operation in the region on the basis of proposals made by European advisers, and was based
mainly  on  the  model  of  financial  integration  in  the  European  Community.  The  folly  of  this
approach was immediately grasped by the Governors at their first meeting. The divergencies in
the stage of  economic  development  of  the  members  of  SADC  are  so  vast  that  there  can  be  no
talk  at  this  juncture  of  a  European  type  of  economic  integration  in  Southern  Africa.  The
Governors’ Committee therefore had to design its own model for sensible financial co-operation
in  the  region.  In  drafting  its  own  mission  statement,  the  Committee  designed  a  model  for
financial co-operation that was described as a “bottom-up” approach. This approach is based on
building financial co-operation by laying an appropriate foundation in the form  of  an  effective
institutional framework for the financial system in each country. More grandiose schemes for the
harmonisation or integration of macroeconomic monetary polices can be considered once central
banks, private banking sectors and financial markets have been established and are functioning
effectively in most of the participating countries.
A  second  challenge  that  had  to  be  faced  was  the  diverse  roles  and  functions
assigned by their Governments to the various central banks in the region. In finding an answer to
the question of what contribution central banks can make towards the achievement of the goals
of  SADC,  a  consensus  had  to  be  found  on  what  the  task  of  the  central  banks  should  be  in
promoting optimum economic development and growth. There may not yet be full agreement on
this  daunting  question,  but  the  majority  view  now  favours  the  contemporary  approach  of  the
more  advanced  economies  that  the  central  bank’s  responsibilities  should  be  restricted  to  the
creation and maintenance of a stable financial environment that will be conducive for sustainable
economic growth. Central banks must protect the value of the currency. This is gospel, not only
in  more  industrialised,  but  also  in  developing  and  emerging  economies.  Overall  financial
stability  may  not  be  a  guarantee  for,  but  certainly  is  a  precondition  for,  sustainable  economic
growth.
5. The framework for financial co-operation within SADC
In  terms  of  the  bottom-up  approach,  the  Committee  of  Governors  kicked-off  its
work  programme  by  exchanging  views  on  the  nature,  structure  and  functions  of  each  central
BIS Review   52/1997
- 4 -
bank  in  the  region.  In  many  developing  countries,  central  banks,  acting  as  extensions  of
Government  Finance  Departments,  are  often  directly  involved  in  normal  commercial  and
development  banking,  and  in  many  other  macroeconomic  activities  such  as  export  promotion,
social  upliftment  programmes,  and  financing  of  government  budgetary  shortfalls.  This,  of
course, often creates a conflict with the prime objective of central banking, and that is to protect
the value of the currency. The powers of the central bank in such countries must first be reduced
to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy.
In  the  second  phase  of  its  deliberations,  the  Committee  of  Governors  is
concentrating on the quantity and quality of private banking in the region. The establishment of
sound  and  well-managed  privately-owned  banking  institutions  must  be  encouraged  to  provide
financial services in a competitive environment. The two tiers of banking, that is central banking
and private banking, must be separated on a clearly-defined basis.
In  the  third  phase  of  financial  co-ordination,  the  central  bank  Governors  are
working  together  in  a  joint  effort  to  develop  compatible  and  inter-linkable  national  payments,
clearing and settlement systems for financial transactions. Eventually, the national systems must
be  linked  to  each  other  to  provide  for  more  effective  cross-border  settlement  of  inter-regional
financial transactions. This project requires some co-operation in the development of compatible
electronic data processing and technology systems in the twelve participating central banks.
In a fourth phase, more attention will be focused on the development of financial
markets in the region. A lot of  research  work  must  be  done  on  the  introduction  of  appropriate
legal institutional frameworks, the introduction of financial instruments and the improvement of
technological  systems  and  human  resource  skills  in  the  foreign  exchange,  money  and  capital
markets. Some rationalisation in the use  of  the  existing  markets  to  the  advantage  of  the  whole
region will be necessary.
Only  then  will  it  become  possible  to  consider  greater  harmonisation  and  even
integration of macroeconomic financial policies such as interest and exchange rate policies, the
management of bank liquidity and credit extension on a regional basis, and operations by central
banks in a more integrated financial market environment.
6. The practical implementation of the programme for financial co-operation
The  SADC  Committee  of  Governors  is  determined  gradually  to  implement  its
plan  for  greater  financial  co-operation  over  the  next  few  years  in  the  whole  region.  On  the
African  Continent,  many  ambitious  plans  for  economic  co-operation  exist  on  paper,  but  are
never executed. The Governors’ Committee has already embarked on the implementation stage,
and is now actively involved in a number of the ground-work projects:
1.    It  has  become  necessary  for  the  twelve  Governors  to  have  a  better
understanding  of  the  regional  economic  environment  within  which  they  operate.  For  this
purpose  the  Secretariat  of  the  Governors’  Committee  established  a  statistical  data  base  for
essential economic time series from the twelve countries in the computer capacity of the South
African Reserve Bank. It is the intention to connect all the central banks in due course with real-
time on-line linkages to the data base.
2.  To enable Governors to learn from the experiences of each other, a data bank
with  information  on  issues  such  as  legislation,  relationships  with  Governments,  functions  and
responsibilities, management, policy objectives, procedures and instruments of monetary policy,
BIS Review   52/1997
- 5 -
and administrative structures for each central bank, has been  compiled  and  is  now  available  to
all the Governors.
3.    Programmes  are  encouraged  for  the  establishment  of  efficient  and  well-
managed  privately-owned  banking  institutions  in  all  SADC  countries.  Assistance  is  being
provided  for  the  revision  of  the  banking  laws  in  some  countries,  and  central  banks  are
encouraged where necessary to withdraw themselves from private sector banking activity.
4.  The South African Reserve Bank is playing a leading role in the development
of the quality of, and capacity for, proper bank regulation and supervision. Some harmonisation
is  encouraged  on  policies  such  as  bank  licensing,  minimum  financial  prudential  requirements,
and  regular  auditing  of  banking  institutions.  A  joint  effort  is  also  being  made  to  take  the
necessary action against illegal  banking  activities  in  the  region,  such  as  money  laundering  and
pyramid schemes.
5.    There  is  a  great  need  for  training  and  the  development  of  skills  in  central
banking  in  the  region.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  a  specialised  Training
Institute  for  Central  Banking,  and  is  now  providing  specialised  courses  in  central  banking  and
financial management for its own staff and officials of other central banks in the SADC region.
The central banks of the region also formed an East and Southern Africa Banking
Supervisors Group (ESAF) to standardise bank regulation and supervision in the region. ESAF
is providing specialised courses for the development of the financial  regulatory  capacity  in  the
region.
There  is  also  a  more  ambitious  training  programme  provided  through  the
Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute (MEFMI). A number of Southern African
countries,  but  not  all  members  of  SADC,  participate  in  this  venture.  With  its  headquarters  in
Harare, MEFMI’s operational mandate covers two broad areas:
“(i)  In-depth  capacity  building,  involving  training,  institutional  development,
networking  and  technical  support,  to  strengthen  countries’  ability  to  manage  their  debt  and
external reserves;” and
“(ii)  a 
training  programme  for  public  officials  with  duties  relating 
to
macroeconomic  and  financial  management,  providing  courses  in  a  wide  range  of  high-priority
fields.”  MEFMI  has  the  support  of  a  number  of  international  institutions,  such  as  the  World
Bank, and has the potential to make an important contribution to the development of desperately
needed skills for the management of the economic transformation of African countries.
6.  The removal of remaining exchange controls in the region is a major priority
of  the  Governors’  Committee.  Arrangements  have  been  introduced  for  the  unrestricted
repatriation  of  notes  and  coin  used  in  participating  countries  amongst  the  members  of  SADC,
and the movement towards an unrestricted flow of capital in the region is being promoted. South
Africa is lifting its remaining exchange controls in respect of SADC countries faster than for the
rest  of  the  world.  Two  members,  namely  Zambia  and  Mauritius,  have  already  removed  all
exchange controls in their countries.
7.  Reference has already been made to the work that is being done in the area of
electronic data processing and the development of a cross-border network for financial clearing,
payment and settlement transactions. International assistance is now sought (through the World
BIS Review   52/1997
- 6 -
Bank) for the development of the national payment and  clearing  systems  in  the  less-developed
economies of the region.
7. The road ahead
There  is  growing  enthusiasm  in  Southern  Africa  for  a  regional  approach  to
economic  development  issues.  There  are,  unfortunately,  more  than  one  initiative  for  multi-
national  regional  economic  co-operation  arrangements  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  initiatives  that
often  compete  with  each  other.  In  Southern  Africa  itself,  the  SADC  and  COMESA  (the
Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa),  groupings  provide  many  overlapping
services and some countries belong to both organisations, and others to only one of the two. The
time  has  come  for  Governments  in  the  region  to  consider  a  merger  of  the  two  competing
regional groupings in a more viable single regional association.
Both SADC and COMESA have their own Secretariats with a strong bureaucracy
that often inhibits initiatives because of unnecessary  rigid  procedural  requirements.  In  the  case
of the Committee of Governors of SADC, we often live in sin because of non-compliance with
the  prescribed  procedures  of  the  SADC  Secretariat.  Forgiveness,  however,  can  easily  be
extorted, as long as progress and successes can be claimed.
There is among some governments still a strong suspicion of the motives behind
closer economic co-operation in the region. The question arises whether it is perhaps not a real
danger that the powerful South African economy will exploit the smaller economies for its own
advantage: South Africa has to act with great discretion in performing its role in the programme.
South  Africa  obviously  has  a  vested  interest  in  the  economic  development  of  the  region  as  a
whole.
Internally,  South  Africa  still  has  many  serious  economic  problems  that  must  be
resolved  to  improve  the  living  conditions  of  its  own  people.  Unemployment  is  high,  many
communities live in great poverty, and  there  is  a  relatively  wide  spread  between  high  and  low
incomes  earned  in  the  country.  Many  people  therefore  believe  that  South  Africa  should
concentrate all its resources on the development of its own economy. There is, however, a basic
fallacy  in  this  approach.  Whenever  South  Africa  makes  some  progress  in  solving  its  own
economic  problems  without  a  parallel  development  in  other  countries  in  the  region,  the
unemployed from the other countries get sucked into the South African system. If South Africa
is not prepared to accept more exports from other African countries and does not want to allow
part  of  the  South  African  savings  to  be  invested  in  these  countries,  the  country  will  have  to
absorb great numbers of unemployed people from the rest of the region.
The  region  of  SADC  is  gradually  becoming  an  attractive  place  for  foreign
investors. Its potential for economic development is vast, and undeveloped human resources and
the  exploding  demand  for  goods  and  services  emanating  from  people  who  are  now  being
absorbed for the first time in a real market economy, must lure many multi-national institutions
to the Southern Africa region. It depends on us how attractive we can make our own region for
the outside world as a place for long-term, durable, and productive investment.
BIS Review   52/1997
