Mr.  Macfarlane  reviews  monetary  policy,  growth  and  unemployment  in
Australia   Talk by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, to the
Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce in Melbourne on 15/5/97.
It is a pleasure to be here in Melbourne, and to be speaking to the Australia-Israel
Chamber of Commerce. I was very pleased to be invited to address this distinguished group so
soon  after  I  was  appointed.  If  at  the  end  of  this  address,  you  feel  that  I  have  still  left  some
important questions unanswered, my suggestion is that your next guest be my opposite number
from Israel. Jacob Frenkel, the Governor of the Bank of Israel, is a distinguished economist, but
a very busy man. My invitations to him to visit Australia have so far been unsuccessful - perhaps
this Chamber can swing the balance.
I want to take this opportunity today to talk about the economy, monetary policy,
and some aspects of unemployment. I propose to  do  this  by  looking  over  a  longer  period  than
normal.  Most  economic  commentary  concentrates  on  very  current  events  and  focuses  on  the
latest monthly or quarterly economic statistics. This is an inevitable result of the news-gathering
process  and  the  need  for  financial  markets  to  reassess  after  each  new  piece  of  information.  In
this environment, the outlook for the year ahead is considered a long time. In my view, even that
is  too  short  -  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  we  should  be  looking  at  a  period  as  long  as  an
economic  expansion.  That  may  not  be  a  lot  of  immediate  help  to  most  people  because  they
would be unsure of what time span was encompassed by an economic expansion. As a point of
reference, the last two expansions have lasted for about six-and-a-half years, but I think we can
do a lot better on this occasion.
Lengthening the expansion
The current expansion in Australia has been going on for about 5½ years, which
is similar to the United States, the United Kingdom and New Zealand, and a fair bit longer than
for countries in continental Europe or Japan. Table 1 shows that over that period we have grown
at  an  annual  rate  of  3½  per  cent  and  had  inflation  of  2½  per  cent.  Our  growth  rate  has  been
higher than nearly all OECD countries, although not as strong as for the countries of east Asia.
Our inflation rate is also very good and close to the average for OECD countries.
The  results  are  pretty  good  by  international  standards,  particularly  since  there
should  be  a  lot  more  expansion  still  to  come.  The  main  reason  that  I  think  we  still  have  a  lot
more to come is that this has been a low-inflation expansion and remains so.
An important reason why inflation has remained low is that monetary policy has
been determined to keep it low this time. The centrepiece of our monetary policy approach is a
medium-term  inflation  target  endorsed  both  by  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank.  It  was
also  endorsed  by  the  Treasurer  in  the  previous  Government  and  was  incorporated  into  the
Accord  Mark  VIII  agreed  in  June  1995.  It  is  not  just  something  we  dreamt  up  at  the  Reserve
Bank; it has enjoyed wide bipartisan support. And recently, the Industrial Relations Commission
made it clear that they felt their own decision had to take note of this framework.
The  statement  agreed  between  the  Treasurer  and  myself  at  the  time  of  my
appointment saw low inflation as a  requirement  for  sustained  growth,  which  is  another  part  of
the Bank’s Charter. Containing inflation is not an end in itself; it is one of the pre-conditions for
sustained growth. It is not the only one, but it is obviously the one for which central banks have
to accept most responsibility.
BIS Review   53/1997
- 2 -
Table  1:  GDP  Growth  and  Inflation
GDPa
Consumer Pricesa
Ireland
Norway
Australia
New Zealand
United States
Canada
Denmark
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Finland
Germany
Japan
Spain
Belgium
France
Italy
Sweden
Switzerland
6.1
3.8
3.6
3.6
2.7
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.0
1.0
-0.1
2.4
2.3
2.3
1.7
3.1
1.7
2.0
2.9
3.0
1.9
3.1
0.8
4.8
1.9
1.9
4.3
2.1
2.3
(a) Average annual rate since June 1991
Inflation and growth
We do attract criticism, however, from people who think that because we have an
inflation target it means we are not interested in economic growth. This is not  true  -  as  I  have
pointed out on a number of occasions.  In fact, the reverse is true: we are interested in sustaining
a  good  inflation  performance  because  we  are  interested  in  growth.  Let  me  make  two  points  I
have made before:
(a)  The other way of looking at an inflation target is to say that the aim is to
grow as fast as possible consistent with maintaining low inflation, but no faster. We say no
faster because post-war history has taught us that allowing inflation to rise actually harms
growth prospects in the longer term. Strong growth and long expansions have always gone
hand-in-hand with low inflation. Weaker growth and short expansions have occurred in the
high-inflation  era,  particularly  the  1970s  but  also  in  some  parts  of  the  1980s.  This  “no
faster” idea does not mean that we will panic at unexpectedly strong growth over a short
period.  It  does  mean  we  intend  to  avoid  a  “full  steam  ahead  and  damn  the  torpedoes”
approach to policy.
(b)  As I said at the start of the talk, we want a long expansion this time. We
do not want the expansion to last only six-and-a-half years and be followed by a recession.
The  damage,  particularly  to  unemployment,  occurs  during  recessions.  The  net  rise  in
unemployment in Australia over the past 25 years has not been due to prolonged periods of
weak  economic  growth;  it  has  been  concentrated  into  three  relatively  short  periods  of
recession  (see  Diagram  1).  The  best  thing  monetary  policy  can  do  to  improve  our
BIS Review   53/1997
- 3 -
employment  prospects  is  to  prolong  the  expansion  and  delay  and  reduce  the  size  of  any
subsequent  recession.  On  occasion,  that  means  easing  the  growth  rates  back  a  bit  to
counter inflationary pressures early, as an alternative to more vigorous  application  of  the
brakes when inflation has built more momentum.
Diagram  1
Unemployment Rate
 9
9
6
6
3
3
0
0
 9
9
6
6
3
3
1973
1977
1981
1985
1989
1993
0
0
1997
Ideally, we should try to eliminate the business cycle (and recessions) altogether,
but that would be too utopian an aspiration. The business cycle has been declared dead before,
only  to  re-assert  itself.  I  do  believe,  however,  that  if  inflation  is  kept  under  control,  this
expansion  will  be  a  lot  longer  than  its  predecessors  and  any  subsequent  downturn  kept  milder
than in the past. Less pressure would be placed on monetary policy in a late-cycle situation if the
aim were only to slow the economy, than if it were necessary both to slow the economy and to
reduce an entrenched inflation, as has been the case in the past.
Speed limits
Some  people  would  characterise  our  approach 
to  monetary  policy  as
incorporating “a speed limit”. In a very broad sense this is true. We do not want the economy to
grow  so  fast  that  it  pushes  up  wage  and  price  inflation  to  unacceptable  rates.  I  have  already
explained the reason for that.
However,  the  concept  of  a  “speed  limit”  is  unhelpful  if  we  try  to  use  it
mechanistically. It has been claimed that the Reserve Bank has a rule that the economy cannot
be allowed to grow faster than 3½ per cent. I have seen this claim on a number of occasions, but
can  assure  you  that  it  is  not  true.  I  do  not  know  where  it  came  from;  perhaps  from  observing
historical growth rates, or perhaps from some  misinterpretation of things that the Bank has said
on occasion. The figure of 3½ per cent is also sometimes regarded as the Government’s target.
Again, I do not know where this claim came from, but it is probably derived from the fact that
government  projections,  such  as  those  underlying  the  Budget  forward  estimates,  often  assume
average  growth  rates  like  this,  particularly  for  the  out-years  of  multi-year  projections.  These
assumptions  should  be  seen  as  what  they  are  -  an  attempt  to  base  government  planning  on
BIS Review   53/1997
- 4 -
prudent,  conservative  assumptions  rather  than  wishful  thinking  -  not  as  iron-clad  limits  to
growth or short-term “targets”.
There are a number of reasons why it does not make sense to specify a particular
number as the “speed limit” for the coming year. Among those reasons are the following:
(a)   Even if we have a clear idea of a long-term average rate of growth, an economy
can clearly grow faster than that when it is taking up excess capacity. This would
be the case if it was coming off a year when growth was a bit on the soft side (as
was 1996, for example) and where inflation was very well contained.
(b)   It is not possible to “fine-tune” an economy to grow at the rate you want over the
space of one year. Neither forecasting accuracy, nor the monetary policy process,
permits  that  degree  of  accuracy.  Even  with  very  good  economic  policy,  the
economy will grow faster than average half the time and slower the other half.
(c)   Just  because  the  economy  averaged  a  particular  figure  in  the  past,  it  does  not
mean that this average is the one we should project into the future when thinking
about potential growth. There is some evidence, as is shown in our Semi-Annual
Statement on Monetary Policy, that productivity growth has increased, and hence
it is possible that potential growth may have risen. On the other hand, population
and labour force growth may well be slower than in the past and this would work
in the opposite direction.
I hope I have made it clear that we do not regard economic growth as excessive
because it has breached a particular figure - say, 3½ per cent. We would regard it as excessive if
it  is  pushing  up  wages  and  prices  in  a  way  which  would  cause  our  medium-term  target  to  be
exceeded.    Obviously,  the  faster  is  growth  in  any  particular  period,  all  other  things  equal,  the
higher the risk of that problem  becomes.  But  we  do  not  have,  and  it  is  not  sensible  to  have,  a
doctrinaire  view  of  particular  growth  thresholds  which,  if  breached,  are  assumed  to  generate
problems.    The  policy  process  is  rather  more  pragmatic  than  that,  and  proceeds  by  the  rather
simple  technique  of  examining  the  evidence  for  what  it  says  about  inflation  pressures  in  the
period ahead.
That,  to  repeat,  is  the  test:  not  whether  a  growth  rate  matches  or  exceeds  a
particular  pre-determined  figure,  but  whether  low  inflation  performance  is  being  maintained
over time. At any point in time we are constantly monitoring wages and prices and making  an
assessment of the outlook over the next year or so. If we get good news and our assessment is
for  lower  growth  in  wages  and  prices,  we  can,  other  things  equal,  let  the  economy  run  faster.
This may be done by reducing interest rates or, depending on the circumstances, refraining from
raising them. If on the other hand we are getting bad news, we may have to tighten or forego an
easing.
This idea is not all that novel.  It is very similar to the way the monetary policy
process is described in the United States. Our newspapers are full of the latest speculation about
what Alan Greenspan - the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board - is going to do this month,
next month and thereafter. The big story of 1996 in the United States was that nearly everyone
expected monetary policy to be tightened. The US economy was already at full capacity and still
growing strongly, people expected  that  inflationary  pressures  would  soon  emerge,  and  the  Fed
would have to tighten. On three occasions - July, September and December - the markets were
convinced  it  was  going  to  happen,  but  on  each  occasion  the  Fed  was  able  to  sit  on  its  hands.
Why was it possible to delay the tightening for nearly a year? It was not because the economy
BIS Review   53/1997
- 5 -
weakened; in fact, it grew faster than initially anyone had forecast, expanding by over 3 per cent
in  1996,  well  above  previous  forecasts  and  economists’  estimates  of  its  long-run  potential
growth rate. It was  because  the  Fed  continued  to  receive  constant  feedback  from  the  economy
indicating  that  rises  in  prices  and  wages  remained  moderate.  None  of  this  means  that  the  US
economy is somehow entirely freed from all the constraints it has experienced in the past; only
that, to date, inflation performance has been a bit better than they expected. To that extent, the
Fed has been able to allow the growth to run just a little longer.
No-one would be  more  pleased  than  the  Reserve  Bank  to  see  a  similar  outcome
for  the  Australian  economy  over  the  next  12  or  18  months  -  that  is,  continuing  good  news  on
wages  and  prices,  allowing  us  to  grow  faster  for  longer.  It  was  an  assessment  of  improving
prospects for inflation, and the associated scope for additional growth, that lay behind the three
easings in the second half of 1996. We would like to have seen that pattern of news continued,
but the latest data on wages seems to have been a setback to that expectation.
Other views
Of course, not  everyone  agrees  with  this  approach.  There  are  those  who  think  a
much higher figure for growth is achievable and should be pursued. Their approach would be to
nominate a figure - I have seen  5  per  cent  mentioned  -  and  expect  the  Reserve  Bank  to  adjust
monetary policy to achieve it in the long run (not just for one year).
The  trouble  with  this  approach  is  that  it  amounts  to  a  gamble  with  rather  poor
odds. While we do not wish to take too strong a view on what is “too much” in any particular
short period, we need to keep a reasonably sober perspective on what is likely to be feasible over
the long run. A growth rate of 5 per cent, for example, is so far above our historical performance
that unless you can specify how improvements on the supply side of the economy have lifted the
potential  growth  rate  dramatically,  it  cannot  be  taken  seriously.  Now  there  may  well  be  some
significant  benefits  coming  through  on  the  supply  side  as  a  result  of  structural  changes  and
micro-economic reform. For example, reductions in tariffs and increased competition within the
domestic market are two that spring to mind. We may also be getting something out of increased
flexibility in some parts of the workforce, though the jury is still out at present on exactly how
far  that  process  has  brought  us.  But  even  though  there  is  some  tentative  evidence  of  higher
productivity,  I  think  we  have  still  got  a  lot  further  to  go  before  we  could  be  confident  that
supply-side reforms have significantly lifted our potential growth rate.
More  importantly,  our  current  monetary  policy  procedures,  consistently  applied,
should guide us to the right answer without having to take such a gamble. If the economy really
is  capable  of  much  faster  non-inflationary  growth  than  in  the  past,  constant  evaluation  of  the
feedback we receive from the data should enable us to detect this change. If we receive a flow of
information  pointing  to  lower  pressures  on  wages  and  prices,  for  example,  we  can  let  the
economy  run  faster  than  earlier  relationships  might  have  suggested,  as  in  the  Greenspan
example. This may not satisfy those with a liking for a punt, because the feedback process takes
longer. But it carries less risk of miscalculation.
Longer-term aspects of unemployment
So  far,  we  have  been  talking  about  monetary  policy  in  relation  to  the  business
cycle. I have argued that we should try to maintain the economy in a position of growth for as
long a time as possible. This is best achieved by seeking to remain free of major imbalances, and
addressing those which do emerge as quickly as possible.
BIS Review   53/1997
- 6 -
But  there  is  a  bigger  dimension  to  Australia’s  unemployment  problem  than
managing  the  business  cycle.  It  becomes  clear  from  a  consideration  of  the  longer-term  history
both of our own economy and those of other countries. What I want to suggest is that a common
perception  that  if  we  could  only  grow  faster,  unemployment  would  go  away,  is  missing  an
important part of the story.
Consider the data in Table 2, which is for the same group of countries as shown
earlier in Table  1.  The  table  sets  out  the  average  growth  rate  per  capita  in  these  countries  and
their  unemployment  performance.  This  latter  concept  is  measured  by  seeing  how  much  higher
their current unemployment rate is than it was in the first half of the 1960s. There is one country
where the unemployment rate is now lower, namely the United  States.  At  the  other  end  of  the
spectrum,  we  have  the  large  European  countries  where  the  unemployment  rate  is  enormously
higher  than  it  was  in  the  1960s.  We  are  somewhere  in  the  middle  -  better  than  the  large
Europeans, but not as good as the United States, the United Kingdom or New Zealand.
We can then pose the question: have the Europeans suffered because their growth
rates were inferior to the United States? Is that the reason for their higher unemployment rates?
The answer seems to be no, because column 1 shows that most of the major European countries
had  quite  respectable  growth  rates  over  this  period;  for  example,  Germany,  France,  Italy  and
Spain all grew faster than the United States (or the United Kingdom, New Zealand or us). Their
performance on unemployment has been  dismal,  not  because  of  their  growth  performance,  but
despite  it.  Diagram  2  shows  that,  over  this  relatively  long  period,  there  is  no  systematic
relationship  between  the  growth  of  the  economy  and  the  change  in  the  unemployment  rate  (if
there was, the dots would be clustered around a downward sloping line).
Table  2:  Growth  Rate  and  Change  in  Unemployment
GDP per capita
Average Growth
1960-1996
Unemployment Rate
Early 1960s
Latest
Difference
United States
Norway
Japan
Canada
United Kingdom
Switzerland
Netherlands
New Zealand
Denmark
Australia
Ireland
Sweden
Italy
France
Germany
Belgium
Finland
Spain
BIS Review   53/1997
2.1
3.2
4.5
2.3
2.0
1.5
2.3
1.2
2.3
2.2
3.7
2.0
3.0
2.6
2.4
2.7
2.7
3.4
5.7
1.7
1.3
6.0
1.7
0.0
0.5
0.1
1.5
2.0
5.0
1.6
3.5
1.4
0.7
2.2
1.4
2.3
4.9
3.5
3.2
9.6
6.1
5.6
6.2
6.4
8.0
8.7
11.7
8.4
12.3
12.8
11.2
12.9
15.1
21.7
-0.8
1.8
1.9
3.6
4.4
5.6
5.7
6.3
6.5
6.7
6.7
6.8
8.8
11.5
10.5
10.7
13.7
19.4
- 7 -
There are, no doubt, many aspects to this story, which I cannot go into here. But it
seems reasonably apparent that while good economic growth is a very important part of reducing
unemployment, growth alone will not be the whole answer. If it was,  Europe’s  unemployment
rates  would  be  much  more  like  that  of  the  United  States.  There  is  something  in  the  European
system which means that growth is not converted into jobs in the same way as it is in the United
States.
People who have spent a great deal of time studying these issues have come to the
conclusion that the highly regulated labour markets  that  form  part  of  the  continental  European
world can often work against the interests of job creation. Such labour markets usually have an
institutional framework which promotes job security,  imposes  relatively  strict  minimum  wages
and  conditions,  provides  easily  accessible  sickness  and  unemployment  benefits,  and  increases
trade union involvement in decisions.
Diagram  2
Growth and Unemployment in OECD Countries
  15
10
5
0
       2
    3
4
 -5
0
1
GDP per capita (average annual growth, 1960 to 1996)
As a  result,  these  systems  tend  to  be  good  at  protecting  the  interests  of  those  in
work - the insiders, but are often not helpful to the longer-term interests of the outsiders - those
looking for work. Employers are less keen to offer new jobs because of the higher costs and the
difficulty  of  reversing  the  decision  if  it  becomes  necessary.  The  unemployed,  while  having  a
more  generous  safety-net  than  under  a  US-type  system,  are  less  likely  to  be  offered  a  job  and
less  likely  to  look  for  one.  A  high  proportion  of  long-term  unemployed  is  a  feature  of
continental European countries. Ironically, it seems that measures designed to promote security
of employment may well have the effect of limiting the extent of employment.
I think we know that there are elements of this story in our own case too. It is not
as though the Australian economy has suffered particularly bad growth in the last twenty years.
It  grew  more  slowly  than  in    the  1960s,  but  everyone  suffered  that  slowdown.  We  have  had
several  periods  of  reasonably  solid  growth  by  international  standards.  On  each  occasion,  we
have,  unfortunately,  found  the  limits  to  growth.  But  we  still  have  high  unemployment  by  the
BIS Review   53/1997
- 8 -
standards of the United States, New Zealand and the United Kingdom and, more importantly, by
the standards of what we ourselves regard as acceptable.
Why does our unemployment performance have rather more in common with the
continental  European  countries  than  we  would  like?  Is  it  perhaps  because  our  labour  market
institutions  also  have  much  in  common?    Our  labour  market  was  never  as  deregulated  as  the
United States and we have not gone through recent deregulations to the same extent as have the
United Kingdom and New Zealand. Last year the Government enacted some changes to increase
flexibility through the  Workplace  Relations  Act.    These  changes,  simplifying  and  streamlining
arrangements and making it easier to strike bargains, seem to be a move in the right direction.  It
is too early to judge how substantial the beneficial effects of these changes will be (and it will of
course depend on how much use the parties choose to make of the flexibility on offer).  On the
surface, these reforms were less ambitious than those in the United Kingdom or New Zealand.
Changes  to  labour  market  arrangements  are,  of  course,  politically  difficult.  One
reason is that the insiders have to give something up. Job security is clearly reduced, and some
hard-won  entitlements  may  have  to  be  relinquished.  More  flexibility  in  wage  setting  almost
certainly entails a wider dispersion of wage rates - that is more wage inequality - and reform of
unemployment benefits would place tougher conditions on the unemployed. It is understandable
that  many  people  are  unwilling  to  make  these  changes  and  why  they  foresee  such  worrying
phenomena as the “working poor”.
Most  people  in  our  society,  in  other  words,  see  general  fairness  as  a  relevant
criterion in choosing policy outcomes. As a result,  we  would  not  want  to  go  completely  down
the US route, with such extreme differences in incomes between senior executives of companies
and  the  shop  floor.  But  we  do  not  have  to  go  as  far  as  the  United  States  -  there  is  a  happy
medium in this, as in most things. All I am suggesting is that we should re-examine our labour
market  institutions  to  see  whether  they  are  protecting  those  in  jobs  at  the  expense  of  those
looking for jobs.
At the same time, while  income  inequality  may  not  seem  fair,  unemployment  is
not very fair either.  Some of our labour market regulations, and many of our attitudes towards
labour market outcomes, indeed some of our very ideas about fairness, stem from a time when
the unemployment rate was 2 or 3 per cent. It was inconceivable then that unemployment would
have  an  upward  trend  over  twenty  years,  or  that  labour  market  regulation  would  have  any
significant  role  in  that  process.  But  the  world  has  changed,  and  our  ideas  about  what  sorts  of
labour  market  arrangements  are  appropriate  need  to  change  too.  This  is  already  happening,  as
evidenced by recent reforms. My guess, however, is that this will not complete the process.
Conclusion
I  began  by  talking  about  the  need  to  lengthen  the  economic  expansion.  This,
achieved by keeping inflation at bay, is the best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the
long-term health of the economy. That long-term focus does not mean that we are too cautious,
that we never take a risk; it simply means that we weigh the risks and rewards of policy actions
over longer time horizons than many of the commentators on the economic scene which fill our
newspapers and airwaves each day.
We want an expanding economy, and low inflation. That offers the prospect that
progress can be made in addressing the rate of unemployment, which remains too high  by  any
standard  in  Australia.  We  fear,  however,  that  the  debate  about  whether  unemployment  will  or
BIS Review   53/1997
- 9 -
will  not  reach  supposed  “targets”  over  the  next  year  is  missing  the  main  point.  Faster  growth
over the next year or two will help reduce unemployment. But it would be a great shame if that
decline obscured  the  longer-term  aspect  to  unemployment,  which  endures  beyond  the  business
cycle.
BIS Review   53/1997
