M. Trichet presents the monetary policy guidelines of the Bank of France for
1997   BANK OF FRANCE, PRESS RELEASE, 17/12/96.
1. The ultimate goal of monetary policy is to ensure price stability, as required by
legislation.  The  objective  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Council  is  that  the  increase  in  prices,  as
measured by the consumer price index, should not exceed 2% in 1997, as in the medium term.
2.  To  meet  this  ultimate  goal,  the  Banque  de  France  uses  two  intermediate
objectives, one of which is external and the other internal:
  The objective of a stable external value of the currency: as it has been for
ten years, the stability of the franc will be maintained against the group of
the most credible currencies in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
An  intermediate  internal  growth  target  for  the  money  supply  as  assessed
by  the  development  of  the  narrow  and  broad  monetary  aggregates:  in
1997,  the  money  supply  should  be  able  to  show  a  medium-term  growth
trend of 5%. This figure is consistent with price inflation of no more than
2% and non-inflationary real GDP growth of about 2.5%, which could be
exceeded, in view of the potential for growth  to  catch  up  in  the  medium
term.  The  Monetary  Policy  Council  has  decided  to  simultaneously
monitor the main narrow and broad money aggregates in order to obtain a
concise estimate of all monetary developments.
3.  Total  domestic  debt  is  an  important  indicator.  It  helps  the  Banque  de  France
make sure that the economy is supplied with enough financing to grow, and it enables us to track
developments in financing for businesses, households and general government simultaneously.
The Monetary Policy Council will keep a close eye on other indicators, including
all  leading  indicators  of  changes  in  prices,  such  as  capacity  utilization  rates,  production  costs,
developments in incomes and commodity prices. The Monetary Policy Council will also monitor
long-term interest rates and the current account balance.
   Before announcing the Council's monetary policy decisions for 1997, I would like
to discuss the results achieved in 1996.
1. The 1996 results are in line with the targets we set.
The ultimate monetary policy goal, which is price stability, was met. Businesses
delayed passing on part of the August 1995 two-point increase in the standard rate of VAT until
the beginning of 1996. The twelve-month rise in consumer prices was equal to and then above
2%  during  the  first  seven  months  of  1996,  but  subsequently  fell  back  to  1.ó%  in  August  and
September, once the VAT effect had disappeared. The twelve-month increase stood at 1.5% to
1.ó% in  November  and  the  latest  forecasts  predict  a  price  rise  of  close  to  1.5%  for  the  end  of
1996. The twelve-month price increase thus resumed its pre-August 1995 trend and will be less
than 2% at the end of 1996, in line with the objective set by the Monetary Policy Council.
The  objective  of  a  stable  external  value  of  the  French  franc  vis-à-vis  the  most
credible currencies in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism was met.
BIS Review   2/1997
- 2 -
Since the beginning of 1996, the franc has continued to move gradually closer to
its  central  rates  against  the  other  currencies  in  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism.  This
firmness of the franc has gone hand in hand with the continuing overall competitiveness of the
French economy. The real effective exchange rate of the French franc has improved and exports,
as  in  previous  years,  helped  to  boost  activity.  The  seasonally-adjusted  current  account  surplus
for the first nine months of 1996 stood at almost FRF 84 billion. This was much greater than the
FRF  64  billion  surplus  posted  for  the  same  period  of  1995.  On  the  basis  of  current  forecasts,
France will record the third largest current account surplus in the world for 1996.
Growth  in  the  M3  reference  aggregate,  which  is  the  reference  for  our  internal
intermediate  objective,  showed  a  reversal  in  its  trend.  The  expansion  of  M3  at  the  end  of  the
third quarter of 1995 was close to its medium-term growth target path of 5%, but subsequently
slowed sharply. The twelve-month increase of 4% in December 1995 gave way to a contraction
of  0.4%  in  October  1996,  the  last  month  for  which  figures  are  available.  This  reversal  in  the
growth  of  M3  was  to  a  very  great  extent  the  result  of  a  large-scale  reallocation  of  investment
flows stemming from the fall in short-term interest rates since autumn 1995, which has been of
unprecedented magnitude and rapidity.
The  M3-M2  aggregate,  which  includes  assets  paying  money  market  rates  of
interest, posted a twelve-month fall of 10.1 % at the end of October 1996. In response to the fall
in  short-term  interest  rates  and  also  a  heavier  tax  burden  on  money  market  mutual  funds,
economic  agents  reallocated  their  portfolios  towards  assets  covered  by  the  investment
aggregates,  and  particularly  the  Pl  aggregate  covering  contractual  savings  products,  including
housing saving plans. Year-on-year growth in P1 accelerated from 12.3% in December l995 to
18.5% in October 1996.
The  rate  of  interest  paid  on  housing  savings  plans  has  remained  unchanged  at
5.25% since February 1994, whereas comparable market rates have fallen sharply. This gave a
strong  boost  to  the  reallocation  of  investment  flows.  Year-on-year  growth  in  housing  savings
plans accelerated significantly, rising from 14.1% at the end of 1995 to almost 26% in October
1996.
In  addition,  twelve-month  growth  in  the  P2  aggregate  covering  investment  in
bonds and life insurance products remained buoyant. It stood at 12.3% in June 1996, with new
investment accounting for 9%.
At  the  same  time,  formation  of  liquidity  was  dynamic.  The  narrow  money
aggregates  M1  and  M2,  which  cover  transaction  balances  and  liquid  savings,  showed  annual
growth trends in October 1996 of around 5.8% and 7.5%, respectively. In particular, the growth
of  M2-M1,  covering  passbook  savings  deposits,  accelerated  from  7.6%  in  December  1995  to
9.6% in October 1996.
In such a context, it is important to monitor closely the investments which, within
the P investment aggregates, constitute fairly close substitutes for monetary assets in the strictest
sense. M3 + P1 posted significant annual growth of around 4%.
On the financing side, total domestic debt showed a yearly growth trend of around
3.3%.  Total  domestic  debt  incorporates  the  debt  financing  obtained  by  resident  non-financial
agents in the corporate, personal and public sectors, be it in the form of borrowing from credit
institutions or debt issues on domestic or international markets, and is thus a valuable yardstick
BIS Review   2/1997
- 3 -
for analyzing the financing provided to the economy. Even though government debt continues to
be the most dynamic component of total domestic debt, its twelve-month growth slowed sharply
from  13.4%  in  December  1995  to  ó.9%  in  September  1996.  Outstanding  lending  by  credit
institutions to the private sector is practically stable, particularly owing to the corporate sector's
sizeable  cash  surplus.  According  to  the  National  Institute  for  Statistics  and  Economic  Studies
(INSEE), the self-financing rate of companies and near-companies stood at around 114% in the
second quarter of 1996.
I shall now make a few comments concerning interest rates, which fell across the
board in 1996.
This  decline  in  interest  rates,  which  began  in  October  1995,  corresponds  to  a
considerable increase in confidence in the French franc and in the creditworthiness of France in
connection with the policies set forth by the President of the Republic and the Government for
the reduction of government deficits, the stability of the franc and Monetary Union in 1999.  In
1996, the Banque de France's repurchase tender rate was cut from 4.45% to 3.2% today. It is one
of the lowest rates in the G7 countries in both nominal and real terms. The five-to-ten-day repo
rate fell from 5.85% to 4.75%.
Short-term  market  rates  eased  substantially,  with  three-month  rates  shedding
almost 400 basis points since October 1995 and currently standing at around 3.4%.
The  easing  in  short-term  rates  went  hand  in  hand  with  a  significant  decline  in
long-term  rates,  which  are  the  reference  for  a  large  share  of  lending  to  the  private  sector.
Ten-year rates have fallen by more than 100 basis points since October 1995.
Thanks to the credibility of every component of its economic policy, France today
enjoys  the  lowest  medium-  and  long-term  market  rates  in  the  European  Union,  and  the  third
lowest rates in the world, bettered only by Japan and Switzerland.
This brings me to the monetary policy decisions for 1997.
1.  The  ultimate  goal  of  monetary  policy  is  to  ensure  price  stability,  as
required by legislation. The objective of the Monetary Policy Council is that the increase in
prices, as measured by the consumer price index, should not exceed 2%  in  1997.  as  in  the
medium term.
2. To meet this  ultimate  goal,  the  Banque  de  France  uses  two  intermediate
objectives, one of which is external and the other internal:
  The objective of a stable external value of the currency: as it has been for
ten years, the stability of the franc will be maintained against the group of
the most credible currencies in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
An intermediate internal growth target for the money supply assessed
by the development of the narrow and broad monetary aggregates: in
1997,  the  money  supply  should  be  able  to  show  a  medium-term  growth
trend of 5%. This figure is consistent with price inflation of no more than
2% and non-inflationary real GDP growth of about 2.5%, which could be
exceeded, in view of the potential for growth  to  catch  up  in  the  medium
term.  The  Monetary  Policy  Council  has  decided  to  simultaneously
BIS Review   2/1997
- 4 -
monitor the main narrow and broad money aggregates in order to obtain a
concise estimate of all monetary developments.
3.  Total  domestic  debt  is  an  important  indicator.  It  helps  the  Banque  de  France
make sure that the economy is supplied with enough financing to grow, and it enables us to track
developments in financing for businesses, households and general government simultaneously.
The Monetary Policy Council will keep a close eye on other indicators, including
all  leading  indicators  of  changes  in  prices,  such  as  capacity  utilization  rates,  production  costs,
developments in incomes and commodity prices. The Monetary Policy Council will also monitor
long-term interest rates and the current account balance.
   These decisions call for two remarks.
First,  on  a  technical  level,  the  Monetary  Policy  Council  has  decided  to  monitor
several narrow and broad money aggregates simultaneously in order to obtain a concise estimate
of  all  monetary  developments.  As  we  have  seen,  certain  data,  and  particularly,  but  not
exclusively, M3 data, have been severely disrupted recently by several factors, such as the very
substantial fall in  short-term  rates  and  the  ensuing  large-scale  reallocation  of  investment  flows
towards  non-monetary  assets,  higher  taxes  on  money  market  mutual  funds,  and  the  continuing
very high level of interest paid on housing saving plans.
We  will  therefore  keep  a  very  close  eye  on  the  M1,  M2,  M3,  and  M3+P1
aggregates  as  expressions  of  the  underlying  growth  of  the  money  supply.  Particular  attention
will  be  paid  to  the  growth  of  the  M3+P1  aggregate  covering  monetary  assets  and  contractual
savings.
A  very  large  proportion  of  the  outflows  from  M3  in  the  past  year  was  directed
towards  investments  covered  by  P1,  and  particularly  housing  savings  plans  with  a  residual
maturity of one year or less. In fact, this type of investment at  present  constitutes  a  very  close
substitute for monetary assets.
Second,  the  Monetary  Policy  Council  has  set  monetary  policy  against  the
background of potential growth for the French economy of around 2.5% per year. We consider
the average growth of our economy in the medium-term, and it could be exceeded given that we
have a potential to catch up in the medium term. We reckoned with a maximum price increase of
2% and potential real growth of between 2.5% and 3% in the medium term to arrive at a figure
of 5% for the medium-term growth trend of the money supply.
   BIS Review   2/1997
- 5 -
It is very important to bear in mind the essence of the policy implemented by the
Monetary Policy Council.
Parliament confers on the Banque de France an objective, namely the objective of
price  stability.  Maintaining  the  value  of  the  currency  preserves  the  purchasing  power  of  the
currency, and therefore that of French citizens.
In addition, Parliament has sought to create the conditions for growth and for job
creation, via the stability of the currency. This is also the goal of the Monetary Policy Council.
To achieve this goal, we use two means.
First,  by  preserving  the  value  of  the  currency,  we  enhance  its  credibility  in
France,  in  Europe  and  in  the  world  and  allow  our  economy  to  benefit  from  financing  at
favourable  market  interest  rates.  It  is  very  important  for  future  French  growth,  for  investment
and  for  job  creation  that  we  have  the  lowest  medium-  and  long-term  market  rates  in  the
European Union today and the third lowest interest rates in the world.
Second, price stability curbs cost increases in our productive sector. In doing so,
the  competitiveness  of  our  economy—other  things  being  equal—is  preserved  and  enhanced.
This  is  good  for  future  French  growth  and  for  job  creation.  It  is  important  to  note  that  we
currently have a dynamic export sector and, according to the latest forecasts for 1996, the third
highest current account surplus in the world.
One other indicator of competitiveness is encouraging, namely the flow of foreign
direct investment into France. It stood at FRF 120 billion in 1995. The latest figures for the first
nine  months  of  1996  show  inward  foreign  direct  investment  totalling  FRF  74  billion.  In  all,
since the beginning of 1995, a total of FRF  194  billion,  the  equivalent  of  USD  39  billion,  has
been invested directly in France, making us the third-ranking industrialized economy in terms of
inward foreign direct investment, behind the United States and the United Kingdom.
Thus, when the Monetary Policy Council makes interest-rate decisions, it bears in
mind first the objective of preserving the purchasing power of the currency, for and on behalf of
all  French  people,  and  second,  its  corollary,  namely  the  creation  of  monetary,  financial  and
competitive  conditions  that  will  allow  our  economy  to  achieve  its  full  potential  for  sound  and
sustained growth, for job creation and therefore for combating unemployment.
Central  Banks  cannot  “command”  growth.  Growth  is  the  fruit  of  the  labour  of
men and women, of the efficiency of employees, workers and engineers, of the imagination and
skill of business leaders, and also, more broadly, of the influence of European and international
business  conditions.  It  is  stimulated,  in  the  medium  and  long  term,  by  structural  reforms  that
liberate initiative, strengthen the dynamism of the economy, combat unemployment effectively
and encourage the  creation  of  the  greatest  possible  number  of  jobs  for  a  given  level  of  wealth
and growth.
However,  it  is  up  to  Central  Banks  to  create  the  best  possible  monetary  and
financial conditions, through the credibility and stability of the currency.
These  conditions  now  exist  in  our  country  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Council  is
convinced that the time has come for firms and households to invest. In many sectors and firms,
the financing exists. The self-financing rate of the entire French productive sector is above 100%
overall.  Interest  rates  as  a  whole  are  at  historic  lows.  The  French  economy  has  substantial
BIS Review   2/1997
- 6 -
potential for growth in the medium term. In the last three years, potential growth has averaged a
little more than 2% a year for the years 1994, 1995 and 1996. We can do better. We believe that
our  economy's  potential  non-inflationary  growth  is  around  2.5%  in  the  medium  term,  and  this
can be exceeded given the capacity for growth to catch up. The requirements for investment are
financing  terms,  self-financing,  competitiveness,  and  medium-term  growth.  We  believe  these
requirements exist today.
If I had to sum up briefly the message of the Monetary Policy Council,  I  would
say: “The investment plans exist. The time has come today to implement them. Let us invest. It
is the surest way for us to contribute to non-inflationary growth that creates jobs and thus to help
in the fight against unemployment.”
   French monetary policy is in line with the European strategy of the President  of
the Republic and the Government, and therefore with the creation of an economic and monetary
union on 1 January 1996.
The  advance  towards  the  single  currency  was  decisively  confirmed  at  the
European Summit in Dublin, where an agreement was reached on the legal status of the euro, on
the new European Monetary System and on the stability and growth pact intended to guarantee
fiscal discipline in the Monetary Union.
The  Banque  de  France's  monetary  policy  contributes  directly  to  our  country's
success in meeting three of the five criteria for entry into Monetary Union: the criterion of price
stability, which is the ultimate goal of our monetary policy; that of the stability of the franc vis-
à-vis  the  most  solid  European  currencies,  which  is  an  intermediate  objective  to  which  the
Banque  de  France  is  steadfastly  committed,  and  that  of  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates,
which is a result and an important indicator of our monetary strategy.
l) Today, the Monetary Policy Council is happy to note that we fully meet these
three entry criteria. The Council will continue to  make  sure  that  we  abide  by  them  throughout
1997 so that the Heads of State and Government can draw up the list of countries eligible for the
euro in the best possible conditions, in accordance with the terms of the Dublin decision of the
Heads of State and Government, “as soon as possible in 1998”.
The  euro  will  be  created  on  1  January  1999.  Our  market  interest  rates  on
maturities of more than two years already incorporate the credibility and soundness of the euro,
the future single currency of European citizens. The agreement on the stability and growth pact
drawn up in Dublin is a decisive element in inspiring confidence in the euro in French citizens
and investors from around the world that is at least equal to the confidence in the French franc.
This  will  give  us  low  market  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area,  which  is  good  for  growth,  job
creation and the fight against unemployment.
BIS Review   2/1997
