Mr.  Padoa-Schioppa  reviews  his  experience  in  central  banking  over  the  last
thirty years   Text of the remarks by Dott. Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, a Deputy Director General of
the Bank of Italy, at the Governors' Dinner held in Basle on 7/4/97.
1.
To have been invited to  attend  and  address  the  Governor’s  dinner  is  a  very
great honour for me as I step down from the chair of the Basle Committee and leave the community
of central bankers.
When  Governor  de  Larosière  proposed  my  name  to  succeed  Gerry  Corrigan,  he
admitted, so I have been told, that my curriculum vitae was not that of a full-time bank supervisor.
Presenting this handicap as an advantage, he suggested that my previous involvement in a variety of
central  banking  activities  could  be  useful  because  of  the  growing  interaction  between  monetary
policy, payment systems and banking stability. You were generous enough to accept that view. That
was an act of confidence. As words like confidence, trust and credibility are the very essence of the
vocabulary of banking, I am deeply grateful for the confidence you granted me four years ago.
2.
In view of my mixed background, I shall focus on central banking, rather than
just banking supervision, and try to sum up what I have learned and what I have witnessed over the
last thirty odd years: first about the tasks of central banking and then about the context in which such
tasks are performed.
3.
A  person  of  my  generation  is  inevitably  struck  by  the  difference  between
what he was taught at university in the sixties and the reality he faced in the two following decades.
In the lecture room central banking had just one pole, monetary policy. In the real world I found it
was triadic, as monetary policy was combined with involvement in the payment system and banking
supervision.
At  the  Bank  of  Italy,  for  instance,  more  than  half  the  staff  of  just  over  9,000  is
devoted  to  the  operation  of  the  payment  system  (the  note  issue,  clearing  systems,  Treasury
inpayments  and  outpayments,  interbank  funds  transfers,  etc.);  around  15  per  cent  is  engaged  in
banking supervision; less than 5 per cent is concerned with monetary policy. Although not all central
banks  have  primary  responsibility  for  banking  supervision,  the  three  tasks  are  inextricably  linked
because there is a close relationship between them and the three practically indivisible functions of
money as numeraire, means of payment and store of value.
Dealing  with  the  complexities  of  triadic  central  banking  has  been  for  me  both  a
fascinating professional experience and an intellectual adventure bringing new insights nearly every
day.
4.
Not only was monetary policy the sole task highlighted when I was a student,
but  the  word  “monetary”  was  overshadowed  by  the  word  “policy”.  Monetary  policy  had  always
existed, of course, but the rise of fiat money greatly increased the room for manoeuvre. The central
banker came to be seen in the fifties and sixties as a demiurg able to choose between inflation and
unemployment, and to do so almost on a quarter-by-quarter basis.
So delicate and powerful was the policy choice entrusted to the central banker that he
could  not  be  left  to  make  it  alone.  Few  central  banks  were  truly  independent.  The  intellectual
paradigm  that  followed  the  demise  of  the  Gold  Standard,  with  its  emphasis  on  discretionary  goal
BIS Review   41/1997
- 2 -
setting, implicitly suggested that elected politicians should have the last word. Future historians will
perhaps see this view of the role of central banks as having characterized only two  or  three  of  the
twenty or so decades of their modern history, which began when convertible paper superseded coins
as the main means of payment.
5.
After  a  long  period  of  neglect,  payment  systems  have  gradually  returned  to
the  centre  of  the  stage.  When  advances  in  data  processing  and  telecommunications  brought  a  new
revolution,  we  suddenly  realized  how  much  our  monetary  institutions,  practices  and  even  theory
owed to the previous revolution. Until the eighties the term “payment system” was almost completely
absent from central bank reports. Today, there are many who argue that monetary policy functions
would not have developed in the way they did without the first revolution in payment technology.
The raison d’être for central bank involvement in payment systems is to avoid, or at
any  rate  minimize,  systemic  risk,  while  fostering  their  efficiency  through  an  appropriate  blend  of
cooperation and competition in the  industry.  Is  there  also  a  policy,  or  even  a  political,  dimension?
Perhaps  not.  The  issue  of  central  bank  independence  would  be  a  much  less  burning  one  if  only
payment system tasks were considered. And systemic risk itself could become much less important in
the  years  to  come  with  the  shift  from  net  to  gross  settlement  that  new  technologies  are  making
possible.  It  is  possible  that  payment  system  issues  will  move  to  the  back  of  the  stage  again  once
appropriate arrangements are in place to cope with the new technological environment.
6.
Chronologically, if not logically, the task of supervising banks came after that
of  running  the  payment  system  and  before  the  advent  of  fiat  money  and  discretionary  monetary
policy.  From  a  monetary  angle,  it  was  the  consequence  of  the  spread  of  deposit  banking,  which
ultimately resulted in bank money accounting for the bulk of the money stock. Runs on deposits can
be seen as collapses of confidence about the stability of the rate of exchange between a unit of central
bank  money  and  a  unit  of  commercial  bank  money.  Commercial  banks  had  to  have  sound
fundamentals if one-to-one convertibility was to be preserved  hence, the need for bank supervision.
In the short run interventions, i.e. lending of last resort, could be - and was - used to support the rate.
But, as in the more familiar case of foreign exchange interventions, they were no substitute for sound
policies; credit provided too easily and too generously could even generate the risk it was meant to
avoid; today we call it moral hazard.
The  ambivalent  relationship  between  supervising  banks  and  lending  to  them
(surveillance and conditional lending, in IMF language) explains why there is no clear-cut answer to
the  question  whether  the  central  bank  or  a  separate  agency  should  be  responsible  for  supervision.
Seven of the twelve Basle Committee countries have a separate agency, as against about 10 per cent
of countries in the world as a whole. More importantly, even where this solution has been adopted,
the centrality of the banking system, and of its money creation prerogatives, in the monetary policy
transmission mechanism means that no central bank disregards the “state of health” of its banks or
completely rules out lending of last resort in extreme circumstances.
7.
The  other,  perhaps  more  important,  change  concerns  the  context  of  central
banking. This can be seen in terms of both time and space. I began my career in a world of annual
accounts and quarterly or monthly statistics, in which paper was the medium and mail the carrier. For
the bulk of financial transactions the two parties, the intermediary, the currency of denomination, the
relevant  laws  and  courts,  and  the  central  bank  all  belonged  to  the  same  jurisdiction.  And  that
jurisdiction  was  not  only  economic,  as  it  included  the  political  jurisdiction  from  which  public
BIS Review   41/1997
- 3 -
institutions  derive  their  legitimacy  through  the  democratic  process.  This  simple  description  never
fully coincided with the state of the world, of course, but twenty-five years ago it was still a workable
approximation. Today, that is no longer true. The advance of data processing and telecommunications
technology  has  been  the  most  powerful  single  driving  force  of  this  change.  But  the  low  cost  of
transportation, the evolution of economic ideas, the desire for closer and more peaceful relationships
among nations have also been crucial.
8.
The  time  dimension  of  our  world  has  shifted  from  the  long  and  medium
waves  of  the  year  and  the  quarter  to  the  short  and  micro  waves  of  the  day  and  the  intra-day.  The
direct credit controls many of our countries still used ten or fifteen years ago called for compliance at
the end of the month, as did most other prudential requirements. Payment finality at the close of the
day,  achieved  through  clearing  and  settlement  in  central  bank  money  rather  than  correspondent
banking,  was  considered  sufficient.  Monthly  figures  (not  monthly  averages  of  daily  data)  were
judged  adequate  for  the  purpose  of  computing  compulsory  reserves.  The  exchange  rate  and  other
prices were “fixed” once a day.
The reality of the monetary and financial world is becoming that of the intra-day, the
micro wave; we are moving towards a continuous-time  economy.  We  do  not  yet  have  markets  for
“one-hour  money”,  real-time  accounting  and  reporting,  and  other  similar  devilries.  But  they  will
come. The Basle Committee has stated that “although regular reporting will in principle take  place
only at intervals (in most countries quarterly), banks are expected to manage the market risk in their
trading book in such a way that the capital requirements are being met on a continuous basis. i.e., at
the close of each business day”. Naturally, cost considerations will set a limit to the process, but the
effects  will  be  - and  to  some  extent  already  are -  sufficient  to  upset  many  of  the  operational  and
regulatory instruments on which central bankers rely. Indeed, market players have so far been much
more at their ease in the new microcosm than public authorities.
9.
As  regards 
the  space  dimension,  markets  have  grown  bigger 
than
jurisdictions. A single transaction is now likely to involve a multiplicity of “nationalities” in terms of
currencies,  players,  authorities  and  legal  systems.  We  used  to  regard  the  “State”  as  the  universal
container providing the grounds and the rules for the game played by profit-driven players. Today,
we sometimes have the impression that no one is responsible for maintaining the grounds or making
the rules and even that central banks are the balls some round, some oval - being hit or kicked around
in a free-for-all of baseball, golf, cricket, soccer, rugby and American football.
10.
Even the most independent, best equipped and highly reputed national central
banks are hard put to perform their triadic task effectively in the new conditions of time and space.
The new context has been created by the market, evolves in response to market forces and basically
meets  the  needs  of  private  interests.  It  is  a  creature  of  the  market  much  more  than  of  public
authorities.
Partly because of this evolution central  banks  and  governments  have  become  much
more  respectful  of  market  forces,  even  humble.  They  are  much  more  conscious  that  wealth  and
welfare are created primarily in  and  by  the  market.  They  know  that  this  is  a  much  more  powerful
beast than its  would-be  tamer.  The  effectiveness  of  both  the  instruments  on  which  central  bankers
rely - banking operations and regulatory provisions - have been eroded by the innovation in market
practices and the blurring of national frontiers.
BIS Review   41/1997
- 4 -
To some extent this is healthy. Market players are not there to serve us, we are here to
serve  the  economy.  Yet,  this  downsizing  of  our  role  should  not  be  carried  too  far.  There  is  still  a
public interest to be promoted that private actions cannot be counted upon  to  serve.  There  are  still
grounds for being proud to serve the public interest and for claiming that central banks should have
the means to achieve their ends. The fact that markets are powerful, global and fast-moving, while
central bank operations and  regulations  are  national,  intrusive  and  burdensome,  does  not  mean  the
monetary system can do without a central bank or a bank regulator.
11.
Basle, the BIS, the meetings of the community  of  central  bankers,  from  the
Governors  down  to  junior  officials,  are  where  our  profession  has  strived,  largely  successfully,  to
maintain the upper hand over the reality that calls for its public function. The task is being performed
notwithstanding the wide diversity of national laws, traditions, operational practices and institutional
constraints.
I  am  a  convinced  institutionalist,  because  I  believe  that  without  a  “Rule  of  Law”
liberty  and  peace  - the  key  prerequisites  for  economic  activity -  cannot  survive  for  long.  And  my
basic  training,  as  well  as  much  of  my  professional  experience,  have  been  in  the  European  arena,
which is a highly institutionalized cooperative system.
In international monetary cooperation Basle stands at the “soft” end of the spectrum -
no  legal  basis,  no  written  terms  of  reference,  no  extensive  minutes.  Mostly  personal  contacts  and
work  based  on  the  key  words  of  banking  and  central  banking:  confidence,  trust,  credibility,
confidentiality.
12.
Although  I  started  to  attend  BIS  meetings  well  before  this  tower  was
constructed (in the old hotel building of the Centralbahnstrasse), it was only when you called me to
the Basle Committee that I fully realized how strong this soft approach could be. Lawyers say that the
Basle Committee “does not legally exist”. When I was appointed to its chair, my secretary had to take
my word for it because she could not find any written evidence of the decision. Yet the Committee
rules, once endorsed by you, are adopted by the markets, followed by national legislators and spread
to all countries worldwide.
When considering the working methods of the Basle Committee, I have often thought that
international cooperation among central banks can be compared to Italo Calvino’s “Nonexistent
Knight”. When Charlemagne, reviewing his paladins before the battle against the Infidels, reached
the last knight, Agilulf, clad entirely in white armour, the cavalier refused to show his face to the
emperor. The explanation he gave was simple: “Sire, because I do not exist”. Charlemagne insisted
and when the knight finally raised his visor, the helmet was empty. “Well, well! Who’d have thought
it!” exclaimed Charlemagne. “And how do you do your job, then, if you don’t exist?”. “By will
power and faith in our holy cause!” said Agilulf. He fought with valour and bravery. His special
status assisted him in the accomplishment of his duty and indeed he proved to be one of the best
paladins.
BIS Review   41/1997
