Mr. Reddy discusses gold banking in India   Address by the Deputy Governor
of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, at the World  Gold  Council  Conference  held  in
New Delhi on 02/08/97.
I  am  thankful  to  the  World  Gold  Council  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this
Conference. It is unusual for the organisers to seek the same speaker and even more unusual for
the speaker to accept such an invitation within a span of nine months. That happens in academic
circles. It is of course, routine in the Toast Masters Club, of which I was a member decades ago.
But, this is a gathering of hard-headed finance and business people. I presume that the organisers
felt that I should be called upon to squarely address the issues that I raised in the last meeting, in
a  somewhat  less  inconclusive  manner  this  time.  Well,  it  should  be  possible  to  address  these
issues  with  a  little  more  confidence  now,  since  the  last  conference  has  generated  pretty
well-informed and wide-ranging debate on most of the issues posed.
Today, I will briefly recall the issues that I had posed in November last. We could
trace policy developments since then.  I would also share with you the response we received on
the subject, not only from intellectual circles and the media but also through letters addressed to
the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  -  from  people  in  many  walks  of  life.
Against this background, and keeping in view the recent developments in economic reform, it is
possible  to  examine  the  rationale  for  a  New  Gold  Policy  (NGP)  at  this  juncture.  The  possible
objectives  and  the  immediate  tasks  of  an  NGP  need  our  attention.  If  some  changes  in  policy
towards  NGP  are  considered  necessary,  the  role  of  the  RBI,  banks,  government  and
industry/trade would have to be redefined and re-oriented. I will elaborate on the re-orientation.
In my normal style, I will conclude with a set of issues. Deliberately, I am avoiding going into
details of gold banking since these aspects will be elaborated by Mrs. Usha Thorat, who is one of
our resident experts on gold in the RBI.
Issues: A Recall
The issues raised in the last  meeting  related  to  demand,  supply  and  use  of  gold.
On  the  demand  side,  the  need  for  and  the  effectiveness  of  restricting  demand  were  the  main
concerns.  On  the  supply  side,  limits  to  domestic  production  and  the  implications  of  import
through various channels were touched upon. The  fiscal  dimensions,  trade  policy  implications,
balance of payments (BOP) impact and the desirability of restricting gold import  to  corporates
or banks were also flagged.  The role of the RBI in gold policy, sequencing of changes in such a
policy  and  finally  the  link  with  capital  account  convertibility  were  flagged  for  further  debate.
As you are aware, many of these issues have been debated since then, and there has been policy
response also.
Policy Response: A Summary
We  have  made  some  progress  in  liberalising  gold  policy  since  we  met  last.  The
policy on gold import has been further relaxed and non-resident Indians (NRIs) are  allowed  to
import 10 kgs of gold, against 5 kgs allowed previously.  The EXIM policy for 1997-2002 has
been  modified  and  now,  in  addition  to  the  existing  canalising  agencies,  the  RBI  will  be
authorising banks to act as nominated agencies for importing gold into the country under various
schemes viz., NRI, SIL and export replenishment/loans, etc. The Tarapore Committee on Capital
Account  Convertibility  has  submitted  its  report  and  has  made  wide-ranging  recommendations
relating to gold, including a more liberal import policy for domestic consumption.  The RBI has
issued guidelines to banks  to  apply  to  it  for  becoming  nominated  agencies,  and  the  first  set  of
applications  will  be  considered  shortly.    In  the  meantime,  the  customs  have  also  modified  the
BIS Review   76/1997
- 2 -
procedures for the import of gold - no longer requiring banks to be totally accountable for export
obligations of the exporters. The Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals in the RBI
(Subrahmanyam Committee) has been  expanded  to  include  representatives  of  the  Ministries  of
Finance and Commerce. The Committee is more active now in rendering advice to the RBI and
the Government.
General Response: A Review
The general response to the issues raised in the previous seminar can be described
as one dominated by aggressive liberalisers, some advocating caution,  only a few favouring no
change in the existing policy and virtually none seeking total roll-back of the policy. There has
been no mention of the mobilisation of idle gold for productive purposes or the establishment of
a Gold Bank to raise resources.
(i) Let me summarise the arguments of aggressive liberalisers.
- The gold industry, employing goldsmiths numbering about five lakhs, involving
an  annual  turnover  of  about  Rs.25,000  crore,  is  kept  out  of  any  serious  consideration  in  the
current  reform  process.  This  reflects  continuation  of  a  gold-control  mindset  and  the
identification of all import, sale or use of gold with black money. Consequently,  gold  industry
exporters of jewellery and genuine purchasers of gold jewellery continue to suffer.
- On account of the present policy, the purchaser of gold jewellery pays a higher
price of about Rs.3,000  crore  every  year  because  of  the  “hawala”  premium,  etc.  In  percentage
terms,  at  wholesale  level,  it  is  an  extra  17  per  cent.  Also,  because  of  lack  of  consumer
protection, and improper certification of quality, the purchaser loses about Rs.4,000 crore each
year.
-  The  present  gold  policy  shows  anti-rural  bias.  The  real  purchaser  of  gold  is
typically a peasant. Close to seventy per cent of gold jewellery is sold in rural areas and most of
gold sales are by way of jewellery. To quote Professor Jeffrey A. Franks, “holding gold has in
fact  often  in  history  served,  from  France  to  India,  as  the  only  way  the  peasant  can  protect
himself against inflation and the vicissitudes of politics”.
-  Similarly,  there  is  a  gender  bias,  since  most  of  the  jewellery  is  sought  by
women. While macho consumer durable components are imported and their production or even
consumption  financed,  a  non-depreciating  asset  like  gold  is  discriminated  against.  It  makes  no
sense  to  constrain  the  demand  for  “a  multi-purpose  indestructible  asset”  like  gold  or  gold
jewellery,  which  is  a  lifetime  asset,  a  hedge  against  inflation,  a  source  of  liquidity  and  a
preferred form of saving.
- From a fiscal point of view, the NRI route generated about Rs.500 crore towards
customs in a year. The “officialising” of gold import by liberal import of gold will give Rs.250
crore per annum more towards customs, with duties at the same rate as for NRIs. Further, if gold
is imported freely under OGL, gold trade down the line becomes traceable and will provide sales
tax to State Governments and octroi to local bodies.
-  From  a  trade  policy  point  of  view,  the  existing  restrictions  on  gold
jewellery-producing units like EOUs constrain the participants in the export market and hamper
export growth. Free  import  under  OGL  and  free  export  are  pre-conditions  for  capturing  world
markets - as is evident from the Turkish experience.
BIS Review   76/1997
- 3 -
-  Some  advocate  free  import  of  gold  or  import  under  OGL  on  the  ground  that
there may be a fall in reserves and a desirable impact on the exchange rate. However, most argue
that there will be only “officialising” of gold import and use of foreign exchange under hawala,
resulting in no net loss of reserves. In fact, once gold jewellery exports pick up, consequent upon
gold-import liberalisation, there will be a positive impact on the trade balance.
-  There  is  no  way  of  getting  rid  of  or  at  least  drastically  reducing  the  hawala
market  in  foreign  exchange,  so  harmful  to  the  social  and  moral  fabric  of  India,  unless  gold
import is freed and the scope for gold smuggling reduced.
-  As  pointed  out  by  the  Committee  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility,  a
pre-condition for further reforms in the external sector is free import of gold.
-  Finally,  while  bank  credit  is  available  for  import,  domestic  production  or
processing and easy acquisition or consumption of luxury goods, no such bank credit is available
for gold and gold jewellery employing half a million and providing first-rate security for banks.
In fact, the only way of penetrating the informal credit sector without generating non-performing
assets is encouraging the  flow  of  bank  credit  against  gold  and  silver  without  reference  to  end-
use.
(ii)  The cautious liberalisers avoid the subject of liberal bank credit or regulating
the gold market altogether, but concentrate on possible balance of payments impact. Hence, they
advocate  limited  import  through  designated  agencies  to  meet  both  exporters  and  domestic
industry.
(iii)  The  no-changers  feel  that  the  existing  import  regime  is  foreign  exchange
neutral; and existing policy is a reluctant admission of our incapacity to change the mindset of
Indians  who  are  wasting  their  savings  on  gold.  There  is  no  need  to  assist  or  develop  this
“unproductive” sector or activity.
(iv) There is little support for a total roll-back of  policy.  There  was,  however,  a
suggestion in the context of an analysis of the Report on Capital Account Convertibility in  the
Economic and Political Weekly (EPW, June 1997). This article reiterated the possible impact of
liberalisation of gold import on domestic savings in an adverse way; on diversion of productive
resources  into  unproductive  channels;  on  aiding  the  process  of  tax-evasion  and  hoarding  of
incomes and assets. Having expressed this, the article states, and I quote, “a more viable policy
from the  point  of  healthy  and  egalitarian  development  was  to  recommend  the  banning  of  gold
imports (other than for jewellery exports and for industrial use), and strict enforcement measures
against smuggling”.
Rationale for New Gold Policy Now
Responses to the issues raised by me last year thus show a distinct preference for
an NGP. It is possible to highlight the important reasons for a re-look at the existing gold policy.
Firstly,  it  is  argued  that  import  or  use  of  gold  should  be  discouraged  since  it
affects domestic savings adversely and implies diversion of resources for unproductive purposes.
In  reality,  our  household  savings,  unlike  government  savings,  have  been  increasing  since
independence,  while  gold  was,  in  spite  of  the  policy,  being  imported,  traded  and  used.  The
diversion of savings to unproductive purposes did not happen in the household sector. Further,
the idea of mobilisation of resources for productive purposes as defined by planners has yielded
BIS Review   76/1997
- 4 -
place  to  a  slightly  different  form  of  policy  management  of  disposition  of  resources  under  the
post-reform era. Now, even depreciating luxury goods are produced and traded in our economy.
Why discriminate against gold?
Secondly,  it  is  also  held  that  we  should  not  waste  scarce  foreign  exchange  on
unproductive  purposes.  With  current  account  convertibility  and  a  market-determined  exchange
rate,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  place  a  premium  on  foreign  exchange.  Further,  the  recent
liberalisation  of  imports  through  the  NRI  and  SIL  route  has  shown  that,  in  reality,  there  is  no
adverse impact of a liberalised gold import. In fact, this recent experience should provide reason
enough for a review now, with a view to liberalising further.
Thirdly, it is felt that gold is an important instrument for black money deals and
hence  restrictions  on  gold  amount  to  restrictions  on  black  money.  Since  gold  is  not  the  only
instrument  of  black  money  deals,  making  gold  availability  difficult  will  not  deter  either
generation of black money, or its disposition in many ways, including illegal gold. In any case,
with the reduction of income tax rates and the launch of the Voluntary Disclosure Scheme in the
current year, the fiscal stance  is  clear  -  remove  incentives  for  generating  black  money.  Hence,
gold policy as an important instrument of anti-black money policy loses its significance, in view
of the recent Budget.
Fourthly,  international  experience,  especially  with  Turkey,  where  conditions  are
similar,  has  shown  that  liberal  imports  and  organised  trade  in  gold  benefits  the  economy,
including  the  external  sector.  Also,  our  neighbours  in  the  SAARC  region  have  liberalised  and
officialised  gold  imports  at  nominal  duties.  These  developments  make  it  imperative  that  we
review our policies urgently.
Finally, gold plays an important role in our external trade (next only to oil) and in
the domestic economy. The reform process would be incomplete without a review and update of
the gold policy.
Objectives and Tasks of a New Gold Policy
What should be the possible objectives of an NGP? The review of our policy so
far and the rationale for an NGP that we considered indicate clearly the desirable objectives of
an NGP. The major objectives should perhaps be to:
- recognise the importance of gold in the Indian economic system and enable gold
to play a transparent and positive role in the industrial development, employment
and export sectors of the economy,
-  ensure  orderly  development  of  a  gold-related  industry  in  India  in  terms  of
physical standards and consumer protection,
- create and nurture appropriate official regulatory framework and self-regulatory
trade bodies,
-  exploit  the  scope  for  generating  revenues  to  the  central,  state  and  local
governments,
-  align  the  regulatory  framework  and  institutional  capabilities  in  the  financial
sector - especially banking sector - to enable the above, including gold banking,
and
- enable fuller integration of gold with other areas of the domestic economy and
closer  integration  with  the  world  gold  economy,  consistent  with  our  economic
reform policies.
BIS Review   76/1997
- 5 -
If  we  accept  the  above  objectives  of  an  NGP,  four  broad  sets  of  measures  may
need our attention now. These are (i) gold and  trade  policy  (ii)  regulation  and  development  of
domestic trading, including quality markup (iii) bank financing for import, export and domestic
activities and (iv) gold banking.
First, on gold and trade policy, the broad thrust has to be liberalisation of import
and export, but there are many options in this regard, and these need to be debated. First, place
gold  under  OGL.  This  would  be  an  ideal  situation  for  free  trade  and  freely  tradeable  good.
However,  as  an  immediate  measure,  some  scepticism  could  be  expressed.  Gold  has  some
characteristics of currency, a financial asset and has quasi-foreign exchange attributes. However,
free import by members of the organised bullion market or designated agencies should serve the
purpose, with some scope for regulation. Import of gold through designated agencies including
banks  would  help  regulate  the  gold  market,  besides  assuring  the  quality  of  gold  and  bringing
more transparency in prices. The advantage of restricting import of gold to designated agencies
is  that  the  regulators  can  fix  monetary  limits  on  import  during  the  transition.  The  domestic
transactions of gold imported through the designated agencies could be more easily tracked and
would  be  channelled  for  making  jewellery  for  domestic  use  or  export.  This  would  also  boost
exports substantially. On this logic, it will be necessary to discourage liberalised import through
NRIs.  However,  it  is  possible  to  charge  less  import  duty  when  designated  agencies  import,  to
discourage  the  NRI  route.  In  any  case,  nominal  import  duty  is  a  pre-condition  for  liberalised
imports. Incidentally, under the liberalised regime, the sale of gold by designated agencies has to
be  freely  permitted  to  domestic  jewellery  units.  Also,  the  stipulation  of  payment  of  duty  in
foreign  exchange  may  have  to  be  dispensed  with  in  view  of  the  avoidable  irritants,  the
undermining of domestic currency and market-determined exchange rate.
Second, impetus to active domestic trading in gold is a logical consequence of an
NGP. Currently, the industry is fragmented. It will be essential to tackle major operational issues
required  to  give  a  fillip  to  the  gold  market,  such  as  the  development  of  refining  capacity,
accredition  of  refineries  and  the  introduction  of  the  system  of  hallmarking  as  a  consumer
protection and export promotion measure. Further, serial number, fineness and assay mark of the
melter and assayer should be found stamped on bars. We may have to allow foreign companies
with expertise in this area to set up shop in India. The melters and refiners, both from within and
outside India may have to be permitted based on net worth, turnover, etc. Perhaps we have a lot
of catching up to do.
Third,  it  may  be  necessary  to  recognise  financing  as  an  important  policy
component  of  developing  the  gold  market.  As  would  be  explained  later,  the  legal  and
institutional framework is available.
Finally, the development of gold banking will be derived from the policy stance.
On this subject, I expect the deliberations in this conference to throw up some ideas.
The Role of the Reserve Bank of India
Central  banks  the  world  over  have  a  special  concern  and  role  in  gold  economy.
The RBI is no exception. Broadly speaking, the role of the RBI spans five areas.
First, and very obvious, is the management of gold reserves. Since October 1990,
the  Bank’s  gold  holdings  have  been  valued  on  the  basis  of  international  market  prices.  We
recognise  the  price  risk  on  the  gold  holdings  and  have  considered  the  use  of  gold  options  and
futures  to  hedge  our  risk.  However,  the  RBI  Act  in  its  present  form  does  not  have  enabling
BIS Review   76/1997
- 6 -
provisions.  There  is  also  a  view  that  exemption  notification  by  the  Government  would  be
required under Section 27 of the Forward Contracts (Regulations) Act to enable the RBI to enter
into gold - currency swaps.
Second, the RBI had played  an  active  part  in  the  local  bullion  market.  The  RBI
had,  in  the  past,  close  links  with  Bullion  Market  Association,  and  the  RBI’s  nominee  was  a
member. In the 1970s, gold sale was organised domestically by the RBI, even as it continued its
interest in the study  of  gold  and  precious  metals,  monitoring  prices,  trade,  etc.,  and  constantly
advised the Government on policies. The RBI in future under the NGP, could play a role similar
to the Bank of England in the bullion market.
Third,  the  licensing  of  import  of  gold  and  silver  bullion  was  for  a  long  time  a
function of the RBI and not of the Import Trade Control. It was only through the amendment to
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 in 1992 that the import of gold/silver and the export
of  gold,  jewellery  and  precious  stones  ceased  to  be  regulated  by  the  RBI.  Now,  policy  with
regard to the import and export of gold is under the purview of EXIM policy. However, as per
the  recent  EXIM  Policy,  the  RBI  can  designate  an  agency  to  import  gold  for  selling  it  to
exporters only.
Fourth, in terms of Section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, in addition to
the business of banking,  a  banking  company  may  engage  in  the  buying,  selling  and  dealing  in
bullion and specie. In fact, the Act allows banks to trade in bullion. Banks extend credit against
gold. The regulatory role of RBI arises out of its supervisory functions over banks.
Fifth, the  RBI  has  and  continues  to  play  its  rightful  role  in  influencing  the  gold
policy in the country. We have in fact established a framework for ongoing review of policy in
gold. We established a Standing Committee on Gold and other Precious Metals  in  1992  which
has since been enlarged and activated in 1997. The Committee is also addressing issues relating
to the development of the gold market and gold based instruments, with providing a significant
boost to jewellery export being one of its objectives. We expect this committee to take an active
interest in matters relating to gold banking also.
The Role of Government
I  have  alluded,  earlier  today,  to  the  need  for  an  amendment  to  the  RBI  Act  and
also to issuance of  notification  by  the  Government  under  Section  27  of  the  Forward  Contracts
(Regulation)  Act,  1954.  These  measures  are  needed  to  enable  the  RBI  and  banks  to  enter  into
derivative  contracts  in  gold.  Further,  it  is  not  clear  whether  gold-denominated  certificates  and
other  gold-related  products  would  be  deemed  to  be  a  security  in  terms  of  Securities  Contracts
(Regulation)  Act.  There  are  also  wide-ranging  issues  related  to  taxation.  In  the  European
Community,  transactions  in  gold  are  subject  to  VAT  at  rates  which  vary  from  country  to
country.  In  some  countries,  gold  is  subject  to  sales  tax  as  well.  In  the  UK,  there  is  a  formal
agreement between the Commissioner of Customs and Excise and the London Bullion  Market,
on matters relating to tax treatment, and no doubt with the support of the Bank of England. The
Government’s role is critical in creating an enabling environment, especially through changes in
the legal framework.
The Role of Trade and Industry
In the early part of this century, there existed an active gold market in India - both
BIS Review   76/1997
- 7 -
physical and financial - and gold options and futures were actively traded in the Bombay Bullion
Exchange.
It is possible to revive this market now. Futures trading is already active in other
commodities like pepper, etc. and perhaps there is  no  reason  for  disallowing  gold  to  be  traded
again, though under an appropriate regulatory framework. The focus of the regulation could be
to  ensure  that  trading  is  undertaken  within  prudential  limits  and  correlated  to  risk-taking
capacity, to prevent systemic weakness and to induce transparency in trading practices.
We could draw lessons from the British experience. The London Bullion Market
Association has the formal responsibility for the supervision of its wholesale bullion market. The
Bank of England, with assistance from the London Bullion Market Association, has drawn up a
Code  of  Conduct  for  the  market  which  covers  such  matters  as  confidentiality,  market  ethics,
inducement  and  conflicts  of  interest.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Association  to  monitor  its
members’  adherence  both  in  letter  and  in  spirit,  and  bring  any  breaches  to  the  central  bank’s
attention. In addition, the Association has taken over the functions previously performed by the
London Gold Market and the London Silver Market in connection with the technical aspects of
deliverable  material,  the  rules  governing  application  for  inclusion  in  the  list  of  acceptable
Melters and Assayers and the codification of market practices as far as clearing and  settlement
are concerned.
The Role of Banks
Currently,  the  role  of  commercial  banks  is  limited  to  investment  in  gold  as  an
SLR asset and to lend against bullion and specie. As mentioned, banks could play a more active
role  in  financing  gold-related  activities.  As  an  immediate  measure,  perhaps  banks  may  be
(a) permitted to be designated agencies for import, (b) encouraged to lend against gold or silver
jewellery as security up to - say Rs.2  lakh  without  any  stipulation  on  end-use  to  help  peasants
and  penetrate  the  informal  credit  sector,  (c)  advised  to  devise  gold  acquisition  plans,
(d) permitted  to  lend  liberally  to  gold  jewellery  business,  and  (e)  allowed  to  draw  upon
international experience to deal in the gold industry.
Issues
As you would notice, I have not gone into the details of gold banking. Similarly,
on  gold  policy  and  capital  account  convertibility,  my  distinguished  predecessor,  friend,
philosopher  and  guide  Dr.  Tarapore,  will  address  you  later.  Deliberately,  I  have  not  gone  into
the issue of the current price situation of gold or use of gold as reserves by central banks. I feel
that those issues, though of contemporary interest, are not directly relevant.
I am thus, left with issues that flow from my presentation today.
First:  what  should  be  the  possible  objectives  of  an  NGP?  And  when  should  we
launch  an  NGP?  Second:  is  mere  liberalisation  of  import  of  gold  enough  of  a  reform?  If  not,
what  are  the  other  measures?  Third:  who  should  be  the  promoter/regulator  for  gold  trade?
Fourth: what should be the objectives of regulating gold trade?  Fifth: what are the measures that
are possible under the existing legal framework? What changes in legal framework are needed to
achieve a globally strategic position for India in world gold economy? Sixth: what should be the
tax regime, since in many countries the tax regime for gold is somewhat special. Seventh: how
soon  could  the  physical  facilities,  like  quality  assaying,  marking,  designs  etc.  of  international
standards  be  established?  What  will  be  the  role  of  foreign  investment  and  technology  in  this
BIS Review   76/1997
- 8 -
area? Eighth: how should the banks equip themselves to do gold banking - immediately, with the
present  legal  and  policy  frame  -  and  soon,  to  exploit  the  opportunities  under  a  possible  NGP?
Ninth:  and  this  is  critical  from  the  RBI’s  point  of  view  -  what  is  expected  of  the  RBI  in  the
context of developing gold banking now, and under a possible NGP?
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  the  audience  for  patiently  listening  to  me  and
assuring  the  organisers  that  we  in  the  RBI  are  eagerly  looking  forward  to  the  benefit  of
deliberations here.
BIS Review   76/1997
