Prof.  Tietmeyer  discusses  the  Bundesbank’s  commitment  to  stability
Translation  of  an  article  by  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,
published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 28/12/96.
In post-war Germany, there has been a broad consensus about the importance of a
stable  currency  across  all  political  groupings.  The  bitter  consequences  of  two  previous
hyperinflations as well as the positive experience gained with the D-Mark and its strength played
a major role in this.
In the recent past, however, the public debate has sometimes caused doubts to be
raised  concerning  how  far  this  consensus  still  goes.  Admittedly,  there  have  often  been  similar
disputes in post-war history. One has only to remember the controversy surrounding the D-Mark
appreciations  in  the  sixties,  when  the  relationship  between  internal  monetary  stability  and
external exchange rate stability first became an issue. Or the arguments in the seventies about the
spurious  alternative  of  more  inflation  or  more  unemployment.  Ultimately,  however,  all  these
controversies did not seriously jeopardise the consensus on stability; if anything, they tended to
strengthen it, in fact.
New discussion on stability
In  the  run-up  to  the  introduction  of  European  monetary  union  and  against  the
backdrop of very sharp exchange rate changes in the first half of the nineties, the debate about
the importance of monetary stability -- at  least  in  some  of  its  forms  --  seems  to  have  gained  a
new quality. For example, it is not only the trade-off between inflation and unemployment -- that
had  been  thought  to  have  been  overcome  --  which  has  been  revived  recently  in  a  number  of
comments  made  by  industry,  the  trade  unions  and  politicians.  In  view  of  the  degree  of  price
stability achieved, adherence to a policy of non-inflationary growth is occasionally even brought
into discredit as a deflationary  policy.  Perhaps  even  more  frequently  one  hears  the  proposition
that foreign exchange rate stability must purportedly assume priority over internal price stability
-- exchange rate stability evidently meaning the nominal and not the real  (price  level-adjusted)
stability of exchange rates. A  sustained  low  external  value  of  the  D-Mark  has  not  infrequently
even been regarded as necessary (or at least beneficial) for the German economy, regardless of
its implications for internal monetary stability.
In  the  recent  past,  this  debate  has  also  increasingly  become  part  of  the  wider
discussion  about  monetary  integration  in  Europe.  It  is  thus  acquiring  a  new  dimension,  even
going  as  far  as  postulating  European  monetary  union  at  all  costs;  in  other  words,  a  monetary
union  which  would  tend  to  result  in  a  soft  rather  than  a  strong  euro.  At  any  rate,  there  are  a
number of participants in the current discussion (in Germany,  too)  who  --  without  saying  it  so
explicitly, of course -- evidently regard the changeover to the euro as a welcome opportunity of
lessening the D-Mark’s former external strength. The open or covert advocates of a weakening
of the currency on competitive grounds obviously fail to recognise the interrelationship between
internal and external stability. They  overlook  the  fact  that,  in  the  past,  Germany  was  regularly
among those countries with the lowest interest rate level world-wide -- precisely because of the
stability  of  its  currency.  That  was  and  continues  to  provide  a  strong  competitive  edge  which
cannot  be  rated  too  highly,  quite  apart  from  the  generally  cost-curbing  effects  of  monetary
stability.
The  fact  that  such  depreciation  strategies  are  at  variance  with  the  aim  of  the
Maastricht Treaty and even more so with its interpretation by the Bundestag, the Bundesrat and
BIS Review   141/1996
- 2 -
the  Federal  Constitutional  Court  seems  either  not  to  be  taken  into  consideration  or  to  be
deliberately  accepted.  The  Bundesbank’s  adherence  to  internal  monetary  stability  has  led  to  it
being accused of an undue stability policy bias, or even of being obsessed with stability.
Bundesbank in favour of a stability union
To  avoid  any  misunderstanding:  the  Bundesbank  is  committed  to  the  road  to
European monetary union laid down in the Maastricht Treaty. In the relevant bodies at national
and European level it is collaborating intensively in solving the complex and by no means easy
technical  tasks  involved  --  these  range  from  harmonising  the  hitherto  very  different  monetary
policy  instruments  in  Europe,  putting  in  place  the  organisational  and  legal  framework  for  the
European Central Bank and the euro, to a fundamentally new and modernised payment system.
All  this  work  should  not  be  underestimated.  The  preparations  have  to  be  advanced  to  a  stage
which  enables  the  European  Central  Bank  Council  to  take  decisions  immediately  after  it  has
been  established.  The  European  Central  Bank  System  has  to  be  fully  operational  and
functionally viable right from the very first day of monetary union. And the set of instruments
then in force must not put individual banking groups at a disadvantage or jeopardise the benefits
of the decentralised banking structure which obtains, particularly in Germany, and the dominant
long-term orientation of the markets.
As  important  as  this  intensive  collaboration  in  the  technical  preparation  of
monetary union may be, what is of even greater importance is the Bundesbank’s public advocacy
of  monetary  union  actually  becoming  a  permanent  stability  union,  as  is  provided  for  in  the
Maastricht  Treaty  and  is  quite  obviously  desired  by  the  majority  of  the  population.  Although
there  are  occasionally  slight  differences  of  emphasis  on  individual  points,  there  is  complete
unanimity  within  the  Central  Bank  Council  concerning  the  goal  itself.  Monetary  union  must
become a permanent stability union with a strong currency, not least in order to prevent political
conflict which might otherwise pose a risk at a later date. The Bundesbank is at one in favouring
the  creation  of  the  economic  and  political  preconditions  which  will  ensure  that  the  monetary
stability  gained  through  the  D-Mark  is  likewise  permanently  maintained  following  the
changeover  to  the  euro.  It  has  the  authority  to  do  this  not  only  by  virtue  of  the  consensus  on
non-inflationary growth prevailing in Germany, it is also under a statutory obligation to do so. In
accordance with article 3 of the Bundesbank Act it  has  the  legal  mandate  of  “safeguarding  the
currency”.  Moreover,  in  accordance  with  article  12  it  “is  required  to  support  the  general
economic  policy  of  the  Federal  Cabinet”,  but  only  without  prejudice  to  the  performance  of  its
primary  duty  to  “safeguard  the  currency”.  The  Act  explicitly  states  that  the  Bundesbank  is
independent of instructions from the Federal Cabinet in exercising its powers.
Priority of internal stability
However,  the  legal  wording  “to  safeguard  the  currency”  does  not  seem  to  be
totally  unambiguous  with  regard  to  the  question  of  internal  monetary  stability  having  priority
over exchange rate stability. At the time this law was drafted in 1957, when the Bretton Woods
system of fixed exchange rates was still in force worldwide, internal and external exchange rate
stability  was  virtually  free  of  conflict.  It  was  not  until  tensions  emerged  between  the  major
industrial countries, as a result of domestic policy decisions and priorities drifting apart, that the
subject of protecting internal stability policy against external constraints (as it was later called by
Karl Schiller) became a matter of key importance. As the sixties progressed, the Bundesbank in
Germany,  with  the  vigorous  support  of  the  Federal  Economics  Ministers  Ludwig  Erhard  and
BIS Review   141/1996
- 3 -
Karl Schiller, committed itself more and more unequivocally to the priority of internal monetary
stability.  And  that  has  remained  the  case  to  the  present  day,  with  far-reaching  agreement
between the Federal Government and the Bundesbank. The Maastricht Treaty even adopted the
priority  of  internal  stability  expressis  verbis,  in  fact.  Maintaining  price  stability  has  been
enshrined in article 105 as the primary objective of the European System of Central Banks. The
Bundesbank’s primary orientation towards internal price stability is hence fully consistent  with
the regulations which will apply one day to the European Central Bank.
The  Bundesbank  has  to  fulfil  its  stability  mandate,  as  defined  above,  in  several
ways.  Its  first  and  most  crucial  task  is  to  conduct  its  own  monetary  policy  in  line  with  its
anti-inflationary stance. It does have to play its part in achieving the other targets of the Stability
and  Growth  Act  (high  level  of  employment,  external  equilibrium  and  stable  and  adequate
economic growth), but only to the extent that this does not jeopardise its primary goal of price
stability. Since there is a large measure of consensus among economists that price stability is not
--  at  least  in  the  medium  term  --  inconsistent  with  the  other  targets  of  the  so-called  uneasy
quadrangle, but is, instead, a prerequisite for  continued  growth,  high  employment  and  external
equilibrium,  there  should  not  actually  be  any  conflict  in  this  respect.  An  anti-inflationary
monetary  policy  also  serves  other  macroeconomic  goals,  the  example  of  Germany  providing
ample evidence of this. Although a stable currency alone cannot automatically bring about and
safeguard  sustained  growth  and  increased  employment,  it  is  an  indispensable  precondition  for
them.  Furthermore,  experience  has  shown  that  monetary  stability  also  makes  a  major
contribution  to  social  equity.  Given  the  demographic  trends,  not  only  in  Germany  but  also  in
other  European  countries,  this  will  be  all  the  more  the  case  in  the  future,  since  private
provisioning by the “ordinary citizens” will become increasingly important.
Role as a guardian of monetary stability
In  the  final  analysis,  however,  monetary  stability  cannot  be  safeguarded  by  an
anti-inflationary  monetary  policy  alone.  It  will  always  be  influenced  by  the  prevailing
behavioural  patterns  in  society  and  by  developments  in  other  policy  areas.  This  applies,  in
particular, to those decisions taken in fiscal policy, labour market policy, social policy and wage
policy  which  affect  the  viability  of  the  economic  and  social  system.  Long-term  undesirable
trends in those areas also tend to jeopardise monetary stability in the short or long run, and then
often  require  monetary  policy  countermeasures.  For  that  reason,  the  Bundesbank’s  role  as  a
guardian  of  monetary  stability  must  of  necessity  extend  beyond  its  decision-making  powers  in
monetary policy. It has to draw attention -- at as early a stage as possible -- to potential risks to
stability  in  other  areas  and  parallel  behavioural  patterns  in  the  economy  or  in  society.  The
Bundesbank has always made every possible effort to do this, without interfering in the political
discussion of specific details.
The Bundesbank is also especially suited  to  this  more  far-reaching  function  as  a
guardian  of  stability  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the  legislature  has  kept  it  largely  free  of
day-to-day  political  influence  and  special  party  and  lobby  interests  by  virtue  of  its  being
independent  of  political  instructions  and  by  the  long-term  appointment  of  the  members  of  its
governing bodies. Being free of short-term party and special interests, the Bundesbank is hence
able  to  raise  its  warning  voice  --  which  it  has  always  done  in  the  almost  forty  years  of  its
existence -- if it perceives the emergence of national or international risks to monetary stability.
However, the political independence of the Bundesbank by no means implies that
it is free of responsibilities. In contrast to many other countries, it is not -- for well considered
BIS Review   141/1996
- 4 -
reasons  --  accountable  to  the  government  or  to  parliament.  Nevertheless,  from  the  very
beginning  it  has  placed  itself  under  the  obligation  publicly  to  explain  and  justify  its  policy  as
well as its assessment of developments that are relevant to monetary  policy.  Its  target  group  is
the  general  public  which  it  addresses  through  the  speeches  of  the  members  of  its  governing
bodies and its diverse publications, especially its Monthly and Annual Reports. The Bundesbank
uses  all  these  opportunities  to  explain  its  policy  and  the  reasons  behind  its  decisions.  It  hence
puts itself before the forum of public discussion.
Role of a monetary policy adviser ...
Furthermore, the Bundesbank has been assigned a specific advisory role vis-à-vis
the  Federal  Cabinet  by  the  legislature.  In  accordance  with  article  13,  the  Bundesbank  has  to
“advise  the  Federal  Cabinet  on  monetary  policy  matters  of  major  importance”.  This  advisory
role  has  often  been  quite  significant  in  the  history  of  the  Bundesbank.  It  not  only  played  a
considerable  part  in  all  the  discussions  on  the  design  and  application  of  the  international  and
European monetary system. At the request of the Federal Cabinet, the Bundesbank also advised
it in connection with preparing for German monetary union. Naturally, the political bodies were
and remain free to follow the advice given  by  the  Bundesbank  or  not.  In  fulfilling  its  political
responsibilities,  the  Federal  Cabinet  departed  from  the  Bundesbank’s  recommendations  on
individual points (e.g. in the selection of the conversion rate for current payments).
... in the Maastricht negotiations ...
The  Bundesbank  also  performed  its  advisory  function  in  connection  with  the
negotiations on the Maastricht Treaty. As long ago as September 1990, the Central Bank Council
drew attention to  what  it  deemed  to  be  the  key  issues  in  a  memorandum.  It  said,  among  other
things, “... the participating economies (i.e. in the monetary union) will be inextricably linked to
one another in the monetary field, come what may. The implications of this -- especially for the
value  of  money  --  will  depend  crucially  on  economic  and  fiscal  policy  and  on  the  stance  of
management  and  labour  in  all  member  states.”  And  then  the  indispensable  benchmarks  of  a
successful stability union are spelled out in detail: from an independent central banking system,
with  a  priority  commitment  to  the  target  of  price  stability,  via  the  regulations  for  lasting
budgetary  discipline,  to  the  requirements  for  sufficient  and  durable  policy  convergence  among
the participating countries prior to entry into the final stage.
In addition, Bundesbank representatives, through their work on the EU Monetary
Committee  in  Brussels  and  on  the  erstwhile  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  Basle,
contributed  to  the  wording  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  in  numerous  instances.  For  example,  the
statute of the European Central Bank was drafted largely by representatives of European central
banks  in  Basle  and  then  adopted,  virtually  unchanged,  by  government  representatives  in  the
Treaty negotiations. Parallel to the negotiations in Brussels and Maastricht, there were of course
also  repeated  bilateral  talks  between  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Government  on  major
aspects of the Treaty.
These  intensive  and  close  contacts  were  and  are  fully  in  line  with  the
Bundesbank’s statutory mandate to proffer advice. Equally, attention should be drawn to the fact
that  this  does  not  affect  the  Government’s  political  accountability.  It  was  not  and  is  not  the
BIS Review   141/1996
- 5 -
Bundesbank that conducted or conducts negotiations itself on these subjects. Incidentally, neither
was  it  the  Bundesbank  that  was  responsible  for  the  numerical  fixing  of  the  so-called  fiscal
criteria  at  3  %  of  GDP  for  the  current  budget  deficit  and  at  60  %  of  GDP  for  the  fiscal  debt
level.  To  my  knowledge,  both  figures,  which  in  the  eyes  of  the  Bundesbank  tend  to  be  too
generous, rather than too strict, for most countries, were put forward by delegations other  than
the German one. In the joint estimation of the Central Bank Council, however, it is imperative
that,  prior  to  entry  into  monetary  union,  “the  budget  deficits  in  all  the  participating  countries
should be reduced to a level which is sustainable in the long run and unproblematic in terms of
anti-inflation policy requirements”.
After  the  conclusion  of  the  Treaty  negotiations,  the  Central  Bank  Council
published the following evaluation of the Treaty early in 1992: “The question of whether EMU
is to be established is a political decision. ... The planned institutional design of the final stage is
largely  in  line  with  the  Bundesbank’s  recommendations.  In  particular,  the  statute  of  the  future
European System of Central Banks ... It will be of paramount importance for the overall success
of the envisaged economic and monetary union that the Community decisions to be taken in ...
1998 on the selection of the countries eligible for participation should be geared solely to their
stability policy performance.”
... in the preparations for EMU
In  line  with  its  statutory  mandate,  the  Bundesbank  is  also  advising  the  Federal
Government  in  the  current  negotiations  on  the  preparation  of  monetary  union.  That  applies
particularly  to  the  consultations  on  the  legal  texts  for  what  is  known  as  the  “secondary
legislation”  now  taking  shape  in  Brussels.  And  it  also  applies  to  the  proposal  for  a  European
stability  pact  (which  was  put  forward  by  the  Federal  Government  and  backed  by  the
Bundesbank)  to  concretise  the  surveillance  process  for  budgetary  and  debt  trends  in  the
participating countries envisaged in article 104c of the Treaty. That stability pact has nothing to
do  with  any  German  desire  for  hegemony.  Instead,  it  is  intended  to  prevent  potential  conflicts
from  arising  between  the  future  single  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy
(especially the fiscal policies of the major  member  states),  thus  protecting  the  smaller  member
states, in particular, from hardships imposed by the potential misconduct of the larger ones.
Urging  “strict”  compliance  with  the  contractual  convergence  criteria  in  the
selection decision by the European Council on the member states participating in the monetary
union beginning in 1999 -- as reflected in the evaluation of the Treaty published early in 1992 --
is, after all, part of the Bundesbank’s function of being a guardian of price stability and advisor.
The  calls  made  by  the  Bundesbank  --  incidentally,  in  complete  agreement  with  the  Federal
Government -- for a “strict” interpretation of the criteria laid down in the Treaty are by no means
merely legalistic. Just like the Bundestag and the Bundesrat, the Bundesbank regards strict and
lasting  compliance  with  the  convergence  criteria  as  an  essential  precondition  for  the  smooth
inception and, as far as possible, conflict-free continuation of monetary union.
Lasting convergence indispensable
References to the fact that today there is not infrequently divergence, rather than
convergence,  within  existing  monetary  areas  disregard  the  fundamental  difference  that  obtains
between a monetary area that is identical to the borders of a nation state and a monetary union,
which comprises several nation states with a different regulatory and social systems. After all, in
BIS Review   141/1996
- 6 -
a monetary union extending beyond the frontiers of a  single  nation  state,  the  common  features
and compensatory systems which regularly exist within a nation state (such as a common legal
and  tax  system,  a  dominant  central  government  budget,  common  social  security  systems  and
fiscal  adjustment  mechanisms)  are  missing.  Hence  in  a  monetary  union  composed  of  several
member states without superordinate national ties, the potentially diverging forces are far greater
than  in  a  nation  state.  It  would  be  a  fallacy  to  suppose  that  a  common  central  banking  system
alone  can  prevent  potential  divergencies  in  a  union  comprising  several  major  member  states.
This is why a monetary union encompassing several nation states entails from the outset a high
level  of  common  “stability  culture”,  in  the  sense  of  joint  preferences  and  tried-and-tested
capabilities.  The  degree  of  lasting  convergence  achieved  and  the  readiness  to  maintain  lasting
financial discipline are intended to document precisely that. Disregarding the significance of the
selection  criteria  and  lastingly  failing  to  acknowledge  it  would  imply  a  lack  of  strategic
perceptiveness, and not vice versa.  A  monetary  union  which  later  turned  out  to  be  particularly
conflict-prone, let alone fragile, would not only pose economic problems, it might even turn out
to  be  a  serious  threat  to  the  European  integration  process.  Drawing  attention  to  these
far-reaching  political  dangers,  and  thus  to  the  crucial  importance  of  selecting  countries  in
keeping with the criteria, is undoubtedly part and parcel of the Bundesbank’s advisory mandate.
After  all,  the  monetary  union  must  not  be  allowed  to  fail,  let  alone  to  become  a  source  of
political conflict in Europe.
Not a “state within the state”
All in all, the Bundesbank has constantly endeavoured to perform its role of being
a guardian and advisor in keeping with its stability target, as laid down by Parliament -- and it
will  continue  to  do  so.  In  the  basic  orientation  of  its  policy  it  knows  at  the  same  time  that  it
enjoys a consensus with the vast majority of the population. The performance of these duties by
the Bundesbank, like its monetary policy, which is geared primarily to domestic price stability,
has nothing to do with any stance as a “state within the state”. Nor does it have anything to do
with  a  desire  for  German  hegemony  in  Europe.  Quite  the  contrary,  a  lastingly  sustainable
foundation and an anti-inflationary orientation of the monetary union  are  without  any  doubt  in
the best interests of Europe, too.
It  may  well  be  that  such  a  stability-oriented  guardian  and  advisor  function  does
not always fit in with the political and tactical aspirations of the political decision-makers. That
may even be true at times of our trading partners. But Chancellor Kohl rightly said publicly not
long ago: “As the Federal Chancellor, I sometimes have  problems  with  individual  measures  or
statements by the Bundesbank. But as a citizen of this country, I am happy that the Bundesbank
exists and that it acts in this way. Of course, neither the Bundesbank nor its President can claim
always to take the right action in all circumstances”.
On taking office in 1993 I said: “Even the Bundesbank is not faultless”. Needless
to say, that is just as true today, and will remain so in future. But the fact that the Bundesbank is
attested a substantial measure of “credibility in anti-inflation policy” in Germany, in Europe and
in international circles alike has certainly done Germany and Europe as a whole more good than
harm.  That  verdict  has  been  confirmed  time  and  again  by  impartial  observers.  Hence  the
Bundesbank will also continue to feel itself committed to stability in the period ahead.
BIS Review   141/1996
