Mr. Davies gives his personal view of EMU   Speech by the Deputy Governor
of the Bank of England, Mr. Howard Davies, at the EFMA Conference on the Single Currency
in Brussels on 16/12/96.
Like many British men of my generation, I spent a good part of my spare time as
a boy involved with the Scouting movement, first as a Wolf Cub, then as a Boy Scout.
I have to confess that I have forgotten many of the useful things I learned in the
Boy Scouts.  I can no longer light a camp-fire using only two sticks.  I can no longer tie a clove
hitch.  But I can remember the Boy Scout’s motto - ‘Be Prepared’.  And that motto strikes me as
a  useful  injunction  to  bear  in  mind,  as  we  approach  the  D-Day  for  Economic  and  Monetary
Union of 1 January 1999.  It applies, I think, just as much to those who may, for one reason or
another, find themselves outside the first group of EMU countries, as it does to those who firmly
intend to surf on the first wave.  The preparations, though, may be slightly different in each case.
Now some of you may think, if you read the British press, or hear echoes of the
British  political  debate  on  EMU  through  the  media  elsewhere  in  Europe,  that  in  present
circumstances one of the other pieces of advice which Lord Baden-Powell handed down to Boy
Scouts  who  followed  him  would  be  more  appropriate.    I  am  thinking  particularly  of  the
injunction to smile and whistle through all difficulties.  Certainly I am sometimes tempted, when
asked to explain the state of opinion in London, to take refuge in a cheery smile, and to begin to
whistle  a mournful tune (not easy to do at the same time, you will find).
Fortunately,  it  is  not  my  responsibility  to  discuss  the  politics  of  EMU  in  the
United Kingdom.  Another good reason for me not to do so is that I would like to keep my job.
As  a  humble  central  banker,  a  mere  technician,  it  is  more  appropriate  for  me  to  focus  on  the
economic dimension of EMU and to say something, also, about the financial market implications
which concern us, particularly given the Bank of England’s position at the heart of the City of
London.
In both these areas - economic and financial - the Boy Scout motto is particularly
apposite today.  Let me explain why.
At  the  Bank  of  England  we  have  always  held  the  view  that  Economic  and
Monetary Union is a  momentous  enterprise,  with  huge  consequences  for  European  economies.
The act of irrevocably fixing exchange rates, between economies which have in many cases been
managed separately for centuries, is not a step to be undertaken lightly.  It is an exciting venture,
almost too exciting for some, perhaps.
Those who have operated for decades with a regime of low inflation, interest rates
set  by  a  strong  independent  central  bank,  and  a  strong  and  appreciating  currency,  may  rightly
think they have little to fear from the disciplines implied by EMU.  Others will find EMU more
bracing, particularly those whose inflation record has been poor, whose currency has undergone
successive devaluations, and whose fiscal position is less than robust.    For  those  countries,  the
EMU mission is potentially dangerous.
Joining EMU would for them be to embark on a stiff mountain ascent, in weather
which might be colder and less forgiving than one is used to.  In those circumstances, the Boy
Scout ensures that he is well prepared.  He equips himself with waterproofs in the event of rain,
with thick pullovers for the cold, with stout boots and, probably, a Swiss army knife in case it
should prove necessary, at some point on the journey, to extract a stone from a horse’s hoof.  He
would also, I think, wish to ensure that he was fit, and had undertaken some strenuous rambles
BIS Review   1/1997
- 2 -
in the foothills before making an assault on the mountain range.
At  this  point  you  may  be  tired  of  hearing  about  Boy  Scouts,  and  be  ready  to
accuse  me  of  the  typical  British  trick  of  hiding  behind  down-home  metaphors,  and  reducing
topics of high seriousness to wry jokes.  So let me be entirely clear about what I mean.
We  fully  appreciate  the  great  potential  advantages  of  EMU  for  Europe’s
economies. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kenneth Clarke, described them in the House of
Commons on Wednesday of last week.  As he said then "if EMU can be made to work it would
eradicate  exchange  rate  movements  which  can  disrupt  trade  and  have  disrupted  trade  in  our
recent history.  EMU would also reduce transaction costs, making it easier for smaller businesses
to enter into and compete  in  the  European  market.    The  members  of  a  strong  euro  zone  could
also expect to enjoy lower interest rates . . . countries with a history of devaluation or bursts of
inflation pay a lasting premium in terms of higher interest rates, as we in Britain know only too
well!"  And in his response to the debate  Gordon  Brown,  the  Shadow  Chancellor,  said  that  he
was in principle in favour of a single currency for the United Kingdom.
So the attractions of EMU are well understood in Britain.  They were in the minds
of the architects of the Maastricht Treaty five years ago.  But those architects also knew that the
advantages  would  only  be  accessible  to  those  countries  whose  economies  were  equipped  to
accept  the  disciplines  which  go  alongside.    If  that  were  not  true,  then  the  EU  would  have
discovered the economic equivalent of alchemy.
We  are  convinced  that  if  a  single  currency  is  to  be  a  success,  then  all  the
participants must be satisfied that they can survive within the EMU disciplines in the long term,
as well as the short.  This applies to the 1997 convergence criteria themselves, of course.  It also
applies  to  performance  against  those  criteria  in  later  years.    And,  in  our  view,  perhaps  more
controversially,  it  applies  to  other  aspects  of  the  real  economies  of  applicant  countries,
particularly to the structures of their labour markets.
In the case of the convergence criteria, our attitude is straightforward.  They must
be rigorously respected.  And that applies to the substance, as well as the form.  So it would be
unwise for a country to seek to qualify in 1998 by massaging down its 1997 public sector deficit
through artificial, unrepeatable devices, even if those devices are not technically disallowed.
It  would  be  unwise,  because  the  deficit  limit  is  not  a  one-off  requirement.
Continued discipline on individual member states’ budget positions is a crucial element of EMU
in the future.  Friday’s agreement at Dublin provides for such discipline, albeit with an element
of political judgement over the way that discipline will be exercised in certain circumstances.
But  the  general  conclusion  is  clear.    Member  states  will  need  to  live  with
continued  fiscal  discipline.    In  our  view,  unless  a  country  can  show  that  its  fiscal  position  is
structurally sound - in other words that in mid-cycle, with the economy growing at trend on its
potential growth path, the budget of the government would tend to be close to balance - then it
may find the fiscal discipline of EMU difficult to sustain.  That is both a long-term  point,  and
one relevant to the transition period.  It would be potentially destabilising of the whole project if
countries  found  themselves  obliged  to  take  extremely  difficult  political  decisions  in  the  early
years because their fiscal positions had not been properly corrected beforehand.
Of  course  it  goes  without  saying  that  if  a  country’s  outstanding  debt  burden  is
well  above  the  Maastricht  guideline  it  will  be  much  more  difficult  to  achieve  a  sustainable
BIS Review   1/1997
- 3 -
deficit position, since it will be necessary to run sizeable primary surpluses at high points in the
cycle.    It  is  worth  recalling  that  when  the  Treaty  set  a  figure  of  60 per  cent  of  GDP  the  EU
average was 55 per cent.  This year it will be over 73 per cent,  and  only  Luxembourg,  France
and the UK will be below 60 per cent.
Any country with a very large outstanding debt to GDP ratio will find the going
particularly tough.  As far as the UK is concerned, our debt to GDP ratio is relatively low at 56
per  cent,  but  while  we  have  made  considerable  progress  towards  fiscal  consolidation  in  recent
years, our deficit remains above the Maastricht guideline, even after almost five years of growth.
A UK government of any political colour, as it comes to make a decision on our readiness  for
EMU  membership  next  year,  will  be  bound  to  take  that  into  consideration.    The  latest
government forecast, after the recent Budget, shows us achieving a figure of a touch below 3 per
cent in calendar 1997.
I could make similar points about the exchange rate criterion where, once again,
we  believe  it  is  important  to  focus  on  the  substance  rather  than  on  the  form.    Has  a  country
shown that its anti-inflation discipline, over a lengthy period, has allowed its currency to hold its
own without generating significant current account imbalances?  For  some  applicant  countries,
the answer is evidently yes; for others, no.  Once again, that is an issue which we will have to
consider carefully as we assess the position of the United Kingdom next year.
I  imagine  that  these  points  would  be  very  widely  accepted  across  the  EU,
certainly by my central banking colleagues.  But our view of the optimal state of preparedness
for EMU is rather broader than this.  And, here - as I said earlier - we may be less obviously in
the mainstream of European opinion.  Because we have concerns about the sustainability of an
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  which  there  is  too  little  flexibility  in  product  and  labour
markets,  particularly  the  latter.    Is  the  monetary  union  being  designed  one  which  retains
sufficient  flexibility  to  cope  with  the  kind  of  differential  shocks  which  may  affect  different
countries within it?  This point is, I think, not the same as asking whether the EU is an optimal
currency area.  I suspect the answer to that question would be no.  But one might well give the
same answer in relation to the United States, or even to the United Kingdom itself.  The question
is  whether  there  is  sufficient  flexibility  within  the  proposed  currency  union  to  cope  with
asymmetric shocks.
We know that, in the United States, there is  considerable  fiscal  flexibility,  some
through  automatic  stabilisers,  like  federally-funded  welfare  benefits,  and  some  through  direct
transfer  payments  from  prosperous  to  less  prosperous  states.    We  also  know  that  there  is
considerable  labour  mobility  in  the  United  States,  and  that  wages  vary  widely  from  region  to
region.
In Europe, the central EU budget is very small, less than 1.5 per cent of European
GDP, and there is no strong current of opinion in favour of expanding it significantly.  It is also
the case that labour mobility is low, for linguistic and cultural reasons, which  cannot  easily  be
overcome by government fiat.
Now I would certainly not argue that an EMU could not be attempted without a
huge  central  EU  budget,  or  without  teaching  everyone  commercial  German.    But  we  need  to
make sure that labour markets  are  as  prepared  as  they  can  be  for  the  future,  a  future  in  which
there  will  be  no  possibility  of  the  use  of  the  exchange  rate  to  cope  with  changes  in
competitiveness,  from  country  to  country,  whether  driven  by  supply-side  shocks  or  by
differential rates  of  productivity  growth.    Our  concern  is  that,  unless  EMU  is  accompanied  by
BIS Review   1/1997
- 4 -
measures  to  free  up  Europe’s  labour  markets,  existing  high  rates  of  unemployment  in
disfavoured  regions  will  be  ossified,  with  unpredictable  and  possibly  unpleasant  social
consequences in the long term.
Looking  at  Europe’s  regional  economies,  it  is  striking  that  relativities  between
them  have  remained  so  stubbornly  large  for  so  long,  even  within  individual  member  states.
Indeed only in the UK have there been some recent signs that relative unemployment rates, from
prosperous  to  less  prosperous  regions,  have  begun  to  converge.    That  appears  to  be  related  in
changes in  relative  wages  which  have  come  about  as  a  result  of  the  dismantling  of  centralised
pay bargaining, and of other labour market restrictions, in the 1980s.  Elsewhere in Europe those
changes have not been made; without them we would have to enter a reserve on the preparedness
of some European economies for the rigours of a single currency.  That is another point which, I
am sure, any British government will wish to take into account in making its final decision.  And
we would feel more comfortable about the likely success of EMU as a whole - and I emphasise
that the success of EMU is strongly in the British  national  interest,  whether  we  are  in  or  out  -
were we to see faster progress towards greater labour market flexibility elsewhere in Europe.
It may be argued that EMU itself will act as a stimulus to reforms needed in fiscal
policy,  and  in  labour  markets;  indeed  that  the  prospect  of  EMU  is  already  doing  so.    We  -
cautious,  pragmatic,  non-visionary  people  that  we  are  -  would  like  to  see  the  needed  reforms
implemented first.
These  preparations,  both  in  the  financial  and  the  real  economies,  are  the
preparations  which  prospective  ‘ins’  need  to  make,  in  particular.    But  there  are  of  course
preparations  in  financial  markets  which  apply  to  everyone.    We  are  in  no  doubt  that  the
introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999,  if  the  current  timetable  is  maintained,  will  have  profound
consequences  for  financial  markets,  initially  for  wholesale  markets,  and  later  for  the  retail
financial  sector  too.    It  is  incumbent  on  all  central  banks  to  seek  to  ensure  that  the  financial
markets in which they sit are as well prepared as they can be for this momentous change.  We
must also ensure that the central banks themselves are well prepared.
At the Bank of England we now have a steering group, which I chair, focused on
preparing the Bank itself.  We have made a clear decision that  the  Bank  will  be  ready  for  UK
membership of EMU in January 1999, if a future government decides that that is the right course
for the country.  But our more important work in the short term is focused on preparing the City
of London and on preparing the financial infrastructure which the City will need to maintain its
position as the most innovative and dynamic financial market in Europe.
I  should  emphasise  that  we  see  the  City  as  a  financial  market  for  the  whole  of
Europe, not just for the United Kingdom.  That explains why we are always ready to welcome
overseas financial institutions to London, why we rigorously avoid discrimination on grounds of
nationality in our financial market dealings, and why we have greatly welcomed the decisions by
German,  French  and  Swiss  banks  in  particular  to  concentrate  many  of  their  wholesale  market
activities in London in recent years.  Europe needs a broad and deep market like London to rival
those in Tokyo and New York.
I would not wish, today, to talk at length about the preparations being made in the
City  for  EMU.    Partly  because  this  afternoon,  in  London,  we  shall  be  releasing  our  latest
quarterly report on Practical Issues Arising from the Introduction of the Euro, which sets out in
some detail the progress that has been made over the last three months, and how we propose to
take things forward.  In short, we are confident that London will be as well prepared for EMU as
BIS Review   1/1997
any market, when the time comes.
- 5 -
As  we  say  in  that  paper,  we  are  fully  involved  in  preparing  the  wholesale
financial  sector  of  the  economy  for  the  euro  and,  of  course,  in  the  extensive  work  being
undertaken  at  the  European  Monetary  Institute.    For  the  most  part  that  work  is  proceeding
successfully  and  we  are  happy  with  the  decisions  made.    Some  are,  inevitably,  compromises.
But  that  is  what  building  Europe  is  all  about,  and  we  are  always  ready  to  seek  compromise
solutions.  We understand that to build one European wholesale financial market will require a
staple diet of solid Bundesbank fare, seasoned with a soupçon of Banque de France, a ración of
Banco de España, and so on, as well as a couple of pints of Bank of England pragmatism.
There  is  one  important  area,  I  think,  in  which  it  has  not  so  far  been  possible  to
reach an agreed solution, and one on which I might just conclude with one or two observations.
That is the question of TARGET, the inter-linking of real time gross settlement systems across
Europe.  There are two issues of interest, here.  First, pricing policy.  We have argued that the
pricing of the national element of cross-border  payments  should  relate  to  national  costs,  rather
than  being  set  uniformly.    So  far  we  have  not  prevailed  on  that  point  and,  as  long  as  the
competition  authorities  approve,  it  is  likely  that  there  will  be  a  common  price  within  the
TARGET  system  for  cross-border  transactions.    Unfortunately,  some  of  our  colleagues  do  not
believe this is an area in which competition should intrude.
The second important question relates to the  terms  on  which  ‘out’  central  banks
might link to TARGET in the future.  We can see no reason why out central banks should not be
able  to  link  to  TARGET  on  the  same  terms  as  those  which  apply  to  the  ins.    We  accept,  of
course, the need in both in and out countries for rigorous  policing  to  prevent  unintended  spill-
over of intra-day credit into the overnight market.  That policing can be achieved through penal
interest  rates.    But  we  can  see  no  monetary  policy  issue  in  relation  to  intra-day  credit.    The
extension of sterling intra-day liquidity in our  present  domestic  RTGS  system  is  of  no  interest
to, and never  considered  in  the  context  of,  monetary  policy  decisions.    The  same  holds  for  all
other countries.
Indeed we could go further and say that denying even-handed access to TARGET
through out central banks will negate one of the main purposes of the whole exercise, to reduce
the  risk  inherent  in  systems  in  which  banks  are  exposed  to  each  other  for  a  period  of  hours.
Banks would find other ways round the restriction which would be more risky.  So central banks
across Europe will have scored an own goal.
We  shall  need  to  look  carefully  at  this  issue  as  we  move  towards  1999.    If
restrictions were to be applied to out central banks which made TARGET unattractive to banks
in  London,  thereby  encouraging  them  to  use  less  secure  cross-border  mechanisms  for  euro
payments,  then  we  shall  need  to  think  about  the  other  options  we  could  adopt.    One  possible
option might be to develop our own euro RTGS arrangements to allow quick, efficient and safe
euro payments within the UK which would not rely on access to intra-day credit from the euro
area.
We would prefer a pan-European solution which, we strongly believe,  would  be
in the interests of the EU as a whole in the long run.  But one thing is clear.  Safe, efficient and
competitive payment and settlement systems must be available in our own marketplace, and they
will be.
London has huge advantages as a strong and competitive financial centre in or out
BIS Review   1/1997
- 6 -
of  EMU.    We  are  confident  that  those  advantages  will  remain.    The  fact  that  more  and  more
banks are centring their foreign exchange, corporate finance and investment business in London
suggests  that  they  share  our  confidence  in  the  future  of  London.    In  these  matters  it  always
seems  to  me  to  be  best  to  take  one’s  cue  from  ‘revealed  preferences’  -  where  financial
institutions  choose  to  base  themselves,  taking  account  of  all  the  uncertainties.    Those  revealed
preferences remain strongly in London’s favour.
The preparations for EMU are now hotting up.  All over Europe, Boy Scouts are
packing  their  rucksacks  with  the  kit  they  will  need  for  this  determined  assault  on  what,  in
deference  to  its  German  roots,  we  should  perhaps  call  the  Magic  Mountain,  with  apologies  to
Thomas Mann.    The  Magic  Mountain  is  perhaps  a  more  tactful  title  to  choose  than  The
Confessions  of  Felix  Krull,  Confidence  Man,  or  Death  in  Venice,  as  some  others  in  London
might  suggest.    I  hope  that  this  morning  I  have  given  you  some  insights  into  what  we  think
should  be  in  the  central  banker’s  rucksack,  and  how  the  United  Kingdom  will  assess  its  own
preparedness next year, when the time comes.
BIS Review   1/1997
