Mr.  Heikensten  looks  at  the  intellectual  framework  for  monetary  policy  in
Sweden   Address by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, at the
Monetary Policy Forum held in Stockholm on 26/5/97.
Economic  policy  developments  during  the  early  1990s  were  marked  by  the
after-effects  of  the  overheating  in  the  1980s.  At  the  beginning  of  1993--after  the  krona  had
fallen--the Riksbank made clear its intention to meet an inflation target. An important task since
then  has  been  the  firm  establishment  of  a  policy  of  low  inflation  in  Swedish  society  and  the
clarification of the principles that guide monetary policy.
We think that we have now come a long way in the effort to secure low inflation.
At the same time, support for the policy of low inflation has increased.  The Government and the
Riksdag  have  positioned  themselves  behind  the  policy  and  recently  proposals  have  been  put
forward to, among other things, make price stability an objective of the Riksbank prescribed by
law.  Against  this  background  it  may  now  be  appropriate  to  try  to  clarify  the  intellectual
framework  within  which  the  Riksbank  is  working.  To  contribute  to  such  a  more  fundamental
discussion on the  principles  of  monetary  policy  formulation,  I  will  today  consider  four  related
issues:
First  I  intend  to  comment  on  how  I  view  the  connection  between  price  stability
and growth for different time perspectives. One issue that I will dwell on somewhat is how the
balance between the two appears in the short term.
Next,  I  shall  discuss  how  uncertainty  and  the  degree  of  credibility  with  which
monetary policy is associated influence policy formulation. These two factors play an important
role in practice.
The third issue concerns the exchange rate. For small open economies this issue is
one of the most important determinants of inflation  at  the  same  time  as  it  is  also  an  important
measure of how stable economic policy is seen to be. How changes in the exchange rate ought to
be  handled  when  monetary  policy  decisions  are  taken  has  been  an  important  monetary  policy
issue in Sweden in recent years.
Finally I shall discuss the issue of how the monetary policy goal has been defined
and should be interpreted.
The Inflation/Growth Connection
The Riksbank’s chief task is the achievement and preservation  of  price  stability,
which should be interpreted as keeping the rate of inflation at a low and stable level. Behind this
view of the role of monetary policy lies the understanding that growth and employment cannot
in  the  long  run  be  achieved  via  an  inflationary  policy.  There  are  other  factors  that  determine
growth: technological development, the way in which the economy functions, human resources
development, etc.
Attempts to stimulate  the  economy  in  the  short  run  by  allowing  higher  inflation
tend to rebound in the long run.  Swedish experience in the last decade, and also experiences in
other  countries,  demonstrate  this.    Participants  in  the  economy  see  through  the  policy,  revise
wage demands upwards and raise prices. When inflation expectations are taken into account, the
outcome of an inflationary policy is normally worse rather than better economic development .
BIS Review   56/1997
- 2 -
The best contribution that monetary policy can make to good growth in the long
term is to see to it that an environment with stable prices is created and maintained. Within these
bounds  a  central  bank  can  support  economic  development  in  general.  In  the  short  term  the
possibility may exist to influence the economy’s activity level with monetary policy instruments.
For that to be possible, monetary policy objectives would need to be completely credible.
A central bank should have as its primary objective price stability. Given the time
lags that exist in monetary policy, it takes from one to two years before the effects of an interest
rate change make themselves fully felt on inflation. Therefore policy must be be guided by the
forecasted inflation, not by the inflation existing in the present situation. If an inflation forecast
for the coming two years shows that there is a risk that the inflation target may be missed, the
instrumental rate should be changed so that inflation is driven back in line with the target.
If  inflation  is  expected  to  be  lower  than  the  target,  there  is  room  in  practice  for
monetary policy to take the activity level into consideration.  The Riksbank can then lower the
interest  rate  and  in  such  a  manner  stimulate  production  and  employment  temporarily.  In  the
same manner, interest rates will normally need to be raised in situations in which future inflation
tends to get excessive as a consequence of a too high resource utilization.
Consequently,  when  an  inflation  forecast  shows  that  future  inflation  does  not
appear to be in line with the target, policy must be altered. In these situations there is a balancing
problem. The question is how forceful the  interest  rate  change  should  be.  If  it  is  dramatic,  the
adjustment in the rate of inflation to the established target may be faster, but the repercussions in
the short term in the form of fluctuations in production and employment will probably be bigger
also.
Pr ice  Stab ilizatio n : Alte r n ative  Path s
Figure 1
p
t
2%
t+4
t+8
t
The reasoning can be made clear with a simple diagram (Figure 1). By choosing
interest  rate  path  2  rather  than  path  1,  the  adjustment  to  the  inflation  target  will  be  somewhat
slower; however, the development in the economy will also be less spasmodic.
BIS Review   56/1997
- 3 -
The  fact  that  the  Riksbank--when  the  price  stability  objective  was  introduced  in
1993--chose  to  postpone  its  application  for  about  2  years  (the  decision  that  evaluation  would
only be made when the direct effects of the krona’s weakening had died away in 1995) can be
said  to  have  been  a  way  of  taking  into  consideration  the  above  reasoning.  In  recent  years,
however,  this  sort  of  consideration  has  not  played  such  a  prominent  role.  There  are  several
interrelated explanations for this. Monetary policy  thus  far  has  been  aimed  to  a  great  extent  at
establishing  a  regime  of  low  inflation  and  engendering  understanding  for  it.  In  practice,  the
scope is also limited for monetary policy decisions of a fine-tuning character by the uncertainty
that prevails, inter alia, about future developments and by the degree of credibility  for  the  low
inflation policy.
2. Uncertainty and Credibility
There  are  various  kinds  of  uncertainty  that  in  practice  play  an  important  part  in
monetary policy and are also important  for  the  speed  and  scale  with  which  changes  in  interest
rates are made:
-    One  type  of  uncertainty  has  to  do  with  the  economy’s  basic  mechanisms..
Which  model  of  the  economy  shall  we  use  for  our  analysis?  A  major  problem  here  in  recent
years has been that the shift to low inflation and a flexible exchange rate by itself can change the
relationships in the model.
-    A  second  type  of  uncertainty  concerns  the  interpretation  of  new  information
that  is  constantly  coming  in.  It  is  important  in  this  connection  to  assess  what  effects  an
interference  or  a  shock  have,  which,  inter  alia,  is  linked  with  whether  it  is  permanent  or
temporary.
-  Finally there is uncertainty about  the  effect  of  the  measures that  the  Riksbank
can  take--in  practice,  changes  in  the  instrumental  interest  rates.  The  question  is  how  the
so-called  transmission  mechanism  looks  and  in  what  time  frame  interest  rate  changes  affect
inflation.
If  a  central  bank  overestimates  the  deviation  from  the  inflation  target  or
underestimates the effect of a change in its interest rate policy, there is a risk that it will raise or
lower interest rates too much. In such a situation, the policy in the end will become excessively
restrictive or expansive and it may become necessary  for  the  central  bank  to  shift  its  policy  in
the  opposite  direction.  Such  a  change  may  create  instability  and  reinforce  cyclical  swings.
Therefore it would appear that there is reason to proceed with some caution when the policy is
changed. Central banks also tend to adjust interest rates in relatively small steps.
Nevertheless,  the  conclusion  that  a  central  bank  should  proceed  carefully  is  not
self-evident.  The  question  is  how  the  markets  players  interpret  a  certain  behaviour.    Ever  so
small  changes  in  the  instrumental  interest  rates,  which  may  be  interpreted  as  the  first  step  in
policy  change,  can  have  a  big  impact.  (cf.  the  Federal  Reserve’s  increase  in  February  1994).
There is probably no obvious and simple rule for action. Most likely, the central bank’s task is to
account for, as clearly as possible, both its long-term plans and the uncertainty that is inherent in
its assessment.
BIS Review   56/1997
- 4 -
Figure 2
M o n e y M a r k e t Ag e n ts’ In fla tio n
E x p e cta tio n s
P e r  ce n t
C P I
NN oo vv . ’. ’9696
55
44
33
22
11
00
--11
OO cc tt. . ’’9494
FF ee bb . ’. ’9977
OO cc tt. . ’’9595
MM aa y  y  ’’9696
55
44
33
22
11
00
--11
9494
9595
9696
9797
9898
9999
0000
0101
S o u rce s : S ta tis tics  S w e de n  a n d P ros pe ra  R e s e a rch
The way in which the instrumental interest rates are changed also has to do with
credibility  and  tactics.  If  complete  credibility  in  monetary  policy  and  a  low-inflation  regime
have not been achieved , it will naturally influence the pace with which interest rates are lowered
or raised. In situations of this kind, the result may be that the central bank has its instrumental
rates set at either a too high or a too low level compared with what would have been warranted
in an environment of high credibility.
Developments during 1996 can illustrate the effects on policy of both uncertainty
and insufficient credibility. At the beginning of the year, the Riksbank estimated that activity in
the economy was declining and that inflationary pressure was falling. Both the demand situation
and the indicators that exist for inflation expectations pointed in the same direction. (Figure 2).
However,  the  forecasts  of  inflation,  which  were  made  by  private  players,  were
still not wholly in line with the Riksbank’s target. Nevertheless, the Riksbank’s assessment was
that  in  this  situation  there  was  room  to  begin  lowering  interest  rates  without  threatening  the
inflation target.
Initially, the Riksbank chose to lower the repo rate in equal intervals of 25 basis
points  (Figure  3).  Prudence  was  warranted  by  our  wish  to  receive  further  information  which
could confirm our picture of falling inflationary  pressures.  Moreover,  we  estimated  that  it  was
urgent that the decreases not be interpreted by the market as an indication that the Riksbank had
begun  to  tinker  with  the  inflation  target,  with  possible  negative  effects  primarily  on  long-term
interest rates and the krona. The series of small decreases in the repo rate continued to the end of
the year, when the rate had been lowered to 4.10 per cent, that is to say, a total decrease of 4.81
per  centage  points.  In  the  spring,  new  information  came  that  supported  the  brighter  picture.
Inflation and budget figures were improving gradually at the same time as the policy generally
appeared to be stabilising. This supported monetary policy.
These events give an example of how difficulties in interpreting  the  information
received  can  be  handled.  The  Riksbank’s  policy  is  based  on  forecasts,  which  are  necesssarily
BIS Review   56/1997
- 5 -
uncertain, and it also has to be designed so that it is perceived as consistent in the long term and
credible.
Actu a l a n d  E x p e cte d  Re p o  Ra te
Figure 3
P e r  ce n t
1010
99
88
77
66
55
44
33
jj aa nn --9966
RR ee pp o  o  rr aa ttee
5 5 MM aa rr ..’’9696
1010
99
88
77
66
55
44
33
5 5 JJ u nu n ee ’’9696
24 24 SS ee pp tt.’.’9696
10 10 MM aa rr .’.’9797
13 13 MM aa yy ’’99 77
mm aa rr --9966
jj u nu n --9966
ss ee pp --9696
dd e ce c --9696
mm aa rr --9977
jj u nu n --9977
S ource : T he  R iks ba nk
The conclusion is that there may be reason and scope for the Riksbank, within the
framework  of  a  policy  with  price  stability  as  its  objective,  to  pay  attention  to  real  economic
developments.    In  fact,  this  possibility  is  inherent  in  a  monetary  policy  based  on  an  inflation
target. In practice, however, the possibilities of an active stabilisation policy are limited by the
general uncertainty that prevails.
The Exchange Rate
In  small,  open  economies,  the  exchange  rate  has  an  important  influence  on
inflation. At the same  time,  it  is  a  variable  that  has  fluctuated  considerably  in  recent  years  for
reasons which have not always been easy to foresee and interpret.
How changes in the exchange rate should be handled in practical policy depends
above all on how lasting a change in the exchange rate is judged to be. More enduring changes
that  have  an  effect  on  inflation  forecasts  obviously  have  to  be  taken  into  account    In  order  to
decide  on  the  duration  and  what  is  a  reasonable  reaction,  one  normally  has  to  know  what
brought about the change. Several different cases can be discerned:
A  nominal  change  in  the  exchange  rate  can  be  a  result  of  a  change  in  the  real
equilibrium exchange rate. This case is in principle simple to manage since it normally does not
lead  to  a  changed  picture  of  inflation  and  thereby  does  not  occasion  any  specific  policy
measures.  Changes  in  the  real  equilibrium  exchange  rate  have  not  been  an  especially  common
reason  for  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  in  recent  years,  at  any  rate  since  the  krona  fell  in
connection with the changeover to a flexible exchange rate in 1992.
A change in the nominal exchange rate may also have to do with a change in the
long-term view of the steadfastness in economic policy, or what is termed credibility. In practice
it  is  not  always  so  easy  to  distinguish  between  what  is  important  for  credibility  and  various
factors can interact in a complicated manner. Two cases can, however, be discerned:
BIS Review   56/1997
- 6 -
-    In  the  first  case,  the  problem  of  credibility  is  primarily  based  on  a  lack  of
confidence in the central bank as such and in monetary policy. In the long-term perspective, the
task  is  then  the  establishment  of  a  trackrecord.  Laws  that  guarantee  independence  can  be  an
important support in this process. In the short term, there is probably most often not much that
can be done other than to show by action--increases in interest rates--that one is sticking to one’s
objectives.
-    More  difficult  to  assess  and  manage  are  situations  in  which  the  currency’s
depreciation  is  a  consequence  of  weakening  credibility  in  the  general  direction  of  economic
policy. Investors in the financial market may, for example, think that the risk has increased for a
change  of  regimes  in  the  future,  when  the  target  for  price  stability  may  be  abandoned  at  least
temporarily  as  a  result,  for  example,  of  government  financial  problems.  In  Sweden  this  was
probably  the  most  common  explanation  for  the  recurrent  periods  of  exchange  rate  turbulence
during the 1990s. In situations of this type, monetary policy itself cannot do the job, and what is
worse, in the short term the costs of monetary policy measures may be considerable. Yet there is
hardly  any  other  alternative  for  a  central  bank  than  to  respond  by  raising  interest  rates  and  in
such a way demonstrate its intention to counter inflationary tendencies.  At the same time there
is reason to try to influence developments in other ways by clarifying the nature of the problems,
so that financial policy is turned in the right direction.
Figure 4
T h e  Swe d ish  Exch an ge Rate
ve r su s U SD an d DEM
55,,00
44,,88
44,,66
44,,44
44,,22
44,,00
SSEE KK //UUSS DD
rrii gg hh t t aaxx ii s  s  
SSEE KK //DDEE MM
ll eefft t aaxx ii ss
88,,00
77,,88
77,,66
77,,44
77,,22
77,,00
66,,88
66,,66
66,,44
66,,22
66,,00
jjunun--9966
jjuull--9966
sseepp--9966
nnoovv--9966
jjaann--9977
mmaarr--9977
mmaajj--9977
S ource: T he R iksbank
Another,  often  complementary,  reason  for  fluctuations  in  the  nominal  exchange
rate  may  be  unrest  or  disturbances  in  the  international  currency  and  capital  markets.  If  such
disturbances  can  be  deemed  to  be  pure  market  phenomena  and  thus  of  short  duration,  they
should  make  hardly  any  difference  to  the  bank’s  behaviour.    However,  this  is  not  the  most
common  case.  What  we  saw  in  the  international  financial  markets—after  the  bond  markets’
crash  in  1994  or  the  Mexico/Barings  unrest  in  1995—is  an  interaction  between  market
tendencies in a more limited sense and weak public finances or other credibility problems. High
international interest rates and currency unrest have aggravated the problem of public finances,
BIS Review   56/1997
- 7 -
so that on these occasions economies such as Sweden’s have moved from a virtuous to a vicious
circle.
Examples  of  how  one  could  analyse  exchange  rate  developments  in  the  above
terms can also be found in events of the last half-year.
An  explanation  of  developments  with  respect  to  the  krona  has  to  do  with  the
position of the  Swedish  and  continental  economies  in  the  business  cycle.  In  recent  months  the
dollar  and  the  pound  especially  have  appreciated  relative  to  continental  currencies.  Monetary
policy in the USA and Great Britain has been relatively tight. (Figure 4).
This is still not the entire explanation. The krona has also fallen somewhat against
continental currencies, especially during the winter and spring. In part,  this  has  coincided  with
concerns  with  respect  to  the  EMU  process,  possibly  strengthened  in  Sweden’s  case  because
Sweden’s  position  on  the  EMU  issue  is  unclear.  In  addition  there  has  been  some  uncertainty
about the steadfastness of long-term economic policy connected with, inter alia, continued high
unemployment.
The studies that have been done by the Riksbank indicate that there is room for an
appreciation  of  the  krona.  Not  only  are  government  finances  in  considerably  better  condition
than  they  were  earlier  (in  fact,  Sweden  is  one  of  the  relatively  few  EU  countries,  which,
according to the EU Commission can be expected to have a budget deficit in 1997 that complies
with Maastricht targets with a margin), but also Sweden has a large current account surplus and
the inflation forecasts are positive. Despite that, the krona has depreciated by 6 to 7 per cent in
effective terms since October last year.
How  should  monetary  policy  handle  such  a  situation?  We  can  use  ‘open-mouth
operations’  and  inform  the  markets  and  other  players  of  our  assessment  of  what  has  been
happening. Maybe this can influence developments in some measure. If the  krona’s  downward
trend cannot be stopped, it will eventually have an effect on demand -- something the Riksbank
has  to  take  into  account  when  the  instrumental  rates  are  decided.  Accordingly,  a  depreciating
exchange rate is an important factor that can affect the estimate of future inflation and thus the
direction of monetary policy.
Target Variable
To conclude, I intend to discuss a few issues that have to do with the design and
interpretation of the price stability objective. The line of argument I am going to take can hardly
be perceived as controversial. Even with  the general support for a price stability objective that
has been achieved, a number of questions of a more practical nature concerning how monetary
policy  should  be  implemented  remain.  Price  stability,  as  everyone  realizes,  may  be  defined  in
many ways, with somewhat different consequences for the execution of monetary policy.
When  the  index  for  measuring  inflation  is  chosen,  a  number  of  different
considerations have to be taken into account. The index has to be reasonably broad  and  give  a
picture  of  price  developments  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  It  is  an  advantage  if  it  is  also  well
established  and  regularly  published  with  a  short  time  lag.  In  addition,  it  is  desirable  that  the
index is seldom revised.  All these  factors  bear  out  the  suitability  of  the  consumer  price  index
(CPI)  .  Thus,  the  Riksbank’s  inflation  target  has  been  expressed  in  terms  of  a  change  in  the
official consumer price index.
BIS Review   56/1997
- 8 -
Figure 5
CPI an d  U n d e rlyin g In flatio n
Pe rce n tage  12-m o n th  ch an ge
66..00
55..00
44..00
33..00
22..00
11..00
00..00
--11..00
CCPP II
UUnn ddeerrll yy ii nn g  g  
ddoomm eess ttiic c 
iinn ffll aattii oonn
9292
9393
9494
9595
9696
9797
66..00
55..00
44..00
33..00
22..00
11..00
00..00
--11..00
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the R iksbank
One  problem  with  the  CPI  is  that  it  is  affected  by  temporary  influences  on
inflation. Such influences can be changes in indirect taxes and subsidies or the price of oil. To
the  extent  that  such  changes  only  have  an  initial  direct  effect  on  the  price  level  but  are  not
deemed  to  influence  the  future  rate  of  inflation,  they  should  not  precipitate  interest  rate
adjustments.
A  special  case  of  the  temporary  effects  is  what  happens  when  the  Riksbank
changes its policy and  raises  or  lowers  the  instrumental  rates.  This  affects  the  interest  costs  of
housing, thereby influencing the CPI. Hence, interest rate changes can make it more difficult to
reach the price stability objective in the short run.
The  CPI  has  varied  significantly  more  than  the  various  measures  of  underlying
inflation that the Riksbank produces (Figure 5). One example is 1996, when interest rates were
reduced rapidly. The CPI then fell much more than the underlying inflation, which was due to a
reduction  of  the  interest  costs  for  housing.  In  this  way,  annual  inflation  ended  up  somewhat
below the one per cent lower limit of the tolerance interval.  At the same time, all indicators of
underlying inflation show that it has edged downwards and has recently kept relatively stable in
the interval of 1-1.5 per cent.
The problem of temporary influences can be managed in different ways:
1.  One possibility is to clearly specify in advance which deviations from the CPI
are acceptable. This is the method used in New  Zealand.  It  could  lead  to  greater  transparency.
On the other hand, it would be less clear exactly how the valid objective is defined. In addition,
it  is  difficult  to  foresee  all  the  corrections  warranted  and  to  quantify  their  exact  price  effects.
Finally, it is a problem that corrections of this kind are so highly dependent on the central bank’s
own asessments, which can influence credibility negatively.
2.  A  closely  related  alternative  is  to  use  a  measure  of  underlying  inflation  as
target. Compared to the first alternative, it has the advantage of giving a clear definition of the
BIS Review   56/1997
- 9 -
objective. It would, however, lead to difficulties similar to those of alternative 1 with respect to
problems of defining and quantifying the effects of various disturbances.
3.  Another  possibility  is  to  supplement  the  CPI  by  one  or  several  measures  of
underlying inflation. In Canada the objective is expressed in terms of the CPI whereas a measure
of the underlying inflation--which descibes the process of inflation better--is the operative target.
In the long run, the final goal is reached since there is a clear link between it and the operative
target. A ”softer” variety on the same theme is to clarify how practical policy is influenced  by
underlying inflation, since it can often give a clearer picture of the process of inflation.
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  big  changes  which  occurred  in  the  repo  rate  and
thus in the interest costs of housing in recent years were linked to  the  transition  from  the  high
inflation  regime  of  the  seventies  and  eighties  to  a  regime  of  price  stability.  A  continued
confidence in the low inflation regime would imply that such large changes in the interest rate
component are less likely in the future.
It is evident from what the Riksbank has said earlier in various contexts that there
are  price  effects,  which  will  not  be  caught  within  the  tolerance  interval  and  which  we  do  not
need  to  counteract  fully  by  monetary  policy  measures.  Attempts  to  do  so  could  destabilise  the
economy  further,  partly  due  to  time  lags  in  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Consequently,  if
unexpected  disturbances  were  to  occur,  or  if  taxes  and  subsidies  were  to  be  changed,  for
example in connection with a major change in the tax system, we would have to accept that this
would  have  an  immediate  effect  on  the  price  level.  Temporary  deviations  from  the  targeted
inflation rate may therefore happen. What is important with respect to such deviations is to drive
inflation  back  to  the  target  within  the  horizon  where  monetary  policy  has  its  biggest  effect  on
price developments.
The possibility to achieve the inflation target is accordingly affected not only by
how the target variables are defined, but also by what time perspective is used when the policy is
evaluated  and  how  wide  the  applied  tolerance  level  is.  The  Riksbank  has  emphasized  that  one
should see the price stability objective in an annual perspective—nothing more precise than that.
As  to  the  width  of  the  band,  we  have  started  from  an  interval  of  +1  per  cent,  which  is  fairly
normal among countries with an inflation target.
Summary
The  policy  with  an  inflation  target  has  functioned  well  in  Sweden  and  in  other
countries that have chosen to work with an inflation target. Inflation has become low. In addition
an increased understanding of a policy directed at price stability has been created in Sweden as
well as in other countries with an inflation target. This is especially notew
orthy because many of the countries which now work with an inflation target are
the very same countries that earlier had problems with inflation.
When  monetary  policy  is  conducted  with  an  inflation  target,  production  and
employment  are  normally  stabilised  too.  For  example,  increased  demand  usually  implies  an
increased rate of inflation. When inflation forecasts indicate that a risk for inflation will exceed
the target, raising the instrumental rate is warranted, thereby also slowing down demand growth.
In  practice  the  room  for  an  active  stabilisation  policy  is  circumscribed  by  the
uncertainty  about  future  inflation.  Another  important  complication  relates  to  how  credible  the
policy  is.  Increased  credibility  of  monetary  policy  creates  more  room  for  both  rapidly  shifting
BIS Review   56/1997
- 10 -
policy  in  a  more  expansionary  direction  in  situations  of  weakening  demand  and  deferring
interest rate hikes. Measures to strengthen central bank independence should inter alia be seen in
this light.
How the exchange rate is to be managed within the framework of a policy with an
inflation  target  is  an  important  matter.  The  countries  with  inflation  targets  have  different
approaches. In all circumstances, it is important to assess how durable an exchange rate change
is  likely  to  be.  This  normally  implies  a  picture  of  what  caused  the  change.  Durable  changes
influencing the inflation forecast have to be taken into account when the instrumental rates are
set. Increased credibility of economic policy in general makes this problem easier to handle. The
higher the credibility, the smaller the exchange-rate fluctuations are likely to be.
The  question  of  how  the  target  is  formulated  and  interpreted  (for  example,  in
relation to the measures describing the underlying inflation process) is worth discussing. Several
factors  have  to  be  taken  into  account  when  the  target  variable  is  chosen.  First,  the  capacity  of
monetary policy exactly to forecast and control inflation in the very short run is small. Second,
the  economy  may  be  hit  by  disturbances  that  could  create  a  conflict  between  a  short-term
inflation target and an ambition to stabilise the real development. Third, the outcome of the CPI
is not a perfect indicator of the underlying inflation trend. This problem is handled in different
ways in countries having a price stabilization objective.
The Swedish monetary policy with a price stability objective has been successful
and seems well balanced in view of present inflation forecasts. However, this should not prevent
us  from  deepening  the  discussion  about  how  monetary  policy  is  conducted  against  the
background of the experiences in Sweden and other countries.
BIS Review   56/1997
