Mr.  Dai  looks  at  the  possibilities  of  strengthening  financial  co-operation
between  China  and  Hong  Kong  in  order  to  promote  economic  prosperity  and  stability
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Mr.  Dai  Xianglong,  at  the  Hong  Kong
Association of Banks’ Dinner on 13/11/96.
I would like to thank the Hong Kong Association of Banks for inviting me to Hong
Kong to meet with you and to attend this dinner function. Although this is my first visit to Hong
Kong since taking up my post in the central bank, we follow closely the economic developments
of Hong Kong. All of you have contributed to the prosperity of Hong Kong. I greatly appreciate
the wisdom and the spirit of the people of Hong Kong. They are industrious and always striving
for the better. Hong Kong’s success is partly attributable to the characteristics  of  its  people.  We
have good reasons to believe that through our joint efforts, Hong Kong will have an even better
future.
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  give  a  brief  description  of  the  current
situation of the economic and financial reforms in the mainland as well as the basic principles and
policies towards the financial relationship between China and Hong Kong after 1997. In addition,
I would also say something on co-operation and joint development between the financial sectors
of China and Hong Kong.
I. Mainland China’s economy is experiencing a stable development
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  financial  and  economic  conditions  of
China  which  is  a  hot  topic  for  discussion  among  professionals  from  the  Hong  Kong  financial
sector.  This  is  because  Hong  Kong’s  future  is  closely  linked  with  the  economic  and  financial
developments of China.
China’s  economy  began  to  pick  up  in  1992  with  a  dynamic  national  economy.
However, there was also hyper-inflation. During the latter half of 1993, the Chinese Government
began to adopt an appropriately tight monetary policy. The adoption of this policy means firstly,
price  increases  should  be  kept  at  a  level  lower  than  the  rate  of  economic  growth.  Secondly,  the
growth of money supply should be slightly above the sum of the rate of economic growth and the
target  rate  of  the  price  increase.  Thirdly,  indirect  monetary  instruments  should  be  used  more
frequently for relating money supply so that the economy will not be too volatile. Our efforts in
the  past  three  years  are  beginning  to  pay  off.  We  have  successfully  curbed  inflation  by  making
macro-economic adjustments.
Firstly,  the  growth  of  the  money  supply  has  slowed  down.  It  is  expected  that  the
total money supply at the end of this year will be 26% higher than the previous year. This growth
rate is 3.7% lower than the average annual growth rate during the period under the “Eighth Five-
Year Plan”.
Secondly,  price  increases  have  slackened  noticeably.  During  the  period  from
January to October, retail prices have risen by 6.4% as compared to the same period last year. It is
expected that the growth rate for the whole year will be around 6.5%.
Thirdly, the economy continues to grow at a relatively high rate. During the period
from January to September, GDP rose by 9.6%. It is anticipated that the annual growth rate will
exceed 9.5%.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 2 -
Fourthly,  our  foreign  reserves  continue  to  grow.  As  at  the  end  of  October,  our
foreign reserves reached US$ 98.8 billion. We are certain that our reserves will exceed US$ 100
billion by the end of the year. The trade surplus is estimated to be over US$ 100 billion this year.
There is also US$ 40 billion of foreign direct investment. The supply of foreign exchange exceeds
demand  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  renminbi  remains  stable.  Moreover,  the  renminbi  has
become  fully  convertible  in  the  current  account.  Our  experience  proves  that  we  are  right  in
adopting  an  appropriately  tight  financial  and  economic  policy.  Our  ability  in  performing
macro-economic  operations  has  improved  greatly  and  our  achievements  are  recognised
internationally.
Despite the foregoing, several major problems remain to be solved. The percentage
of financial revenues in GDP is still falling. The asset quality of banks still needs to be improved.
The basic elements of the agricultural sector remain relatively weak and it is unlikely to have any
improvement in the operational efficiency of state-owned enterprises in the short run.
In  view  of  the  current  economic  situation,  the  focus  of  economic  and  financial
reforms in the coming year will be placed on promoting the reform of the economic system and
changing  the  pattern  of  economic  growth.  We  will  continue  to  adopt  an  appropriately  tight
financial and monetary policy. Further efforts will be made to adjust the structure of the economy
so  as  to  foster  new  areas  of  economic  growth.  In  order  to  ensure  steady  growth  of  the  national
economy, efforts will also be made to develop domestic as well as overseas markets. Based on the
above considerations, it is desirable that next year’s target annual GNP growth rate should be set
at 8-9% while the retail price increase be contained at a level below 6%. In order to achieve these
targets, the People’s Bank of China is prepared to:
1.  Control  money  supply.  Our  preliminary  proposal  is  to  contain  the  increase  of
next year’s total money supply (M2) within the range of 23% to 25%.
2.  Adjust  the  credit  structure.  The  total  amount  of  loans  to  the  agricultural  sector
will be increased. Economic integration and the setting up of conglomerates will be encouraged.
Efforts will also be made to promote the development and sale of residential property.
3.  Conduct  monetary  operations.  Employ  more  frequently  monetary  policy
instruments  such  as  interest  rate  policy,  reserve  requirements  and  open  market  operations  to
regulate the money supply.
4.  Deepen  financial  reforms.  Reforms  of  state  banks  should  be  stepped  up.  New
commercial  banks  will  be  set  up.  The  policy  of  transforming  rural  credit  co-operatives  into
co-operative  financial  institutions  will  be  maintained.  Direct  financing  will  be  developed  in  a
prudent way with better management. In addition, the financial sector will continue to open up.
5.  Foster  risk  management.  Continue  the  rationalisation  of  financial  order  and
prevent and eliminate financial risks.
It is envisaged that China’s economy and society will continue to develop steadily
in  the  coming  years  and  objectives  embodied  in  the  “Ninth  Five-Year  Plan”  can  be  achieved.
China will enter the 21st century with a dynamic economy and society.
II. Basic principles and policies governing the financial relationship between mainland China and
Hong Kong after 1997
BIS Review   12/1997
- 3 -
As China and Hong Kong  have  different  currencies  and  financial  systems,  people
from Hong Kong as well as the international community are very much concerned with how the
principle  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  can  be  implemented  as  regards  financial  issues.  It  is
because the implementation of this principle has direct bearings on the prosperity and stability of
Hong Kong as well as the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre.
“The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
Republic  of  China”  lays  down  specific  provisions  relating  to  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an
international  financial  centre,  its  monetary  and  financial  policies,  the  status  of  the  Hong  Kong
dollar and the issuing arrangements, capital flows and the role of the Exchange Fund. Our national
leaders have reiterated on different occasions that the People’s Bank of China, which is the central
bank of the People’s Republic of China, should insist on implementing the “Basic Law” and the
principle of “one country, two systems”. We should also protect the financial relationship between
Hong  Kong  and  the  mainland  which  can  be  summarised  as  “one  country,  two  currencies,  two
monetary  systems  and  two  monetary  authorities”  within  a  sovereign  state  and  deal  with  issues
relating to this relationship in an appropriate manner.
At  the  IMF/World  Bank  Annual  Meeting  which  was  held  in  late  September  this
year,  I  stated  in  my  speech  our  principles  governing  the  financial  relationship  between  the
mainland and Hong Kong. Mr Chen Yuan, the Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China,
also presented these principles in a systematic manner at the Bank of England seminar which was
held  in  September  this  year.  Both  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority (HKMA) have been offered membership in the Bank for International Settlements. This
is a clear demonstration of the above principles and shows that the mutually independent financial
relationship between the mainland and Hong Kong are widely accepted by international financial
organisations.
Now  I  am  going  to  give  an  outline  of  the  main  issues  relating  to  the  financial
relationship between the mainland and Hong Kong after 1997.
Hong  Kong  will  continue  to  maintain  its  own  system  of  currency  issuance  and
management after 1997. The Hong Kong dollar and the renminbi will circulate as legal tender in
Hong Kong and the mainland respectively. Hong Kong’s existing note-issuing arrangements will
remain  unchanged.  Moreover,  China  supports  Hong  Kong’s  commitment  to  the  maintenance  of
the linked exchange rate system.
It  follows  from  the  two  mutually  independent  monetary  systems  of  the  mainland
and  Hong  Kong  that  the  two  monetary  authorities,  i.e.  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the
HKMA, will  also  be  mutually  independent.  The  HKMA  will  be  accountable  solely  to  the  Hong
Kong Government. The People’s Bank of China will not take the place of the HKMA and will not
set up any office in Hong Kong. The  People’s  Bank  of  China  will  strengthen  further  its  present
sound co-operation with the HKMA. The HKMA has made great contributions to the stability of
the local  currency  and  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  Such  efforts  by  the  HKMA  help
promote the prosperity and smooth transition of Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong Government will continue to supervise local financial institutions.
The  supervision  will  continue  to  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  Hong  Kong’s  laws  and
international rules and practices. mainland financial institutions in Hong Kong shall not enjoy any
privileges. They shall be regulated by the relevant supervisory authorities in Hong Kong.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 4 -
The Exchange Fund of Hong Kong shall be managed and controlled  by  the  Hong
Kong Government. The financial revenues of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall
be  used  exclusively  for  its  own  purposes  and  the  Chinese  Government  shall  not  levy  taxes  in
Hong Kong. Moreover, China will not draw on or resort to Hong Kong’s Exchange Fund or other
assets in any way and for any reason.
All financial transactions between the mainland and Hong Kong will be conducted
in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  practices  of  international  financial  activities.  Claims  and
liabilities between institutions from the mainland and those from Hong Kong will continue to be
regarded as external claims and liabilities. When participating in the Hong Kong market, Chinese
entities will have equal treatment as other international and local market participants.
Apart  from  the  above,  it  is  also  important  for  Hong  Kong  as  an  international
financial centre to continue to  develop  its  international  monetary  relations  and  participate  in  the
activities of international and regional financial institutions. There are therefore provisions in the
Joint  Declaration  and  the  Basic  Law  that  Hong  Kong  may,  on  its  own,  maintain  and  develop
financial  relations  with  other  countries,  regions  and  relevant  international  organisations  after
1997. The 1997 World Bank/IMF Annual Meeting will be held in Hong Kong just a few months
after China resumes the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong. This is a magnificent financial
event and I am confident that it will be successful.
III  The  strengthening  of  financial  co-operation  and  the  promotion  of  economic  prosperity  and
stability between the mainland and Hong Kong
Mainland China and Hong Kong have close financial links with each other.  Since
the  implementation  of  financial  reforms  and  the  open-door  policy,  such  links  have  been
strengthened  further.  It  is  necessary  to  further  enhance  such  a  mutually  beneficial  relationship
between the two places.
First of all, the mainland and Hong Kong should work together for the prosperity,
stability and smooth transition of Hong Kong. China’s commitment to the implementation of the
“one  country,  two  systems”  principle  is  increasingly  accepted  and  appreciated  by  the  people  of
Hong Kong and the international community. Worries and doubts about the future of Hong Kong
which emerged in the early 1980’s have largely subsided. We are pleased to note that the financial
situation in Hong Kong is heading towards a smooth transition. We are confident that Hong Kong
will enjoy financial stability before and after 1997. Even though there may be some fluctuations
in Hong Kong’s financial market,  we  believe  that  the  HKMA  is  fully  capable  of  handling  these
situations  satisfactorily.  If  necessary,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  will,  at  the  request  of  the
HKMA and in accordance with the Basic Law and market practices, offer support to the HKMA.
Financial stability in Hong Kong before and after 1997 is not only  essential  to  the  prosperity  of
Hong Kong and China but also to financial stability in the Asia-Pacific Region. We are confident
that the international financial community, including the central banks in the Asia-Pacific Region,
will be actively involved in the efforts to maintain Hong Kong’s financial stability.
Secondly,  the  two  places  should  work  closely  together  to  maintain  and  enhance
Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre. Hong Kong has some unique competitive
advantages in being an international financial centre in a number of aspects such as opportunities,
geographic location and people. I have made it clear to the international financial community on
many occasions that after China’s resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong, the status of Hong
Kong  as  an  international  financial  centre  will  not  be  undermined  but,  rather,  it  will  be  further
strengthened.  This  is  because  the  many  unique  advantages  which  Hong  Kong  enjoys  now  will
BIS Review   12/1997
- 5 -
continue to exist after 1997. There is also the Basic Law which guarantees that Hong Kong will
remain  unchanged.  More  importantly,  with  the  sustained,  rapid  and  healthy  growth  of  the
economy in China - the vast hinterland at the back of Hong Kong - numerous opportunities will
be  created  for  Hong  Kong’s  financial  sector.  All  these  are  favourable  conditions  for  the
maintenance  and  strengthening  of  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre.
Economic  developments  in  the  mainland  have  given  rise  to  strong  demand  for  funds  and  Hong
Kong will continue to be our major funding centre. We will strengthen our coordination and co-
operation  with  Hong  Kong  in  areas  such  as  the  development  of  markets  and  infrastructures  in
response  to  the  needs  of  financial  developments  in  both  places.  I  have  met  with  many  central
bankers  and  major  international  bankers  and  they  all  agreed  that  Hong  Kong  should  be  able  to
maintain  its  status  as  an  international  financial  centre  as  regards  the  future  relationship  between
Hong Kong and Shanghai. I think as a national economic centre, Shanghai’s financial status will
become  increasingly  important.  However,  it  will  not  be  possible  for  Shanghai  to  become  an
international financial centre in the longer term and it will not replace Hong Kong.
Thirdly, the mainland and Hong Kong should co-operate fully with each other so as
to promote prosperity and stability. Since the implementation of economic reforms and the open-
door policy, financial co-operation between the two places has been strengthened which, in turn,
helps  to  develop  economic  and  trading  ties.  At  present,  China  and  Hong  Kong  are  each  other’s
major  investment  and  trading  partner.  As  at  the  end  of  1995,  Hong  Kong’s  total  cumulative
investment in China reached US$ 78.6 billion, accounting for 58% of total foreign investment in
China. In 1995, 90% of the syndicated loans to China were arranged in Hong Kong and 90% of
the Chinese companies listed on overseas stock markets have their primary listing in Hong Kong.
The volume of import and export trade between the two places amounted to US$ 44.6 billion last
year, accounting for 15.9% of China’s total external trade. If Hong Kong’s entrepôt trade which
came from China is also taken into account, the figure reached US$ 124.1 billion, accounting for
34.1%  of  Hong  Kong’s  total  external  trade  in  that  year.  The  number  of  mainland  financial
institutions in Hong Kong is on the rise and vice versa. These institutions are going to provide a
whole range of financial services which are conducive to the continuous and stable development
of the economic relationship between the two places.
China  will  further  open  up  its  financial  markets.  This  includes  the  opening  up  of
more  districts,  the  gradual  relaxation  of  renminbi  business  and  the  gradual  introduction  of  the
investment banking mechanism. The Hong Kong financial sector will directly benefit from these
moves  since  they  will  offer  numerous  business  opportunities.  In  the  course  of  stepping  up  our
pace of financial reforms, we have to keep on learning from advanced international management
experience  and  to  provide  training  to  outstanding  personnel.  We  hope  that  the  financial
community in Hong Kong will provide us with assistance and support in these areas.
Before ending my speech, I would like to point out that the Hong Kong Association
of  Banks  has  contributed  a  lot  in  assisting  the  HKMA  to  ensure  the  financial  stability  of  Hong
Kong. I hope all of you will continue to give your support to the HKMA and play a more active
role in promoting economic and financial developments in Hong Kong and its smooth transition. I
would also like to announce that an association of mainland banks will be formed this year. I hope
that  the  two  banking  associations  will  strengthen  their  exchanges  and  co-operation  and  work
together for a more prosperous future.
A delegation from the Hong Kong Association of Banks will visit Beijing in a few
days. I would like to welcome the delegation on behalf of the People’s Bank of China. I will meet
with some of you again on that occasion. We can further exchange views on the strengthening of
co-operation between the banking sectors on the mainland and in Hong Kong.
BIS Review   12/1997
