Mr. Greenspan’s testimony before the  House  of  Respresentatives’  Commmittee  on
Banking  and  Financial  Services      Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  US
Federal Reserve System, Mr. Alan Greenspan, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services
of the US House of Representatives in Washington DC, on 13/11/97.
Recent  developments  in  world  finance  have  highlighted  growing  interactions  among
national  financial  markets.  The  underlying  technology-based  structure  of  the  international  financial
system has enabled us to improve materially the efficiency of the flows of capital and payment systems.
That improvement, however, has also enhanced the ability of the financial system to transmit problems in
one  part  of  the  globe  to  another  quite  rapidly.  Doubtless,  there  is  much  to  be  learned  from  the  recent
experience in Asia that can be applied to better the workings of the international financial system and its
support of international trade that has done so much to enhance living standards worldwide.
While  each  of  the  Asian  economies  differs  in  many  important  respects,  the  sources  of
their spectacular growth in recent years, in some cases decades, and the problems that have emerged are
relevant to a greater or lesser extent to nearly all of them.
Following the early post-World War II period, policies generally fostering low levels of
inflation and openness of their economies coupled with high savings and investment rates contributed to
a  sustained  period  of  rapid  growth,  in  some  cases  starting  in  1960s  and  1970s.  By  the  1980s  most
economies  in  the  region  were  expanding  vigorously.  Foreign  net  capital  inflows  grew,  but  until  recent
years were relatively modest. The World Bank estimates that net inflows of long-term debt, foreign direct
investment,  and  equity  purchases  to  the  Asia  Pacific  region  were  only  about  $25  billion  in  1990,  but
exploded to more than $110 billion by 1996.
A major impetus behind this rapid expansion was  the  global  stock  market  boom  of  the
1990s. As that boom progressed, investors in many industrial countries found themselves more heavily
concentrated in the recently higher valued securities of companies in the developed world, whose rates of
return, in many instances, had fallen to levels perceived as uncompetitive with the earnings potential in
emerging economies, especially in Asia. The resultant diversification induced a sharp increase in capital
flows into those economies. To a large extent, they came from investors in the United States and Western
Europe. A substantial amount came from Japan, as well, owing more to a search for higher yields than to
rising stock prices and capital gains in that country. The rising yen through mid-1995 also encouraged a
substantial  increase  in  direct  investment  inflows  from  Japan.  In  retrospect,  it  is  clear  that  more
investment monies flowed into these economies than could be profitably employed at modest risk.
I  suspect  that  it  was  inevitable  in  those  conditions  of  low  inflation,  rapid  growth,  andample  liquidity  that  much  investment  moved  into  the  real  estate  sector,  with  an  emphasis  by  both  the
public  and  private  sectors  on  conspicuous  construction  projects.  This  is  an  experience,  of  course,  not
unknown in the United States on occasion. These real estate assets, in turn, ended up as collateral for a
significant  proportion  of  the  assets  of  domestic  financial  systems.  In  many  instances,  those  financial
systems were less than robust, beset with problems of lax lending standards, weak supervisory regimes,
and inadequate capital.
Moreover, in most cases, the currencies of these economies were closely tied to the U.S.
dollar,  and  the  dollar’s  substantial  recovery  since  mid-1995,  especially  relative  to  the  yen,  made  their
exports  less  competitive.  In  addition,  in  some  cases,  the  glut  of  semiconductors  in  1996  suppressed
export growth, exerting further pressures on highly leveraged businesses.
However,  overall  GDP  growth  rates  generally  edged  off  only  slightly,  and  imports,
fostered by rising real exchange rates, continued to expand,  contributing  to  what  became  unsustainable
current account deficits in a number of these economies. Moreover, with exchange rates  seeming  to  be
solidly  tied  to  the  dollar,  and  with  dollar  and  yen  interest  rates  lower  than  domestic  currency  rates,  a
significant part of the enlarged capital inflows into these economies, in particular short-term flows, was
BIS Review   105/1997
- 2 -
denominated by the ultimate borrowers in foreign currencies. This put additional pressure on companies
to earn foreign exchange through exports.
The  pressures  on  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  mounted  as  foreign  investors  slowed  the
pace of new capital inflows, and domestic businesses sought increasingly to convert domestic currencies
into  foreign  currencies,  or,  equivalently,  slowed  the  conversion  of  export  earnings  into  domestic
currencies. The shifts in perceived future investment risks led to sharp declines in stock markets across
Asia, often on top of earlier declines or lackluster performances.
To  date,  the  direct  impact  of  these  developments  on  the  American  economy  has  been
modest, but it can be expected not to be negligible. U.S. exports to Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia,
and Malaysia (the  four  countries  initially  affected)  were  about  4  percent  of  total  U.S.  exports  in  1996.
However, an additional 12 percent went to Hong Kong,  Korea,  Singapore  and  Taiwan  (economies  that
have been affected more recently). Thus, depending on the extent of the inevitable slowdown in growth
in this area of the world, the growth of our exports will tend to be muted. Our direct foreign investment
in,  and  foreign  affiliate  earnings  reported  from,  the  economies  in  this  region  as  a  whole  have  been  a
smaller  share  of  the  respective  totals  than  their  share  of  our  exports.  The  share  is,  nonetheless,  large
enough to expect some drop-off in those earnings in the period ahead. In addition, there will be indirect
effects on the U.S. real economy from countries such as Japan that compete even more extensively with
the economies in the Asian region.
Particularly  troublesome  over  the  past  several  months  has  been  the  so-called  contagion
effect of weakness in one economy spreading to others as investors perceive, rightly or wrongly, similar
vulnerabilities.  Even  economies,  such  as  Hong  Kong,  with  formidable  stocks  of  international  reserves,
balanced  external  accounts,  and  relatively  robust  financial  systems,  have  experienced  severe  pressures.
One  can  debate  whether  the  turbulence  in  Latin  American  asset  values  reflects  contagion  effects  from
Asia,  the  influence  of  developments  in  U.S.  financial  markets,  or  home-grown  causes.  Whatever  the
answer,  and  the  answer  may  be  all  of  the  above,  this  phenomenon  illustrates  the  interdependencies  in
today’s world economy and financial system.
Perhaps  it  was  inevitable  that  the  impressive  and  rapid  growth  experienced  by  the
economies in the Asian region would  run  into  a  temporary  slowdown  or  pause.  But  there  is  no  reason
that  above-average  growth  in  countries  that  are  still  in  a  position  to  gain  from  catching  up  with  the
prevailing technology cannot persist for a very long time. Nevertheless, rapidly developing, free-market
economies  periodically  can  be  expected  to  run  into  difficulties  because  investment  mistakes  are
inevitable  in  any  dynamic  economy.  Private  capital  flows  may  temporarily  turn  adverse.  In  these
circumstances,  companies  should  be  allowed  to  default,  private  investors  should  take  their  losses,  and
government policies should be directed toward laying the macroeconomic and structural foundations for
renewed  expansion;  new  growth  opportunities  must  be  allowed  to  emerge.  Similarly,  in  providing  any
international financial assistance, we need to be mindful of the desirability of minimizing the impression
that international authorities stand ready to guarantee the external liabilities of sovereign governments or
failed  domestic  businesses.  To  do  otherwise  could  lead  to  distorted  investments  and  could  ultimately
unbalance the world financial system.
The recent experience in Asia underscores the importance of financially sound domestic
banking and other associated financial institutions. While the current turmoil has significant interaction
with  the  international  financial  system,  the  recent  crises  would  arguably  have  been  better  contained  if
long-maturity  property  loans  had  not  accentuated  the  usual  mismatch  between  maturities  of  assets  and
liabilities of domestic financial systems that were far from robust to begin with. Our unlamented savings
and loan crises come to mind.
These are trying days for economic policymakers in Asia. They must fend off domestic
pressures that seek disengagement from the world trading and financial system. The authorities in these
countries are working hard, in some cases with substantial assistance from the IMF, the World Bank, and
the Asian Development Bank, to stabilize their financial systems and economies.
BIS Review   105/1997
- 3 -
The  financial  disturbances  that  have  afflicted  a  number  of  currencies  in  Asia  do  not  at
this  point,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  threaten  prosperity  in  this  country,  but  we  need  to  work  closely  with
their leaders and the international financial community to assure that their situations stabilize. It is in the
interest  of  the  United  States  and  other  nations  around  the  world  to  encourage  appropriate  policy
adjustments, and where required, provide temporary financial assistance.
BIS Review   105/1997
