Mr.  Stals  considers  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  stabilising  the  business  cycle
during  the  pre-  and  post-election  period      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  South
Africa, Dr. Chris Stals, at the Annual Conference of the Bureau for Economic Research, in Cape Town,
on 7/11/97.
1. Introduction
In the implementation of monetary policy the Reserve Bank should not be influenced by
the  fact  that  an  election  will  take  place  in  South  Africa  in  May  1999.  The  reference  to  the  “pre-  and
post-election period” in the title of this address should therefore be regarded as coincidental. As always,
monetary policy should be guided by developments in financial aggregates such as the money supply and
In  contemporary  monetary  policy,  central  banks  are  normally  also  not  guided  by  the
objective  of  “stabilising  the  business  cycle”.  It  is  the  task  of  monetary  policy  to  promote  a  stable
financial  environment  at  all  times,  irrespective  of  the  current  phase  of  the  business  cycle.  There  is,
however, a definite relationship between developments in real  economic  activity  (“the  business  cycle”)
and  in  the  financial  aggregates  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  By  concentrating  on  the  trends  in  the
financial aggregates, and not in real economic activity, monetary policy, however, has a better chance of
maintaining  financial  stability  that  will,  in  the  longer  term,  be  conducive  for  sustainable  economic
growth at a higher level.
A former Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia once said the following:
“There was a recognition that (monetary) policy had to do more than stabilise the cycle:
the problem with an exclusive focus on the business cycle was that we may well stabilise the real side of
the  economy  without  stabilising  the  price  side  of  the  economy”.  (Governor  M.J.  Phillips,  When  the
Music Stops, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, July 1990).
A slowdown in the business cycle will normally also  include  a  slowdown  in  real  gross
domestic  expenditure,  incorporating  declines  in  the  growth  rates  of  both  consumption  and  investment
expenditure. Such slowdowns, however, may not yet at the time of the decline in expenditure justify the
relaxation  of  monetary  policy.  The  slowdown  in  real  expenditure  will  after  some  normal  time-lags  be
followed  by  a  decrease  in  the  demand  for  bank  credit,  which  will  also  lead  to  a  decline  in  the  rate  of
growth in the  money  supply.  Timing  monetary  policy  decisions  to  coincide  rather  with  changes  in  the
monetary aggregates and not with changes in real economic activity reduces the  danger  of  a  premature
re-stimulation of the demand for bank credit, and a too early injection of excessive amounts of additional
money. A monetary policy linked to changes in the business cycle could easily lead to the re-emergence
of the harmful stop-go policies so often pursued by central banks in the 1960s.
2. 1997 - A year of macroeconomic consolidation
Developments  in  the  South  African  economy  in  the  early  months  of  1996,  and
particularly the currency crisis of February last year, exposed certain weaknesses that were developing in
the South African economy at that time, and that needed early correction. The signs were already there in
the  first  half  of  1996  that  the  calendar  year  of  1997  would  turn  out  to  be  a  year  of  macroeconomic
consolidation.
Now, eighteen months later, we can look back with some satisfaction on the progress that
has been made in restoring overall economic equilibrium. Firstly, in the area of real economic activity,
equilibrium has been restored not only in the growth rates but also in the absolute levels of total gross
BIS Review   106/1997
- 2 -
domestic product  and  total  gross  domestic  expenditure.  After  increases  of  about  6  per  cent  per  year  in
1994  and  1995,  the  growth  in  gross  domestic  expenditure  slowed  down  to  3  per  cent  in  1996,  and  to
almost zero so far in 1997. The rate of growth in total production also slowed down marginally, but was
still maintained at a positive level of about 2 per cent in the first nine months of 1997.
These  developments  in  real  economic  activity  over  the  past  eighteen  months  were
reflected in an improvement in the overall balance of payments. The seasonally adjusted and annualised
rate of the current account deficit declined from R13 billion in the second quarter of 1996 to R3½ billion
in the second quarter of 1997. This improvement contributed to the adoption of a more positive attitude
by foreign investors and the net capital inflow increased from less than R4 billion in the full year of 1996
to  more  than  R16  billion  in  the  first  half  of  1997.  In  light  of  the  surplus  that  emerged  on  the  overall
balance  of  payments,  the  total  gross  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  held  by  the  banking  sector
increased by R14 billion from about R17 billion at the end of December 1996 to about R31 billion at the
end of June 1997.
Thirdly, the excessive rates of increase in the money supply and in bank credit extension
in  1995  and  1996  also  marginally  slowed  down  in  1997.  In  the  third  quarter  of  1997,  the  seasonally
adjusted  amount  of  the  money  supply  increased  at  an  annual  rate  of  12.2  per  cent,  and  that  of  total
domestic credit extension by the banking sector by only 6.3 per cent.
Finally,  in  the  consolidation  process,  South  Africa  succeeded  in  absorbing  the
unavoidable increase in inflation in the aftermath of the depreciation of last year. As was expected, the
rate of increase in consumer prices accelerated from 5.5 per cent in April 1996 to 9.9 per cent in April
1997 but then declined again to 8 per cent in September 1997. In the third quarter of 1997, inflation was
indeed  running  at  an  annualised  rate  of  6.6  per  cent,  back  on  track  again  towards  the  medium-term
objective of bringing the rate of inflation in South Africa more in line with the average rate of inflation in
the economies of our major international trading partners and competitors.
The  parts  played  by  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  and  in  interest  rates,  in
bringing about better equilibrium should not be underestimated. The average weighted value of the rand
against a basket of currencies first depreciated  by  about  23  per  cent  during  the  first  ten  months  of  last
year, before it appreciated again by 11 per cent from 31 October 1996 to 13 March 1997. Since then it
followed a more steady path and depreciated by about 10 per cent in the next seven months. At the end of
October  1997,  the  average  weighted  value  of  the  rand  was  only  marginally  down  from  its  level  of
31 December 1996.
Liquidity was initially drained  from  the  money  market  after  the  foreign  capital  inflows
subsided in February 1996, and the money market shortage gradually increased to reach a peak of more
than R10 billion in March 1997. Since then, the situation eased again to an average daily shortage of only
about  R5  billion  in  October  1997.  Interest  rates  obviously  followed  these  trends  and  increased  quite
sharply during the  course  of  1996  but  then  declined  again  in  1997.  The  rate  on  three  months  bankers’
acceptances  for  example  reached  a  peak  of  almost  17  per  cent  at  the  end  of  November  1996,  before
declining to 14.9 per cent at the end of October 1997.
The macroeconomic consolidation process therefore without any doubt created a sounder
and better balanced overall economic basis on which a next phase of more rapid economic expansion can
now develop.
3. The role of monetary policy
After the exchange rate crash of February 1996, the monetary policy approach was to let
market  forces  work  with  some  intervention  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  foreign  exchange  and  in  the
money markets, but  mainly  with  the  intention  of  supporting  an  orderly  adjustment  in  market  prices.  It
BIS Review   106/1997
- 3 -
was never the intention to try and fix the exchange rate of the rand at any predetermined artificial level,
neither did the Bank try to keep interest rates unrealistically low.
It was  furthermore  accepted  that,  after  the  relatively  large  depreciation  in  the  exchange
rate and taking account also of the “openness” of the South African economy, the rate of inflation would
rise. The challenge for monetary policy was, however, to constrain the rate of increase in inflation to a
first  round  effect  only,  and  to  prevent  prices  from  going  into  an  uncontrollable  and  perpetuating
inflationary spiral.
In  retrospect,  the  policy  seemed  to  have  worked  quite  well.  The  restrictive  monetary
policy, and particularly the rise in interest rates, were not received with unanimous support by all sectors
of  the  South  African  community.  Interest  rates,  however,  remain  one  of  the  main  disciplines  of  the
market  economy  and  countries  that  are  not  prepared  to  bear  the  effects  of  this  discipline  from  time  to
time  will  be  punished  by  the  markets.  This  basic  lesson  is  now  being  learned  again  by  a  number  of
countries  in  the  East  Asia  region  where  interest  rates  recently  soared  to  a  much  higher  level  than  ever
experienced by South Africa.
Now  that  the  overall  macroeconomic  consolidation  process  has  made  good  progress,
there are some impatient pressures building up on the Reserve Bank to relax monetary policy quickly and
decisively.  Some  of  these  pressures  are  still  based  on  the  now  defunct  Phillips  curve  or  an  assumed
trade-off  between  inflation  and  growth  --  an  argument  that  was  buried  in  most  countries  of  the  world
already  in  the  1980s  when  macroeconomic  policy  switched  the  emphasis  from  a  demand-management
approach  to  a  supply-side  solution.  The  rapid  expansion  of  communications  and  the  increase  in
electronically  driven  capacity  for  economic  analyses  further  contributed  to  the  more  effective
implementation of pre-empting expectations, and reduced the opportunity for central bankers to stimulate
economies in the short term by applying over-expansionary monetary policies.
The South African Reserve Bank now follows the lead of many other central banks in the
world to base monetary policy decisions on developments in financial or monetary aggregates, and  not
on  changes  in  real  economic  activity.  Indeed,  the  latest  fashion  is  for  central  banks,  together  with
governments, to target inflation more directly. Taking account of typical time-lags that exist between the
implementation of monetary policies and their eventual effect on prices, monetary policy adjustments are
based  on  the  expectation  of  what  the  rate  of  inflation  may  turn  out  to  be  twelve  to  eighteen  months
downstream. Reliable forecasting therefore has become as important for the monetary authorities as they
are for private sector operators in the markets. For this purpose, the familiar monetary aggregates such as
the money supply, bank credit extension, the level of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve and
changes  in  the  exchange  rate  provide  the  best  indicators  available  in  the  short  term  to  guide  monetary
policy decisions.
What will be important for the stance of monetary policy over the next year will not be
the  approaching  election  in  1999,  but  rather  current  developments  in  these  well-known  basic  financial
aggregates.  Apart  from  contending  with  the  after-effects  of  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  last  year,  the
major concern for the Reserve Bank recently has been the continuous increase at a high rate in the total
amount  of  bank  credit  extended  to  the  private  sector.  Over  the  past  few  months  there  has  been  a
significant  slowdown  in  the  annualised  rate  of  increase  in  bank  credit  extended  to  the  private  sector
which amounted to 21.2 per cent in the second quarter of 1997, before declining to 9.5 per  cent  in  the
third  quarter.  After  the  recent  downward  adjustment  in  the  financial  markets  in  South  Africa,  we  may
find  some  further  slowdown  in  the  rate  of  increase  in  bank  credit  extension,  to  reflect  more  truly  the
slowdown which already occurred in real economic activity.
Recent  events  in  the  international  currency  markets  proved  once  again  that  the
forecasting of possible future developments in financial aggregates can be very perilous. As South Africa
liberalises  its  financial  markets  further  and  as  the  South  African  financial  system  gets  more  integrated
into  an  extremely  volatile  international  environment,  the  hazards  of  forecasting  will  increase.  For  the
central bank, this unfortunately reduces the value of strictly defined monetary policy models, and makes
BIS Review   106/1997
- 4 -
the task of implementing policies more discretionary. Market participants prefer a monetary policy based
on  pre-announced  rules  and  want  to  be  in  a  position  where  they  can  pre-empt  important  changes  in
monetary policy for their own advantage, and for the sake of giving  good  advice  to  their  clients.  This,
however, is not possible in the present environment where unpredictable events in far-away places such
as Thailand can have profound influences on monetary developments in South Africa.
Forecasting  possible  developments  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  for  example,  must
not  only  take  account  of  developments  in  South  Africa,  but  also  of  possible  changes  in  the  cross
exchange rates of major currencies, developments in international capital markets, economic and political
developments  in  a  number  of  emerging  economies  and  a  multitude  of  other  possible  global
developments. As illustrated over the past year, changes in the effective exchange rate of the rand in turn
can have many effects on monetary policy decisions in South Africa. In this multi-complex environment
it is just unreasonable to expect of any governor of any central bank anywhere in the world to signal to
markets in advance what adjustments in interest rates or other monetary policies could be expected over
the next year.
4. A greater reliance on markets
In the situation, it is advisable to rely more on market forces for the necessary correction
of  imbalances  that  may  develop  from  time  to  time  in  the  macro  economy.  Markets  must  therefore  be
encouraged to become more flexible, more efficient and more responsive to changes in underlying supply
and demand conditions.
In the case of South Africa, three important changes will be introduced in the structure of
financial markets over the next few months:
   Firstly, the existing national payment, clearing and settlement system will be upgraded in March
1998 to pave the way for real-time on-line settlement of large transactions on a gross basis, and
for  the  daily  settlement  on  a  net  basis  of  other  (smaller)  transactions  between  banking
institutions.  This  versatile  new  system  will  provide  challenging  opportunities  for  the
development of a more active interbank funds market.
Secondly,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  introduce  a  new  system  for  providing  liquidity  to  banking
institutions  through  daily  repurchase  transactions  that  will  establish  a  floating  interest  rate  for
central bank accommodation.
Thirdly, the Department of Finance intends to introduce a new system for the primary sale of and
secondary  market  making  in  government  bonds  by  the  appointment  of  a  number  of  securities
dealers from the private banking sector to operate as authorised dealers on behalf of the Treasury.
These changes are all intended to serve the needs of more liberalised  and  free  financial
markets  in  South  Africa.  At  the  same  time,  they  should  open  up  the  way  for  further  exchange  control
relaxations  and  encourage  greater  integration  of  the  South  African  financial  markets  in  the  global
financial system.
5. Concluding remarks
Next  year  holds  the  prospects  for  being  an  interesting  one  for  the  South  African
economy.
 Firstly,  there  is  the  prospect  for  better  economic  growth  in  South  Africa,  following  upon  the
macroeconomic consolidation of the past year.
BIS Review   106/1997
- 5 -
  Secondly, important structural adjustments, particularly  in  the  financial  markets,  will  introduce
interesting new challenges for all participants in the markets.
Thirdly,  we  shall  have  to  contend  with  the  continuing  turmoil  in  the  international  currency
markets, and possibly also with the adverse effects of the El Nino phenomenon.
BIS Review   106/1997
