Mr. Thiessen’s remarks to the Canadian Club of Toronto   Notes for remarks
by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon Thiessen, to the Canadian Club of Toronto
in Toronto, on 1/12/97.
What can monetary policy do to help the economy reach its full potential?
Today,  we  meet  against  a  backdrop  of  some  uncertainty  in  the  international
economy. I would like to begin my remarks with an assessment of what the recent financial and
economic events in Asia could mean for Canada.
The nervousness and uncertainty that spread around the world in the wake of the
problems  in  Southeast  Asia  highlight  the  growing  interactions  among  national  economies  and
financial  markets.  The  events  in  Asia  also  underscore  how  crucial  prudent  macroeconomic
policies and sound financial sector management are to good economic performance.
The  measures  that  have  been  taken,  mainly  through  the  International  Monetary
Fund, are important first steps for the affected Asian economies in dealing with their problems. I
believe that these measures have helped to contain at least some of the potential spillover effects
to other countries and, thus, they are helping to settle global financial markets.
Canada’s  direct  trade  links  with  Southeast  Asia  are  not  large.  However,  those
with Japan and Korea are more important to us, and there are also potential effects on our other
trading  partners  that  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  problems  in  Asia  and  their  possible
implications for the world economy are probably the source of some of the recent softening in
world  commodity  prices.  Because  of  the  importance  of  commodities  to  Canada,  this  softening
has been a factor behind the recent weakness in our currency.
Our judgment at this stage is that the overall impact of these recent developments
on  Canada  does  not  look  likely  to  be  large.  However,  we  are  sensitive  to  the  fact  that  some
industries and regions will be affected more than others. I can assure you that we will continue
to  monitor  the  situation  very  closely,  in  view  of  the  uncertainty  that  remains  about  the  likely
outcome of events in Asia.
Even  with  this  uncertainty,  however,  recent  suggestions  that  there  is  a  risk  of
worldwide  deflation  strike  me  as  being  very  pessimistic.  Developments  in  Asia  will  slow
somewhat the pace of global economic expansion. But as long as the world’s largest economy,
the United States, is pressing against its capacity limits, with the possibility of upward pressure
on  its  inflation  rate,  the  risk  of  worldwide  deflation  looks  rather  remote.  Certainly,  from
Canada’s perspective, the U.S. economy is by far the most important influence.
I  would  now  like  to  turn  from  these  recent  events  and  talk  about  the  Bank  of
Canada’s longer-term strategy for monetary policy.
In any discussion of strategy, the place to start is with the objective. In conducting
monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  ultimate  objective  is  to  help  the  Canadian  economy
achieve its full potential. And that means more jobs and rising standards of living. I am sure that
all Canadians would agree that this is an appropriate objective.
BIS Review   113/1997
- 2 -
The Bank pursues this objective through a policy aimed at keeping inflation low
and stable. Today, I would like to explain why such a policy is the best way to achieve Canada’s
full economic potential and to extend the current expansion. In this connection, I will review the
recent U.S. experience in this area -- an experience that I find both relevant and instructive.
On the road to full economic potential
The performance of the Canadian economy over the past 25 years has been rather
disappointing.  The  economy  has  suffered  from  recurring  bouts  of  boom  and  bust,  and
unemployment  has  been  very  high.  The  growth  of  productivity  and,  thus,  the  improvement  in
our standard of living have been very gradual.
Canada  is  not  unique  in  this  respect.  Most  industrial  countries  have  shared  this
experience  to  varying  degrees.  And  that  includes  the  United  States.  Since  the  early  1990s,
however, the U.S. economy  has  performed  remarkably  well  and  substantially  better  than  other
industrial  economies.  That  country  has  enjoyed  a  solid,  six-and-a-half-year-long  economic
expansion.  Over  that  period,  employment  growth  has  averaged  2  per  cent  per  year.  The
unemployment  rate  has  declined  from  a  peak  of  8  per  cent  to  under  5  per  cent.  Household
incomes have risen by 2½ per cent a year (after correction for  inflation).  U.S.  businesses  have
become highly competitive, even in areas where prospects did not look all that good at the end
of the 1980s. What’s more, inflation has been on a declining path,  albeit  with  some  help  from
temporary factors (such as an appreciating U.S. dollar, declines in energy prices, and the slack in
overseas economies).
Why has the U.S. economy done so well? Are there any lessons here for Canada?
Lessons from the U.S. experience
There  are,  undoubtedly,  a  number  of  factors  behind  this  striking  U.S.
performance. But, to me, there are at least two that seem to have been particularly important: the
early  adjustment  of  that  economy  to  changing  technology  and  globalization;  and  the  credible,
low-inflation policy pursued by the U.S. central bank.
The  Americans  started  adjusting  in  earnest  in  the  1980s  to  the  new  realities  of
heightened global competition and rapidly changing technology. As  a  result,  they  are  ahead  of
most  other  industrial  countries  on  that  score.  And,  with  improving  productivity  and  highly
competitive  enterprises  in  a  wide  range  of  sectors,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  able  to  expand
rapidly and to support rising employment on a sustained basis.
But  taking  full  advantage  of  that  improved  potential  for  economic  growth  has
required  a  climate  of  confidence  in  monetary  policy.  Bringing  inflation  down  in  a  credible
manner  has  helped  to  create  that  climate.  And  because  of  this,  the  U.S.  monetary  authorities
have been in a position to encourage the economy to test its full capacity to produce, to create
jobs,  and  to  support  rising  incomes.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  in  an  environment  of
high inflation and high inflation expectations. In such an environment, businesses, workers, and
investors  respond  swiftly  to  any  signs  of  demand  pressures  by  pushing  up  prices,  wages,  and
interest  rates.  And  this  has  the  effect  of  undermining  the  sustainability  of  the  economic
expansion.
BIS Review   113/1997
- 3 -
What precisely did the U.S. Federal Reserve do? In the early 1990s, problems in
the banking sector were restraining the economic recovery in that country by limiting access to
financing and undermining confidence. To counter these “headwinds”, as Alan Greenspan called
them, the Fed responded by providing a high degree of monetary stimulus. Then, in early 1994,
when it became evident that  the  economy  had  started  to  pick  up  steam  and  move  ahead  on  its
own, the Fed began withdrawing the excess monetary stimulus.
This timely, pre-emptive action to moderate monetary stimulus accomplished two
things.  First,  it  sent  a  strong  reassuring  signal  to  investors,  businesses,  and  consumers  that  the
Fed would not let inflation break out as the economy surged ahead. Indeed, after short-term rates
went  up  in  1994-95,  long-term  rates  declined,  as  investors  became  more  confident  that  the
economic  expansion  would  remain  non-inflationary  and,  thus,  sustainable.  Second,  the
pre-emptive action helped avoid the need for stronger, more disruptive, tightening later on.
The  less-accommodative  monetary  conditions  that  have  prevailed  since  then
certainly have not stopped the U.S. economic expansion dead in its tracks, as some had feared at
the time. On the contrary, the expansion has continued at a healthy pace. And with widespread
belief  in  the  Fed’s  commitment  to  low  inflation,  there  has  been  some  room  to  explore  the
possibility  that  capacity  has  improved.  As  a  result,  the  Fed  has  been  able  to  set  monetary
conditions that have encouraged output and employment to expand at rates that in the past could
not  have  been  sustained.  And  both  unemployment  and  inflation  have  come  down  at  the  same
time.
To  be  sure,  with  tightening  labour  markets,  there  is  some  risk  of  an  increase  in
inflation  pressures  in  the  United  States.  Thus,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  Fed
may  have  to  raise  interest  rates  somewhat  further  at  some  point.  But  any  future  increases  in
interest  rates  should  not  have  to  be  large  and  may  be  conditioned  by  the  implications  of  the
recent international developments I mentioned earlier.
What parallels can we find in all this for Canada?
The recent Canadian experience
The adjustment in Canada to the forces of technological change and globalization
has run behind that in the United States. Because the restructuring was delayed, Canada had to
respond in a more dramatic fashion. We had to do more and do it faster. More importantly, our
fiscal  situation  was  more  precarious  and  required  stronger  medicine.  As  a  result,  we  ended  up
with more pronounced short-run disruptions and more catching up to do in terms of output and
employment.
These difficult but necessary adjustments in the private and public sectors of our
economy were Canada’s parallel to the U.S. headwinds.
To  compensate  for  the  direct  impact  of  these  adjustments,  as  well  as  for  their
indirect effects on consumer confidence, the economy needed a substantial amount of monetary
support.  The  Bank  of  Canada  was  able  to  provide  such  support  once  investor  concerns  about
Canada’s  fiscal  and  political  problems  began  to  subside  in  late  1995.  We  did  that  by
systematically  reducing  interest  rates  over  the  next  year  or  so.  As  in  the  United  States  in
1991-92, short-term rates in Canada were brought down during 1995-96 from over 6 per cent to
about 3 per cent -- their lowest level in over 30 years. At the same time, the Canadian dollar has
BIS Review   113/1997
- 4 -
been relatively low, providing support to the export sector. When we put interest rates  and  the
exchange  rate  together  --  as  we  must  in  order  to  correctly  gauge  the  amount  of  monetary
stimulus -- it is clear that monetary conditions in Canada have been exceptionally stimulative for
well over a year.
This was entirely appropriate while our economy was still struggling against  the
headwinds  of  private  and  public  sector  restructuring.  To  return  to  my  automobile  analogy  of
recent speeches, we needed to put the “pedal to the metal” to buck those headwinds and get the
economy going.
The monetary stimulus has done its job. The economy has  been  gathering  speed
and absorbing unused capacity. We now expect it to have expanded by about 4 per cent from the
end of 1996 to the end of 1997. The diminishing effects of fiscal restraint, along with evidence
of  continued  strong  demand,  output,  and  money  growth,  suggest  another  year  of  healthy
expansion in 1998.
Thus, in terms of the economic cycle, we are about where the Americans were in
1994.
What should the role of monetary policy be in the period ahead?
As we move towards full capacity over the next year or so, the task for monetary
policy will be to try to ensure that this process goes smoothly and that inflationary pressures do
not re-emerge.
I want to make it clear that the Bank does not see an overheated economy at this
point, nor a threat of inflation lurking around the corner. There is still unused capacity and, thus,
room for strong expansion for some time yet. But, with monetary policy actions taking between
one to two years to have their full effects on the economy, we always have to look ahead. And
we  have  to  ask,  What  sort  of  monetary  support  will  the  economy  need  at  that  point?  The
measures -- especially the fiscal measures -- needed to restructure our economy will be largely in
place  by  then.  Thus,  monetary  policy  will  no  longer  need  to  compensate  for  these  sources  of
restraint  on  demand.  By  gradually  easing  off  on  the  monetary  gas  pedal,  we  can  steady  our
economy at a safe cruising speed down the road.
As we look still further down the road, we will face other important issues. How
well will our economy perform once it reaches full capacity? How rapid can growth be and still
be sustainable? And how far can we reduce our unemployment rate?
Given  the  complexity  of  the  factors  affecting  economic  performance,  it  is  not
possible  to  make  precise  predictions  on  these  matters.  Much  will  depend  on  the  flexibility,
efficiency, and productivity of Canadian enterprises; on how effectively new technology is used;
on the skills, training, and adaptability of our labour force; on our ability to control costs; and on
the initiative and ability of Canadian businesses to develop new products and new and expanded
foreign markets for those products.
Still, I believe that the restructuring that has taken place in the Canadian economy
provides good reason to think that our potential to grow and create jobs is the best we have had
in  years.  I  also  believe  that  continued  credible  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  have  an  important
role to play.
BIS Review   113/1997
- 5 -
The best contribution monetary policy can make towards achieving that potential
is to ensure that the economic expansion remains sustainable over the medium term.
As we have learned over the past 25 years, a sustained expansion is not possible
unless we can avoid a resurgence  of  inflation  and  the  painful  cycles  of  boom  and  bust  that  go
with it. Thus, the challenge for monetary policy will be to set monetary conditions at levels that
allow the economy to expand at a pace that makes full use of its production capacity and at the
same time preserves low inflation.
It is by conducting monetary policy prudently during  the  upswing  that  the  Bank
can  assure  Canadians  that  inflation  will  not  break  out  when  the  economy  begins  to  operate  at
levels that push against capacity limits. If we succeed in providing that confidence, we will then
have the flexibility that will allow us to carefully explore the limits of growth and employment
without immediately putting the economic expansion at risk.
Concluding remarks
Let me summarize my main messages to you today.
The extraordinary monetary stimulus of the recent past has accomplished its task.
It  has  supported  the  economy  through  a  period  of  difficult  but  necessary  restructuring.  As  the
impact  of  this  restructuring  subsides  and  our  economy  enters  a  phase  of  self-sustaining
expansion, we will no longer need the same amount of monetary stimulus.
Because the economy takes time to respond to monetary policy actions, the Bank
has  to  focus  on  the  future.  This  means  taking  steps  early  to  ensure  that  we  will  reach  full
capacity at a sustainable cruising speed.
Of course, projections of future economic trends need constant reassessment. And
that  is  particularly  true  at  a  time  of  nervous  financial  markets  and  uncertainty  about  the
implications  that  events  in  Asia  may  have  for  the  world  economy.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  Bank
continues to monitor the current global situation carefully.
Aside  from  any  complications  that  could  arise  from  a  prolonged  period  of
international instability, the Canadian economy in the next year or so should absorb the unused
capacity that we now see. At that point,  we  will  begin  to  see  concrete  evidence  of  the  kind  of
payoffs we are going to get from the economic restructuring process we have been through.
With low inflation and a sound fiscal position, the Canadian economy is now in a
better  position  than  it  has  been  for  years  to  weather  the  impact  of  unexpected  international
developments and to make progress in generating higher incomes and employment.
BIS Review   113/1997
