Mr.  Greenspan's  testimony  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  of  the  US
Congress      Testimony  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan
Greenspan, before the Joint Economic Committee of the US Congress in Washington DC on 29/10/97.
We meet against the background of considerable turbulence in world financial  markets,
and I shall address the bulk of my remarks to those circumstances.
We need to assess these developments against the  backdrop  of  a  continuing  impressive
performance of the American economy in recent months. Growth appears  to  have  remained  robust  and
inflation  low,  and  even  falling,  despite  an  ever  tightening  labor  market.  Our  economy  has  enjoyed  a
lengthy  period  of  good  economic  growth,  linked,  not  coincidentally,  to  damped  inflation.  The  Federal
Reserve  is  dedicated  to  contributing  as  best  it  can  to  prolonging  this  performance,  and  we  will  be
watching economic and financial market developments closely and evaluating their implications.
Even after the sharp rebound around the world in the past twenty-four hours, declines in
stock markets in the United States and elsewhere have left investors less wealthy than they were a week
ago  and  businesses  facing  higher  equity  cost  of  capital.  Yet,  provided  the  decline  in  financial  markets
does not cumulate, it is quite conceivable that a few years hence we will look back at this episode, as we
now look back at the 1987 crash, as a salutary event in terms of its implications for the macroeconomy.
The  1987  crash  occurred  at  a  time  when  the  American  economy  was  operating  with  a
significant  degree  of  inflationary  excess  that  the  fall  in  market  values  arguably  neutralized.  Today’s
economy,  as  I  have  been  suggesting  of  late,  has  been  drawing  down  unused  labor  resources  at  an
unsustainable  pace,  spurred,  in  part,  by  a  substantial  wealth  effect  on  demand.  The  market’s  net
retrenchment of recent days will tend to damp that impetus, a development that should help to prolong
our six-and-a-half-year business expansion.
As  I  have  testified  previously,  much  of  the  stock  price  gain  since  early  1995  seems  to
have reflected upward revisions  of  long-term  earnings  expectations,  which  were  implying  a  continuing
indefinite  rise  in  profit  margins  from  already  high  levels.  I  suspect  we  are  experiencing  some  scaling
back  of  the  projected  gains  in  foreign  affiliate  earnings,  and  investors  probably  also  are  revisiting
expectations of domestic earnings growth. Still, the foundation  for  good  business  performance  remains
solid.  Indeed,  data  on  our  national  economy  in  recent  months  are  beginning  to  support  the  notion  that
productivity growth, the basis for increases in earnings, is beginning to pick up.
I also suspect earnings expectations and equity prices in the United States were primed to
adjust.  The  currency  crises  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  declines  in  equity  prices  there  and  elsewhere  do
have some direct effects on U.S. corporate earnings, but not enough to explain the recent behavior of our
financial  markets.  If  it  was  not  developments  in  Southeast  Asia,  something  else  would  have  been  the
proximate cause for a re-evaluation.
While productivity growth does appear to have picked up in the last six months, as I have
pointed out in the past, it likely is overly optimistic to assume that the dimension of any acceleration in
productivity will be great enough and persistent enough to close, by itself, the gap between an excess of
long-term  demand  for  labor  and  its  supply.  It  will  take  some  time  to  judge  the  extent  of  a  lasting
improvement.
Regrettably, over the last year the argument for the so-called  new  paradigm  has  slowly
shifted from the not unreasonable notion that productivity is in the process of accelerating, to a less than
credible view, often implied rather than stated, that we need no longer be concerned about the risk that
inflation can rise again. The Federal Reserve cannot afford to take such a complacent view of our price
prospects. There is much that is encouraging in the recent performance of the American economy, but, as
I  have  often  mentioned  before,  fundamental  change  comes  slowly  and  we  need  to  evaluate  the
prospective balance of supply and demand for various productive resources in deciding policy.
BIS Review   98/1997
- 2 -
Recent  developments  in  equity  markets  have  highlighted  growing  interactions  among
national  financial  markets.  The  underlying  technology-based  structure  of  the  international  financial
system has enabled us to improve materially the efficiency of the flows of capital and payment systems.
That improvement, however, has also enhanced the ability of the financial system to transmit problems in
one  part  of  the  globe  to  another  quite  rapidly.  The  recent  turmoil  is  a  case  in  point.  I  believe  there  is
much to be learned from the recent experience in Asia that can be applied to better the workings of the
international  financial  system  and  its  support  of  international  trade  that  has  done  so  much  to  enhance
living standards worldwide.
While  each  of  the  Asian  economies  differs  in  many  important  respects,  the  sources  of
their  spectacular  growth  in  recent  years,  in  some  cases  decades,  and  the  problems  that  have  recently
emerged are relevant to a greater or lesser extent to nearly all of them.
Following the early post-World War II period, policies generally fostering low levels of
inflation and openness of their economies coupled with high savings and investment rates contributed to
a  sustained  period  of  rapid  growth,  in  some  cases  starting  in  1960s  and  1970s.  By  the  1980s  most
economies  in  the  region  were  expanding  vigorously.  Foreign  net  capital  inflows  grew,  but  until  recent
years were relatively modest. The World Bank estimates that net inflows of long-term debt, foreign direct
investment,  and  equity  purchases  to  the  Asia  Pacific  region  were  only  about  $25  billion  in  1990,  but
exploded to more than $110 billion by 1996.
A major impetus behind this rapid expansion was the  global  stock  market  boom  of  the
1990s. As that boom progressed, investors in many industrial countries found themselves more heavily
concentrated in the recently higher valued securities of companies in the developed world, whose rates of
return, in many instances, had fallen to levels perceived as uncompetitive with the earnings potential in
emerging economies, especially in Asia. The resultant diversification induced a sharp increase in capital
flows into those economies. To a large extent, they came from investors in the United States and Western
Europe. A substantial amount came from Japan, as well, owing more to a search for higher yields than to
rising stock prices and capital gains in that country. The rising yen through mid-1995 also encouraged a
substantial  increase  in  direct  investment  inflows  from  Japan.  In  retrospect,  it  is  clear  that  more
investment monies flowed into these economies than could be profitably employed at modest risk.
I  suspect  that  it  was  inevitable  in  those  conditions  of  low  inflation,  rapid  growth  and
ample  liquidity  that  much  investment  moved  into  the  real  estate  sector,  with  an  emphasis  by  both  the
public  and  private  sectors  on  conspicuous  construction  projects.  This  is  an  experience,  of  course,  not
unknown in the United States on occasion. These real estate assets, in turn, ended up as collateral for a
significant  proportion  of  the  assets  of  domestic  financial  systems.  In  many  instances,  those  financial
systems were less than robust, beset with problems of lax lending standards, weak supervisory regimes,
and inadequate capital.
Moreover, in most cases, the currencies of these economies were closely tied to the U.S.
dollar,  and  the  dollar’s  substantial  recovery  since  mid-1995,  especially  relative  to  the  yen,  made  their
exports  less  competitive.  In  addition,  in  some  cases,  the  glut  of  semiconductors  in  1996  suppressed
export growth, exerting further pressures on highly leveraged businesses.
However,  overall  GDP  growth  rates  generally  edged  off  only  slightly,  and  imports,
fostered by rising real exchange rates, continued to expand, contributing  to  what  became  unsustainable
current account deficits in a number of these economies. Moreover, with exchange rates seeming  to  be
solidly  tied  to  the  dollar,  and  with  dollar  and  yen  interest  rates  lower  than  domestic  currency  rates,  a
significant part of the enlarged capital inflows, into these economies, in particular short-term flows, was
denominated by the ultimate borrowers in foreign currencies. This put additional pressure on companies
to earn foreign exchange through exports.
BIS Review   98/1997
- 3 -
The  pressures  on  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  mounted  as  foreign  investors  slowed  the
pace of new capital inflows, and domestic businesses sought increasingly to convert domestic currencies
into  foreign  currencies,  or,  equivalently,  slowed  the  conversion  of  export  earnings  into  domestic
currencies. The shifts in perceived future investment risks led to sharp declines in stock markets across
Asia, often on top of earlier declines or lackluster performances.
To  date,  the  direct  impact  of  these  developments  on  the  American  economy  has  been
modest, but it can be expected not to be negligible. U.S. exports to Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia,
and Malaysia (the four countries initially affected) were about four percent of total U.S. exports in 1996.
However, an additional 12 percent went to Hong Kong, Korea,  Singapore  and  Taiwan  (economies  that
have been affected more recently). Thus, depending on the extent of the inevitable slowdown in growth
in this area of the world, the growth of our exports will tend to be muted. Our direct foreign investment
in,  and  foreign  affiliate  earnings  reported  from,  the  economies  in  this  region  as  a  whole  have  been  a
smaller  share  of  the  respective  totals  than  their  share  of  our  exports.  The  share  is,  nonetheless,  large
enough to expect some drop-off in those earnings in the period ahead. In addition, there may be indirect
effects on the U.S. real economy from countries such as Japan that compete even more extensively with
the economies in the Asian region.
Particularly  troublesome  over  the  past  several  months  has  been  the  so-called  contagion
effect of weakness in one economy spreading to others as investors perceive, rightly or wrongly, similar
vulnerabilities.  Even  economies,  such  as  Hong  Kong,  with  formidable  stocks  of  international  reserves,
balanced external accounts and relatively robust financial systems, have experienced severe pressures in
recent  days.  One  can  debate  whether  the  recent  turbulence  in  Latin  American  asset  values  reflect
contagion  effects  from  Asia,  the  influence  of  developments  in  U.S.  financial  markets,  or  home-grown
causes. Whatever the  answer,  and  the  answer  may  be  all  of  the  above,  this  phenomenon  illustrates  the
interdependencies in today’s world economy and financial system.
Perhaps  it  was  inevitable  that  the  impressive  and  rapid  growth  experienced  by  the
economies in the Asian region would run  into  a  temporary  slowdown  or  pause.  But  there  is  no  reason
that  above-average  growth  in  countries  that  are  still  in  a  position  to  gain  from  catching  up  with  the
prevailing technology cannot persist for a very long time. Nevertheless, rapidly developing, free-market
economies  periodically  can  be  expected  to  run  into  difficulties  because  investment  mistakes  are
inevitable  in  any  dynamic  economy.  Private  capital  flows  may  temporarily  turn  adverse.  In  these
circumstances,  companies  should  be  allowed  to  default,  private  investors  should  take  their  losses,  and
government policies should be directed toward laying the macroeconomic and structural foundations for
renewed  expansion;  new  growth  opportunities  must  be  allowed  to  emerge.  Similarly,  in  providing  any
international financial assistance, we need to be mindful of the desirability of minimizing the impression
that international authorities stand ready to guarantee the liabilities of failed domestic businesses. To do
otherwise could lead to distorted investments and could ultimately unbalance the world financial system.
The recent experience in Asia underscores the importance of financially sound domestic
banking and other associated financial institutions. While the current turmoil has significant interaction
with  the  international  financial  system,  the  recent  crises  would  arguably  have  been  better  contained  if
long-maturity  property  loans  had  not  accentuated  the  usual  mismatch  between  maturities  of  assets  and
liabilities of domestic financial systems that were far from robust to begin with. Our unlamented savings
and loan crises come to mind.
These are trying days for economic policymakers in Asia. They must fend off domestic
pressures that seek disengagement from the world trading and financial system. The authorities in these
countries are working hard, in some cases with substantial assistance from the IMF, and the World Bank,
and the Asian Development Bank, to stabilize their financial systems and economies.
The  financial  disturbances  that  have  afflicted  a  number  of  currencies  in  Asia  do  not  at
this  point,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  threaten  prosperity  in  this  country,  but  we  need  to  work  closely  with
their leaders and the international financial community to assure that their situations stabilize. It is in the
BIS Review   98/1997
- 4 -
interest  of  the  United  States  and  other  nations  around  the  world  to  encourage  appropriate  policy
adjustments, and where required, provide temporary financial assistance.
BIS Review   98/1997
