Mr. Camdessus considers the lessons  from  Southeast  Asia      Remarks  by  the
Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  M.  Michel  Camdessus,  at  a  press
briefing in Singapore, on 13/11/97.
How  could  events  in  Southeast  Asia  unfold  as  they  did,  after  so  many  years  of
outstanding  performance?  We  have  a  fairly  clear  analysis  of  what  happened  in  Thailand.  The
more difficult question is how the crisis spread so quickly to other economies in the region. I’m
not sure we have the full picture yet,  but  let  me  give  you  my  perspective  on  the  causes  of  the
crisis and where we go from here.
I. How could it happen?
Certainly, the Thai crisis did not strike out of the clear blue sky. On the contrary,
there  were  numerous  signs  of  a  gathering  storm.  Macroeconomic  indicators  pointed  to
substantial  imbalances:  substantial  real  exchange  rate  appreciation;  a  marked  slowdown  in
export  growth;  a  persistently  large  current  account  deficit  financed  increasingly  by  portfolio
inflows, including a substantial amount of short-term capital; and rising external debt.
These  problems,  in  turn,  exposed  other  weaknesses  in  the  Thai  economy,
including substantial, unhedged foreign currency-denominated borrowing by the private sector,
an  inflated  domestic  property  market,  and  a  weak  and  over-exposed  banking  system.  Markets
issued  their  own  warnings  in  the  form  of  declining  equity  prices  and  mounting  exchange  rate
pressure,  as  doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  policies  grew.  And  as  you  know,  the  Fund  also
stressed these problems and pressed for urgent measures in a continuous dialogue with the Thai
authorities.
It  was,  of  course,  difficult  for  the  authorities  in  Thailand  and  elsewhere  in  the
region  to  recognize,  after  so  many  years  of  outstanding  macroeconomic  performance,  that
serious  underlying  deficiencies  could  seriously  jeopardize  their  track  record.  This  certainly
contributed to the delay in taking the necessary corrective action. And at last, in the absence of
convincing policy action, the storm broke.
We  all  have  been  troubled  by  developments  in  the  Thai  economy,  both  because
they have been so costly for Thailand and its neighbors and because they were so  preventable.
But  at  least  their  origins  are  by  and  large  clear.  What  is  less  evident,  and  therefore  more
unsettling  to  all  who  are  trying  to  make  sense  of  broader  regional  developments,  is  how  the
crisis  spread  as  it  did  to  economies  such  as  Indonesia,  Malaysia  and  the  Philippines,  where
current account deficits were  generally  smaller  and  foreign  direct  investment  more  substantial.
Although it may be some time yet before we  have  the  complete  answer  to  this  question,  some
elements of the explanation are becoming clear.
Part of the explanation lies in the extent to which developments in Thailand have
affected conditions in neighboring countries. For example, in expectation that the depreciation of
the baht would erode the competitiveness of Thailand’s trade competitors, their currencies also
weakened. And as these currency slides acquired an almost self-perpetuating character, the debt
service costs of the domestic private sector increased. Uncertainty about how far these currencies
would  slide  and  how  much  debt  service  costs  would  increase  encouraged  a  rush  to  hedge
external liabilities that only intensified exchange rate and interest rate pressures.
BIS Review   111/1997
- 2 -
Another factor is that problems in the Thai economy prompted markets to take a
closer look at the risks in other countries. And what they saw -- to different degrees in different
places -- were  many  of  the  same  problems  affecting  Thailand:  among  them,  overvalued  real
estate  markets,  weak  and  over-extended  banking  sectors,  poor  prudential  supervision,  and
substantial private short-term borrowing in foreign currency. Moreover, after Thailand, markets
began  to  look  more  critically  at  weaknesses  they  had  previously  considered  minor,  or  at  least
manageable in an orderly way, given time.
I see two other factors that hastened the stampede: one, the lack of transparency,
and  hence  the  increased  uncertainty,  about  government  and  central  bank  operations,  about  the
true state of financial sectors, about the links between banks, industry, and government and the
impact  these  links  might  have  on  economic  policy;  and  two,  the  controls -- and  threat  of
controls -- on market activity. Given the tendency of financial  markets  participants  to  run  with
the  herd,  this  was  a  sure-fire  way  to  send  the  herd  scrambling  for  safer  pastures  and  set  back
efforts to restore confidence.
II. What lessons should we draw from all of this?
The  first  lesson  is  the  most  obvious  one:  the  necessity  of  taking  early  action  to
correct  macroeconomic  imbalances  before  they  precipitate  a  crisis.  This  did  not  happen  in
Thailand,  despite  timely  and  vigorous  warnings.  On  the  contrary,  policymakers  attacked  the
symptom of the crisis, the pressure on the baht, accumulating large  reserve  losses  and  forward
foreign  exchange  liabilities  in  the  process.  This,  together  with  delays  in  addressing  Thailand’s
severe  financial  sector  problems  and  lingering  political  uncertainties,  clearly  contributed  to  a
deepening of the crisis and its spread to other economies in the region.
The second lesson is that other countries can find that their vulnerability to crises
in other markets is greater than economic fundamentals would suggest. Consequently, they need
to  take  pre-emptive  actions  to  strengthen  their  policies.  Where  might  such  action  be  needed?
Several suggestions come to mind:
    one, maintaining an appropriate exchange rate and exchange rate regime. Clearly, there is no
single  “right”  choice,  but  more  flexible  exchange  rates  can  help  provide  early  and  visible
signals of the need for policy adjustments and are less likely to invite  reckless  behavior  on
the part of borrowers and lenders. But regardless of the exchange rate arrangement chosen,
appropriate macroeconomic policies are essential to ensure its success;
two, maintaining a proper policy mix -- among other reasons -- so that high domestic interest
rates do not damage the domestic economy, attract excessive amounts of short-term capital,
or preclude further monetary tightening if market conditions require; indeed, it is important
to  keep  the  option  of  using  the  interest  rate  instrument  open,  so  that  the  authorities  have
some room for manoeuvre in times of international instability;
three, strengthening structural policies -- especially the policies and institutions such as better
prudential supervision, needed to underpin a sound financial system;
and  four,  carrying  out  other  supporting  reforms -- what  we  call  “second  generation”
reforms -- to  promote  domestic  competition,  increase  transparency  and  accountability,
improve  governance,  help  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  future  growth  are  widely  shared,  and
otherwise strengthen the foundations for future growth.
BIS Review   111/1997
III. Restoring confidence
As developments have shown, confidence, once lost, is hard to regain. Restoring
confidence takes a strong commitment to economic adjustment and reform demonstrated by the
implementation of  often  painful  measures.  It  also  requires  a  free  flow  of  timely,  accurate,  and
comprehensive information so that markets can assess the extent of underlying problems and the
seriousness of efforts to correct them and uncertainty can be reduced. And, of course, restoring
confidence takes time.
This process is now under way in  Southeast  Asia.  With  the  support  of  the  IMF,
Japan, and a number of other countries in the region,  Thailand  has  launched  a  courageous  and
comprehensive  program  that  addresses  the  problems  of  large  external  deficits  and  troubled
financial institutions.
As  a  result,  the  budget  is  moving  back  into  surplus  and  a  comprehensive
restructuring of the financial sector is getting under way. The Philippines, for its part, has taken
necessary measures and extended its program with the IMF under which a substantial amount of
economic adjustment and reform had already taken place. Malaysia is also adapting to changing
conditions  by  scaling  back  investment  plans,  tightening  its  fiscal  stance,  and  strengthening
prudential banking regulations.
Indonesia has strengthened its policy  stance  in  continuous  dialogue  with  us,  and
has  recently  reached  agreement  with  the  Fund  on  a  major  program  consisting  of:  strong
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  to  bring  about  orderly  adjustment  in  the  economy  and  restore
confidence  to  financial  markets;  a  major  restructuring  of  the  financial  sector,  along  with
measures to ensure its future soundness; and significant deregulation measures and trade reforms
that should improve economic efficiency immediately and over the longer term.
The Fund has agreed to support this program with a loan of $10 billion in a total
package of $23 billion, of which $18 billion will consist of multilateral financing. On top of that,
a  contingency  safety  net  is  being  established  through  which  an  important  group  of  countries
have declared their readiness to complement our package in the case of unexpected need.
Naturally,  it  will  take  time  for  these  efforts  to  bear  fruit.  But  developments  in
recent months have by no means wiped out the achievements of past decades. On the contrary,
the  region’s  longer  term  fundamentals -- including  its  high  domestic  saving  rates,  strong  fiscal
positions,  dynamic  private  sectors,  and  recent  gains  in  competitiveness -- remain  favorable.
Moreover,  all  of  these  countries  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  to  catch  up  with  advanced
economies.  Thus,  with  sound  policies,  they  should  be  able  to  sustain  high  rates  of  growth  for
another two decades or more.
In  the  less  distant  future,  growth  can  be  expected  to  rebound  strongly  after  a
relatively short, but sharp, weakening of economic activity, especially in Thailand, and a rapid
narrowing  of  external  deficits.  In  fact,  we  are  already  seeing  improvements  in  exports,  even
though recent exchange rate changes have not had much opportunity yet to generate their effects.
And as these adjustments take place, each of these countries will have seized the opportunity to
strengthen their economies in fundamental ways. This leads me to agree with those in the region
who see this crisis not as a blight on the future, but as a blessing in disguise. Indeed, after this
period of adjustment, these economies will emerge stronger than before.
BIS Review   111/1997
- 4 -
In  the  meantime,  I  hope  that  some  perspective  about  the  benefits  of  global
markets will be maintained. First, we must give credit where credit is due: the capital provided
by  global  markets  has  been  a  key  factor  in  Southeast  Asia’s  exceptional  growth  rates  and  its
ability  to  lift  so  many  out  of  poverty.  Certainly,  there  are  risks  in  tapping  global  markets  to
which  no  country  is  immune.  At  times,  markets  can  be  slow  to  react  to  changes  in  economic
conditions and then react sharply; and in some instances, herd instinct seems to prevail.
But  let  us  not  forget  that  markets  also  provide  tremendous  opportunities  to
accelerate growth and development, as Southeast Asia itself so vividly shows. Thus, the lesson
to be drawn from recent developments is not about the risks of global markets, but rather about
the  importance  of  approaching  markets  in  a  responsible  manner -- with  strong  macroeconomic
fundamentals and sound structural policies that give markets confidence and therefore encourage
long-term investment; with respect for the signals that markets provide; and with transparent and
market-friendly policies that allow markets to allocate resources efficiently.
IV. Perspectives for stronger regional cooperation
Spillover  and  contagion  effects  can  be  so  rapid,  so  costly,  to  countries  with
basically sound policies, that every country has an obligation to keep its own house in order. No
country should run the risk of becoming the tinder for a wider conflagration. At the same time,
there is also much that can be done on a regional and multilateral basis to bolster the efforts of
individual countries seeking to manage their economies well.
At the regional level, countries can make a valuable contribution to regional and
global stability by joining voluntarily with their neighbors in mutual surveillance. The objective
should  be  to  complement  IMF  surveillance  by  developing  a  “club  spirit”  through  which
neighboring  countries  can  encourage  one  another -- and,  at  times,  exert  some  peer  pressure  on
one another -- to pursue sound policies. We welcome the efforts being made in this direction in
various fora.
To  be  effective,  such  regional  surveillance  will,  of  course,  have  to  be  based  on
sound economic analysis. In this connection, the management and staff of the IMF are ready to
contribute to regional surveillance in Asia, as they already do in Europe, the G-7, and other fora.
Indeed,  one  of  the  tasks  of  our  new  regional  office  in  Tokyo  could  be  to  help  promote  more
intensive regional surveillance.
V. The response of the Fund
At  the  multilateral  level,  the  international  community  sees  it  as  indispensable  to
work and cooperate through a central institution, the IMF, in  order  to  help  countries  deal  with
the  opportunities  and  risks  of  globalization.  And  given  the  challenges  of  the  global  financial
markets, the international community has encouraged the Fund to strengthen its capacity in this
respect. The Fund’s response centers on four broad areas.
First,  we  have  strengthened  Fund  surveillance,  which,  as  you  know,  lies  at  the
heart  of  the  IMF’s  efforts  to  maintain  an  orderly  international  monetary  system.  In  order  to
detect financial tensions as early as possible, we have sought to make our dialogue with member
countries  more  continuous  and  probing  and  put  more  emphasis  on  the  continuous  and  timely
provision  of  accurate  data.  We  are  also  concentrating  more  on  policies  decided  at  a  regional
level, on the regional implications of national economic policies, on banking and financial sector
soundness, and on the policies and institutions that sound financial systems require.
BIS Review   111/1997
Second,  we  are  doing  what  we  can  to  help  markets  function  more  smoothly.
Considerable progress has been made in liberalising current  account  transactions  worldwide  so
that countries can take advantage of the opportunities offered by the expansion of world  trade.
Now,  we  must  turn  our  attention  to  fostering  an  orderly  liberalization  of  capital  account
transactions,  so  that  countries  can  also  reap  the  benefits  of  global  capital  markets,  while
minimizing their risks.
To  this  end,  IMF  members  have  agreed  that  the  Fund’s  charter  should  be
amended to make the liberalization of capital movements one of the purposes of the Fund and to
extend  the  Fund’s  jurisdiction  to  capital  movements,  with  appropriate  safeguards,  including
transitional arrangements, to ensure that liberalization is neither premature nor unduly delayed.
At the same time, the IMF is actively encouraging all countries to be transparent
about  their  economic  performance  by  improving  the  dissemination  of  economic  and  financial
data to the public. Greater transparency will help strengthen market discipline and avoid market
surprises that can lead to disruptive market reactions.
To  this  end,  the  Fund  has  developed  a  set  of  standards  regarding  the  quality,
coverage, frequency, and timeliness  of  data  made  available  to  the  public  and  has  established  a
Dissemination  Standards  Bulletin  Board  on  the  Internet  to  which  43  economies  have  now
subscribed, including Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  and
Thailand. Procedures have also been put in  place  through  which  countries  can  make  known  to
the  markets,  and  to  the  public  in  general,  the  Fund’s  views  on  their  economic  policies  and
situation.
Recognizing  the  importance  for  growth  of  creating  an  environment  that
encourages  private  sector  activity,  the  Fund  has  also  become  more  active -- in  close
collaboration with the World Bank, regional development banks, and others -- in promoting the
“second generation” reforms that I referred to earlier. These include developing an institutional
framework that will, among other things, provide an efficient, professional justice system, help
limit  arbitrary  and  corrupt  government  practices,  and  set  clear  regulatory  and  supervisory
standards for markets, including financial markets.
They also include  policies  to  improve  the  quality  of  public  expenditure,  making
adequate allocations for education and health to help ensure that individuals are able  to  realize
their  potential  to  participate  actively  in  a  market  economy,  and  providing  social  protection  to
those who bear the brunt of the changes of a dynamic economy.
Third, the Fund has taken action on several fronts to strengthen its resource base
and  adapt  its  procedures  and  financing  facilities.  As  you  may  know,  the  membership  has  just
agreed  to  an  increase  of  45  percent,  equivalent  to  about  $90  billion,  in  IMF  quotas.  This  will
raise the capital base of the institution to some $290 billion. In addition, the Fund has taken steps
to augment its financial resources through the agreement on the New Arrangements to Borrow.
Under  these  arrangements,  participants  would  be  prepared  to  lend  up  to  the
equivalent of some $47 billion when additional resources are needed to forestall or cope with an
impairment of the international monetary system, or deal with an exceptional situation that poses
a threat to the stability of the system. We hope that participants who have not yet done so will
complete the necessary legislative action so that these arrangements can enter into force soon.
BIS Review   111/1997
- 6 -
Furthermore, in order to allow all members to participate on an equitable basis in
the  SDR  system,  agreement  has  been  reached  on  a  proposal  to  amend  the  Fund’s  Articles  of
Agreement to authorize a  special  one-time  allocation  of  SDRs  of  about  $30  billion  that  would
equalize all members’ ratios of SDR allocations to quotas and would double the amount of SDRs
allocated  to  date.  These  resources  will  supplement  members’  reserves,  giving  them  more
flexibility in economic policies and a cushion against adverse developments.
Last  but  not  least,  recent  experience  has  demonstrated  once  again  that  early
warnings  cannot  always  prevent  crisis  from  blowing  up.  This  makes  it  indispensable  for  the
international community to strengthen the financial capacity of its central monetary institution to
assist  countries  in  a  crisis  situation.  This  is  also  why  the  Fund  has  established  an  emergency
financing mechanism to allow financial assistance to be provided more speedily, when countries
facing external crises are willing to take strong corrective action.
This  mechanism  was  used  effectively  to  expedite  the  recent  programs  for  the
Philippines,  Thailand,  and  Indonesia.  Even  if  it  would  be  naive  to  believe  that  such  programs
could  produce  an  immediate  return  to  the  status  quo  ante,  we  are  confident  that  once  these
programs have produced their full effects in the next months, these economies will be in a much
better position to start growing again at a strong, but more sustainable, rate.
In conclusion, these are trying times in Southeast Asia. But the mechanisms are in
place at the national and multilateral levels—and soon, I hope, at the regional level -- to enable
your countries not just to pull through this crisis, but to emerge stronger than before. The only
other pre-requisite for your success is the resolve to put current problems behind you. I see no
reason why we will not see the same determination in Southeast Asia in the future as  we  have
seen in the past.
BIS Review   111/1997
