Mr.  Gaddum  discusses  Germany  as  a  financial  centre  and  the  strengths  of  the
German  capital  market  of  today      Speech  by  the  Vice-President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,
Mr. Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, at the Financial Centre Roadshow in New York on 14/10/97.
1. Strengths of the German capital market of today
Finanzplatz Deutschland -- the financial centre Germany, which is the “home port” of the
D-Mark -- is characterised by the long-standing stability  culture  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  And  the
financial centre Germany has benefited considerably from the currency’s stability. With the introduction
of the euro everything will change. The financial centre Germany will lose its D-Mark bonus. However,
it will gain the opportunity to display its competitiveness with the euro in a larger market. The banks, the
German  parliament  and  the  Bundesbank  have  been  working  for  years  to  increase  the  attractiveness  of
Germany  as  a  financial  centre.  With  a  view  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  it  is  important  to  further
strengthen the competitiveness reached so far through additional innovations. It is essential to prepare for
competition  in  the  large  European  market.  But  we  can  say  with  some  satisfaction  that  even  today  the
financial centre Germany, which is the biggest and most dynamic financial market in continental Europe,
is in a good position.
Germany is currently the third-largest  industrial  nation  in  the  world  and,  since  German
reunification,  it  has  had  the  highest  population  of  any  country  in  the  European  Union;  in  the  wake  of
reunification, however, it has also changed from a capital-exporting country into a capital-importing one.
The large current account surpluses which had prevailed until 1990 have turned into sizeable deficits.
But the era of Germany’s current account deficits could soon be a thing of the past. After
a  seasonally  adjusted  positive  balance  was  recorded  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  I  expect  the
German current account will show an annual surplus again in 1998 at the latest.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 2 -
The  deficit  on  current  account  was  covered 
in  part  by  sales  of  fixed-rate
bonds -- especially Federal securities -- abroad. In view of the D-Mark’s role as a reserve currency and
the  high  creditworthiness  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  as  a  borrower  (triple  A  rating),  it  is
not -- and never has been -- a problem for Germany to raise funds abroad. German banks are among the
premier credit institutions worldwide in all sectors of traditional banking business. In only a short period
of time they have diversified into new areas of business (investment banking, derivatives, etc.); here, too,
they have meanwhile established professional and efficient lines of business.
This  trend  has  been  and  is  being  accompanied  by  modernisations  undertaken  at  the
German stock exchanges, which are acquiring new structures, opening up new markets and, in doing so,
consistently  put  their  faith  in  the  use  of  electronic  systems.  Concerning  the  speed,  security  and
cost-effectiveness of securities trading, the German stock exchange Deutsche Börse leads the field. It has
made rapid progress towards full computerisation and soon will  offer  a  trading  platform  which  will  be
trend-setting in the European context. The tool needed for this -- XETRA (Exchange Electronic Trading)
is  currently  being  implemented.  The  aim  of  XETRA  is  to  facilitate  full  electronic  handling  of  stock
exchange trading with up to 40,000 securities -- with a worldwide remote membership facility. This will
mean lower costs, more efficiency and a high degree of liquidity.
In  this  context  the  centralised  securities  settlement  system  of  Deutsche  Börse  Clearing
AG, the leading German stock exchange clearing house, deserves a mention. Its functionality and speed,
together  with  its  cost-effective  settlement  procedures,  are  unmatched  internationally.  In  Germany,
settlement is generally completed within just two days (T+2) -- if necessary, even on the same day; that
is  faster  than  anywhere  else.  And,  for  the  sake  of  security,  they  are  working  on  cutting  the  time  even
further.  The  question  of  deregulation  proved  to  be  a  less  pressing  problem  in  the  traditionally  liberal
German financial market than in other countries; however, in Germany, too, further steps in this direction
were necessary. Thus -- to cite just a few examples -- the securities transfer tax was abolished in 1990.
Since 1992, foreign non-banks have been able to issue commercial paper denominated in D-Mark.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 3 -
In  1994  investors’  protection  was  reinforced  by  the  establishment  of  the  Federal
Supervisory  Office  for  Securities  Trading  and  the  legal  ban  on  insider  dealing.  In  1994,  too,  genuine
money market funds were admitted. In January 1997 minimum reserve requirements on repo transactions
were abolished. In March 1997 the new stock exchange segment “New Market” was introduced for small
and  medium-sized  fast-growing  enterprises.  Since  May  1997,  banks  have  been  allowed  to  collateralise
and sell loans in the form of asset-backed securities. Measured by the volume of securities outstanding,
the German bond market is currently the third-largest debt securities market in the world. Within Europe
it leads the field.
Approximately  40  per  cent  of  the  German  government  bonds  outstanding  are  held  by
foreign investors. This shows that the long-standing benchmark position of German Federal bonds rests
on a sound real base. And it is surely not  surprising  either  that,  with  a  42%  market  share,  the  trade  in
D-Mark-denominated interest-related products  is  the  leading  business  in  the  European  financial  futures
exchanges. Annual net sales of fixed-rate bonds issued by German borrowers amounted to the equivalent
of  more  than  US$  100  billion  in  each  of  the  past  few  years.  The  primary  and  the  secondary  markets
exhibit a very high degree of liquidity, especially in respect of Federal securities.
In  order  to  maintain  its  leading  position  in  the  market,  the  Federal  Government  has
gradually streamlined its array of issue instruments. Thus, the maturity range was complemented both at
the short end (“Bubills”) and at the long end of the market (30-year bonds). The further fixing of issue
dates has meanwhile led in effect to a regular issuance calendar over the entire year. The concentration on
standardised instruments and regular issue dates, in combination with re-openings of issues, ensures large
and liquid issue amounts. The introduction of stripping for Federal bonds is likewise part of the strategy
to protect the Federal Government’s benchmark position. Whereas in the primary market the Government
focuses  on  certain  maturity  segments,  by  allowing  the  stripping  of  government  bonds  it  offers
international institutional investors facilities for investment along the entire yield curve.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 4 -
Some regional Land governments in Germany have meanwhile started to combine their
issues  into  joint  bonds,  which  has  proved  to  be  rather  successful.  Another  important  segment  of  the
German debt securities market is constituted by mortgage bonds (Pfandbriefe) which, as “jumbo” issues,
have met with a positive response in the international capital market for some time now. The picture is
complemented by the German Financial Futures Exchange (DTB). Although it was established relatively
late, it has already conquered a major market position.
In conjunction with MATIF in Paris and SOFFEX in Zurich, the DTB is seeking to build
a joint continental European trading and clearing platform.  Not  least  because  of  its  efficient  settlement
and  its  electronic  access  facilities  installed  in  foreign  financial  centres,  the  DTB  offers  global  capital
market  players  access  to  all  derivative  business.  In  its  efforts  to  catch  up  with  the  longer-established
futures exchanges, it has already made ground especially with the introduction of the Bobl future; in this
respect, it has even surpassed LIFFE. The DTB’s range of products meanwhile cover maturities from one
month to ten years. Contracts such as the 1-month and the 3-month Euro-Mark future and the future on
2-year Federal Treasury notes are the most recent examples of the DTB’s market orientation.
2. Further capital market improvements in the pipeline
The launch of European monetary union will change the operating framework in Europe.
Thus, the D-Mark will cease to exist as an internationally renowned reserve currency. For the emerging
single currency area and the larger single financial market, a number of European Union directives will
have to be incorporated into national law.
You may rest assured that in doing so we will endeavour to further strengthen Germany
as a financial centre. These measures are being supported by practical considerations aimed at smoothing
the transition from the D-Mark to the euro for capital market players. The Federal Government will do
justice to its leading position as an issuer also by converting its marketable old issues to euros right at the
BIS Review   99/1997
- 5 -
start of monetary union on January 1, 1999. That will prevent any split in the market between D-Mark
and euro-denominated Federal Government bonds. In other words, large and liquid euro issues covering
the entire maturity range will be available from the outset.
With  regard  to  the  conversion  procedures,  due  consideration  has  to  be  given,  among
other  things,  to  avoiding  costs  and  to  agreeing  general  practical  rules  in  the  interest  of  ensuring  a
smoothly  functioning  capital  market.  This  includes  a  simple  and  relatively  cost-effective  concept  for
bonds in respect of the conversion of (even) D-Mark nominal amounts into (odd) euro amounts, i.e. the
so-called  1-cent  method.  As  far  as  equities  are  concerned,  conversion  is  likely  to  be  facilitated  by  the
introduction of stock based not on par values, but on divisible units. Thus an instrument which has long
been common in the United States will be established in Germany, too.
To put it  in  a  nutshell:  the  German  capital  market  is  itself  in  excellent  shape  and  is  or
will be very well prepared for the future challenges.
3. Trends in other market sectors
3.1. Foreign exchange market
The launch of monetary union in Europe will definitely have far-reaching consequences
for  the  foreign  exchange  market,  too.  Monetary  union  will  lead  to  the  elimination  of  dealings  in
currencies  belonging  to  the  European  Monetary  System.  On  the  other  hand,  the  odds  are  that  the
remaining  foreign  exchange  dealings  will  concentrate  further  within  continental  Europe  in  favour  of
Frankfurt.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 6 -
At  a  roughly  constant  level  of  trade  in  US  dollars,  German  banks  have  been  able  to
increase  their  operations  in  sterling,  Swiss  francs  and  yen  distinctly  already  during  the  past  few  years.
And further growth prospects look likely. Another cause of optimism is undoubtedly that Frankfurt will
continue  to  be  the  location  of  one  of  the  three  central  banks  which  issue  the  major  international
currencies, i.e. the US dollar, yen and euro.
3.2. Money market
In the German money market, too, progress has been recorded in the past few years. And
the Bundesbank has made a major contribution to that. The list is headed by the drastic lowering of the
minimum reserve ratios to a level of 1.5% to 2.0% in several stages up to 1995. That has lessened  the
incentives to circumvent the regulations while preserving the instrument’s functional effectiveness. Since
then the growth of short-term D-Mark-denominated deposits in the Euro-market has come to a halt. This
effect has been reinforced by the exemption from minimum reserve requirements of liabilities under repo
transactions with maturities of up to one year, which came into force at the beginning of this year. Within
a short period of time this measure fostered the growth of a repo market in Germany and led to a shift of
D-Mark-denominated repo business from the Euro-market, particularly London, back to Germany.
The set of monetary policy instruments of the future European Central Bank are expected
to incorporate key elements of the Bundesbank’s tried and tested toolkit. And I am convinced that even if
the  minimum  reserve  instrument  is  likewise  employed,  solutions  will  be  found  which  exclude  any
negative effects on financial markets in the euro area, especially shifts to offshore financial centres.
In  comparison  to  the  existing  national  markets,  the  money  market  in  the  euro  area  is
likely  to  become  considerably  wider  and  deeper.  The  harmonisation  of  market  practices  which  is
currently being vigorously pursued will create a level playing field conducive to boosting competition. A
European Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) is to be determined by a representative selection of banks
from the euro area as the benchmark interest rate for the financial markets. It will enhance the profile of
the  European  continent  and  of  Frankfurt  against  London’s  Euro-Libor.  The  EURIBOR  will  establish
itself  as  a  major  benchmark  for  derivative  financial  instruments  such  as  options,  futures,  floating-rate
notes, etc. The fast, smooth and secure settlement of money market transactions is ensured by efficient
payment systems.
One  of  the  linchpins  of  the  Bundesbank’s  payment  system  facility  is  the  Frankfurt
Electronic  Clearing  System  (EAF  2).  This  system 
the
liquidity-conserving  elements  of  a  net  settlement  procedure  with  the  risk-reducing  features  of  gross
settlement systems. The second linchpin is the express electronic intercity credit transfer system known
as EIL-ZV. This gross settlement system will constitute the interface to the ESCB’s TARGET system in
stage 3 of EMU which links the national RTGS systems. Money market transactions within the euro area
will then take just a few seconds.
is  exceptional 
it  combines 
that 
in 
4. Concluding remark
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you can see, Finanzplatz Deutschland -- the German financial
centre -- is entering the European competition from a good starting position. We are in favour of an open
exchange  with  other  financial  centres  in  Europe  and  are  looking  forward  to  this  competition.  No  one
should have any doubt that our ambition is to remain the best in those fields which we already lead and
to become the best in those fields in which we are still trailing at the moment.
Colour charts for this text can be found on the BIS Website (for address see last page)
BIS Review   99/1997
