Mr.  Bäckström  discusses  the  current  situation  for  monetary  policy  in  Sweden
Remarks  by  the  Governor  of  the  Swedish  Central  Bank,  Mr.  Urban  Bäckström,  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance, in Stockholm, on 23/10/97.
I  should  like  to  thank  the  Committee  for  the  invitation  to  discuss  the  Swedisheconomy and the current situation for monetary policy. In my opening remarks today I shall begin by
briefly summarising the recent years’ economic tendencies and then consider the present construction
Sweden’s  economy  is  now  entering  the  fifth  year  of  expansion  since  the  profound
of monetary policy. A look into the future will conclude. What I have to say is based on the latest
crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  decade.  Since  GDP  turned  upwards  in  the  summer  of  1993,  annual
growth has averaged over 2.5 per cent. Annual inflation in this period has averaged only about 2 per
cent.  This  is  a  marked  contrast  with  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  annual  growth  averaged
approximately 2 per cent and inflation about 8 per cent. In one respect, however, the situation to date
is still dismal, namely as regards the labour market and employment. If an economy is growing well
but employment remains weak and unemployment high, there is a strong probability that the labour
market is affected by structural problems.
inflation report and events since it was published.
From a dual situation to broader expansion
Although  growth  in  recent  years  has  been  satisfactory,  the  generation  of  a  broader
upswing  in  the  economy  has  proved  difficult.  Initially,  about  three-quarters  of  the  GDP’s  increase
came  from  manufacturing,  which  represents  only  about  20  per  cent  of  Sweden’s  economy.  This
meant  that  bottlenecks  occurred  fairly  quickly,  accompanied  by  various  types  of  inflationary
impulses.  Our  relatively  small  industrial  sector  cannot  be  expected  to  sustain  a  growth  rate  that  is
higher than the total economy achieved in the 1970s and 1980s.
The  problem  with  the  dual  economy -- a  flourishing  export-related  industrial  sector
and a rather weak recovery in sectors with a more domestic orientation -- stemmed in part from low
confidence  in  economic  policy’s  determination  and  ability  to  keep  inflation  low  in  the  longer  run.
This  in  turn  was  a  consequence  of  Sweden’s  poor  record  in  this  respect,  coupled  with  serious
problems with government finances. Long bond rates fluctuated widely and in 1994 and 1995 they
actually climbed to the levels of the years of high inflation.  The  exchange  rate  continued  along  its
depreciating path from the 1970s and 1980s. For the Riksbank, the lack of confidence in the direction
of economic policy left little room for manoeuvre. Although the instrumental rate was lowered during
the  spring  of  1994,  virtually  all  the  market  rates  and  particularly  those  for  longer  maturities  rose.
Sweden  was  approaching  a  point  where  economic  policy  had  to  demonstrate  that  the  focus  on
stability was a firm commitment.
The  monetary  tightening  and,  perhaps  to  an  even  greater  extent,  the  fiscal
consolidation gradually generated increased confidence in Sweden’s readiness and ability to achieve
low long-term inflation. Against this background, during 1996 it was possible to cut the repo rate to
its  lowest  level  since  the  early  1960s.  Low  inflation  and  decreased  inflation  expectations  also
contributed to falling bond rates, accompanied by an appreciation of the krona from the earlier lows.
Since December 1996 the repo rate has been unchanged at 4.10 per cent.
All in all, conditions were gradually created for  a  broader  economic  upswing.  With
the time lag that generally applies in economic policy, during 1997 we have observed a mood swing
among households, leading for instance to increased private consumption, while export growth has
BIS Review   101/1997
- 2 -
been maintained. The Swedish economy is entering a phase of high activity with a combination of
strong domestic demand and strong export growth.
The impact  of  the  Riksbank’s  current  monetary  stance  will  take  about  two  years  to
materialise in full. We therefore have to assess the outlook for inflation as far ahead as in 1999. Such
an analysis was presented some weeks ago in the inflation report. I shall be returning shortly to that
report  and  subsequent  developments  but  first  I  want  to  discuss  the  approach  in  principle  to  the
conduct of monetary policy over the complete economic cycle.
Monetary policy in a cyclical perspective
A matter that savers and investors are currently discussing is  not  whether  but  when
the Riksbank will raise the instrumental rate. An expected increase in the repo rate is also indicated
by the structure of market rates. The general impression among financial agents seems to be that a
repo rate increase is probable some time in the coming winter.
The  timing  of  a  change  in  the  monetary  stance  is  determined  by  the  Riksbank’s
assessment of inflation. The simple rule of thumb for the Riksbank can be formulated as follows: if
the assessment of inflation, given an unchanged instrumental rate, points to a rate of inflation one to
two  years  ahead  that  is  in  line  with  the  target,  then  the  monetary  stance  is  well  balanced.  If  the
assessment  indicates  a  risk  of  inflation  rising  above  (falling  below)  the  target,  then  the  monetary
stance is too expansive (contractive) and the repo rate should therefore be raised (lowered).
The time has not yet come for an increase in the repo rate, but when it does, our action
will hopefully be seen as a natural ingredient of a monetary policy for price stability. Our ambition is
to take predictable and timely measures so that sizeable interest rate movements can be avoided.
Still, it is hardly surprising that the direction of monetary policy is being discussed. At
present Swedish monetary policy’s overall impact can be described as expansionary at a time when
activity is becoming stronger.
The  short-term  real  interest  rate  is  between  2  and  2.5  per  cent,  depending  on  the
exact maturity and how inflation expectations are measured. How a neutral monetary stance translates
into  the  short  real  rate  is  difficult  to  determine  precisely  but  it  can  be  said  that  the  current  rate  is
comparatively low, with an impact on total demand that should be stimulatory. In addition, the level
of the real exchange rate is weak in relation to a reasonable long-term equilibrium. This means that
its effect is stimulatory, too. The combined effect of the short interest rate and the exchange rate is
therefore tending to support the economic upswing.
All else equal, an expansionary monetary stance leads to a successive acceleration of
demand.  In  time,  this  may  generate  a  growth  rate  that  exceeds  the  economy’s  long-term  potential.
The  ability  of  the  economy  to  cope  with  a  high  demand  trend  is  not  unlimited.  As  unutilised
resources  are  activated  and  the  output  gap  closes,  bottlenecks  of  various  kinds  arise  in  the  labour
market or in real capital. It is in such a situation that inflation may accelerate.
In order to avoid the occurrence of shortages and accelerating inflation, the monetary
stance  must  not  remain  too  expansive  for  too  long  in  an  upward  phase.  Instead,  a  timely
adjustment -- bearing  in  mind  the  lag  associated  with  monetary  policy -- must  be  made  to  a  more
neutral position before the output gap closes. This promotes a continued growth of demand at a rate
the  economy  can  absorb -- for  instance  with  the  help  of  new  investment,  improved  efficiency  and
labour  supply -- without  generating  inflationary  bottlenecks.  The  purpose  of  such  a  monetary
adjustment is not to break the expansionary trend but to achieve growth that is more sustainable. In
BIS Review   101/1997
- 3 -
other words, a shift from an expansionary stance to one that is more neutral is designed to bring the
economy  onto  the  growth  path  that  matches  its  structure -- not  to  bring  growth  to  a  halt.  Neither
should  this  be  described  as  a  contractive  turn;  it  is  rather  a  move  that  yields  a  less  expansionary
stance.
In the public debate the Riksbank’s monetary policy is sometimes described as though
repo rate adjustments were a form of “punishment” or “reward”, aimed at measures that have been
taken  either  by  the  political  system  or  by  labour  market  organisations  in  connection  with  wage
negotiations. My point here has been that interest rate adjustments are a natural feature of monetary
policy’s  path  over  the  economic  cycle.  Of  course  this  does  not  mean  that  the  construction  of
monetary  policy  is  not  affected  by  fiscal  expansion  or  contraction,  or  by  low  or  high  wage
settlements. What I want to make clear is that adjustments to the instrumental rate in the course of the
economic  cycle  are  a  natural  phenomenon  and  their  purpose  is  to  create  conditions  for  sustained
growth and low inflation.
If a central bank waits too long before shifting from an expansive to a more neutral
monetary stance, problems with bottlenecks are liable to become more widespread and the economy
may become overheated. Besides entailing rising inflation, this causes firms and households to start
accustoming themselves to a high level of inflation. Monetary policy may then be forced to adopt a
contractive stance in order to bring inflation back to the target rate. So if the central bank waits too
long,  the  interest  rate  increases  may  be  all  the  larger.  In  the  meantime,  moreover,  economic
imbalances and tensions may become so great that they lead to economic setbacks. We are familiar
with such a course of events from the 1970s and 1980s, and perhaps not least from the early 1990s.
Against this background, in situations when capacity is coming under pressure, it is
clearly better for a central bank to act at an early stage.
Future inflation
The assessment in the inflation report, published just over a month ago, is that growth
in the Swedish economy will be about 2 per cent in 1997 and around 3 per cent in 1998. In 1999, the
rate is expected to go on accelerating to just over 3 per cent. This assessment envisages that, in an
expanding  world  market,  export  growth  remains  relatively  high.  This  is  accompanied  by  an
accelerating increase in private consumption, while public consumption at least stops falling.
Economic growth in Sweden in 1998 and 1999 would then most probably exceed the
potential rate, which is estimated to be just over 2 per cent in annual terms. The broad rise in all the
major  demand  components  will  therefore  gradually  exert  pressure  on  the  available  resources.  This
successive  increase  in  resource  utilisation  is  already  evident  in  some  indicators.  A  growing
proportion of firms are reporting, for example, that output is being restricted  by  productive  factors
rather than by demand.
The gap between total demand and total resources for production is an important but
elusive indicator of inflationary pressure.  The  Riksbank  considers  that  the  output  gap,  which  is  an
attempt to  measure  the  degree  of  unutilised  resources  in  the  total  economy,  is  2  per  cent  of  GDP.
With the GDP forecast from the inflation report, this means that the gap will narrow by degrees and
close some time during 1999, in any event towards the end of that year.
In the light of the assessments of resource utilisation and other factors, in the inflation
report the Riksbank forecast that the annual increase in the CPI will be around 1 per cent in 1997 and
around 2 per cent in both 1998 and 1999, with some upward tendency in the latter two years. This is
our main scenario.
BIS Review   101/1997
- 4 -
Like most other forecasts, however, inflation assessments are subject to uncertainty.
Our forecasts as a foundation for monetary policy therefore do not consist of single point estimates of
future  inflation.  In  practice  we  construct  a  number  of  alternative  outcomes  and  assess  their
probabilities. Normally there is one main scenario and two alternatives.
Economic  activity  could  be  stronger  than  we  have  envisaged,  so  that  inflation  is
somewhat higher; but it could also be weaker, giving lower inflation. Most of the evidence suggests,
however,  that  since  the  inflation  report,  an  outcome  which  is  appreciably  weaker  than  the  main
scenario has become less likely.
The forecasts for all the demand components are naturally uncertain. It is, however,
particularly worth discussing the forecast for private consumption, since this component  represents
about one-half of total demand. Some factors suggest that the growth of private consumption could
become stronger than most observers count on today.
The background here is that for a number years the growth of household disposable
income has been held back by fiscal consolidation. After 1998, however, the direct restrictive fiscal
impact on household finances is expected to diminish. But in spite of the weak or negative income
trend, private consumption has already been rising for a number of years, albeit rather slowly. The
reason is that, besides the effect of income on private consumption, spending by households, as well
as their view of the future, is influenced by the increase in wealth.
Households  have  recently  become  appreciably  more  optimistic  about  the  future.
House  prices  and  share  prices  have  been  rising  markedly  for  some  years.  The  realised  and  latent
capital gains of households in 1997 add up to the equivalent of about 25 per cent of their income, a
figure that is as high as in the late 1980s. It would be surprising if such an increase in wealth did not
contribute sooner  or  later  to  higher  consumer  demand.  The  key  question,  however,  is  how  rapidly
private consumption will grow.
The  above  applies  provided  the  increase  in  asset  prices  is  maintained.  Since  share
prices turned upwards in the autumn of 1992, the increase on the Stockholm Exchange has been one
of the largest since the early 1920s, which is as far back as the statistics go. The overall valuation of
corporate profits is also historically high. The present level of share prices calls for a further rapid
increase in profits for several years to come. Minor changes in this picture of the future could affect
current share prices.
Another  element  of  uncertainty  concerns  the  economy’s  supply  side.  We  cannot  be
sure of just how much the economy can produce without an increase in inflation. Moreover, it is not
only  the  total  reserve  of  resources  that  may  affect  inflation.  The  rate  at  which  resource  utilisation
rises may also be important.  A  rapid  activation  of  the  unutilised  resources  could  generate  stronger
inflationary impulses even if surplus capacity still exists at total level.
CPI  inflation  has  moved  up  sharply  during  1997.  The  12-month  change  was  down
around 0 per cent for a couple of months last spring but after that it moved up fairly quickly to 1.9 per
cent  for  September.  In  September  alone  the  CPI  rose  0.9  per  cent,  which  was  more  than  most
observers had expected. The figure also aroused some uncertainty among savers and investors. The
question is whether the increase in inflation represents a new and unforeseen tendency.
The  main  features  of  this  development  are  not  unexpected.  One  factor  behind  the
rising  CPI  is  increased  indirect  taxes,  for  instance  for  tobacco,  and  higher  administered  prices.
Another  explanation  is  that  the  impact  on  the  CPI  from  the  falling  interest  rates  in  1996-1997  is
diminishing. All in all, this means that the CPI is closing in on underlying inflation as measured in
various ways by the Riksbank.
BIS Review   101/1997
- 5 -
Still,  the  CPI  outcome  for  September  is  somewhat  higher  than  the  Riksbank  had
counted  on.  Figures  for  a  single  month  admittedly  do  not  warrant  definite  conclusions  but  it  is
certainly important to pay heightened attention to price movements in the coming months.
Normally it is underlying or trend inflation that is primarily of interest for monetary
policy. This holds unless transitory price effects influence inflation expectations. In a setting where
inflation expectations are firmly anchored to the inflation target, monetary policy has some room for
manoeuvre.  But  if  expected  inflation  starts  to  rise,  we  must  be  on  the  alert,  particularly  in  that  the
current  monetary  stance  is  stimulatory.  The  importance  of  expected  inflation  for  price  and  wage
formation was evident not least in connection with the 1995 round of wage negotiations. At that time,
expectations of future inflation seem to have been a bit above 4 per cent, which probably contributed
to the excessively high level of the ensuing wage agreements. Now that the Swedish economy is on
the threshold of very important wage negotiations, there must be no doubt that the Riksbank is truly
serious about the inflation target.
Future  wage  formation  is  yet  another  risk  factor  that  the  Riksbank  has  to  consider.
There are some encouraging signs that wage formation is moving in the right direction, even though
the parties have gone in for a certain amount of bidding. This tends to be a process that conveys a
varying degree of realism. It is important to bear in mind that wage formation is not just a matter of
the  level  of  wage  agreements.  The  outcome  for  wages  is  also  conditioned  by  the  wage  drift  that
mirrors  labour  supply  and  demand.  The  less  efficiently  the  labour  market  works,  the  sooner
bottlenecks arise that generate increased wage drift. Tendencies to labour shortages in certain sectors
are already discernible, despite the high unemployment.
Conclusion:  monetary stance well balanced; changes in the spectrum of risks
A  monetary  policy  that  aims  for  sustained  price  stability  is  not  at  odds  with  good
economic growth. This presupposes that the supply side functions so well that growth does not give
rise to inflationary impulses. But if the structure of the economy is such that only moderate growth is
feasible, demand and accordingly the monetary stance must be adjusted accordingly. The alternative
is  demand  growth  that  exceeds  what  the  economy  is  capable  of  producing  without  inflationary
bottlenecks. Accelerating inflation is  a  threat  to  sustainable  growth  and  may  even  result  in  serious
economic setbacks, as history has taught us.
As economic activity becomes stronger and monetary policy adjusts its sights on the
future  picture,  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  stance  will  have  to  gradually  move  away  from  its  current
expansionary position. The timing of such a move has to be assessed in the light of new information
and today one cannot say when it will happen.
Our present assessment is that the monetary stance is well balanced. There has been
some shift in the spectrum of risks but our inflation forecast for the coming years is unchanged.
BIS Review   101/1997
