Mr.  Heikensten  discusses  recent  economic  and  monetary  policy  developments  in
Sweden   Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr.  Lars  Heikensten,  at  the  Local
Authorities Economics Seminar in Malmö on 19/8/98.
Thank you for the invitation to attend this Seminar and talk about the Swedish economy
and monetary policy. I shall begin with a brief account of how the Riksbank operates with its inflation
target. In that context I shall also be saying something about economic policy’s results in recent years.
Then  I  shall  consider  the  Riksbank’s  appraisal  of  the  Swedish  economy,  as  presented  in  our  latest
inflation report last June, together with subsequent economic tendencies. Finally I shall be returning to
the somewhat longer perspective of my opening section. This will tie in with the theme of the seminar
and highlight some factors that are of crucial importance for our success in creating a potential for future
economic expansion.
1. Inflation target policy—how does it work?
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  keep  the  value  of  money  stable.  This  has  been
defined  more  specifically  as  keeping  the  annual  rate  of  inflation  (measured  as  the  change  in  the
Consumer Price Index) at 2  per  cent.  Around  this  target  there  is  a  tolerance  interval  of  ±1  percentage
point which serves to accommodate normal deviations that arise, for instance, from transitory impulses.
But the possibility of larger deviations than this cannot be ruled out. If they occur, it is important that we
explain their causes and state how inflation is to be brought back into line with the target.
To  influence  consumer  prices,  the  Riksbank  uses  its  instrumental  rate—the  repo  rate.
Simplifying somewhat, one can say that, by altering the marginal interest rate for banks, the Riksbank
influences  other  domestic  interest  rates  and  thereby  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  Sweden  and
consequently the development of prices. It should be noted, however, that in the short and medium term,
pricing is also affected by other factors, such as the construction of fiscal policy and the development of
wages.  That  is  why  the  Riksbank  is  concerned  that,  when  making  decisions,  politicians  and  labour
market organisations should also promote low inflation. It is the reason, moreover, for my returning to
these matters at the end of this talk. But in the long run the course of inflation is crucially dependent on
monetary policy.
Interest rate adjustments have their main effect on prices after an interval of one to two
years. Monetary policy decisions therefore have to be based, not on the latest figures for inflation but on
the Riksbank’s current assessment of future price movements. Our quarterly inflation reports accordingly
present ongoing inflation forecasts based on analyses of a large array of economic indicators, supported
by  economic  models  and  knowledge  of  relationships  between  different  parts  of  the  economy.  The
inflation  assessment  is  used  by  the  Riksbank  in  drawing  conclusions  about  the  direction  of  monetary
policy. A forecast rate of inflation above the target normally leads to interest rate increases, just as an
expected rate below the target prompts the Riksbank to lower the repo rate.
Inflation is assessed on a continuous basis. New information—fresh economic statistics,
for  instance,  or  signs  of  a  change  in  some  economic  relationships—leads  the  Riksbank  to  review  its
current  forecast  and  make  the  necessary  changes.  If  a  new  forecast  indicates  that  future  inflation  will
deviate  from  the  target,  then  the  Riksbank  has  to  adjust  the  repo  rate  in  accordance  with  the  new
assessment.
However, assessments of future inflation—like any other forecast—are bound to include
an element of uncertainty. Moreover, observers are liable to differ on which future path is most probable.
So it is hardly surprising—rather a healthy sign—that our inflation assessments and monetary policy are
sometimes a subject of lively debate. But while inflation assessments may vary, in Swedish society today
there is broad support for focusing monetary policy on price stability.
BIS Review  66/1998
2. Recent years
- 2 -
The  Swedish  economy,  as  we  all  know,  went  through  a  profound  crisis  in  the  early
1990s. This is not an occasion for discussing the causes of the crisis in depth. It will suffice to note that
the  origins  lay  in  structural  weaknesses  in  Sweden’s  economy.  But  the  crisis  also  had  to  do  with
shortcomings in stabilisation policy in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Since production stopped falling and growth restarted in the course of 1993, economic
developments in Sweden have exceeded expectations in several respects. The average annual growth rate
of above 2.5 per cent is higher than the average in the boom period in the 1980s.
In a way, perhaps this is hardly surprising. The weak exchange rate gave exports a strong
impetus and there was plenty of unutilised capacity. But I do not think many people expected that such
high growth could be combined with low inflation. In these years Sweden has rejected the policy from
the decades of high inflation and reinstated the time-honoured tradition of annual price increases around
2 per cent. Inflation has also been low in an international comparison. Judging from the expectations of
economic agents, a low-inflation regime has now been established.
The composition of growth has also been favourable. After decades of growth that was
generated to a high degree by rising consumption—with an accumulation of external debt—it is a healthy
sign that expansion been associated with strong export demand and industrial investment. One result of
this, the large current-account surpluses since 1994, has made it possible to repay external debt.
A dramatic turnaround has also been achieved in government finances. Massive budget
deficits  have  been  succeeded  by  a  surplus.  This  trend  is  primarily  a  consequence  of  the  economic
recovery,  just  as  declining  activity  was  the  main  cause  of  the  earlier  fiscal  collapse.  But  without  the
extensive  measures  for  budget  consolidation,  neither  the  economic  upturn  nor  the  improvement  in
government finances would have been feasible.
Tax  increases  and  spending  cuts  on  the  scale  we  have  experienced  in  recent  years
obviously leave their mark. Household income has been sharply restricted, particularly in 1995–96. So
have public activities.
In  one  respect,  moreover,  the  outlook  is  still  troublesome,  namely  as  regards
employment. Despite the economic recovery, a rapid expansion of employment has proved  difficult  to
achieve. It is worth noting, however, that the number of private sector jobs, in services in particular, has
in fact been rising continuously since 1995. But this has not made up sufficiently for the contraction of
employment during the 1990s in, for example, the public sector and construction.
After  this  review  of  developments  in  recent  years,  I  shall  now  discuss  the  Riksbank’s
appraisal of the coming twenty-four months, which is the period we need to consider when conducting
monetary policy.
3. The message in June
In the latest inflation report last June the Riksbank presented an economic forecast for
Sweden and its implications for the path of inflation up to the middle of the year 2000. Our assessment
was  that  the  trends  in  recent  years,  with  high  growth  and  low  inflation,  would  continue  in  the  years
ahead.
The  economic  upswing  was  assumed  to  continue  in  the  forecast  period,  with  annual
growth rates around 2.5 per cent this year and 3 per cent in the next two years. The forecast involved an
increasing  contribution  from  rising  domestic  demand,  accompanied  by  a  successive  fall-off  in  export
growth. Private consumption was expected to pick up, partly in view of rising household income.
BIS Review  66/1998
- 3 -
Notwithstanding the prospect of further good economic growth in the coming years, the
Riksbank  judged  that  the  rate  of  inflation  would  remain  low  and  even  be  less  than  we  had  expected
earlier. The strong demand was certainly assumed to give some increase in inflationary pressure in the
forecast period but not so much as to be a cause for concern. One reason lay in the good productivity
growth  that  was  also  foreseen,  indicating  that  full  capacity  utilisation  in  the  economy  would  not  be
reached in the coming twenty-four months. Although capacity utilisation was high in certain sectors, the
Riksbank envisaged that in the economy as a whole there would be a capacity surplus.
External inflationary pressure was expected to be low in view of subdued international
inflation, low raw materials prices and a somewhat stronger exchange rate.
Expectations of future inflation among households,  financial  agents  and  manufacturing
indicated  a  belief  that  future  inflation  would  be  low.  Thus,  confidence  in  economic  policy’s  focus  on
price stability seemed to have been firmly established.
The Riksbank noted that the uncertainty in the assessment of future inflation was mainly
whether it would be even lower than we foresaw in the main scenario. One of the main factors here was
the crisis in Asia and its conceivable effects on international economic developments and prices. There
were risks of the crisis’ effects being greater than assumed in the main scenario in June, so that weak
demand and low inflation in the rest of the world would lead to an even lower price rise in the Swedish
economy.
All  in  all,  these  considerations  meant  that  in  the  June  report  the  Riksbank’s  overall
assessment of inflation in the coming years was adjusted downwards. As the rate of inflation twelve to
twenty-four months ahead was judged to be below the target, the Riksbank considered that, at least for a
time, there was room for a somewhat more expansionary monetary stance. The repo rate was therefore
lowered 25 basis points.
4. What has happened since the June report?
Let us now look at what has actually happened since the beginning of the summer.
Low pressure from international prices
During  the  summer  the  Asian  crisis  has  got  worse  and  the  uncertainty  about  its  future
course  seems  to  have  grown.  More  countries  in  the  region  are  now  expected  to  show  a  fall  in  output
during  the  year.  One  of  the  main  factors  behind  the  deterioration  is  the  weak  Japanese  economy.  The
knock-on effects of the Japanese crisis in other parts of the world are highly uncertain, as is the outlook
in such countries as Russia and China.
An  impact  from  the  Asian  crisis  is  now  discernible  in  economic  growth  in  the  United
States  and  the  United  Kingdom.  These  economies  show  signs  of  a  slowdown  that  can  be  traced  to
decreased exports to Asia but there are also indications that their domestic demand is slackening.
In the euro area, however, growth prospects seem to be more favourable. The recovery
appears to be firm—to a growing extent as a result of stronger domestic demand—and it looks as though
inflation will remain low.
The  overall  picture  of  international  activity  is  somewhat  weaker  than  the  Riksbank
forecast in June. International inflationary pressure is low. The extensive economic problems in  Japan
and the unrest in global stock exchanges are contributing to this.
BIS Review  66/1998
Swedish economy strong
- 4 -
Economic growth in Sweden seems to be good, however. As expected, the statistics show
an accelerating growth of domestic demand, accompanied by a slowdown in foreign trade.
Private consumption is rising strongly and a continuation of this trend is indicated by a
number of factors: households’ personal economic expectations are still rising, employment is expanding
and  disposable  income  is  growing  as  a  result  of  low  inflation  and  a  less  restrictive  fiscal  policy.
Uncertainty about share prices could have a contrary effect but the downward movements that have been
observed constitute no more than a correction after a relatively strong increase. Since the beginning of
1998 the Stockholm Exchange has risen 20 per cent. The statistics also show strong growth for public
consumption as well as gross capital formation.
But foreign trade is weakening; export growth is slowing and imports are rising. There
are  several  signs  that  exports  will  go  on  slackening;  the  inflow  of  export  orders  has  deteriorated  and
confidence has fallen among purchasing managers in manufacturing. However, the weaker exchange rate
may have a contrary effect on exports.
The  inflation  statistics  show  that  inflationary  pressure  in  the  Swedish  economy  is  still
low. In June and July the price level fell 0.2 per cent. This means that for both months the twelve-month
rate of inflation was 0.6 per cent.
All  in  all,  it  looks  as  though  the  growth  of  domestic  demand  in  1998  may  exceed  the
assessment  in  the  June  report.  On  the  other  hand,  foreign  trade  may  be  somewhat  weaker  than  we
counted on at that time. Thus, the figures on real economic developments that have been published since
the latest inflation report do not seem to call for any substantial revision of the forecasts. Neither have
the summer figures for inflation or the regular surveys of inflation expectations altered the outlook from
the early summer.
Weaker exchange rate
In the June report we counted on some appreciation of the krona in the forecast period.
During the summer the krona has weakened and I want to take this opportunity of commenting on the
tendency since June. Most of the weakening has occurred in August. In effective terms (TCW) the krona
has depreciated somewhat more than 3 per cent since the beginning of June, from 119 to 123. Against the
US dollar and the German mark the fall in this period amounts to somewhat more than 5 per cent and 3
per cent, respectively.
Several  explanations  are  given  for  the  weakening  of  the  krona.  A  downward  tendency
was already evident in May–June in connection with the repo rate cut. After that the krona seems to have
been pulled down by the unrest in Asia, which has hit relatively small industrialised countries that are
dependent  on  foreign  trade.  Some  observers  consider  that  countries  with  a  high  export  share  for  raw
materials have experienced a currency depreciation in connection with the price fall for raw materials.
That explanation is not really all that applicable to Sweden because it is difficult to show that we are still
particularly dependent on raw materials exports.
The stock exchange turbulence is also considered to have had a major effect on the krona
recently in that nonresidents have disposed of Swedish shares, which involves selling kronor for other
currencies.  Since  the  June  inflation  report  there  has  been  no  new  information  that  warrants  increased
concern  about  economic  development  in  Sweden.  So  the  weaker  krona  does  not  appear  to  reflect  a
change in confidence in the economic fundamentals. The traditional indicators of credibility, computed
from  price  trends  in  financial  markets,  convey  the  same  picture.  Both  the  long  bond  differential  with
Germany  and  the  expected  future  short  interest  rates  point  to  persistently  strong  confidence  in  the
low-inflation policy.
BIS Review  66/1998
- 5 -
In this context I should like briefly to rehearse the role of the exchange rate in monetary
policy. The Riksbank does not target the exchange rate; monetary policy focuses instead on a target for
inflation.  The  exchange  rate  can  be  seen  as  one  of  a  number  of  indicators—albeit  one  of  the  most
important—that we use to predict inflationary pressure in the Swedish economy. If the krona weakens or
strengthens permanently, then this—all else equal—will affect inflation.
The difficulty accordingly lies in assessing the permanence of exchange rate movements
and incorporating the assessment in the overall picture of inflation. The economic fundamentals favour
an appreciation of the krona in the coming years. For this reason we believe that the current weakening is
temporary and will be followed in time by a renewed appreciation. It should be underscored, however,
that  if  the  krona’s  weakening  to  date  can  be  regarded  as  permanent,  then  there  are  also  reasons  for
expecting that the weaker exchange rate will lead to inflation at a higher rate than we foresaw in the June
report.  That  would  have  consequences  for  monetary  policy,  always  assuming,  of  course,  that  other
factors have not simultaneously contributed to a better outlook for inflation.
The  recent  weakening  of  the  krona,  together  with  increased  concern  about  continued
turbulence  in  Asia  and  global  stock  exchanges,  has  shown  up  in  money  market  pricing.  The  market’s
earlier assessment was that room existed for further interest rate cuts. Today the picture is less clear-cut.
This I find entirely natural in that the exchange rate is an important factor in our assessment of future
inflation.
The overall picture
To  sum  up,  the  new  statistics  since  June  largely  support  the  opinion  about  inflation
prospects  that  we  presented  in  the  latest  report.  The  figures  for  real  economic  activity  and  inflation
suggest, if anything, that the path of inflation will be lower than in our main scenario in the June report.
If so, however, it is presumably a question of marginal revisions. The exchange rate, however, instead of
moving as we predicted, has weakened. The assessment of this tendency and how it should be weighed
up with other factors in an overall assessment of inflation prospects is a matter to which the Riksbank
will be returning in the next inflation report on September 28th.
Concluding remarks
Having presented the Riksbank’s picture of current economic developments, I should like
to return to the somewhat longer time perspective from the beginning of this talk and take up the issue
that is the theme for today’s speakers. Is there room for expansion in the Swedish economy? In doing so I
shall concentrate on two fields that are closely connected with monetary policy: the functioning of the
labour market and fiscal policy.
The  economic  policy  that  has  been  implemented  in  recent  years,  with  its  emphasis  on
price stability and sound government finances, has had favourable results in a number of respects. High
growth has been combined with persistently low inflation. Moreover, the composition of growth has been
structurally  desirable,  focusing  on  exports  and  industrial  expansion.  This  helps  to  establish  a  better
foundation for a sustained increase in future consumption. A reduction of external debt has begun.
Prospects  for  the  coming  years  also  look  favourable.  It  seems  that  output  can  grow
relatively rapidly by Swedish standards, accompanied by relatively low inflation.
There is reason to emphasise, however, that what we see is hardly the final solution to
our problems but rather important initial steps towards a more balanced development.
For  one  thing,  the  positive  trend  in  the  Swedish  economy  does  not  yet  apply  at  all
substantially to the labour market. A downward adjustment in the rate of wage increases towards more
reasonable long-term figures has begun but we do not know how permanent it will be. What will happen
in the next round of wage negotiations if capacity utilisation at that time is high? Is the functioning of the
BIS Review  66/1998
- 6 -
labour  market  in  other  respects  sufficiently  smooth  for  the  adequate  creation  and  filling  of  new  job
vacancies?  This  is  a  key  question.  If  we  do  not  succeed  in  finding  good  solutions  in  Sweden  when  it
comes to wage formation and the workings of the labour market, in the longer run it will not be possible
to permit such strong economic expansion as we have experienced in recent years.
Another  aspect  of  economic  policy  that,  like  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market,  is
closely connected with the Riksbank’s domain is fiscal policy. In recent years monetary policy has been
assisted  in  the  first  place  in  that  the  consolidation  of  government  finances  has  restored  a  stable
foundation  for  economic  policy;  in  addition,  there  has  been  the  more  direct  restraint—in  a  cyclical
perspective—on demand and price impulses. In recent decades that was by no means invariably the case.
On the contrary, there were periods when fiscal policy accentuated the cyclical movements.
I find it important to issue a warning about repeating mistakes of this type. In the middle
of  an  economic  upswing  we  are  now  hearing  calls  for  expansionary  fiscal  policies  in  the  form  of
increased public spending as well as unfinanced tax cuts. There are strong long-term grounds for using
the upswing in activity to build up government surpluses as a buffer for harder times. That will increase
our  future  freedom  of  action  in  economic  policy.  It  will  be  easier  to  cope  both  with  future  economic
downturns and with structural challenges such as an ageing population. A tighter fiscal policy also eases
the burden on monetary policy and increases the probability in the years ahead of being able to continue
to  have  low  interest  rates  and  a  stable  economic  development,  with  good  growth  of  production  and
employment.
BIS Review  66/1998
