Statement by Mr. Dai Xianglong on the stability of the Chinese yuan and on
a number of other regional issues   Statement by the Governor of the People’s Bank of China,
Mr.  Dai  Xianglong,  at  a  press  conference  held  on  16th January  1998,  on  the  stability  of  the
Chinese  yuan,  the  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  in  South-East  Asia,  the  linked  exchange  rate
system  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  and  the  impact  of  the  collapse  of
Peregrine on domestic business.
The commitment to hold the current yuan exchange rate steady
Judging from the balance of payments position and macroeconomic performance,
there  is  no  possibility  for  the  Chinese  yuan  to  depreciate.  I  believe  that  the  yuan  will  remain
stable and will not depreciate for the following reasons. First of all, over the past years, the value
of the yuan has appreciated and the exchange rate at the end of last year  stood  at  around  yuan
8.29 for a dollar. The  trade  surplus  of  last  year  reached  $43  billion,  and  capital  inflow  was  as
high  as  $60  billion,  which,  put  together,  contributed  to  the  rise  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.
Following a successive increase over the years, the total amount of foreign exchange was $139.9
billion.  In  addition,  this  reserve  position  does  not  include  another  $2.5  billion  to  support  the
South-East Asian countries to  overcome  their  financial  crisis  and  $2  billion  otherwise  retained
by foreign trade corporations. In the wake of the drastic currency depreciation for a number of
countries in South-East Asia, the pace of increase for China’s foreign exchange reserves slowed
down,  which  in  the  end  reduced  the  upward  pressure  for  yuan.  Second,  the  macroeconomic
prospects for this year look quite favourable. With continued price stability, GDP for this year is
expected  to  grow  over  8%,  which  can  be  seen  as  another  contributing  factor  for  a  steady
exchange  rate.  Third,  the  level  of  exchange  rate  is  determined  overall  by  foreign  exchange
demand and supply. It is true that the currency depreciation in some South-East Asian countries
does increase the pressure on our export. But such a pressure is quite limited given the fact that
commodities  from  China  and  their  destination  are  different  from  those  of  South-East  Asian
countries. Fourth the labour cost in China is significantly lower in comparison with South-East
Asian countries, and in fact 50% of our export is in the form of processing of imported material,
which  is  not  subject  to  the  influence  of  exchange  rate  fluctuation.  Indeed,  Chinese  export
businesses  can  enhance  their  competitiveness  via  reducing  cost  and  improving  product  mix.  It
can be said with a high degree of certainty that prospects for the country’s exports this year will
remain  favourable.  I  would  like  to  reaffirm  our  commitment  to  hold  the  yuan  exchange  rate
steady with no consideration for depreciation and to stand ready for the test of the market. This
commitment can be seen as our contribution to financial stability in Asia.
Over 8% GDP growth in 1998
The financial crisis in some South-East Asian countries will have some impact on
the growth rate for China, for example trade between China and South Korea. However, China
largely depends on its domestic market for growth. In  1998,  China  will  continue  to  expand  its
export  market  and  increase  its  domestic  investment.  With  continued  price  stability,  GDP  is
expected  to  grow  over  8%  in  1998.  The  slowdown  of  the  GDP  growth  to  8.8%  last  year  is
attributed  to  international  factors  and  the  sluggish  growth  of  township  and  village  enterprises.
We believe that supported by the vigorous measurers to address the adverse influence, we  will
be able to maintain GDP growth over 8% in 1998.
To be specific, first of all we shall continue to pursue a moderately tight monetary
policy  and  make  timely  adjustment  as  necessary.  Broad  money  will  be  expected  to  grow  by
BIS Review   4/1998
- 2 -
16-18%, narrow money by 17% and injection  of  cash  by  yuan  140  billion.  More  discount  and
rediscount activities will be expected for commercial papers. Second, banks will be expected to
improve  their  services  in  support  of  new  growth  areas.  The  financing  service  for  residential
houses  will  be  improved  so  as  to  strongly  support  the  growth  of  the  market  for  residential
houses,  to  expand  the  scope  of  residential  lending  and  remove  the  lending  quotas  imposed  on
public housing projects for less privileged people. Loans denominated in foreign exchange will
be  actively  developed  on  the  domestic  market  with  a  projected  increase  of  10-15%  of  foreign
currency  denominated  lending.  The  input  for  agriculture,  railway,  highway  and  high-tech
industry will  be  increased  under  the  precondition  of  ensuring  the  service  of  loans.  Finally,  the
interest  rate  instrument  will  be  used  appropriately  to  adjust  the  money  supply,  but  at  this
moment the central bank has no intention to lower interest rates.
Toward the establishment of a modern financial system and a regulatory/supervisory system
In  1997  the  financial  sector  functioned  in  a  sound  manner  and  contributed  in  a
significant  way  to  economic  development  and  social  stability.  In  1998  we  will  continue  to
pursue a moderately tight monetary policy and make strong efforts toward the establishment of a
modern  financial  system  and  a  regulatory/supervisory  system  to  the  extent  that  all  financial
institutions  will  be  properly  regulated/supervised  by  law,  and  financial  risks  are  properly
reduced  in  the  interest  of  significantly  improving  the  order  in  the  financial  industry  and
promoting  a  high  and  steady  growth  of  the  economy.  In  so  doing,  the  most  crucial  policy
measure is to reform the organisational structure of the central bank. The number of provincial
branches of the central bank will be reduced in a well-planned approach. A number of first-tier
branches across the  judicial  administrative  line  will  be  created  so  as  to  enhance  independence,
authority and expertise of the central bank. In addition, with regard to commercial banks, their
provincial  branches  and  branches  located  in  provincial  capital  cities  will  be  consolidated
gradually  and  the  grassroots  branches  with  overlapped  businesses  with  their  counterparts  that
have  incurred  sustained  losses  will  be  removed.  When  conditions  allow,  urban  commercial
banks will be created in 300 city centres with equity shares from local fiscal authorities with a
view to establishing a multi-layered financial system comprising different financial institutions.
The  underlying  nature  of  financial  institutions  requires  the  existence  of  a  set  of  rules  and
regulations  for  the  management  of  the  institutions.  All  these  institutions  shall  function  in
compliance  with  laws  and  regulations  and  no  government  agencies  or  individuals  shall  be
allowed  to  interfere  with  the  business  management  of  financial  businesses.  Again,  these
institutions  shall  be  required  to  assume  managerial  responsibility  and  risk  inherent  in  the
business.  Their  internal  control  system  shall  be  strengthened.  The  supervisory  board  shall  be
established  for  all  state-owned  commercial  banks.  The  lending  quota  imposed  on  these  banks
will  be  removed  and  they  will  gradually  adopt  the  basic  asset  and  liability  ratios  and  risk
management techniques for managing their balance sheets. With  reference  to  internal  practices
and in consideration of the country circumstances, we will improve the existing system for asset
classification and loan loss provisioning. Efforts will be made to improve the system for capital
replenishment in order to increase capital adequacy of financial institutions. In maintaining the
order  in  financial  industry,  we  shall  follow  the  principle  of  segregating  commercial  banking
from  securities  and  trust  businesses  and  close  all  unlicensed  financial  institutions.  All  these
measures will be phased in during the next three years according to a well designed plan. By the
decision of the State Council, we shall build a modern enterprise system, a modern financial and
regulatory  system  within  a  time  framework  of  three  years.  I  feel  optimistic  that  state-owned
commercial banks and other commercial banks will operate under an new mechanism at the turn
of the century.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 3 -
The lessons from the financial crisis in South-East Asian countries
Serious  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  the  financial  crisis  in  South-East  Asian
countries. This is also true for China despite the fact that the country started early in 1993 to cap
the bubbles in the economy. The major lessons for us can be summarised as follows: first of all,
it is essential to maintain an equilibrium for aggregate demand and supply, and especially to be
on guard against the bubbles in the real estate and stock market; second, the structure of external
borrowing  should  be  proper  and  external  borrowing  by  domestic  businesses  should  be  well
regulated. Before the crisis, fiscal deficits were  small,  economic  fundamentals  were  sound  and
central bank reserves were high. The underlying cause for the crisis is the over indebtedness of
business entities, especially the large amount of short-term borrowing not necessarily reported to
the  central  bank.  Given  what  has  happened,  China  will  continue  to  favour  foreign  direct
investment and long-term commercial borrowing as a general policy. At the same time, external
borrowing  by  domestic  businesses  shall  be  reviewed  very  carefully  and  subject  to  a  ceiling;
third, efforts shall be made to actively pursue the development of capital market and gradually
achieve capital account convertibility for the renminbi. On top of that, the country must maintain
substantial foreign exchange reserves; fourth, a safe and sound financial system must be in place,
and  no  government  agencies  or  individuals  should  interfere  with  the  business  operations  of
commercial banks. In an effort to ensure the stability of financial industry and reduce financial
risk, a dozen policy measures have been introduced. A better structured financial system is sure
to emerge in China three years later.
A strong commitment to an open policy
We  shall  not  abandon  the  open  policy  simply  because  of  the  financial  crisis  in
South-East Asia. By the end of 1997, 173 foreign financial institutions were licensed to operate
in China with total assets amounting to $36 billion. The Chinese banks, insurance and securities
companies  had  687  overseas  establishments  actively  developing  businesses  abroad.  We  will
continue to grant licenses for foreign banks and insurance companies and authorise more foreign
banks to do local currency business on a trial basis. However, we would be more cautious in this
regard.
China as a safe haven for foreign investment in Asia
With  good  reason,  China  can  be  expected  to  maintain  its  status  as  the  second
largest  recipient  for  foreign  direct  investment.  Although  the  contractual  amount  of  FDI  has
decreased to a certain extent, the amount of actual investment has been on the rise, particularly
by big multinational corporations. China has a stable political situation, a strong currency and a
good  climate  for  foreign  investment  and  lower  tariffs.  A  new  policy  was  announced  recently
whereby  the  import  of  equipment  by  investing  foreign  businesses  shall  be  exempt  from  value
added tax for imports. Therefore, China is very attractive for foreign investment.
The commitment of  the  government  of  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  to  hold  the
Hong Kong dollar steady
The  financial  crisis  in  South-East  Asia  is  not  over  yet  and  the  possibility  of
another  attack  on  Hong  Kong’s  financial  market  still  remains.  So  far,  the  government  of  the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region has introduced a number of measures to protect the
BIS Review   4/1998
- 4 -
stability of the Hong Kong dollar and its financial market, one of which is to maintain the Hong
Kong  dollar  peg.  The  linked  exchange  rate  system  introduced  more  than  ten  years  ago  has
contributed in a significant way to stabilising the Hong Kong economy. At present, Hong Kong
has strong economic fundamentals, a sound banking system, large foreign exchange reserves and
sufficient experience in regulating the economy. Therefore, the linked exchange rate system will
remain  unchanged  and  experience  has  shown  that  this  can  be  done  and  will  be  done.  In
defending the exchange rate, interest rates in Hong Kong rose and caused the drop of prices on
the  stock  market.  Although  banks’  profitability  has  declined,  the  profitability  ratio  for  Hong
Kong banks remains the highest in the whole world. Indeed, 30% drop of the real estate price is
a correction of overvalued real estate in Hong Kong and can prove to be conducive to improving
the competitiveness of Hong Kong.
BIS Review   4/1998
