Mr. Erçel speaks on lessons for Turkish policy-makers from the East Asian
crisis   Address by the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr. Gazi Erçel,
at the Euromoney Conference: Investing In The Future, in Istanbul, on 3/6/98.
It is a pleasure to address you at this new Euromoney Conference being held  in
Turkey. I wish to thank Euromoney and its staff for arranging this conference, which has helped
us reach a better understanding of the Turkish economy and the macroeconomic policies pursued
by the authorities.
I would like to speak today about “Lessons from the East Asian crisis for Turkish
policy-makers”.  The  financial  crisis  in  the  East  Asian  countries  has  had  strong  effects  on  the
economies of the world, on industrial and emerging market countries alike. Some of these effects
have made themselves felt very quickly, while others will not run their course for another two or
three  years.  I  may  say  that  these  effects  are  strong  but  not  dangerous.  One  area  of  particular
concern is capital flows to emerging market economies, which may increase spreads and bring
about a capital market retrenchment.
According  to  a  study  conducted  by  the  Institute  of  International  Finance,  net
private capital flows to major emerging market economies have slowed only slightly below their
1997  level  of  $223  billion,  but  are  well  below  their  1996  level  of  $304  billion.  But  the  share
coming  from  commercial  banks  and  direct  equity  investments  from  private  creditors  will
decrease more than was expected, which means that capital flows will be smaller.
I do not wish to review the origins of the East Asian crisis in detail, but it shows
us  that  it  is  the  structural  weakness  of  domestic  financial  systems  and  the  growing  foreign
perception of that weakness that triggers a crisis in an economy. Like the Mexican peso crisis, the
East Asian crisis was a classic “self-fulfilling prophecy” panic initiated by Jeffrey Sachs.
It is widely recognized that both the Mexican crisis and the crisis in the East Asian
countries stemmed from incorrect macroeconomic policies and structural imbalances. Exchange
rate policies in particular, combined with irresponsible fiscal policies, put enormous strain on the
balance of payments. Weak domestic financial systems and rapid expansion of domestic credit,
combined with pegged exchange rate regimes, deepen the economies’ dependence on short-term
external borrowing.
But it is a distinctive feature of the East Asian crisis that it is based more on the
private sector than were the public sector crises seen during the 1970s and 1980s. The solutions
found for the public-sector-based crises of those years were simpler. Programs supported by the
IMF,  and  much  less  government  borrowing  from  international  institutions,  were  the  main
elements  in  the  solution  of  those  crises.  The  private-sector-based  crises  of  today  are  more
complicated and harder to understand.
Let me follow up this brief summary by focusing my remarks this morning on four
main areas where lessons from the recent East Asian crisis may be found.
First, it was the countries’ ongoing exchange rate policies that contributed to the
build  up  of  crisis  conditions.  The  countries  of  the  East  Asian  region  chose  to  pursue  a  fixed
exchange rate policy, or one pegged to the US dollar, for about a decade after the Plaza Accord.
In  the  beginning  these  policies  contributed  to  stronger  growth  and  low  inflation  in  these
BIS Review   50/1998
- 2 -
countries. But starting in 1995, the appreciation of their currencies had begun to threaten their
balance-of-payments positions.
Second, to offset the weakness of their economies, the  authorities  relied  heavily
on much short-term financing, which concealed the weaknesses of their macroeconomic policies.
The  nature  and  direction  of  the  flow  of  short-term  international  capital  had  not  been  properly
analyzed. The ratios of short-term debt to usable foreign exchange reserves were in the range of
170-200 percent for Indonesia, Korea and the Philippines, much higher than the average ratio of
70 percent for the other major emerging market economies.
Third,  transparency  of  banking  systems,  including  central  banks,  is  essential  for
analyzing  ongoing  developments  in  countries’  financial  sectors.  In  particular,  trends  in  their
off-balance-sheet  items,  cross-border  interbank  funding  and  their  transactions  with  offshore
centers should first of all be transparent and second should be available for making judgements
about the system. The absence of a sufficiently thorough system of banking supervision and the
lack of transparency not only became problematic before the crisis, but also caused confidence
problems later on.
Fourth, the quality of the assets of the banking system is vital for the soundness of
macroeconomic policy. In allocating savings to investment use, the banks should be extremely
careful about the risks that must be taken for a variety of reasons. There are five main types of
risk that the banking system and of course the appropriate authorities have to deal with: interest
risk; foreign exchange risk; maturity risk; loan risk; and market risk. A sound financial system is
the best assurance of efficient monetary and fiscal policies.
In  my  view,  all  four  of  these  factors  contributed  to  the  change  of  foreign
perceptions  and  sentiment  and  produced  a  cutback  in  normal  financing  (in  fact,  95 percent  of
external flows to emerging market countries come from the private marketplace). This cutback,
in  turn,  weakened  the  external  reserve  positions  of  these  countries.  Then  the  combination  of
weak reserves and a weak financial sector brought on a liquidity crisis.
We are now in a position to draw some lessons from the East Asian crisis. First,
policy  implementation  must  pursue  sound  macroeconomic  policies  in  order  not  to  lose  the
confidence of the markets. And second, four main principles must constantly be kept in mind:
•  The  currency  should  not  be  allowed  to  appreciate,  except  as  part  of  a  bold
anti-inflation program.
•  Any  short-term  international  capital  flows  that  occur  must  be  carefully
examined  to  determine  their  direction  and  nature.  In  addition,  the  ratio  of
usable  external  reserves  to  short-term  debt  must  be  kept  at  reasonable  and
internationally accepted levels.
•  Weak  banking  systems  have  been  the  most  important  contributors  to  past
crises. A sound and transparent banking system is an absolute requirement for
avoiding future crises. Risk-taking strategies should be appropriate to a market
system.  Off-balance-sheet  items  and  cross-border  lending  should  be  under
tight discipline. An independent supervisory authority is the best guarantee of
efficient, sound, and effective banking supervision.
BIS Review   50/1998
- 3 -
•  Last  but  not  least,  the  pursuit  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies  in  a
low-inflation environment is an essential precondition for building public and
market  confidence.  Confidence  also  requires  that  both  public  and  private
sector institutions be guided by strong, high quality governance and accepted
ethical rules.
The last point that I want to make  is  that  I  disagree  with  those  economists  who
speak of the difficulty of anticipating the East Asian crisis, since these countries had assembled
all the ingredients of a perfect crisis recipe:
•  An appreciated exchange rate;
•  A high and worsening ratio of short-term debt to usable foreign reserves;
•  Untransparent off-balance-sheet items in the banking sector;
•  A widening current account deficit;
•  Steep growth of domestic credits;
•  And  a  continuous  decline,  during  recent  years,  in  emerging  markets’
their  economic
improvement 
in 
borrowing  spreads  without  matching 
fundamentals.
If someone should combine  all  these  elements,  it  is  conceivable  that  they  might
succeed in creating a crisis.
But  the  world’s  financial  centers  turned  away  from  the  existence  of  this  perfect
crisis recipe and turned toward the Turkish economy, for which, ignoring the  developments  in
East Asia, they predicted a crisis during the last couple of years.
The Turkish economy does not satisfy the perfect crisis recipe described above. Of
course we have high inflation, a high nominal budget deficit, and high short-term domestic debt,
but on the other hand Turkey’s exchange rate policy, current account situation, the nature of its
short-term external debt, and other fundamentals do not indicate an alarming situation.
The East Asian crisis should have  greatly  improved  the  ability  of  economists  to
predict an episode. I would be glad to see some evidence of this improvement.
BIS Review   50/1998
