Bank of Japan’s July report of recent economic and financial developments1   Bank
of Japan communication, 21/7/98.
The Bank’s View2
Final demand remains weak and production has declined significantly. Employment and
income  conditions  continue  to  deteriorate,  and  corporate  sentiment  is  weakening  further.  As  a  whole,
Japan’s economic conditions have deteriorated.
With respect to final demand, public-sector investment seems to have bottomed out. Net
exports, which decreased temporarily in the first quarter of 1998, have resumed to increase mainly due to
a sharp decline in imports. Business fixed investment, however, has decreased significantly, and housing
investment  remains  weak.  Private  consumption  has  shown  little  sign  of  recovery,  although  the
deterioration has stopped. Against the background of weak final demand, the level of inventories remains
high, and the decline in industrial production is accelerating. As a result, corporate profits have further
decreased, and employment and income conditions have deteriorated conspicuously as seen in the fall in
wages below the previous year’s level.
Although  the  above  indicates  negative  interactions  of  production,  income,  and
expenditure,  a  further  deterioration  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  cease  as  the  effects  of  the
comprehensive economic stimulus package, including additional public works and the special income tax
reduction, become full scale. However, given the current considerably low level of economic activities,
the  positive  influence  of  the  package  on  private  demand  will  likely  be  limited,  and  the  economy’s
immediate transition to a self-sustained recovery is hardly expected. In these circumstances, measures to
rebuild the stability of the financial system have been devised, and the reform of the taxation system is
expected  to  be  discussed  actively.  The  materialization  of  these  policies  along  with  the  effects  on
corporate and household sentiment should be carefully monitored.
With regard to prices, wholesale prices continue to fall, and consumer prices (excluding
the effects of institutional changes) have declined slightly below the previous year’s level. With respect
to the factors affecting the outlook, the downward pressure on domestic prices induced by the decline in
import prices is weakening. In addition, the expansion in the output gap in the economy is expected to
slow  in  line  with  the  implementation  of  the  comprehensive  economic  stimulus  package.  Nevertheless,
reflecting  the  present  large  output  gap,  the  downward  pressure  from  domestic  factors  is  unlikely  to
weaken considerably, and hence, prices are likely to be weak for some time.
As for financial markets, stock prices and yields on long-term government  bonds  have
rebounded  since  mid-June  1998.  This  may  be  attributed  to  a  slight  recovery  in  market  sentiment,
although  still  weak,  responding  to  the  announcement  of  the  Comprehensive  Plan  for  Financial
Revitalization, the so-called Total Plan, and to the emergence of expectations for permanent tax cut.
In money markets, with the heightened awareness toward financial problems at a bank,
concerns  over  credit  risks  of  financial  institutions  strengthened  once  again,  and  upward  pressure  on
interest rates suddenly mounted toward the end of June. However, with the ample provision of funds by
the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  announcement  of  the  Total  Plan,  market  anxieties  settled  down,  and  the
upward pressure on interest rates gradually eased.
With respect to monetary aggregates, growth in M2+CDs has been slowing, reflecting the
sluggish private bank lending. These developments appear to strongly reflect the further decline in credit
                                                     
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting
was held on July 16, 1998.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary
Policy Meeting held on July 16, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 2 -
demand of private firms with the worsening of overall economic activities, and the continued cautious
attitudes of private banks in extending loans.
Meanwhile,  some  firms,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  have  been  facing
difficult financing conditions in terms of both funds availability and fund-raising costs. This influence on
the overall economy continues to warrant careful monitoring.
BIS Review   63/1998
