Mr.  Thiessen  reports  on  the  future  performance  of  the  Canadian  economy
Notes for remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon Thiessen, to the Canadian
Club of Winnipeg, in Winnipeg on 25/3/98.
It  can  take  anywhere  from  one  to two  years  for  monetary  actions  to  have  their  full
effect on the economy. Because of this, the conduct of monetary policy must be based on a view of
what the economy will be like -- not tomorrow, not in a month -- but rather in one to two years’ time.
That is why in speeches in Vancouver and Toronto last year I spoke about where the
Canadian  economy  might  be  heading  in  the  future;  what  this  might  imply  for  our  economic
performance  over  the  medium  term;  and  what  should  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  be.
Understandably,  these  important  issues  can  get  pushed  aside  because  of  the  public  focus  on  the
current economic situation and on recent movements in short-term interest rates and in the external
value of the Canadian dollar.
Today,  I  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  revisit  these  medium-term  issues.  In
doing so, I will be underlining the crucial role played by productivity improvements in our economic
performance. The best place to start is with a brief review of the recent record.
Recent economic performance
As we approach the end of the decade, we can take satisfaction in the good economic
performance of the past two years and in the notable improvements in our economic fundamentals.
The Canadian economy has expanded at an average annual rate of 4 per cent since mid-1996 and,
even with the dampening effects of the Asian crisis, it is expected to continue to grow at a healthy
pace  this  year.  This  should  contribute  to  further  gains  in  employment  and  reduce  the  amount  of
unused capacity.
Inflation is low, and we are committed to keeping it low. Last month, together with
the federal government, we announced that we would extend our target of holding inflation inside a
range  of  1  to  3  per  cent  to  the  end  of  2001.  Moreover,  government  deficits  have  virtually
disappeared, and the ratio of public debt relative to the size of our economy is finally on a downward
path -- for the first time in about 25 years. Low inflation and improved fiscal health represent major
contributions towards the sounder economic fundamentals I mentioned a moment ago. They are no
doubt the main reason why our interest rates have been below US rates.
The other key area where there have been important improvements in recent years is
in  the  private  business  sector.  Since  the  early  1990s,  Canadian  businesses  have  taken  up  the
challenge of structural adjustment, which their US counterparts had started several years earlier, in
response  to  the  gathering  momentum  of  technological  change,  globalization,  and  heightened
competition.
With  the  benefit  of  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates,  Canadian  businesses  have
been  investing  in  new  technology  and  streamlining  their  operations  to enhance  productivity.  Their
success in doing so will be crucial to our future economic performance.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
The importance of productivity growth
- 2 -
Why this emphasis on improving productivity? Whether viewed from the perspective
of  an  individual  firm  or  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  overemphasize  the
importance of rising productivity for overall performance and prosperity.
Productivity  growth  is  what  allows  firms  to  hand  out  real  wage  increases,  while
holding their production costs down and remaining profitable.
From  a  broader  perspective,  productivity  growth  is  a  key  element  that  determines
economic welfare and  the  general  well-being  of  a  society.  At  any  point  in  time,  our  perception  of
how well we are doing economically is probably influenced by where we happen to be in the cyclical
fluctuations that affect any economy. But over the longer term, the trend in productivity growth for
the economy as a whole is the basis for growing incomes and rising standards of living.
Now, I know that for some people any discussion of the need to increase productivity
can  be  rather  unsettling.  They  tend  to  associate  improvements  in  productivity  in  an  individual
company with downsizing and layoffs. And from there it is only a short step to the belief that strong
economy-wide  productivity  gains  can  only  mean  a  more  difficult  job  market  and  higher
unemployment.
But the history of industrial economies shows that growth in productivity has actually
gone  hand  in  hand  with  improved  overall  employment  conditions.  This  is  borne  out  by  the
experience of countries like Japan in the 1980s and, more recently, the United States and the United
Kingdom. That was also our experience in Canada during the 1950s and 1960s.
Canada’s productivity record
So how has Canada fared in the productivity department since the 1950s and 1960s?
Not all that well, I’m afraid. After a relatively strong showing from the end of the Second World War
to  the  early  1970s,  our  productivity  performance  became  rather  lacklustre.  Productivity  growth  is
estimated to have slowed from an average rate of about 2 per cent in the 1950s and 1960s to less than
1 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s, although it has picked up recently with the recovery in economic
activity.
I  should  note  that  economists  do  not  fully  understand  why  productivity  growth  in
Canada (and, indeed, in other industrial countries) has slowed so sharply since the mid-1970s. I do
not propose to try to untangle this puzzle today. Nonetheless, there are a few points I would like to
make with respect to the Canadian situation.
The sharp rise in the world price of oil in the 1970s no doubt dealt a major shock to
Canadian  industry.  Because  of  our  climate  and  because  of  the  importance  of  primary  commodity
production in our economy, we are major users of energy. Adapting to higher energy costs certainly
took considerable time.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 3 -
In my view, two other important factors inhibited productivity improvements through
much of the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s: large fiscal deficits and high inflation.
Government deficits through the 1980s and early 1990s tended to crowd out private
sector investment by appropriating an ever-increasing share of Canadian savings. It was, of course,
possible  for  businesses  and  governments to  get  foreign  financing.  But  the  accumulation  of  a  large
public sector debt and the rapid buildup of foreign indebtedness  eventually  resulted  in appreciable
premiums being built into our interest rates. High inflation through the 1970s and 1980s had a similar
effect on interest rates. For these reasons, interest rates were high, even after adjusting for inflation.
This discouraged some of the investment that would have contributed to gains in productivity.
Moreover,  because  high  inflation  increases  uncertainty  about  the  future,  businesses
and individuals seek protection from its ravages or try to profit from it. Either way, scarce economic
resources were diverted from productive investments towards hedging and speculative investments.
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  the  factors  I  have  mentioned  here  explain  all  of  our
productivity problems. But they no doubt worked against the investment that was needed to help us
adjust to both the oil price shocks of the 1970s and the global forces of the past two decades, and to
make headway in terms of productivity growth.
Let me now turn to the question of what we can expect in terms of productivity in the
future.
Future productivity trends and Canada’s economic potential
Increases in productivity do not just happen. We need to work hard to achieve them.
In  a  world  of  rapid  technological  change  and  intense  international  competition,  there  are
opportunities  and  incentives  for  productivity  gains  --  provided  we  do  what  is  necessary  to  take
advantage of the possibilities.
Productivity  comes  from  the  interaction  of  business  investment  in  new  capital
equipment, a skilled labour force, and the adoption of new technology. It takes entrepreneurship and
innovation to pull it all together. Typically, this interaction works best when businesses operate in a
stable, low-inflation economic environment and  when markets are competitive.  Producers  are  then
under pressure to perform in terms of price, quality, and service.
With  low  inflation,  a  balanced  fiscal  position,  and  low  interest  rates,  the  economic
policy  environment  is  better  now  than  it  has  been  for  over  25  years.  This  should  provide  the
underpinnings for solid economic growth and increased savings and investment in the future.
With  this  support  from  improving  economic  policy  conditions,  business  investment
has  indeed  been  buoyant,  particularly  since  mid-1996,  and  notably  in  high-technology  equipment
such as computers. As well, more and more businesses, led by high-tech enterprises, are reported to
have introduced new production technologies. Progress has also been made in learning  new  skills,
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 4 -
removing labour market rigidities, and improving the adaptability, flexibility, and efficiency of our
labour force. But more undoubtedly needs to be done in this area.
It is likely that these trends will continue in the future, and will spread to sectors that
have been lagging behind. With ongoing technological change, deregulation, trade liberalization, and
intensified  global  competition,  the  pressures  and  incentives  are  certainly  there  for  further
productivity gains.
Thus, the trends are positive, and the direction of our economy is clear. What is not
clear is just how much our economic performance will improve. We cannot attach precise estimates
to future growth in productivity. Neither can we judge the end results of the major structural changes
that have taken place in the private sector of the Canadian economy. Because of this, we need to take
a  somewhat  agnostic  view  about the  production  potential  of  the  Canadian  economy  and  about  the
lowest unemployment rate that can be sustained over time.
Monetary policy response -- making the most of the economy’s production potential
What are the implications of all this for the conduct of monetary policy?
When  we  at  the  Bank  look  one  to  two  years  into  the  future  to  set  a  course  for
monetary  policy,  we  must  take  into  account  changes  in  the  trends  that  affect  the  potential  of  the
economy to produce over time. At the same time, we must recognize that our ability to predict that
potential is restricted by the many uncertainties involved.
In these circumstances, the best way for monetary policy to help the economy realize
its potential is to focus on encouraging a sustained economic expansion over time. How do we do
this? By keeping inflation low. As we move towards full capacity over the next year or so, it will be
important to set monetary conditions at levels that forestall a resurgence of inflation and the painful
boom and bust cycles that go with it.
A  responsible,  credible  monetary  policy  will  allow  us  to  explore  the  limits  of  the
economy’s capacity to produce, to create jobs, and to support rising standards of living. The recent
US experience amply demonstrates the advantages and benefits of such a policy.
I believe that the recent extension of the inflation-control targets and the increasing
credibility  of  those  targets  give  monetary  policy  more  scope  to  test  the  limits  of  our  economic
potential than at any time since the 1960s.
Now that I have discussed the rationale behind the Bank of Canada’s medium-term
strategy, let me explain our recent actions to raise the Bank Rate.
As  I  said  earlier,  the  underlying  momentum  of  the  Canadian  economy  remains
positive. Despite the problems in Asia, Canada’s external environment is still favourable, given the
strength  in  our  major  non-Asian  trading  partners,  particularly  the  United  States.  In  addition,  the
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 5 -
dampening effects on domestic demand from the fiscal consolidation efforts of the past four years are
diminishing.  And  monetary  conditions  continue  to  support  the  economic  expansion.  Given  these
circumstances, the persistent decline in the external value of the Canadian dollar through December
and  January  implied  a  further  easing  in  monetary  conditions  that  looked  to  us  to  be  excessive.
Moreover,  the  speed  of  the  decline  in  the  currency  risked  undermining  investor  confidence  in
Canadian dollar assets. That is why we took action.
Concluding thoughts
Let me conclude by summarizing my main points today.
For  much  of  the  period  since  the  1960s,  we  have  not  had  conditions  in  place  that
would  allow  the  Canadian  economy  to  fully  realize  its  potential.  With  low  inflation  and  a  sound
fiscal position, we now have the foundation that should permit us to move towards full capacity and
to explore what our economy can deliver in terms of sustained growth in output and employment and
better standards of living.
Canada’s  private  sector  has  been  responding  to  the  universal  challenges  of  rapid
technological change, globalization, and heightened competition by undertaking major restructuring
initiatives to become more efficient, productive, and competitive. Although we do not know for sure
just  how  much  more  productive  we  are  going  to  be  as  a  result  of  these  initiatives,  there  is  good
reason for optimism.
The best contribution the Bank of Canada can make to this process is by continuing to
provide a stable, low-inflation environment. With an eye to the medium term, this will require setting
a  course  for  monetary  policy  that  will  ensure  that  the  Canadian  economy  reaches  full  capacity
smoothly and then continues to grow over time at a non-inflationary and therefore sustainable pace.
The  longer  economic  growth  is  sustained,  the  more  benefits  we  will  see  in  terms  of  improved
incomes and employment.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
