Mr. George discusses the problems in Asia and considers the risks they pose
to the global economy   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at
the British-American Chamber of Commerce Lunch in London on 22/1/98.
The role of the Chamber is to promote Anglo-American trade and investment, and
you’re doing a pretty good job. Two way trade in goods and services is running at around $50
billion in each direction, and has grown at an annual average rate of about 8% over the past five
years.  Over  the  same  period  the  US  has  accounted  for  just  over  half  of  all  inward  direct
investment  into  this  country  and  close  to  a  third  of  all  UK  outward  direct  investment.  These
examples suggest that our commercial relationships are in good shape.
Economic  developments  in  our  two  countries  have  provided  a  favourable
backdrop  to  British-American  commercial  relationships.  In  the  US  Goldilocks  continues  totiptoe through the tulips. Total output has been growing for seven years - at an average annual
rate  of  around  2¼%.  Unemployment  has  fallen  from  a  peak  of  7.4%  to  4.7%;  and  consumer
price inflation has averaged 3%.
In  this  country  output  has  been  growing  for  the  best  part  of  six  years  -  at  an
average annual rate of close to 3%. Unemployment on a comparable basis has fallen from a peak
of  10.7%  to  below  7%  and  underlying  consumer  price  inflation  has  averaged  around  2¾%.  Ifthat’s  not  Goldilocks  exactly,  it  is  surely  her  younger  sister!  And  while,  in  this  country
particularly, we are having to work harder to keep her from tasting Father Bear’s porridge, there
are now signs that the porridge itself may be beginning to cool down - as it needs to do, quite
soon and quite quickly, if we are not to see inflation pick up.
Some US business people - and certainly some British business people - engaged
in  international  trade  are  understandably  discomforted  by  the  recent  strength  of  our  respective
exchange  rates  -  not  vis-à-vis  each  other  because  the  dollar-sterling  rate  has  been  relatively
stable, but against the rest of the world. But the domestic environment, here and  in  the  United
States, remains - actually and prospectively - relatively benign.
We are though both exposed to the chilly winds  now  blowing  from  Asia.  And  I
should like to devote the rest of my remarks to discussing the problems in Asia and considering
I  emphasise  “problems”  in  this  context  because  it  is  important  to  recognise  that
the  situation  in  Asia  differs  materially  from  one  country  to  another,  even  though  they  are  all
inevitably affected to varying degrees - through their close commercial  links  with  each  other  -
by the present economic weakness in the region as a whole.
Let  me  begin  with  a  few  words  on  Japan.  Japan  is  of  course  much  the  largest
economy in Asia. After a spectacular period of sustained growth during the 1980s, the Japanese
economy has stagnated over the past six years, as Japan has struggled to overcome the fragility
of its financial system in the aftermath of the infamous Japanese financial bubble. A constraining
factor  for  much  of  this  time  has  been  a  widespread  resistance  to  the  use  of  public  funds  to
strengthen  the  financial  system  which  has,  in  turn,  constrained  the  financial  system  in  its
extension of domestic credit. Japan has been reluctant, too, given the size of its public debt, to
use fiscal policy to stimulate the domestic economy. There is now evidence of a change of heart
on both these fronts. Japan - which has an extraordinarily strong external position - was never at
the eye of the storm which struck Asia around the middle of last year. But if, as I expect, these
policy changes now lead to somewhat stronger domestic demand growth, and greater confidence
BIS Review   5/1998
- 2 -
in Japanese financial institutions, that will make a crucial contribution to the stabilisation of the
region as a whole.
The  storm  struck  essentially  the  ASEAN  Four  -  Thailand,  the  Philippines,
Malaysia  and  Indonesia  -  spreading  subsequently  to  South  Korea  and  intermittently  battering
Hong Kong and elsewhere.
It is still not wholly clear - to me at least - quite why the storm suddenly struck.
Most  crises  of  this  sort  have  their  origins  in  some  evident  macro-economic  policy  failure.  At
least in hindsight there are usually fairly clear tell-tale signs of expanding fiscal deficits and/or
lax  monetary  policies,  classically  accompanied  by  evidence  of  imbalance  in  the  form  of
accelerating  inflation  or  a  rapidly  deteriorating  balance  of  payments.  There  were  such  signs,
perhaps most notably in Thailand; but they were not for the most part particularly pronounced in
Asia. In fact through the first half of the 1990s, and in some cases for much longer, the countries
in question were remarkably successful. They  attracted,  by  their  very  success,  huge  inflows  of
capital from the rest of the world in search of higher returns.
The  capital  inflow  made  a  major  contribution  to  sustaining  the  economic
expansion  in  Asia,  but,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  the  increasing  scale  of  the  inflow,  and
particularly  the  form  that  it  took,  became  an  important  part  of  the  problem.  It  was  not  all
effectively  employed.  There  was  overinvestment  in  some  production  sectors;  much  went  into
ambitious  property  development;  and  much  went  into  financial  rather  than  real  assets.  The
hoped-for higher returns could not be maintained.
Again  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  possible  to  identify  a  number  of
structural  weaknesses  in  the  mechanisms  for  financial  resource  allocation  in  the  recipient
countries. There was, for example, a general lack of reliable financial information, and a lack of
transparency  in  relation  to  the  financial  position,  of  both  public  and  private  sectors.  Complex
and opaque links between government, financial institutions and non-financial companies made
it difficult for outsiders to understand the real nature of their exposures. Financial markets were
not well developed, leaving the system heavily dependent upon the banks. There was inadequate
regulatory or supervisory oversight. There was widespread government influence over financial
flows,  which  importantly  also  contributed  to  a  perception  that  much  of  the  borrowing  was
effectively under-written by the government. The list could go on.
The problem was compounded by the absence of any real perception of exchange
rate risk. Borrowers were evidently confident that governments would maintain  their  exchange
rate  pegs  against  the  dollar  so  that  unhedged  foreign  currency  debt,  much  of  it  at  short  term,
appeared  a  cheap  alternative  to  domestic  currency  borrowing.  The  result  was  a  build-up  of
short-term  private  sector  foreign  currency  liabilities,  by  banks  and  non-banks,  which  was  not
fully appreciated, and which left the Asian economies especially vulnerable to a flight of capital
in the event of a  change  in  sentiment.  The  problem  is  that  national  authorities  can  create  their
domestic currency, if they choose to do so, even if it leads to inflation, but they cannot simply
create foreign currencies in the same way.
So, once the run started, it was violent and contagious.
There are certainly all sorts of lessons to be drawn from Asia’s experience for the
future relating to the structural weaknesses in the financial system that  allowed  the  problem  to
emerge.  These  weaknesses  certainly  need  to  be  addressed  in  the  borrowing  countries’  own
interests if they are to continue to reap the great benefits of the free international movement of
BIS Review   5/1998
- 3 -
capital without similar extreme volatility in the future. But the immediate question was, and is,
how to contain the present problem.
Essentially there are two broad options. One is simply to allow financial markets -
exchange markets,  interest  rates,  and  stock  and  bond  prices  -  to  take  the  strain,  and  to  seek  to
restore  confidence,  and  moderate 
restrictive
macro-economic policy adjustment. The second is to  limit  the  financial  market  impact  and  the
extent  of  the  associated  macro-economic  adjustment  by  providing  or  arranging  alternative
external financing. In practice these options are not, of course, mutually exclusive and the  real
question is the appropriate balance between them.
impact  of  market  movements,  by 
the 
Where  a  country  has  transparently  been  pursuing  an  undisciplined  and
unsustainable macro-economic policy, most people find it easy to accept that that country should
bear the burden and adjust, painful though that may be. Many people find that harder to accept
where,  as  in  the  present  case,  conventional  macro-economic  policies  have,  for  the  most  part,
been  relatively  responsible.  There  were  certainly  adjustments  to  macro-economic  policy  that
needed  to  be  made  -  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  in  some  cases,  for  example,  or  a
somewhat tighter overall macro-economic stance, with perhaps some adjustment between fiscal
and monetary policy. And, once the capital outflow had started, adjustment needed to be  more
abrupt than might otherwise have been necessary, in order to re-establish confidence. But there
are  real  dangers  in  extreme  market  movements  or  in  excessively  severe  macro-economic
adjustment to contain them. That could cause a vicious circle of domestic default and systemic
financial weakness in the affected country. And it would have seriously adverse implications - in
terms of both financial and economic knock-on-effects - for the global economy.
That, essentially, is why it is in the self-interest of the international community to
attempt to mitigate the market and macro-economic adjustment pressures  in  Asia  by  providing
financial  support.  It  is  why  the  international  community  responded  to  the  crisis  in  Asia  by
promptly offering very large amounts of official assistance - $17 billion in the case of Thailand,
$43 billion for Indonesia and $57 billion for South Korea.
But  such  official  financial  help  cannot  be  unlimited  and  it  cannot  be  provided
without strings. It, too, has real  dangers.  If  it  were  too  readily  forthcoming  it  could  encourage
“moral  hazard”,  partly  by  encouraging  macro-economic  laxity  in  other  potential  borrowing
countries,  but  especially  by  encouraging  commercial  lenders  -  particularly  foreign  currency
creditors - in the belief that they will be bailed out if things go wrong. That would be likely to
add to the problem of potentially volatile capital inflows next time around. Not surprisingly, too,
there is also strong political resistance in many countries, including notably the United States, to
the idea that public - taxpayers’ - money should be used to bail out private creditors, especially
foreign creditors.
Alternative  external  financing  need  not  come  solely  from  the  public  sector.
Private finance would, in principle, serve the same purpose, and in many situations market price
adjustments  may  be  sufficient  to  stem  the  capital  outflow.  But  given  the  extent  of  the  loss  of
confidence  in  the  present  case  it  would  be  optimistic  to  think  that  other  private  lenders  were
queuing up to volunteer to stand in place of those that are rushing for the exit. In practice in the
present  situation  private  support  means  persuading  existing  creditors  that  their  assets  will  be
better protected if they are prepared to leave them in place. And they may be prepared to do so,
if  all  other  major  creditors  agree  to  do  the  same,  especially  if  official  support  is  being  made
available in parallel. But in this case, too, difficult judgments have to be made. There is a danger
BIS Review   5/1998
- 4 -
that, if private creditors have to be in effect coerced into staying put, they will immediately cut
their positions elsewhere, while they can, adding to the international contagion.
Achieving  a  reasonable  balance  between  market  and  macro-economic  policy
adjustment and official  and  private  financing  was  never  going  to  be  easy.  It  depends  upon  the
good  sense  and  judgment  of  key  players  all  around  the  world  -  the  governments  and  central
banks as well as major market participants in both the major creditor and the debtor countries, as
well  as  the  international  organisations.  My  impression  is  that  after  the  initial  shocks,  in  which
market adjustments have been massively overdone, the key players are now co-operating  more
effectively  to  bring  about  stabilisation.  Within  the  constraints  imposed  upon  it,  the  IMF  in
particular  is  playing  a  very  positive  leading  role.  And  I  particularly  welcome  the  constructive
part which the major commercial banks, from all the main creditor countries, are now playing in
rolling over their loans to Korea. This has already helped to begin to stabilise the situation there,
and it  has  provided  a  breathing  space  while  new  market  financing  is  organised.  Together  with
the availability of the further official support already committed, this, I am reasonably confident,
will enable Korea to regain control of its external position, and go on to rebuild confidence on
the  back  of  the  underlying  strengths  of  its  economy  and  an  already  rapidly  improving  current
account. That, in turn, would do more than anything to help to re-establish stability elsewhere.
Stabilisation, of course, is not the end of the story - it is simply the necessary first
step.
Even assuming, as I do, that we are able in fact to contain the immediate financial
turmoil, there is bound to be a substantial economic aftershock. Domestic economic activity in
much  of  Asia  will  inevitably  be  subdued,  with  knock-on  effects  elsewhere,  and  major
imbalances are likely to emerge in international trading patterns.
It  is  too  soon  to  have  any  very  clear  view  about  the  likely  scale  or  duration  of
these economic effects. The IMF, in its Interim World Economic Outlook, based on information
available  to  early  December,  has  tentatively  estimated  that  world  gdp  growth  this  year  -  at
3½% - might be around 1% lower than it had expected in the autumn. They expected much of
the  impact  to  fall  on  the  Asian  economies  themselves  -  with  forecast  growth  in  the  newly
industrialised  Asian  economies  falling  by  2½%,  whereas  growth  in  the  G7  countries  was
expected to be only about ¼% lower at 2¼%, with a substantially larger  impact  on  Japan.  My
impression  is  that,  notwithstanding  these  revisions,  most  analysts  would  still  see  the  risks  as
being quite heavily on the downside.
There  have  been  suggestions  that  the  dampening  of  activity,  particularly  in  this
country  and  in  the  US,  as  a  result  of  these  developments  is  welcome  insofar  as  it  will  help  to
prevent  the  re-emergence  of  inflationary  pressures.  And  that  is  true  -  up  to  a  point,  my  Lord
Copper. It is clearly not desirable that the necessary moderation of demand should be narrowly
concentrated on those sectors that are exposed to international competition. And while some of
the industrial  countries  can  certainly  tolerate  significant  external  deficits  for  a  time,  persistent,
large deficits would not be sustainable indefinitely. So it is clearly in our own interests as well as
theirs that the Asian economies recover as rapidly as possible and that we help them towards that
end.  That  represents  a  difficult  international  economic  and  financial  agenda  for  the  future  -
which, given the time, is perhaps the subject for another lunchtime occasion. The immediate first
step  is  financial  stabilisation  in  Asia,  and  my  message  to  you  today  is  that  we  are  making
progress towards that end.
BIS Review   5/1998
