Mr.  Grenville  talks  on  the  Asian  crisis,  capital  flows  and  the  international
financial  architecture1      Talk  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,
Mr. Stephen Grenville, to Monash University Law School Foundation in Melbourne on 21/5/98.
Kindleberger (1978), in his classic study of “Manias, Panics and Crashes”, observed
that: “there is hardly a more conventional subject in economic literature than financial crises.” The
Asian crisis, while unexpected in its timing, spread and severity, contains many familiar elements. If
we were to distil a core weakness from the complex causes, it would be the juxtaposition of fragile
domestic financial systems with large and volatile international capital flows. Today, I want to focus
on the second element of this fatal combination - the large and volatile capital flows.2
The Pros and Cons of International Capital Flows
There is a strong a priori case that international capital flows are a Good Thing. The
obvious  analogy  is  with  international  trade.  If  it  is  beneficial  for  nations  to  trade  in  goods  and
services, then there is a presumption that there will also be advantage in trading in saving. Financialflows supplement domestic saving, allowing more investment to be done in those countries  where
returns are highest; they buffer the variations over time between exports and imports; foreign direct
investment  brings  the  advantages  of  technological  transfer;  there  are  gains  for  savers  from
diversification; and, to complete the case for free capital flows, we should record the argument that
even speculative capital flows can serve a beneficial purpose.
3
Capital  flows  are  generally  supported  by  the  economic  profession,  both  academics
and  practitioners.  Open  capital  markets  are  part  of  the  widely-accepted  Washington  Consensus
(whose twin elements are that countries should deregulate, and should open their economies to the
outside world), and are endorsed by the IMF.4
Why,  then,  does  foreign  capital  flow  rank  as  a  central  element  in  the  Asian  crisis?
The short answer is: painful experience in the practical world. Contrast Keynes’ (1919) views on the
pre-WWI  world,  with  his  later  views  on  the  prospective  post-WWII  world,  transformed  by  the
experience  of  the  1930s.  He  describes  pre-WWI  London,  with  evident  approval,  this  way:  “The
inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed, the various products
of the whole earth . . . ; he could at the same moment and by the same means adventure his wealth in
the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of the world, and share, without exertion or
even trouble, in their prospective fruits and advantages . . . He regarded this state of affairs as
normal, certain, and permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation
from it as aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable.” (pp. 9-10) This was, as Keynes noted, a “paradise”
in which “internationalisation was nearly complete in practice”. Contrast this idyllic civilised picture
                                                     
1 
I am grateful for the help of John Hawkins, Suzanna Chiang and Amanda Thornton in preparing this paper.
2 
3 
4 
This  is  not  to  downplay  the  deficiencies  in  domestic  policies,  which  have  been  discussed  elsewhere.  For  some
discussion of the other “twin” problem - financial sector fragility - see Grenville (1997 and 1998b).
The  best  known  proponent  of  this  argument  is  Milton  Friedman,  who  has  argued  that  speculation  is  inherently
stabilising,  as  any  speculator  who  does  not  buy  cheap  and  sell  dear  (thus  driving  the  price  towards  its  fundamental
equilibrium) will quickly go out of business. More recent literature is less confident of this result.
The IMF Managing Director recently put forward seven building blocks for a stronger financial system, with the first
three relating to globalisation: “The first of these building blocks is the tremendous potential for growth and prosperity
globalization provides countries fully integrating into the global economy. Formidable sources of dynamism are there,
engendered  by  new  information  technologies  and  unifying  financial  markets.  .  .  .  The  second  building  block  is
integration. By integrating themselves into the mainstream of the globalizing world economy, the poorest countries will
avail themselves of a most powerful instrument of acceleration of development. . . .  The  third  building  block  is  the
universal  consensus  on  the  importance  of  an  increasingly  open  and  liberal  system  of  capital  flows  in  order  for
globalization to deliver on its promises.” (Camdessus 1998).
BIS Review   46/1998
- 2 -
with the world Keynes envisaged as he wrestled with the problem of reconstruction after the Second
World War: “it is widely held that control of capital movements, both inward and outward, should be
a permanent feature of the post-War system.”5 “Experience between the Wars clearly demonstrated
the  mischief  of  unregulated  capital  movements,  which  take  no  account  of  the  balance  of  trade
available for overseas investment.” 6, 7
The central point here is that some types of capital flows, for all their benefits, are
very  volatile.  Policy-makers  are  not  just  interested  in  the  growth  of  GDP,  but  its  variance.  Large
volatile influences are a policy nightmare.
The Asian Experience
Private  capital  flow  into  the  five  troubled  economies  of  Asia  (South  Korea,
Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and the Philippines) was very large and variable, both up and down. It
had reached almost US$ 100 billion in 1996 - one-third of worldwide flows into emerging countries.
This was a five-fold increase over the 1990-93 average. It reversed in 1997, to record an outflow of
US$  12  billion.  This  turnaround  was  equivalent  to  more  than  10  per  cent  of  the  GDP  of  these
countries.
Portfolio  equity  investment  into  these  five  countries  almost  quadrupled  in  a  single
year  -  1993.  These  flows  were  huge,  compared  to  the  size  of  the  domestic  financial  sectors.  It  is
hardly surprising that the then-Governor of the Indonesian central bank said: “we started building the
foundations of a house but suddenly we had to host a party”.8 Kindleberger (1989), describing the
post-OPEC period, captures the same point when he says: “multinational banks swollen with dollars,
. . . tumbled over one another in trying to uncover new foreign borrowers.” (p. 26)
Two other characteristics are worth noting:
•  almost  60  per  cent  of  the  1996  private  flows  to  the  Asian  Five  were  from
foreign  commercial  banks  and  40  per  cent  were  short-term  credits.  Bank
lending  was  flighty  indeed  -  inflows  of  US$  56  billion  in  1996  turned  into
outflows of US$ 27 billion in 1997. Direct equity investment - which might be
expected  to  be  more  stable  -  was  quite  modest  (6  per  cent  of  the  total),  but
portfolio equity investment (which can - and did - quickly reverse) was twice as
large;9
the flows were driven, to an important extent, from the supply side. The flows
in the 1990s were consistently larger than the current account deficits - i.e. they
were not drawn in by the need to fund the saving/investment gap.
 Paradoxically, one source of volatility was the high profit opportunities available in
these countries, as they “got their economic act together”, combining technology and cheap labour
 5 
6 
7 
8 
 9 
Treasury memo to the UK War Cabinet’s Reconstruction Problems Committee.
Proposal for an International Monetary Fund, Annex A of the Washington Conversations Article VII, Memorandum by
the Minister of State, 7 February 1944.
Bhagwati  (1998),  distinguished  economist  and  long-time  champion  of  free  trade,  provides  another  example,  in  his
strong scepticism that the arguments for international freedom of trade can be transposed to capital flows.
For a description of the measures which Indonesia took in the early 1990s to try to slow the inflows, see IMF (1995, p.
14).
In the two decades beginning in the mid 1960s, Singapore succeeded in absorbing very large capital inflows without
disruption. This was predominantly foreign direct investment.
BIS Review   46/1998
- 3 -
with capital, to produce high productivity (and high profits) as they moved towards the technological
frontier.  Hand-in-hand  with  these  high  profits  go  high  real  interest  rates.  The  international  capital
flows came, as a normal part of the working of markets, to avail themselves of these opportunities.
These capital flows were not some aberration which could be avoided by better macro policies or by
enhanced  policy  transparency,  but  were  the  normal  manifestation  of  the  working  of  capital
markets.10
The  inflows,  nevertheless,  presented  an  intractable  dilemma  for  policy.  While-ever
domestic  interest  rates  were  high,  this  encouraged  more  foreign  inflow  which  made  credit  control
difficult  and  was  costly  to  sterilise;  but  lower  interest  rates  would  have  fuelled  excess  domestic
demand.  More  exchange  rate  flexibility  has  been  suggested  as  the  panacea  in  these  difficult
circumstances, but I have argued elsewhere11 that, while it would have helped, the problems were
more fundamental.  The  one  way  that  an  equilibrium  (of  sorts)  could  be  established  was  to  bid  up
asset  prices  so  that  the  high  intrinsic  profit  opportunities  were  counterbalanced  by  over-priced
assets - but of course this distorted investment incentives and fuelled over-optimistic expectations.
The  result,  in  short,  was  a  widespread  perception  that  borrowing  was  cheap,  with  all  the  resource
misallocations and distortions that go with this.
High saving economies routinely produce another destabilising characteristic - high
leverage  ratios  (Wade  and  Veneroso  1998),  which  leave  enterprises  vulnerable  to  changes  in  the
macro  settings,  particularly  interest  rates.  Households  do  the  saving,  while  companies  do  the
investing,  so  the  corporate  sector  is  inevitably  highly  indebted  in  fast-growing  countries  with
under-developed equity markets. When investment is funded from overseas, then one of the parties
(either the borrower or the lender) is taking an exchange rate risk, which makes these flows volatile
and  flighty.  In  short,  high-profit/fast-growth  economies  are  intrinsically  more  vulnerable  to  the
volatility of capital flows.
This degree of volatility can be ameliorated by better domestic policies. But volatility
is intrinsic to these flows, and there is a long international history in which capital flows were either
the  catalyst  for  a  crisis,  or  exacerbated  a  crisis  which  was  set  off  by  other  factors:  “the  history  of
investment  in  South  America  throughout  the  last  century  has  been  one  of  confidence  followed  by
disillusionment, of borrowing cycles followed by widespread defaults”.12
We might note also, in passing, that the overall international  financial  environment
has been routinely subject to fits, starts and sudden reassessments. The large swings in the yen/dollar
exchange  rate  during  the  1990s  and  the  abnormally-low  interest  rates  in  Japan  were  an  important
factor in the capital flows under discussion here.13
 10 
11 
12 
13 
High levels of international debt and large current account deficits were a reflection of saving/investment imbalances,
and  to  the  extent  that  the  economic  literature  had  wrestled  with  this  issue  beforehand,  the  puzzle  was  that  the
international capital flows had not been larger, rather than that they were somehow too large (the standard reference
here is Feldstein and Horioka (1980)).
Grenville (1998a). Latin America provides earlier examples of countries whose real exchange rates were driven up by
capital inflows, as a prelude to a sharp substantial fall when confidence changed (see McKinnon and Pill (1995)).
Royal  Institute  of  International  Affairs,  quoted  by  Dornbusch  (1985).  See  also  Kindleberger  (1989,  Chapter  7)  and
Arndt (1998). McKinnon and Pill (1995) provide an interesting  account of the interaction between capital flows and
financial  sector  weakness  in  recent  Latin  American  experience.  Their  final  “stylised  fact”  provides  an  accurate
description of the subsequent Asian problems: “The ‘over-borrowing’ episode culminates in a financial crisis, capital
flight and recession - often forcing an uncontrolled deep devaluation of the currency, with a resurgence of inflation.”
(p. 6) The characteristics of emerging countries impart to the flows far more volatility than is seen in, say, Australia. In
the exchange rate problems of Australia in the mid 1980s, capital inflow continued at its underlying average rate.
For discussion of this point, see Eichengreen and Rose (1998).
BIS Review   46/1998
Perceptions and Confidence
- 4 -
In  this  fragile  world,  the  critical  issue  that  changed  -  motivating  the  volte  face  of
capital between 1996 and 1997 - was an extraordinary change in confidence - what Stiglitz calls the
“instability in beliefs” and Keynes called “animal spirits”.
imperfect  understanding  could  easily  change 
Such  reversals  of  sentiment  are  not  uncommon,  even  in  the  United  States:  one
notable  example  was  the  October  1987  share  market  shake-out.14  But  the  opportunities  for  these
reversals of confidence are greater in the Asian countries, where foreign investors did not know these
economies well and the economic fundamentals are not well established. So they were even  more
susceptible to herd behaviour - once doubts started, they were self-fulfilling. Over-optimism based
on 
to  over-pessimism,  equally  based  on
misunderstanding.  Over-inflated  asset  prices  deflated  rapidly.  A  recent  Fortune  (1998)  article
captures  the  post-crisis  disillusionment:  “You  can’t  trust  the  companies,  you  can’t  trust  the
governments,  you  can’t  trust  the  analysts,  and  you  can’t  trust  the  mutual  funds  managers.  Watch
out.”  “There  was  a  touch  of  the  absurd  in  the  unfolding  drama,  as  international  money  managers
harshly castigated the very same Asian governments they were praising just months before. . . . But,
as  often  happens  in  financial  markets,  euphoria  turned  to  panic  without  missing  a  beat.”  (Sachs
1997)15
The recipient countries had only a limited range of instruments that could be used to
counter these changes of confidence. The traditional answer is to raise interest rates.16 But this had
limited effect: nervous foreign lenders were concerned about the fundamental  credit-worthiness  of
borrowers, not interest income. Many lenders had provided funds denominated in foreign currency,
and higher local currency interest rates were irrelevant, except to the extent they added to concerns
about  the  local  economy.  High  interest  rates  in  the  defence  of  the  exchange  rate  were  more
damaging  to  these  vulnerable  economies  because  of  their  high  corporate  leverage.  The  short-term
nature of the flows added to the woes.
Proposals for Reform
In  short,  the  size  and  volatility  of  the  foreign  capital  flows  exacerbated  the  serious
and fundamental domestic policy problems, fuelled the boom and made the subsequent crash worse.
These  problems  are  all  the  more  intractable  for  economies  which  are  in  the  process  of  opening
themselves up to international financial markets, with small inexperienced financial sectors. In the
wake of this experience, there is no shortage of reformist proposals.
George  Soros  (1997)  -  the  most  famous  of  the  hedge  fund  managers  and  a  prime
beneficiary of the current freedoms of capital flow - has suggested the setting up of an international
credit  insurance  corporation.  Henry  Kaufman,  the  doyen  of  Wall  Street  economists,  has  urged  the
creation of an international supervisory structure, which would “vet” countries’ prudential systems
 14 
15 
16 
Greenspan  (1998)  observed  that:  “there  is  no  credible  scenario  that  can  readily  explain  so  abrupt  a  change  in  the
fundamentals of long-term valuation on that day.”
An academic literature is building up around the idea of “rational beliefs”. McKinnon and Pill (1995), referring to the
work of Kurz, say: “The rational beliefs approach permits individuals to hold different views about the structure of the
economy, provided the models implicit in these views are not refutable by observed or observable data. This structure
allows the economy to deviate from ‘sustainable’ paths in the short run - which could last for an extended period - until
observed data demonstrate that the structural model implying this ex post unsustainable behavior was incorrect.” (p.
17)
Kindleberger (1989, p. 153) cites the case where, in 1849, a 2 per cent (200 basis points) rise in the UK discount rate
was enough to cause sailing ships carrying gold to America to turn around and return to the United Kingdom: such
fine-tuning of crises seems to be a thing of the past, along with sailing ships.
BIS Review   46/1998
- 5 -
before allowing them to borrow in international financial markets. At the other end of the spectrum,
there are those who argue that the main problem was “lack of liquidity” in these financial markets,
which they identify as causing large price movements on relatively small volume changes. For the
latter group, the solution is simple: to go harder, stronger and quicker towards full deregulation.
Larry Summers (1998), US Treasury Deputy Secretary and former leading academic,
draws an analogy with the advent of jet travel, which greatly  improved  convenience  and  safety  of
international  travel,  but  when  accidents  happen,  they  are  more  dramatic.  Should  we,  he  asks
rhetorically, address this problem by banning jet landings? To carry this analogy further, clearly the
answer is to make the infrastructure safer for the most beneficial aspects of the innovation, while not
precluding the possibility that the more dangerous aspects should be constrained.
The  Asian  experience  -  following,  as  it  does,  similar  experience  in  Mexico  in
1994/95  -  has  set  the  agenda  for  the  reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture.  The  G22
meeting held last month in Washington focused on three requirements:
  transparency  (i.e.  greater  information  to  help  markets  make  more  rational
decisions);
strengthening  of  financial  systems  to  make  them  more  resilient  in  the  face  of
changes of sentiment;
•  ensuring that the private sector bears a proper share of the burden of any rescue
operation.
All  this  makes  good  sense.  To  argue  that  more  information  is  better  than  less
information is as close to a truism as we can get in economics.17
Nor  would  any  informed  observer  dispute  the  need  for  root-and-branch  reform  of
prudential  supervision  in  these  countries.18  The  issues  here  are  not  ones  of  principle,  but  are
operational: how to put in place an enforceable set of rules which is sufficiently strict to protect the
core of the financial system from crises, without making the rules so onerous that financing  shifts
elsewhere, to an unregulated but equally-vulnerable channel.
The third area - private sector burden sharing - requires some elaboration. Despite the
best  endeavours  on  information/transparency  and  in  building  up  prudential  strength,  it  is  hard  to
believe that the problems will be quickly and fully eliminated. For a start, a good prudential system
will take many years to develop, considering that it requires counterpart improvement in accounting,
legal  and  bankruptcy  arrangements.  Transparency  is  a  good  thing,  but  markets  can  make  radical
reassessments  even  when  information  is  abundant  -  the  October  1987  share  market  shake-out  is
evidence  of  this.  And,  realistically,  domestic  policy-makers  will  never  be  omniscient  and
single-minded in their pursuit of economic perfection.19
 17 
18 
19 
At present, the  focus  is  on  greater  disclosure  from  capital-receiving  countries,  but  this  could  be  extended  to  greater
disclosure from capital suppliers, including private intermediaries and investment funds.
This  focus  revives  an  old  issue  in  economics  -  the  sequencing  of  reform.  The  old  argument  was  that  financial
deregulation  should  come  last,  as  the  financial  sector  facilitated  the  exploitation  of  any  remaining  regulation-driven
distortions in the economy. The new argument is that if financial deregulation precedes the establishment of a strong
prudential framework, the inevitable volatility of capital flows will produce a collapse of the financial system. For an
interesting discussion of the need for a “global standard”, see Sheng (1998).
Stiglitz (1998) puts it this way: “We must bear in mind too in designing policy regimes (such as opening up capital
markets)  that  we  cannot  assume  that  other  aspects  of  economic  policy,  such  as  macroeconomic  policy  or  exchange
rates, will be flawlessly carried out. The policy regimes we adopt must be robust against at least a modicum of human
fallibility. Airplanes are not designed to be flown just by ace pilots, and nuclear power plants have built into them a
huge margin of safety for human error.”
BIS Review   46/1998
- 6 -
If  we  accept  that,  with  all  the  corrections  made  and  “best  endeavours”  on  the
policy-making  front,  there  will  still  be  room  for  sharp  breaks  in  confidence,  then  this  has  to  be
handled in the same way that it is handled domestically in the face of bank crises caused by loss of
confidence - through the availability of a lender-of-last-resort.
Mexico 
in  1994/95  provides  a  classic  example  of 
international
lender-of-last-resort  in  operation,  and  most  observers  would  regard  this  as  a  success.  Most  people
would  also  regard  it  as  an  example  of  the  residual  problem  of  the  lender-of-last-resort  -  “moral
hazard”. This type of moral hazard occurs when those who take economic decisions are not required
to accept the full consequences, when that decision turns out badly. In the case of the sudden capital
outflow from Mexico in 1994, this outflow was replaced by an IMF/US package of US$ 50 billion,
which  was  enough  to  pay  out  the  government  creditors,  until  confidence  was  restored  (which
occurred relatively quickly) There are those who argue that, in doing this, the foreign investors were
“bailed out”, and this sets a bad precedent for future investors.20
the 
While  the  problem  of  moral  hazard  has  long  been  recognised,  and  there  was
substantial discussion about how to address it following the Mexican rescue, subsequent events have
demonstrated  just  how  hard  it  is  to  avoid.  In  late  1997,  foreign  banks  which  had  lent  to  Korean
private banks were given an ex post government guarantee and concerted arrangements were put in
place to avoid the impending default. If Mexico showed that creditors holding government debt can
be bailed out and Korea showed that creditors holding bank debt can be assisted, then Indonesia may
be providing an example, where foreign creditors holding debt of private firms are assisted.21 It is
not hard to see why this occurs: while everyone is against moral hazard in principle, the resolution of
particular  problems  often  requires  that  special  assistance  be  given  to  those  who,  by  their  actions,
could  make  the  current  crisis  worse.  As  Kindleberger  (1989,  p.  182)  noted:  “Actuality  inevitably
dominates  contingency.  Today  wins  over  tomorrow.”  As  with  bankruptcy,  in  practice  the  balance
needs  to  be  drawn  between  the  need  to  keep  continuity  of  operations,  against  the  need,  also,  to
maintain  appropriate  incentives  for  risk-taking.  While  everyone  agrees,  in  principle,  that  private
investors should not be bailed out, administering the appropriate “haircut” is not operationally easy.
Hence the question of private sector burden sharing on the G22 agenda.
If the combination of moral hazard and the understandable reluctance of governments
to enlarge the international lender-of-last-resort leaves the feeling that the problems have not been
fully resolved, then a further - more controversial - element is on the agenda in some quarters. For
some  people,  the  problems  of  short-term  capital  flows  outweigh  their  benefits.  They  argue  that
short-term flows bring little or no technological transfer. William Rees-Mogg (1998), former Editor
of  The  Times,  has  put  it  this  way:  “There  is  now  a  huge  financial  industry  which  is  purely
speculative  in  character;  it  centres  on  the  currency  trading  of  international  banks.  It  is  deeply
resented in those countries which have been ravaged by its inflows and outflows, however much they
may have contributed to their own misfortune. Because it is entirely short-term in character, casino
capitalism makes little net  contribution  to  long-term  investment.”  “It  is  impossible  to  pretend  that
the  traditional  case  for  capital  market  liberalisation  remains  unscathed.  Either  far  greater  stability
than  at  present  is  injected  into  the  international  monetary  system  as  a  whole  or  the  unavoidably
fragile emerging countries must protect themselves from the virus of short-term lending, particularly
 20 
21 
It might be worth noting a common terminological confusion: in a “bail out of Mexico”, for example, it is the foreign
investors who are the direct beneficiaries.
“Again,  the  international  community  faces  a  dilemma:  it  often  sees  no  alternative  to  a  bailout  -  the  risks  of  not
undertaking  an  action  seem  unacceptable.  After  each  crisis,  we  bemoan  the  extent  of  the  bailout  and  make  strong
speeches saying that never again will lenders be let off the hook to the same extent. But, if anything, the “moral hazard
problem” has increased, not decreased, with each successive crisis.” (Stiglitz 1998, p. 18)
BIS Review   46/1998
- 7 -
by - and to - banks. After the crisis, the question can no longer be  whether  these  flows  should  be
regulated in some way. It can only be how.” (Wolf 1998b) “The evidence now seems clear that any
substantial net draft on foreign savings creates huge risks. For countries with savings rates as high as
those of the east Asians such risks hardly seem worth running.” (Wolf 1998a) This last point is taken
up by Stiglitz (1998, p. 5): “the East Asian countries, with their high savings rates, may have gotten
relatively little additional growth from the surge in capital flows”.
With the focus on what might be done on short-term capital flows, there is particular
interest in the experience of Chile, which for a couple of decades  has  imposed  substantial  deposit
requirements on capital inflow - a quasi-tax which impinges more heavily on short-term flows. Note
that the controls are on inflows, not outflows: the aim is to prevent the problem from arising, rather
than attempt to clean up afterwards.22 No-one is arguing for countries to cut themselves off from the
benefits of foreign capital. Rather, the aim is to see how the benefits can be reaped while minimising
the  risks  from  volatility:  in  short  (returning  to  Larry  Summers’  analogy),  how  to  make  jet  travel
safer. As part of this process, there is more interest in ensuring that there are no positive incentives in
favour of short-term flows, for example, via the BIS capital adequacy requirements, or via specific
institutional arrangements such as the Bangkok International Banking Facility.
Where To From Here?
The  sort  of  reform  discussed  here  is  not  going  to  be  easy  to  implement.  There  is
always a tension between those who favour a pure laissez-faire version of the market, and those who
see  a  role  for  government  in  the  international  architecture.23  “It  is  ironic:  the  age  of  globalisation
may well be defined in part by challenges to the nation-state, but it is still states and governments -
by the practices they adopt, the arrangements they enter into, and the safety nets they provide - that
will determine whether we exploit or squander the potential of this era.” (Haass and Litan 1998, p. 6)
Stiglitz (1998, p. 20) makes a similar point: “in approaching the challenges of globalization, we must
eschew ideology and over-simplified models. We must not let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
.  .  .  There  are  reforms  to  the  international  economic  architecture  that  can  bring  the  advantages  of
globalization, including global capital markets, while mitigating their risks. Arriving at a consensus
about those reforms will not be easy. But it is time for us to intensify the international dialogue on
these issues.”
Australia  could,  if  it  chooses,  play  a  role  in  this  dialogue,  out  of  proportion  to  its
modest  standing  in  world  affairs.  The  Asian  crisis  is  the  starting  point  of  the  reassessment  of  the
international architecture: while our understanding of Asia and the crisis is imperfect and no doubt
distorted in various ways, it may well be ahead of many of the larger countries which have tended to
dominate  the  debate.24  We  have  well-developed  links  -  across  a  variety  of  disciplines  -  with  our
                                                     
22 
23 
24 
The Australian experience with Variable Deposit Requirements in the 1970s is also relevant. There is a common view
that  these  were  ineffective,  and  it  would  certainly  have  to  be  acknowledged  that  regulations  such  as  this  are  by  no
means watertight. But it is worth noting that, at one stage, they worked too effectively, and were a major reason behind
the monetary squeeze of 1974, where the safety valve of capital flows was effectively blocked by the VDRs.
Kindleberger  (1989,  p.  7),  again,  has  a  sensibly  balanced  view:  “The  position  that  markets  generally  work  but
occasionally break down is widely at variance with the views at either of two extremes: that financial and commodity
markets work perfectly in all times and places, or that they always work badly and should be replaced by planning or
governmental assignments. On the contrary, I contend that markets work well on the whole, and can normally be relied
upon to decide the allocation of resources and, within limits, the distribution of income, but that occasionally markets
will  be  overwhelmed  and  need  help.  The  dilemma,  of  course,  is  that  if  markets  know  in  advance  that  help  is
forthcoming under generous dispensations, they break down more frequently and function less effectively.”
In  Australia,  for  example,  there  was  a  well-informed  and  bipartisan  discussion  when  these  issues  came  before  the
Australian  Parliament  recently  (House  of  Representatives,  26  March  1998),  with  both  sides  of  politics  exhibiting  a
depth of knowledge which has simply been absent from the legislative debate in America. In contrast, see, for example,
Far Eastern Economic Review, 26 February 1998, p. 17.
BIS Review   46/1998
- 8 -
Asian  counterparts.  An  Australian  view  may  be  less  bound  by  narrow  commercial  interests  than
some others. We have, ourselves, experienced some of the problems of volatile international capital
flows. We know  something,  too,  of  the  trials,  tribulations  and  benefits  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate
regime. Not least, because the international landscape matters more to us (as a small country on the
periphery of a culturally-different and diverse region which is fundamental to our economic future),
we care more, so we will try harder to improve our international environment.
The  current  international  economic  architecture  has  evolved  in  response  to  the
demands placed on it: many of these add-ons, lean-tos and ad hoc bricolage serve the purpose well
enough. But the original floor plan was drawn up in an earlier era and - more importantly for us - the
building committee was formed long ago and does not always represent today’s economic realities.
We are, of course, represented on the IMF Executive Board, but with more than 180 members, our
voice  is  small.  We  have  a  seat  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  but  this  remains  a
European-oriented  institution.  With  the  G22,  we  have  a  group  that  represents  us  and  our
geographical region in a way that did not occur in the older groups such as G10,25 but the future of
this group is not assured: it represents a recognition that the old groupings need to be reworked, but
this has yet to be done definitively. We have shown a readiness and ability to provide key inputs into
international economic relations,26 but we need to see this as a priority issue if we are to have our
voice  heard  in  the  Councils  of  the  World,  and  we  need  persistence  and  patience  to  reinforce  our
credentials.
More regionally-focused groups could give us extra leverage. APEC is, of course, the
over-arching regional framework. There are, in addition, a variety of smaller and more specialised
groups  -  EMEAP  (the  East  Asian  central  bankers  group),  the  Manila  Framework  Group,  Four/Six
Markets Group27 - which all have memberships relevant to Australia’s regional economic interests.
These regional groups might be used, inter alia, to develop more co-ordinated positions and attitudes
in worldwide forums, to influence the shape of the reformed structure.
The challenge is to use the lessons of the Asian crisis to build a more stable, resilient
international framework. Australia has good credentials to play an active role in this.
 25 
26 
27 
Some of the important post-mortem discussions of the Mexican 1994/95 crisis took place within the G10 (e.g. the “Rey
Report”),  but  as  G10  includes  only  one  Asian  country  (Japan),  the  opportunity  for  interaction  with  this  region  was
minimal.
The Australian Treasury played a vital role in fashioning one piece of the New Architecture - the still-pending New
Arrangements to Borrow, the successor to the narrowly-based GAB.
For discussion of these regional arrangements, see Grenville (1998c).
BIS Review   46/1998
Bibliography
- 9 -
Arndt, H. (1998), ‘Globalisation’, Australia-Japan Research Centre Pacific Economic
Papers No. 275.
Australia,  House  of  Representatives  (1998),  Parliamentary  Debates,  26  March,  pp.
1172-1190.
Bhagwati, J. (1998), ‘The Capital Myth: The Difference between  Trade  in  Widgets
and Dollars’, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77, No. 3, May/June, pp. 7-12.
Camdessus,  M.  (1998),  Toward  a  New  Financial  Architecture  for  a  Globalized
World, address at the Royal Institute for International Affairs, London, 8 May (http://www.imf.org).
Dornbusch, R. (1985), ‘Over-borrowing: Three Case Studies’, in G.W. Smith and J.T.
Cuddington (eds), International Debt and the Developing Countries, The World Bank, Washington,
DC.
Eichengreen,  B.  and  A.K.  Rose  (1998),  ‘Staying  Afloat  When  the  Wind  Shifts:
External Factors and Emerging-Market Banking Crises’, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1828.
Feldstein, M.S. and C.Y. Horioka (1980), ‘Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows’, Economic Journal, June, Vol. 90, pp. 314-329.
Goldstein, M. and J. Hawkins (1998), ‘The Origin of the Asian Financial Turmoil’,
Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9805.
Greenspan,  A.  (1998),  Statement  of  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the
Federal  Reserve  System  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services,  US  House  of
Representatives, Washington, DC, 30 January.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1997),  ‘Asia  and  the  Financial  Sector’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Bulletin, December.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1998a),  ‘Exchange  Rates  and  Crises’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Bulletin, February. (The full text can be found on the Bank’s web site - http://www.rba.gov.au)
Grenville,  S.A.  (1998b),  ‘The  Asian  Economic  Crisis’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Bulletin, April.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1998c),  The  Asian  Crisis  and  Regional  Co-operation,  address  to
International Seminar on East Asia Financial Crisis, Beijing, 21 April (http://www.rba.gov.au).
Haass, R.N. and R.E. Litan (1998), ‘Globalization and Its Discontents: Navigating the
Dangers of a Tangled World’, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77, No. 3, May/June, pp. 2-6.
Institute  of  International  Finance  (1998),  Capital  Flows  to  Emerging  Market
Economies, April (http://www.iif.com).
International  Monetary  Fund  (1995),  International  Capital  Markets:  Developments,
Prospects, and Policy Issues, August.
International Monetary Fund (1996), Annual Report.
BIS Review   46/1998
- 10 -
Keynes, J.M. (1919), The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Macmillan and Co.,
Limited, London.
Kindleberger,  C.P.  (1978),  Manias,  Panics,  and  Crashes:  A  History  of  Financial
Crises, Macmillan. Revised edition 1989, Basic Books, Inc., New York.
Fortune (1998), ‘The Great Emerging Markets Rip-Off’, 11 May, pp. 68-74.
McKinnon,  R.I.  (1973),  Money  and  Capital  in  Economic  Development,  The
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
McKinnon, R.I. and H. Pill (1995), Credible Liberalizations and International Capital
Flows:  The  ‘Over-Borrowing  Syndrome’,  paper  presented  at  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Research
Seminar,  24  August.  (Published  in  T.  Ito  and  A.O.  Krueger  (eds),  Financial  Deregulation  and
Integration in East Asia, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 7-50.)
Rees-Mogg, W. (1998), ‘Capitalism of the casino’, The Times, 12 March.
Rivlin, A.M. (1998), Toward a Better Class of Financial Crises: Some Lessons from
Asia,  remarks  at  the  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  Financial  Structure,  The  Levy  Institute,
Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., 23 April.
Sachs,  J.D.  (1997),  ‘The  Wrong  Medicine  for  Asia’,  The  New  York  Times,  3
November.
Sheng,  A.  (1998),  The  Crisis  of  Money  in  the  21st  Century,  address  to  City
University of Hong Kong, 28 April.
Soros,  G.  (1997),  ‘Avoiding  a  breakdown:  Asia’s  crisis  demands  a  rethink  of
international regulation’, Financial Times, 31 December, p. 8.
Stiglitz,  J.  (1998),  The  Role  of  International  Financial  Institutions  in  the  Current
Global  Economy,  address  to  the  Chicago  Council  on  Foreign  Relations,  Chicago,  27  February
(http://www.worldbank.org).
Summers, L. (1998), ‘Go with the flow’, Financial Times, 11 March.
Wade, R. and F. Veneroso (1998), ‘The Asian Crisis: The High Debt Model vs. The
Wall Street-Treasury-IMF Complex’, Working Paper No. 128, Russell Sage Foundation, New York,
9 February (http://epn.org/sage/imf24.html).
Wolf, M. (1998a), ‘Caging the bankers’, Financial Times, 20 January.
Wolf, M. (1998b), ‘Flows and blows’, Financial Times, 3 March, p. 16.
BIS Review   46/1998
