Mr.  Heikensten  answers  eight  questions  on  monetary  policy  in  Sweden
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, at The Economics
Association in Umeå on 19/2/98.
Introduction
During  the  1990s  monetary  policy  has  been  the  subject  of  intensive  discussion.
This is not surprising, given the serious crisis in the  Swedish  economy  at  the  beginning  of  the
decade  and  the  role  that  monetary  policy  played  both  then  and  as  the  crisis  was  building  up.
Since that time, monetary policy has had an explicit role to safeguard independently the value of
money – a role that is new in Sweden in the post-war period. With a floating exchange rate, the
decisions currently made by the Riksbank on its instrumental rate are very real and important to
the behaviour of households and businesses and to economic growth.
The monetary policy discussion has evolved over time. Questions and statements
about  monetary  policy’s  basic  objective  of  price  stability  that  were  very  frequent  a  couple  of
years ago  are  less  so  today.  Understanding  of  the  Riksbank’s  actions  seems  to  have  increased.
We are presently trying to evaluate this by asking the public how it views the Riksbank’s work
and by following the media and newsletters written by the market’s players. It is also possible to
form  an  opinion  based  on  the  market’s  reactions  to  changes  in  the  instrumental  rates  as  to
whether the policy is understandable.
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  Riksbank’s  policy
have gradually increased, I believe that from time to time there is a need to explain the basis for
the policy and some of the principles that guide it today. The purpose of today’s speech is just
that.  I  will  endeavour  to  answer  seven  of  the  questions  that  I  have  encountered  most  often  in
recent  years  at  meetings  and  in  editorials  and  commentaries  and  that  seem  to  permeate  the
discussion of monetary policy continually. By way of  conclusion  I  will  comment  on  an  eighth
question.
Question 1:  Why is low inflation good?
The  experiences  of  previous  decades  in  Sweden  and  a  number  of  international
examples show that high inflation is associated with economic costs.  Moreover significant costs
ensue when one is compelled to gear down from high to low inflation – something that sooner or
later always happens.
It has been shown that high inflation is often associated with sharp fluctuations in
the relative prices of goods. Rapid and abrupt price changes create uncertainty about the future
for  all  the  actors  in  the  economy.    It  simply  becomes  more  difficult  to  make  long-range
decisions.  Households  and  businesses  are  compelled  in  practice  to  take  greater  risks  and  both
then demand higher interest and profits. This reasoning is supported by research, which indicates
that  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy  may  be  lower,  because  the  increased  uncertainty  reduces
investment  activity.    In  addition  the  risk  of  making  erroneous  investments  increases.
(Diagram 1. CPI and Growth)
That Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s lost so much ground in terms of prosperity
in relation to many other European  countries  is  certainly  due  in  part  to  the  stabilisation  policy
then  being  conducted.  Prices  and  wages  were  allowed  to  drive  each  other  up,  while  budget
policy  was  far  too  weak.  Devaluation  followed  devaluation,  with  low  investment  and  weak
productivity growth as the result.
BIS Review   14/1998
- 2 -
High  inflation  also  leads  to  arbitrary  changes  in  the  distribution  of  income  and
wealth in society. Wages and profits normally rise at the same rate as inflation. The value of real
estate and some financial investments rises even faster.  At the same time nominal fixed interest
rates and transfers lag behind. The high profits made by the owners of houses and co-operatives
in  the  1970s  and  1980s  occurred  in  practice  at  the  expense  of  tenants  and  those  with  bank
savings. Between 1971 and 1974, for example, house prices rose by 50 per cent and agricultural
property by 80 per cent. In contrast those who had their savings in bonds or in the bank saw their
assets shrink by about a third in real terms.
CPI and Growth
 Index: 1970=100
Growth 1997-1998 OECD forecast
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
Germany
Netherlands
Austria
Sweden
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
650
550
450
350
250
150
50
Netherlands
Sweden
Austria
Germany
650
550
450
350
250
150
50
70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96
Sources: Statistics Sweden and OECD
The problems are amplified by a regime of taxes and subsidies that are wholly or
partly indexed. Groups that have full indexing are favoured at the expense of others who do not
receive  subsidies  or  do  not  get  full  compensation.  Also  the  economic  costs  may  rise  when  the
BIS Review   14/1998
- 3 -
behaviour  of  businesses  and  households  is  negatively  affected  by  taxes  and  subsidies  in
combination  with  a  high  rate  of  inflation.  Many  good  examples  of  this  can  be  found  in  the
Sweden of the 1970s and 1980s. The American economist Martin Feldstein has estimated that if
inflation increases from 0 to 2 per cent, then the economic costs in the United States will amount
to the equivalent of 1 per cent of GDP, principally as a consequence of the disruption caused by
the interaction between the tax regime and inflation.
Let  me  conclude  the  answer  to  this  first  question  by  emphasising  that  my
reasoning  is  anything  but  new,  even  if  some  of  the  examples  are,  and  there  is  new  empirical
research to rely on. The Swedish Trade Union economist Gösta Rehn  argued  in  the  1950s  and
1960s  that  full-employment  policies  must  be  combined  with  a  tight  demand  policy.  Wage
formation  could  function  well  only  if  demand  was  restrained  and  the  rules  of  the  game  were
obvious.  He  also  waged  a  battle  for  many  decades  against  inflation  for  reasons  of  distribution
under  the  slogan,  “Hate  inflation”.  Substantial,  arbitrary  changes  in  income  and  wealth  pose  a
threat to “the cement” in our society and thereby to the democratic system.
Question 2:  Why has inflation been allowed?
Average  inflation  in  Sweden  has  been  low  over  a  very  long-term  perspective.
That  changed  after  the  Second  World  War,  both  in  Sweden  and  in  the  majority  of  other
industrial countries. During the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, inflation was  on  a  rising  trend  and  at
the same time fluctuated considerably. Not until the 1980s was the growth in prices stabilised in
many  parts  of  the  western  world.  In  Sweden,  this  stabilisation  has  come  about  in  the  1990s.
(Diagram 2. Price Developments in Sweden Since 1880)
Price Developements in
Sweden Since 1880
Index: 1880=100
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Source: Statistics Sweden
Given  what  I  have  just  said  about  the  importance  of  low  inflation,  we  may  ask
ourselves how inflation could have been allowed to reach such heights in recent decades. Why
was  there  not  a  tighter  policy  all  along  the  line  to  restrain  inflation?  Developments  in  other
BIS Review   14/1998
- 4 -
countries  of  the  western  world  appear  about  the  same.  This  indicates  that  there  is  a  common
explanation.
It is clear that economic thought has shifted in recent decades and the shift in the
price  level  trends  that  coincided  with  the  Keynesian  approach  (which  was  not  infrequently  a
grossly exaggerated interpretation of what Keynes himself had written or said) had a dominant
influence  on  economic  policy.  The  ambition  to  stabilise  the  economy  and  create  full
employment  using  economic  policy  tools  grew  stronger  and  stronger.  For  a  long  time  it  was
believed that by allowing inflation to rise a little higher, less unemployment could be ‘bought’.
Both  actual  developments  up  until  the  1970s  and  the  theory  then  prevalent  supported  this
approach.
This  picture  of  how  the  economy  functioned  was  modified  in  the  1970s.  The
economies  in  many  western  countries  at  that  time  evinced  both  high  inflation  and  high
unemployment.  In  fairness  it  should  also  be  mentioned  however  that  the  oil  price  shocks  also
contributed to the high inflation that decade; not all problems were a consequence of the failures
of stabilisation policy.
Now most economists and political decision-makers accept that only in the short
term is there a trade-off between inflation and employment. Real wages can be reduced owing to
unexpected  inflation  and  employment  will  thereby  be  stimulated.  But  when  this  pattern  is
recognised – as will very likely happen after a while – inflation expectations adjust to the new,
higher inflation rate. Then the positive effect on  growth  disappears  and  employment  reverts  to
its previous level. All that remains is a higher rate of inflation. In other words, in the long term
there  is  normally  no  positive  relationship  between  employment  and  inflation.  Instead
employment in the long term is decided by such conditions in the real economy as technological
and population developments or labour market efficiency.
However  the  temptation  to  use  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  employment  still
exists. Even for a government that knows that the long-term effects of increasing demand a little
too much are undesirable, it can be tempting in the short run. The very fact that this possibility
exists  has  made  it  more  difficult  to  instil  confidence  in  a  policy  of  low  inflation.  Even  in
countries  in  which  the  governments  and  the  central  banks  have  clearly  switched  to  a  policy
directed at achieving price stability, concern about a recurrence may persist.  Such a concern is
not without costs to the economy. Households and businesses will reckon that there is a risk of
an  increase  in  inflation.  Consequently  the  interest  rate  level  may  be  higher  and  economic
development in general may be worse than what would have been possible if all the actors in the
economy had had complete confidence in the anti-inflation policy.
Question 3:  Why should central banks be independent?
This problem of building confidence in the anti-inflation policy may explain why
in  recent  years  many  western  countries  have  changed  their  legislation  or  in  other  ways  have
made their central banks more independent. There are basically two problems: the temptation to
resort to stimulating the economy in the short term may be too strong and inflation expectations
become built into the system and make the policy less effective. By giving the central bank an
independent  status,  the  political  decision-makers  can  demonstrate  that  they  are  serious  about
their ambition  to  let  monetary  policy  be  conducted  with  a  view  to  long-term  goals.    In  such  a
way price stability can be combined with better economic development.
BIS Review   14/1998
- 5 -
There  have  been  a  good  many  studies  showing  that  an  independent  position  for
the  central  bank  tends  to  have  a  favourable  impact  on  inflation.  In  countries  with  relatively
independent central banks – that is, in which the political regime has only limited possibilities to
influence  monetary  policy  immediately  –  the  fight  against  inflation  has  been  more  successful.
However this should not be over-interpreted; the problem of inflation neither can nor should be
solved solely by a few simple changes in the law. The central bank’s position certainly depends
on  what  the  attitude  to  inflation  is  among  the  general  public.  It  may  very  well  be  that  in
countries  with  a  strong  aversion  to  inflation,  they  have  elected  to  give  the  central  bank  a
comparatively  independent  position.  (Diagram  3.  The  Relation  Between  a  Central  Bank’s
Degree of Independence and Inflation)
In  Sweden  the  Riksbank  has,  in  practice,  had  a  very  independent  standing  in
recent years, which compares quite favourably with that in other countries. This policy has also
had  a  successful  impact  on  price  stability.  This  practice  that  has  been  developed  has  now
received support in the form of a broad multi-party agreement to strengthen the position of the
Riksbank.  The  agreement  has  led  to  a  bill,  which  the  Government  introduced  last  November.
This bill provides, inter alia, for the price stability objective to be confirmed by law and for the
Riksbank to have a management that can formulate monetary policy independently.
The Relation Between a Central
Bank’s Degree of Independence
and Inflation
16)
52
,
)75
7
.4)
59-
,-
+,)
  75)
2
/-4
59
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
1
2
3
Degree of  independence
4
5
Source: SOU (Govt official reports) 1993:20
It should be stressed that an independent position for the Riksbank is not the same
thing as a monetary policy conducted without democratic control. The monetary policy objective
has  been  made  law  by  those  who  are  popularly  elected.  It  is  making  the  objective  operational
BIS Review   14/1998
- 6 -
and the ongoing work to secure the goal decided by the Riksdag that has been delegated to the
Riksbank.
Question 4:  Why 2 per cent?
The  question  of  how  the  monetary  policy  objective  should  be  made  operational
has  several  dimensions.  By  selecting  a  clear  objective  for  monetary  policy,  it  is  possible  to
monitor and evaluate it in an effective way. This is especially  important  when  the  Riksbank  is
being given an independent status. A clearly defined inflation objective also has the advantage of
being  able  to  function  as  an  “anchor”  for  households’  and  businesses’  expectations.  This
function  alone  can  be  an  important  feature,  not  least  when  a  regime  of  low  inflation  is  being
established.
The  objective  for  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  is  inflation  of  2  per  cent
annually, as measured by the consumer price index. We have a stated tolerance interval of plus
or minus 1 percentage point that will catch deviations from the target.
Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, has said words to this
effect:  Inflation  should  be  so  low  that  the  actors  in  the  economy  do  not  need  to  concern
themselves with it when they make economic decisions. This seems reasonable, but what does it
mean in more concrete terms?
Most  likely  it  is  not  advisable  to  aim  at  price  stability  defined  as  zero-inflation.
Some studies indicate that inflation as measured by the consumer price index is overestimated.
There are many arguments for that being  the  case,  one  being  that  goods  may  increase  in  price
because the quality has been improved and another that the items in the valuation basket whose
prices  are  measured  may  be  obsolete.  This  is  a  problem  of  methodology  and  measurement.
Estimates for the American economy show that owing to errors in measurement, inflation tends
to  be  overestimated  by  up  to  2  per  cent.  Estimates  by  Statistics  Sweden  for  the  Swedish
economy indicate a smaller error in measurement.
A very low inflation may also cause problems if the nominal wages are inflexible
downwards, which is often the case. Some degree of inflation  can  then  function  like  oil  in  the
economic  machinery.  However  price  and  wage  rigidity  do  not  follow  any  natural  law,
independently  of  how,  for  example,  economic  policy  is  formulated.  After  a  period  of  low  and
stable inflation, it normally becomes more common and more generally accepted that prices and
wages not only can be raised, but also can be lowered.
In addition striving after absolute price stability with margins of error that are in
all  likelihood  valid  will  sometimes  lead  to  price  increase  rates  that  may  be  negative.  Such  a
situation is not entirely free of risk, since it may be difficult to get out of a deflationary situation.
Should  inflation  then  not  be  allowed  to  be  higher  than  2  per  cent?  The  basic
argument against this assertion is that the disruption in the  economy  will  be  greater  the  higher
inflation  is  allowed  to  rise.  In  practice  the  fact  that  other  countries  in  Europe,  especially
Germany,  have  a  criterion  of  2  per  cent  for  price  stability  has  understandably  had  a  decisive
influence in Sweden. Moreover corresponding assessments have also been made by the majority
of the countries outside Europe that work with explicit inflation objectives.
BIS Review   14/1998
- 7 -
Question 5:  Can’t the Riksbank do something about unemployment?
Sometimes  the  view  is  expressed  that  low  inflation  is  indeed  good,  but  that  it
leads  to  a  very  one-sided  direction  for  monetary  policy;  the  Riksbank  should  also  have  an
objective for employment.
From  what  I  have  said  thus  far,  I  hope  that  it  has  been  clear  that  there  is  no
long-term  conflict  of  interests  between  inflation  and  employment.  On  the  contrary,  there  are
many  indications  that  low  inflation  is  a  prerequisite  for  stable  and  high  growth  and  for
favourable  employment  developments.  Therefore,  low  inflation  is  the  best  contribution  that
monetary policy can make to the fight against unemployment.
It is only in the short term that high inflation may lead to lower  unemployment.
However  to  utilise  such  a  trade-off  has  its  risks,  as  the  experiences  from  the  1970s  and  1980s
that I spoke about earlier indicated. The mere concern that policy will be too expansionary and
that inflation may sprint ahead can push up a country’s interest rates and results not in higher but
in  weaker  growth  and  employment  developments.  Therefore  it  is  crucial  for  monetary  policy
that confidence in the low inflation regime be preserved.
The very construction of the inflation objective  implies  that  economic  growth  is
taken  into  account  in  a  certain  way.  A  weaker  growth,  which  creates  excess  capacity  in  the
economy, normally means that inflationary pressures from the demand side will decrease. This
in turn produces room for a more expansive monetary policy – interest rates will be lowered and
demand  will  be  stimulated.  Conversely  a  very  high  demand  signifies  that  production  capacity
risks  hitting  the  ceiling.  Prices  and  wages  will  then  be  pushed  up.  In  order  to  prevent  such
occurrences, monetary policy must be tightened again and interest rates raised.
The time horizon over which the Riksbank strives to achieve  the  inflation  target
also  has  an  effect  on  growth  and  employment  in  the  short  term.  A  quite  short  time  horizon
means that substantial changes in the interest rate are required in order to achieve the objective.
Such  substantial  changes  may  in  turn  result  both  in  monetary  policy  appearing  abrupt  and  in
undesirable and significant fluctuations in growth and employment. In contrast a very long time
horizon will bring greater short-term stability to growth and employment, but at the same time
lead to considerable fluctuations in inflation. These fluctuations may weaken confidence in the
price  stability  policy  and  lead  to  higher  instrumental  rates  over  time.  Here  monetary  policy  is
obviously faced with a balancing problem. The more credible the policy is, the more room there
is to manoeuvre in practice.
There  may  be  reasons  for  completely  abstaining  from  reacting  to  certain
inflationary impulses of a one-time nature. An example of such “one-time inflation” is indirect
tax hikes. If price disruptions are judged to  have  merely  temporary  effects  on  inflation  and  do
not affect expectations of future inflation, it would imply unnecessary real economic instability
to prevent the price increases from having an impact on the consumer price index.
Question 6:  Doesn’t the Riksbank itself “talk up” inflation?
Now  and  then  the  criticism  is  made  that  the  Riksbank  stresses  the  risks  of
inflation in the economy and is thereby guilty  of “talking  up”  inflation.  When  this  is  carefully
done  the  Riksbank  –  say  some  of  the  critics  –  can  use  the  expected  higher  inflation  (that  we
ourselves have created) as an argument for making the interest rate increases we have wanted to
make  all  along.  This  type  of  criticism  was  common  last  autumn,  for  example,  when  the
BIS Review   14/1998
- 8 -
Riksbank spoke in various connections about its inflation outlook and explained that interest rate
increases might be necessary.
I  have  the  following  answer  to  these  criticisms.  To  begin  with,  the  Riksbank’s
focus on inflation developments is entirely natural. It is undoubtedly our task to show clearly the
reasons for our decisions. Without a candid accounting of monetary policy from the Riksbank’s
perspective it would be more difficult for the political decision-makers and the general public to
evaluate  monetary  policy  and  our  fulfilment  of  our  objective.  Think  what  type  of  debate  we
would  have  and  how  monetary  policy  would  be  seen  if  the  Riksbank  only  made  its  decisions
without  commenting  at  all  on  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  without  giving  reasons  for  its
policies.
Thus  the  need  for  the  Riksbank  to  speak  about  inflation  is  obvious.  Naturally  it
cannot be ruled out that in doing so it will influence households and businesses in their views on
price  developments,  however  our  influence  should  not  be  exaggerated.  The  cause-and-effect
relationship is rather the reverse: the Riksbank reacts to inflationary developments, which in turn
are  determined  by  a  great  number  of  decisions  by  businesses  and  households.  However,  of
course  the  Riksbank  does  not  react  in  a  mechanical  manner  to  a  measured  change  in  inflation
expectations.  The  Riksbank  currently  monitors  a  number  of  indicators  of  future  inflation
developments and, responses to its surveys about inflation expectations are just one of many.
By  way  of  conclusion  there  is  reason  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  inflation
expectations to an ever greater degree are being guided by the inflation objective and not by our
or others’ discussions of the risks of inflation. The signs of this are clear. The expected inflation
has crept down markedly and has now been stabilised in the vicinity of the objective for most of
the  groups  currently  monitored  by  the  Riksbank.  This  is  a  profoundly  positive  development,
which  actually  facilitates  the  monetary  policy  task.  (Diagram  4.  Inflation  Expectations  of  the
Players in the Money Market Agents)
Inflation Expectations of th e  Players
in th e Money Market Agents
Per cent
CCPPII
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
JJaann..’’9955
FFeebb.’.’9966
NNoovv.’.’9977
FFeebb.’.’9988
FFeebb.’.’9977
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
SSoouurrcecess: : SSttaattiissttiiccs s SSwweeddeen n aannd d PPrroossppeerra a RReesseeaarrcch h 
BIS Review   14/1998
Question 7:  Is the policy asymmetrical?
- 9 -
It  takes  time  before  a  change  in  the  instrumental  rate  affects  the  economy  and
inflation.  Therefore  monetary  policy  always  has  to  be  formulated  with  the  aid  of  forecasts  of
future  inflation.  When  the  Riksbank  formulates  monetary  policy  it  is  done  with  the  aid  of  a
forecast  one  or  two  years  into  the  future.  A  simple  rule  of  thumb  should  be  able  to  describe
monetary  policy:  if  our  overall  assessment  of  inflation  –  assuming  that  the  instrumental  rate
remains unchanged – indicates that inflation will deviate from the objective for two consecutive
years, the instrumental rate must be changed in the corresponding direction.
Monetary  policy  is  always  adjusted  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  2  per  cent
objective.  Occasionally  the  argument  has  been  presented  that  the  Riksbank  should  accept  that
inflation  has  risen  to  the  upper  range  of  the  interval  around  the  objective.  This  argument  is
difficult to reconcile with the conduct of monetary policy in general. To begin with, it  is  clear
that if the Riksbank did so, inflation would more often be outside the tolerance interval. In the
second place the rate of inflation would on average be higher than 2 per cent unless the Riksbank
had  the  same  tolerance  for  inflation  staying  at  the  lower  edge  of  the  band  in  an  economic
downturn.  However  such  a  policy  would  instead  reinforce  the  real  swings  in  the  economy,  in
contrast  to  a  policy  that  is  always  focused  on  the  objective.  In  upswings  the  Riksbank  would
allow more growth and inflation and in downturns we would do the opposite.
There  is  not  any  asymmetry  in  monetary  policy  and  there  should  not  be  any
either. One of the purposes of a clearly formulated objective is simply to inform what the policy
aims at. In such a way the inflation objective may anchor the price expectations in the economy.
The  Riksbank  should  be  evaluated  in  light  of  this  objective.  If  the  Riksbank  systematically
aimed below the objective or always overestimated the risks of inflation, it would be manifested
over time by too low inflation on average.
That the Riksbank always aims at the objective of 2  per  cent  unfortunately  does
not  mean  that  the  price  increases  will  always  be  limited  to  2  per  cent.  First  knowledge  of  the
path  leading  from  interest  rate  changes  to  their  impact  on  inflation  is  insufficient  to  enable  us
always to expect to be able to achieve the objective. Second price increases as measured by the
consumer price index will continually be affected by various kinds of temporary factors. There
may  be,  for  example,  changes  in  indirect  taxes  or  external  shocks  in  the  form  of  changed  oil
prices. Often such disruptions should not be counteracted (as long as they do not risk affecting
the long-term inflation process). In addition, there is a continuous flow of new information that
can change the inflation outlook. These factors can make the consumer price index diverge from
the target ex post, so to speak. This insight is the reason for the Riksbank’s decision to establish
a tolerance interval around the inflation objective. (Diagram 5. CPI and Underlying Inflation)
In  the  Inflation  Report  of  December,  the  assessment  was  that  economic  growth
would  be  around  3  per  cent  in  1998  and  somewhat  more  in  1999.  The  rise  in  demand  was
expected to result in a gradual reduction of the output gap in the coming years and in increasing
inflationary pressure. Given an unchanged repo rate, inflation was expected to rise gradually to
2.5 per cent during 1999. In order  to  avoid  more  drastic  changes  in  monetary  policy  at  a  later
stage, we chose to adjust monetary policy in a somewhat less expansionary direction. The repo
rate  was  raised  in  December  from  4.10  to  4.35  per  cent.  (Diagram  6.  Inflation  Forecast
December 1997)
BIS Review   14/1998
- 10 -
CPI and Underlying
Inflation
annual percentage change
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
Underlying inflation
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
CPI
Jan-95
Jul-95
Jan-96
Jul-96
Jan-97
Jul-97
Jan-98
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
The  current  crisis  in  Asia  was  discussed  chiefly  in  our  risk  scenarios.  A  small
reduction in the growth of exports was made in the main forecast. But it was primarily a possible
deepening of the crisis compared with the situation in December that, it was deemed, might have
substantial  effects  on  economic  and  price  developments  in  Sweden.  Thus  the  Asian  crisis  was
taken into account in our risk assessment.
Since  then  the  crisis  in  Asia  has  worsened,  both  in  terms  of  its  effects  on  the
financial markets and its likely consequences for real economic growth. For Sweden’s economy
it means that the negative effects of the Asian crisis probably will be somewhat more extensive
and prolonged than we expected in December.
All in all, the prospects for inflation from the demand side look a bit better than
they did when the repo rate was last  raised.  Another  positive  sign  is  that  the  wage  agreements
that have been concluded so far in 1998 indicate a rate of wage increases that is somewhat lower
than in the main scenario described in December. However the recent weakening of the krona is
a cause for concern. If it turns out to be permanent, it could affect inflation prospects.
In the Riksbank we are now finalising the next Inflation Report, in which we will
present an inflation forecast reaching into the first quarter of the year 2000. There, factors such
as the Asian crisis, the wage negotiations and the exchange rate developments will be weighed
and  put  into  a  larger  context.  The  view  of  the  inflation  prospects  that  will  result  from  this
process will form the basis for future monetary policy.
BIS Review   14/1998
- 11 -
Inflation Forecast
December 1997
CPI and
underlying  inflation(UND1)
CCPPII
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
UUNNDD11
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
BIS Review   14/1998
