Bank of Japan’s June report of recent economic and financial developments in
Japan   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 16/6/98.
The Bank’s View1
Final  demand  remains  weak  and  production  continues  to  decline  in  Japan.  As  a
consequence, employment and income conditions have recently shown a significant deterioration.
With respect to final demand, public-sector investment seems to have bottomed out.
Growth  in  net  exports,  however,  has  virtually  peaked  out  as  exports  to  other  Asian  countries
declined. Business fixed investment continues to be on the decline. Private consumption shows little
sign of recovery, although the deterioration has slowed. Housing investment has decreased further.
Against the background of weak final demand, inventories have accumulated further and industrial
production continues to decrease. As a result, corporate profits have worsened, and employment and
income  conditions  have  deteriorated  evidently,  as  seen  recently  in  the  rapid  rise  of  the
unemployment rate.
As for the outlook of the economy, the implementation of the supplementary budget
for  fiscal  1998  is  assumed  to  boost  demand  through  additional  public  works  and  special  income
tax-reduction, and cease the negative interactions of production, income, and expenditure. However,
such  positive  effects  of  the  fiscal  policy  may  be  weakened,  if  the  ongoing  rapid  deterioration  in
employment and income conditions further dampens the overall economic activities. Therefore, the
overall  economic  activities,  including  corporate  and  household  confidence,  should  be  carefully
monitored.
With  regard  to  prices,  wholesale  prices  continue  to  fall  and  consumer  prices
(excluding  the  effects  of  institutional  changes)  have  declined  slightly  below  the  previous  year’s
level. With respect to the factors affecting the outlook, the downward pressure on domestic prices
induced by the decline in import prices including overseas commodity prices has already weakened.
Also,  the  expansion  in  the  output  gap  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  slow  in  line  with  the
implementation of the economic stimulus package. However, reflecting the  present  high  inventory
level and the relatively large output gap, prices are likely to be weak for some time. There may also
be additional downward pressures if domestic demand weakens further.
As for financial markets, rates on term instruments (for both spots and futures) have
been  generally  steady  in  the  money  markets.  Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  recorded
historical lows from late April to early June with the releases of weak economic indicators, and are
recently showing a slight turnaround. Stock prices have been slightly declining, indicating the weak
market sentiment on the economy.
Market concern towards credit risk remains strong, and the yield differential between
bonds issued by the private sector and those by the government has been significant since the end of
last year.
With  respect  to  monetary  aggregates,  growth  in  M2+CDs  has  been  slowing  and
private  bank  lending  remains  sluggish.  This  reveals  the  fall  in  credit  demand  following  stagnant
economic conditions as well as the continued cautious lending attitudes of private banks.
                                                     
1 
The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the  Monetary
Policy Meeting held on June 12, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   55/1998
- 2 -
Meanwhile, some firms, especially small and medium-sized firms, have been facing
difficult  financing  conditions  in  terms  of  both  funds  availability  and  fund-raising  costs.  This
influence on the overall economy continues to warrant a careful monitoring.
BIS Review   55/1998
