Ms. Hämäläinen discusses achieving a credible currency for Europe   Address
by the Governor of the Bank of Finland, Ms. Sirkka Hämäläinen, at the Frankfurt International
Banking Evening on 5/5/98.
…First  of  all  I  would  like  to  thank  the  hosts  of  this  evening  for  giving  me  the
opportunity to address this distinguished audience in these historical surroundings. It is a great
honour and privilege for me.
With the historical decision reached at last weekend’s European summit, we now
know  that  a  common  monetary  policy  will  become  reality  for  eleven  EU  countries  at  the
beginning of next year. A long, intense process - a process that has had its doubters and critics
along the way - has now passed an important milestone.
Setting forth on this historical project was in itself a tremendous achievement, but
the real challenges still lie ahead. The participating countries must now make this project succeed
and achieve its intended objectives. The project must deliver unquestioned monetary stability and
efficiency  to  the  euro-area,  and  thereby  provide  a  solid  basis  for  growth  and  employment  in
Europe.
As part of the overall stabilization and convergence achieved by the participating
countries  and  as  a  result  of  the  strengthening  of  market  confidence,  we  have  seen  wide
convergence  in  interest  and  exchange  rates.  This  will  ease  the  transition  to  a  single  monetary
policy, but the crucial question remains: How do we make the euro credible from the start, so
that the ESCB doesn’t have to resort to an unnecessarily tight monetary policy?
At the end of the day, strong credibility is what ensures low inflation expectations,
low inflation and low interest rates.
Credibility  is  built  up  from  many  elements,  building  blocks  if  you  will.  Even
though  the  ECB  starts  its  operations  without  a  track  record  and  without  its  own  history  of
credibility, a number of these critical elements already exist. All in all, I would like to identify
seven building blocks that are important for the ESCB’s credibility.
1. The first building block is the credibility the ECB may inherit from the national central banks
of the  participating  countries.  All  NCBs  in  the  euro  area  have  conducted  monetary  policies
aimed  at  price  stability  and  convergence  in  accord  with  the  principles  of  the  Maastricht
Treaty.
2. The  second  building  block  is  the  ESCB’s  uncontested  independence.  This  will  give
institutional credibility from the outset.
3. The third building block is the transparency and clarity of the ECB’s strategy and aims. The
ECB’s  primary  final  objective  is  price  stability.  This  final  objective  will  before  1999  be
operationalized and quantified in a way that is meaningful and understandable to the markets
and the public at large.
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  will  be  geared  towards  a  “domestic”  objective,  internal  price
stability within the euro area while the euro is allowed to float against other world currencies.
The fact is that the share of foreign trade in GDP for the euro area is approximately the same
BIS Review   45/1998
- 2 -
as  for  the  US,  about  10  per  cent,  so  the  exchange  rate  will  probably  not  have  much  of  an
impact on the euro area price stability or the monetary policy stance, even indirectly.
Certainly, it would be expedient to quantify and to announce the target “ price stability”, for
example,  in  the  form  of  a  target  range  or  an  approximate  value.  This,  and  what  kinds  of
intermediate  monetary  aggregate  targets  could  or  should  be  used  to  communicate  the
monetary  policy  stance  to  the  markets,  the  public  and  policy-makers,  are  still  under
consideration. I will therefore not go further  into  this  topic,  except  to  note  that  formulating
monetary policy strategy and the definition and specification of its policy will be one of the
first and most important issues on which the ECB must decide.
The problem of intermediate targets is that  we  lack  Europe-wide  empirical  evidence  on  the
stability of demand-for-money functions and on the monetary policy transmission mechanism
in general. What we can say with certainty at this point - and this is not too productive - is that
the analysis of the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be a truly challenging task.
The financial market and structural changes produced by the single currency, as well as the
general  continuous  structural  changes  in  the  financial  markets  due  to  globalization,  are
transforming the transmission processes.
All  the  central  banks  carefully  distill  vast  amounts  of  data  and  examine  many  different
indicators before they decide on policy. Thus, quantitative targets are not perhaps so important
for the internal decision-making process of the central bank. But they are very important for
communication with the markets and the public. How useful they are for this purpose depends
very much on their predictability.
4. The  fourth  building  block  -  which  partly  covers  the  previous  one  -  is  the  wider  overall
openness of the central bank towards the markets, the public and policy-makers, not only in its
strategy and targeting but also in its analyses and reasoning behind its decisions.
A  high  degree  of  market  transparency  is  natural  for  any  central  bank  operating  in  a  market
environment,  because  transparency  essentially  increases  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy.
Without  doubt,  the  ESCB  has  to,  and  will,  consider  all  possible  means  and  channels  to
achieve it.
Another  central  aspect  of  openness  is  what  is  loosely  called  “democratic  accountability”.
Confidence of the public and the political decision-making bodies that represent the public is
of utmost importance for the credibility of an independent central bank. This confidence can
only be achieved if information provided by the central bank to the public is clear, and if there
is a healthy dialogue between the central bank and political decision-making bodies.
The Maastricht Treaty provides a framework for accountability at the European level; national
legislation of the member states provides a similar framework for national accountability. The
euro  will  require  the  acceptance  and  support  of  citizens  and  policy-makers  in  each
participating member state. Thus, accountability at the national level will be very important.
In practice, democratic accountability should be the outcome of constructive communication
between  the  central  bank  and  political  decision-making  bodies  -  connected  with  complete
central bank independence. There should not be any genuine conflict between the central bank
on the one hand and the other policy-makers and the public on the other hand because they all
share a common ultimate goal under EMU, monetary stability and economic growth.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 3 -
5. The fifth building block, and one of the most important elements in the credibility of the euro,
is the stance and discipline of fiscal policies, both in individual member states and in the euro
area as a whole.
Fiscal policy affects credibility in two ways. The first has to do with how well national fiscal
policies cope with differences in the business cycle and in the monetary policy transmission
mechanisms  of  the  member  states.  Under  a  single  monetary  policy,  national  fiscal  policies
need  to  be  far  more  active  and  flexible  than  at  present  to  deal  successfully  with
country specific  growth  and  inflation  differences.  Both  room  to  manoeuvre  at  the  national
level  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  explicitly  demand  that  the  public  finances  of  the
member state are balanced and healthy.
The second aspect of fiscal policy, closely connected to the first, is the overall degree of fiscal
policy discipline in the euro area. Curbing inflation expectations and achieving the inflation
target  are  the  more  easily  attained  with  low  interest  rates,  the  more  disciplined  the  fiscal
policy at the European level.
It  is  of  vital  importance  that  a  close  and  constructive  dialogue  is  organized  and  established
between the ministers of finance of the participating countries (EURO-11) and the European
Central  Bank.  Such  a  dialogue  does  not  in  any  way  endanger  the  ECB’s  independence  to
pursue its legislated objective price stability.
Simultaneously, the role of national central banks and their dialogue with the national fiscal
policy  authorities  will  continue  to  be  essential;  in  achieving  an  appropriate  monetary  and
fiscal policy mix at the European level, and  in  ensuring  balanced  economic  performance  in
each country under the single monetary policy.
6. The sixth building block of credibility for the European Central Bank and the stability of the
euro,  is  a  high  standard  of  economic  and  monetary  analysis  within  the  ESCB.  High-quality
work encourages confidence in the expertise of the system in a new environment where this
analysis  and  know-how  must  cover  the  entire  euro  area.  Here,  the  skills,  knowledge  and
expertise accumulated in national central banks will be put to good use in the preparation of
the single monetary policy.
As you have noticed, I have repeatedly stressed the importance of national central banks in the
European  System  of  Central  Banks.  Let  me  say  very  firmly  that  I  am  not  doing  it  out  of
parochial concerns or motives. What we need is an ECB that is strong and efficient. In today’s
eleven-country  constellation  the  ECB  needs  to  mobilize  the  support  of  the  national  central
banks.
The governors of the national central banks will have a central role in the Governing Council
of  the  ECB  where  decisions  on  monetary  policy  as  well  as  decisions  on  systems  and
institutional arrangements will be made. Operations and transactions will be decentralized and
carried  out  in  the  national  central  banks.  The  skills  and  accumulated  knowledge  of  the
national  central  banks  will  form  an  integral  part  of  the  preparation  of  joint  decisions.  The
NCBs  will  also  play  a  major  communications  role  by  providing  information  at  the  national
level and helping to define the fiscal and monetary policy mix for both the national and the
entire  euro  area.  And  finally,  the  national  central  banks  will  bear  a  great  responsibility  in
BIS Review   45/1998
- 4 -
ensuring the legitimacy of the independent ESCB through their contributions to transparency
and democratic accountability.
7. While I stress here the role of the national central banks, I also want to stress very strongly
that the seventh, and one of the most important building blocks of the credibility and stability
of the euro and the efficiency of the single monetary policy will be the ability of the governors
of the national central banks to base their analyses, actions and decisions on the interests of
the euro area as a whole.
Although  one  of  the  tasks  of  any  governor  of  a  national  central  bank  is  to  bring  national
information  and  viewpoints  into  the  decision-making  process,  there  is  no  conflict  with  the
interests of the euro area.
Adopting a euro area-wide viewpoint will be a demanding and immediate challenge for the
European System of Central Banks. This challenge makes me believe that it is not a good idea
to  publish  the  minutes  and  the  voting  positions  of  the  Governing  Council  meetings,  even
though  transparency  and  accountability  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  are  very
important.  The  publication  of  the  discussions  and  voting  positions  could  easily  lead  to
dramatization of national differences of opinion at the expense of euro-level views.
 During  the  1990s,  Finland  has  gone  through  severe  adjustments.  We  have
consolidated our public finances and achieved credibility for our monetary policy. For us Finns,
the single monetary policy is a natural continuation of this process. In global, expectation-driven
financial markets, a small country has poor possibilities to ensure its exchange rate and interest
rate  stability,  even  with  a  highly  disciplined  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  and  sound  economic
fundamentals. For us, the stability and credibility that we expect from EMU, and its discipline,
are of vital importance.
BIS Review   45/1998
