Mr.  Macfarlane  gives  an  overview  of  the  Asian  situation  from  an  Australian
perspective      Talk  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  Mr.  I.J.  Macfarlane,  to  the
American Australian Association, in conjunction with the Asia Society, The Downtown Economists
Inc., New York Association of Business Economists and the International Economists Club held in
New York on 11/3/98.
This is my first opportunity to address such an important audience in New York, but I
hope  it  will  be  the  first  of  many  such  occasions.  I  have  chosen  as  my  topic  the  current  Asian
situation, which as you can well imagine is exercising a lot of our time and thought in Australia at the
moment.  We  like  to  think  that  there  is  a  lot  of  expertise  in  Asian  affairs  in  Australia  among  our
policy-makers, in our universities and in our press, and that therefore an Australian perspective could
have interest for a wider audience.
Forecasting economic crises
The events in Asia over the last 18 months have raised again the issue of whether it is
possible  to  forecast  economic  crises.  The  international  community  went  through  the  same
self-examination  after  Mexico  in  1994,  and  a  large  amount  of  research  was  done  on  the  subject  -
much of it by the IMF.
It sounds as though it should be easy. We can all point to obvious signs of trouble in
particular countries - in Mexico, the over-valuation of the real exchange rate; in Thailand, declining
exports and widening current account deficit; in Korea and Indonesia, the large amount of unhedged
foreign borrowing. This type of casual empiricism, however, is not good enough; it tends to highlight
a different factor  for  each  country.  To  be  a  useful  forecasting  device,  we  need  to  identify  a  set  of
characteristics that is nearly always present in all countries that are about to experience an economic
crisis. A number of economic studies have set out to do this, and have found a few useful regularities,
but not much more. The results have disappointed those who hoped for a forecasting kit which would
enable them to pick the timing of the next crisis and the countries involved.
The  private  sector  has  not  done  any  better  as  a  forecaster,  judged  by  interest  rate
spreads  and  credit  ratings.  The  spreads  between  Asian  interest  rates  and  comparable  US  rates
narrowed during the 1990s to reach a low point in the first half of 1997 just as the problems were
about to unfold. The ratings agencies made no downgrades in the first half of 1997, and compounded
the problem by making a flurry of downgrades after Asian currencies had already fallen sharply.
Notwithstanding the disappointing results of these forecasts, I intend to examine some
of the characteristics that seem to lie behind the economic crises of the past decade. But before doing
so, I should say a word or two about what is meant by an economic crisis - it could be something
temporary and manageable, or, on the other hand, it could be an economic disaster.
What do we mean by an economic crisis?
Most  of  the  studies  on  this  subject  concentrate  on  a  very  specific  sub-species  of
economic  crisis,  namely  a  currency  crisis.  This  has  the  advantage  that  it  can  be  measured  by  one
variable - a  currency  crisis  can  be  defined  as  any  episode  when  the  exchange  rate  falls  by  a  large
amount in a short period. A definition of this type would usually include, among others,  Thailand,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Korea and the Czech Republic in 1997, Mexico in 1994, the United
Kingdom and Italy in 1992, and Australia in 1985. I could add a much bigger list if I wanted to, but
the above selection is sufficient to illustrate the points I want to make.
BIS Review   20/1998
- 2 -
The most important point is that a currency crisis need not be much of a crisis at all, in
that it may not lead to a broader economic crisis. While it often does lead to a broader crisis - as in
Asia today - there are examples in the above list where it was not the case. Few would argue that the
United Kingdom’s or Italy’s departure from the ERM precipitated an economic crisis or led to any
lasting hardship. I would make the same case for Australia in 1985. The depreciation of the exchange
rate in these cases led to a beneficial policy response, had only short-term inflationary impact, and
was soon followed by a significant appreciation.
It seems to me that a fruitful approach would be to look at the factors which are likely
to precipitate a currency crisis, and look elsewhere for another  set  of  factors  which  would  cause  a
currency  crisis  to  lead  to  a  full-blown  economic  crisis.  By  this,  I  mean  a  deep  recession,  high
inflation and widespread corporate and banking collapses.
Factors leading to a currency crisis
There is a literature dating back to the 1980s which deals with speculative attacks on
currencies.  Not  surprisingly,  this  points  out  that  any  country  that  has  a  combination  of  a  fixed
exchange rate and the free movement of international capital is particularly vulnerable to a successful
speculative attack. The ERM departures of 1992 and the Asian currency crises of 1997 fit neatly into
this  pattern.  But  other  countries  with  fixed  exchange  rates  have  been  successful  in  avoiding
depreciation. For example, France maintained its peg in 1992 and Hong Kong has  done  so  for  the
past 13 years, despite the turmoil in its region. As well, some countries with floating exchange rates
have experienced currency crises. All that can be concluded at this stage is that a fixed exchange rate
is  more  likely  to  result  in  a  currency  crisis  than  a  floating  one.  It  is  more  “brittle”  -  it  allows
speculators to build a position without turning the price against themselves. Also, it does not allow
the monetary authorities a tactical retreat - they have to  keep  supplying  foreign  reserves  at  a  fixed
price.
The situation described above becomes more marked if three other conditions apply:
 if there is evidence that the currency is becoming over-valued, either because
of domestic inflation (as in Mexico), or because it is fixed  to  an  appreciating  currency  (such  as  in
Asia in 1997);
 if  there  have  recently  been  other  currency  crises  in  countries  with  similar
characteristics. Currency crises  come  in  bunches;  contagion  is  as  good  an  indication  of  impending
trouble as are any “fundamental indicators”;
 if  there  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Government  will  not  have  the
necessary  support  to  be  able  to  resist  depreciation.  Such  resistance  would  normally  involve
tightenings of fiscal and monetary policy which would be hard if the economy is in or near recession,
or where the balance sheets of the corporate sector are very weak.
I have not mentioned the traditional villains - large budget deficits financed by central
banks, and the resulting rapid monetary expansion and inflation. I do not want to suggest that these
will not lead to a currency crisis - obviously, they will, but they have not been the main culprits in
recent years.1 The interesting  situations  -  and  the  ones  worth  studying  -  are  where  currency  crises
occur in countries with reasonably responsible fiscal and monetary policies, as in most of the cases
cited above.
                                                       
1 
In an earlier speech I called these Type I crises and contrasted them to Type II crises where problems
centred on the weakness of banking systems and other private sector deficiencies (as discussed below).   See
“The Changing Nature of Economic Crises”, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, December 1997.
BIS Review   20/1998
- 3 -
Another  category  of  economic  characteristics  that  are  traditionally  associated  with
currency crises are those pertaining to a country’s external trade situation, such as its current account
deficit  or  its  accumulated  external  debts.  Again,  a  large  current  account  deficit  is  often  associated
with a currency crisis, but there are enough important exceptions to question whether this would be a
useful indicator of an impending currency crisis. For example, neither Indonesia nor Korea had large
current account deficits in the 1990s (including in 1997), nor did either the United Kingdom or Italy
in  1992.  The  celebrated  case  in  the  opposite  direction  is  Singapore,  which  ran  a  current  account
deficit which averaged 15 per cent of GDP for the decade of the 1970s without a currency crisis.
As you may have noticed, I have not mentioned any of the economic characteristics
that  have  received  so  much  attention  in  discussions  of  the  current  Asian  situation.  These  include
longstanding structural features such as soundness of the domestic banking system, the transparency
of business relationships, the degree of government involvement in private investment decisions, or
the  quality  of  bank  supervision.  While  these  are  important,  they  are  important  in  a  different  way.
Deficiencies in these areas clearly cannot be the cause of the recent currency crisis in Asia, because
these deficiencies have been around for decades. They did not deter international capital from flowing
in year after year and, therefore, could not be the cause of the change of direction in 1997.
They are important, not because they cause a currency crisis, but because they provide
an environment where a currency crisis can lead to a severe economic crisis.
Severe economic crises
Whether  a  currency  crisis  leads  to  a  severe  economic  crisis  or  not  depends  on  two
factors - how far the currency falls, and how resilient the economy is to a lower exchange rate and
higher interest rates.
(a) The size of the depreciation
This may sound as though it is a small diversion from the main theme, but it is not. It
is quite possible that an exchange rate may fall by an amount much greater than anyone expected on
the basis of ex ante information (anyone can always make up an ex post justification). This should
not surprise us because no-one has yet been able to find a satisfactory explanation for movements in
the  exchange  rate.  That  is,  no-one  has  found  an  equation  linking  the  exchange  rate  to  various
economic variables that is good enough to yield forecasts that outperform crude rules of thumb. We
know that certain factors, such as those listed in the previous section, are associated with falls in the
exchange rate, but we do not know whether the fall will occur this month or in two years, or whether
it will be 10 per cent, 20 per cent or 80 per cent.
One thing that seems clear is that in the early days of a floating exchange rate regime,
we should expect some very large movements, particularly if the balance of forces is in the direction
of depreciation. Markets are unfamiliar with the new system, they have no track record to guide them,
there is often an atmosphere of panic among market participants or indecision among policy makers,
and reliable information is hard to come by. In these circumstances, overshooting is almost bound to
occur. In Australia’s case, the Australian  dollar  moved  from  a  relatively  fixed  regime  to  a  float  in
December 1983 because it was under upward pressure. Yet within 15 months the scene had changed
and it began to depreciate sharply; in the space of 17 months it fell by 39 per cent in effective terms.
This was a gross overshooting, as subsequent events proved (it regained two-thirds of its fall in the
subsequent year).
BIS Review   20/1998
- 4 -
The  situation  in  Asia  involves  an  altogether  higher  order  of  uncertainty.  Their
currencies were floated because they could not resist downward pressure in 1997,2 and they had to
give up their fixed rate regimes and move to a float before anyone was prepared for the new system.
In  these  circumstances,  floating  rate  regimes  operate  very  badly  and  are  extremely  sensitive  to
confidence factors. Great skill is required in finding the right policies and managing the crisis. The
countries  concerned  usually  have  no  experience  of  it,  and  therefore  often  turn  to  the  international
community for help. It is an equally large challenge for the international institutions and the spirit of
international co-operation.
When  an  exchange  rate  falls  quickly  to  half  its  former  level,  or  a  quarter  (as  in
Indonesia),  the  strain  on  the  economy  becomes  intense.  Even  in  those  countries  with  the  most
advanced banking systems, capital markets and regulatory regimes, such a fall is hard to handle. It is
also clear that countries in this situation would have to attempt to reduce the size of the depreciation
by raising interest rates, so that the economy would face a combination of a lower exchange rate and
higher interest rates.
(b) Resilience of the financial sector
A large, but not enormous, fall in the exchange rate - say, something between 20 and
40 per cent - could in some circumstances be absorbed without lasting damage, but in others it could
lead  to  a  major  economic  crisis.  On  the  basis  of  recent  experience,  it  now  seems  that  the  factors
which are most likely to lead to an economic crisis are financial in nature, and pertain particularly to
the  structure  of  the  banking  system,  the  financial  health  of  the  corporate  sector  and  the  general
financial infrastructure. A shortlist of the main factors that reduce an economy’s resilience, and hence
mean that a currency crisis will be translated into an economic crisis, is as follows:
(a)
Has it recently experienced a debt-financed asset price boom, and thus
become vulnerable to a large fall in asset prices? Have there been a large rise in the ratio of
credit to GDP, an increase in corporate  gearing,  and,  of  course,  large  increases  in  property
and equity prices?
(b)
Is the financial sector in good shape? The main thing to look for here
is the quality of bank lending as indicated by the level of bad debts, the extent of lending that
has been collateralised by over-priced assets, or more crudely, the proportion of lending to the
property sector. It is bound to be difficult to get reliable figures, so an alternative would be to
make an assessment of the quality of bank supervision. A starting point here would be to look
for a good set of ownership rules; these should limit the extent of lending to related parties.
(c)
Have banks and commercial firms financed themselves by unhedged
foreign  borrowing?  Every  crisis  focuses  attention  on  at  least  one  important  cause,  and  this
pattern of financing seems to be heavily implicated in each of the current Asian troublespots.
(d)
Is  the  financial  infrastructure  strong  enough  to  handle  a  crisis?  By
this,  I  mean  the  accounting  standards,  commercial  law,  disclosure  requirements  and
bankruptcy  procedures.  In  current  parlance,  this  is  often  discussed  under  the  title  of
“governance”,  and  means  an  institutional  framework  that  limits  the  extent  of  related  party
transactions (also known as “crony capitalism”). A favourable score in this area is needed to
                                                       
2 
countries were under chronic upward pressure.
Of  course,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  in  the  preceding  years  of  the  1990s,  these
BIS Review   20/1998
- 5 -
help  investors  and  lenders  gauge  whether  they  are  dealing  with  a  solvent  or  insolvent
counterparty.
A feature of all these underlying financial characteristics is that they are very slow to
change. Just as deficiencies in this area cannot have been the cause of the recent currency crises, it is
hard  to  believe  that  meaningful  improvements  to  them  can  be  made  quickly  enough  to  restore
confidence to currency markets. A tax or an interest rate can be raised immediately, and so cause a
rapid turnaround in fiscal or monetary policy. Domestic demand can fall sharply, leading to a quick
move  into  surplus  in  the  current  account,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  Asia.  But  improvements  to
financial infrastructure and the sorting out of a weakened banking sector inevitably take a long time,
and any immediate measures are more in the nature of a “promise” than an achievement. They will
not quickly prevent capital outflow or restore inflow: the immediate solution lies elsewhere.
Concluding comments
Neither the financial markets, international organisations nor academic economists are
good at predicting currency crises. In the past,  they  have  happened  in  circumstances  that  appeared
quite tranquil, for example mid-1997.
The likelihood of crises happening is greatest for countries that have a relatively fixed
exchange rate and are open to international capital flows. The speed with which these flows can turn
around  is  astonishing.  The  five  Asian  countries  at  the  centre  of  the  current  troubles  -  Thailand,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and Korea - received private capital inflows equivalent to 8 per cent
of GDP in 1996, and outflows of nearly 2 per cent in 1997.3 Such a turnaround in capital flows, to
quote  Chairman  Greenspan’s  understated  style,  “do  not  appear  to  have  resulted  wholly  from  a
measured judgment that fundamental forces have turned appreciably more adverse. More likely, its
root is a process that is neither measured or rational . . .”4
It  is  not  surprising  that  these  countries’  exchange  rate  regimes  collapsed  and  they
were forced into a rather hurried float. It should also not be surprising that the ensuing depreciations
were extremely large, because that seems to be a common pattern. The smallest of the depreciations
was still of the order of 40 per cent, and this plus the rise in interest rates was bound to put enormous
pressure on domestic financial systems.
In my analysis, I have distinguished between factors that are likely to cause a currency
crisis and factors that are likely to mean it will become a general economic crisis. I have also said that
I do not think the second set of factors - essentially deficiencies in the financial infrastructure - could
have triggered the currency crisis, because they have been around for years. The problem, however,
is that they can interact with the currency crisis once it has started. Market participants who may have
been indifferent to deficiencies in the financial infrastructure at the old exchange rate start to voice
disapproval of it once the exchange rate has fallen. But nothing may have changed with respect  to
financial infrastructure: the only new information on which the change in judgment could be based is
the lower exchange rate itself. This could become self-reinforcing and lead to further capital outflow
and a yet lower exchange rate.
There has been a tendency for this to occur over the past 12 months. For this reason,
and others, we have seen exchange rates in some Asian countries that have fallen to half of their level
a year ago or, in Indonesia’s case, a quarter. Falls of this size defy economic logic and serve no useful
                                                       
3 
4 
Beach, Florida, 27 February 1998.
Institute of International Finance.
Remarks  before  the  Annual  Financial  Conference  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta,  Miami
BIS Review   20/1998
- 6 -
economic purpose. Indonesia was a successful trading nation a year ago at its former exchange rate,
with a healthy growth of exports and a modest current account deficit. There is no value to Indonesia,
to the region or the world in now having an exchange rate at a quarter of its former level.
Any collective solution to the current troubles in Asia should  have  as  a  priority  the
aim of restoring exchange rates a fair way towards their former value. We should not lose sight of
what  we  originally  intended  to  do  when  the  international  support  packages  were  put  together  for
Thailand,  Indonesia  and  Korea.  Our  aim  was  to  allow  an  orderly  economic  adjustment  and  to
minimise the risk of further contagion into other parts of Asia and the rest of the world. Our aim was
not  to  capitalise  on  any  of  these  countries’  difficulties  in  order  to  bring  about  a  political
transformation.
Some of the steps towards the restoration of a more realistic set of exchange rates are
already occurring. Most, if not all, of the troubled Asian countries have returned to trade surplus and,
probably, current account surplus. Although it would be a great help, it is not absolutely necessary to
restore capital inflow; in the short term, all that is needed in order to provide some upward pressure
on currencies is to prevent further capital outflow. The collective agreement among major banks to
rollover Korean bank debt, and then to reschedule it, was a good example of what can be done. If
there is insufficient initiative or cohesion among private lenders to Indonesia  to  follow  the  Korean
lead, then a greater involvement of governments and the IMF is required. Whatever the details that
are  finally  worked  out,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  overwhelming  priority  is  to  rollover,
reschedule,  restructure  existing  debt  or  do  whatever  else  is  necessary  to  prevent  further  capital
outflow.
BIS Review   20/1998
