Mr. Heikenstein discusses the Swedish financial crisis of the early 1990s   Speech
by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikenstein, at a seminar arranged by the
Swedish embassy held in Seoul, Korea on 15/7/98.
Let me begin with a thank  you  to  the  organisers  of  this  seminar.  I  am  honoured  to
have  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  experiences  from  the  Swedish  financial  crisis  in  the
early 1990s.
1.  Introduction
An IMF study from 1996 showed that in the past fifteen years, 132 of the Fund’s 182
member countries had experienced macroeconomic and/or financial crises. Today the figure is even
higher. Crises are a recurring phenomenon. In spite of every effort to prevent them, I fear that crises
will continue to occur. We should therefore use the opportunities to learn from each other, both in
order to avoid making the same mistakes and to find the appropriate correctives sooner.
Needless  to  say,  there  are  no  single  “best  solutions”.  Crisis  situations  are  always
specific in some respects, not least with regard to their structural and political environment. Had they
not been specific, they would probably never have occurred because they would have been “spotted”
in advance. Having said this, however, there are a number of globally accepted “truths” about what
constitutes a good response to crises.
Discussions  around  crisis  situations  are  usually  divided  into  two  parts:  crisis
prevention and crisis management. In this presentation I will be focusing on the latter. To understand
the  handling  of  a  crisis,  it  is  useful  to  know  which  factors  generated  the  problems.  Hence,  my
narrative  will  include  the  events  that  led  up  to  the  crisis  in  Sweden.  I  will  also  comment  on  the
developments in Asia, with some emphasis on Korea. Having sketched this background, I will turn
to  the  actual  handling  of  crises,  explaining  why  we  found  certain  types  of  solutions  useful  in
Sweden - leaving it to you to consider whether the same might apply to some extent to your country.
2.  Background
The macroeconomy
First, let me say a few words about the macroeconomic background to the crisis in
Sweden.  There  are  both  similarities  and  differences  between  Sweden  and  Asia.  In  the  following  I
will  touch  on  some  of  them.  It  should  also  be  remembered  that  substantial  differences  also  exist
between the Asian countries.
One common factor is the fixed exchange rate. In Sweden this led to high levels of
foreign  borrowing,  particularly  in  the  private  sector.  In  addition  it  made  it  difficult  to  counter  the
gradual  overheating  of  the  economy  by  applying  contractive  monetary  measures  -  raising  interest
rates tended to increase capital inflows which, to the extent they were monetised, further contributed
to the overheating.
Following the deregulation of the domestic financial market, the crisis in Sweden was
also  preceded  by  a  rapid  expansion  of  credit;  in  the  course  of  five  years,  private  borrowing  grew
from 85 to 135 % of GDP. The credit expansion coincided with a protracted boom and a significant
proportion  of  the  borrowed  money  was  spent  on  speculation,  both  in  real  estate  and  in  financial
assets,  such  as  equity.  The  real  estate  speculation  in  Sweden  culminated  in  a  bubble  that  burst  in
1990-91. Shielded by the economic upswing, there had been many misdirected and overly optimistic
investments in various industrial and other projects.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 2 -
In these aspects I find similarities between Sweden in the late 1980s and the Asian
countries  during  the  1990s.  A  feature  common  to  Sweden  and  Korea  was,  moreover,  that  the
domestic financial market was liberalised long before the external capital outflows. This meant that
overheating  of  the  domestic  economy  could  not  be  adequately  balanced  by  capital  outflows  for
investment abroad.
But there are also some differences. Other factors that contributed to Sweden’s acute
crisis were a relatively deep international downturn and high interest rates in our part of the world
in the wake of German reunion. On top of this, our fiscal position was more vulnerable, entering the
1990s with a public debt-to-GDP ratio of around 40 per cent. Sweden’s external borrowing ratio was
also high - some 30 per cent of GDP. Besides reflecting the public budget deficit, this had to do with
an  extremely  low  private  savings  ratio.  In  some  years  this  ratio  was  actually  negative.  These
weaknesses made Sweden highly vulnerable to shifts in confidence in our economy.
The financial sector
There  were  also  underlying  weaknesses  in  financial  systems.  Let  me  now  turn  to
these.
The financial systems had not adapted to the change from a sheltered environment to
a deregulated and much more competitive situation. In the earlier environment, banks had had little
incentive to develop a sophisticated credit culture, involving comprehensive evaluations of debtors,
projects and collateral. (One important similarity between Sweden and Korea was the overoptimistic
reliance  on  collateral  and  other  guarantees,  rather  than  on  the  viability  of  the  loan  project  itself).
When deregulation was a fact, bank managers saw a chance of gaining market share and increasing
revenues by taking new risks, but did not clearly see the dangers in a lack of the necessary expertise.
One  of  the  major  faults  in  credit  decisions  in  Sweden  was  that  banks  lent  to
customers, projects and geographical areas of which they did not have sufficient knowledge. Another
major  mistake  was  that  banks  accepted  high-risk  concentrations,  not  just  to  individual  companies
but  also  to  economic  sectors,  primarily  real  estate,  and  to  geographical  areas.  At  the  peak  of  the
crisis, bank loans to real estate, or collateralised by real estate, accounted for more than 60 per cent
of all loan losses.
A  further  weakness  was  the  inability  of  the  banks,  as  well  as  of  the  authorities,  to
register  the  growing  prevalence  of  indirect  concentration  risks.  For  instance,  bank  borrowers
demanded loans denominated in foreign currencies. Interest rates on these loans were lower than on
krona loans and as the krona was fixed within a fairly narrow band, there was presumed  to  be  no
exchange  risk.  The  banks  borrowed  the  foreign  currencies  abroad  and  on-lent  them  to  customers,
avoiding  open  exchange  risk  exposures.  However,  when  the  krona  was  attacked  and  the  fixed
exchange  rate  subsequently  had  to  be  abandoned,  banks  were  doubly  affected.  Foreign
counterparties,  perceiving  the  banks’  weakened  position,  reduced  or  withdrew  credit  lines.  This
forced the banks to demand either early repayment from customers or loan conversion into domestic
currency. This led, in turn, to sharply increased loan losses because, at short notice, borrowers were
unable  to  raise  the  larger  amounts  in  krona  that  were  needed  to  repay  the  foreign  currency  loans,
which the krona’s depreciation had made much more expensive.
Neither had the supervisory authority, the Bank Inspectorate, adjusted. It continued
its  traditional  formal  supervision,  ensuring  that  reports,  permits  et  cetera  were  formally  correct,
rather than supervising the actual risks. The authority was also somewhat complacent about risks (to
be  frank,  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  should  share  the  blame  for  this)  since
BIS Review   65/1998
- 3 -
Sweden had not experienced a financial crisis since the 1930s. Lacking relevant crisis  experience,
the  authorities  did  not  perceive  that  the  1980s  could  pave  the  way  to  a  new  financial  crisis.  The
decade was, after all, characterised by sustained economic growth, rising bank profits and extremely
low loan losses.
The  financial  weaknesses  I  have  described  so  far  are  quite  similar  in  Sweden  and
Korea. However, some differences should also be noted:
 In Sweden, banks had built up good capital reserves. Before the onset of the crisis, all the
banks fulfilled or surpassed the 8 per cent Basle requirement for capital. So, although non-
performing and other impaired loans amounted to 15 per cent of GDP in Sweden (a figure
that is rather similar to recent estimates  for  Korea),  the  original  cost  to  the  government  of
rescuing  the  banking  system  amounted  to  only  some  4  per  cent  of  GDP;  since  then,
moreover, most of this has in fact been recovered.
•  Sweden  applied  restrictive  rules  to  central  bank  involvement  in  the  banks.  Only  liquidity
support was provided, inter alia in the form of foreign currency deposits to stem the outflow
from the banks and to reduce the risk of a credit crunch. This did not involve the Riksbank in
any risks because the State guarantee for banks’ repayments also applied to us as a lender.
3.  Triggers
Now,  let  me  turn  to  the  actual  crisis.  It  is  well  known  that  the  event  (or  events)
triggering a crisis is often different from the crisis’ underlying causes. In the absence of a triggering
factor, countries with substantial underlying problems from time to time have also been able to avoid
an acute crisis. The event triggering a crisis is sometimes rather dramatic, such as the assassination
of a politician - as in the Mexican case - or a sudden loss of confidence, e.g. due to the presentation
of a disappointingly weak fiscal budget.  Opinions  may  differ  about  what  were  the  most  important
“triggers” of the acute crises we are discussing today. Again, I see both differences and similarities
between Sweden and the Asian countries.
In our case, a policy shift to the low-inflation regime in the rest of Europe, combined
with structural changes and a more hostile international environment (with higher interest rates and
lower  growth,  as  I  mentioned  before),  made  the  existing  situation  unsustainable  and  triggered  the
crisis.
In the early 1990s the government refrained from accommodating the high costs and
inflationary pressures that had been building up in the 1980s. Under similar circumstances earlier in
the 1970s and 1980s we had devalued several times. Now there was broad agreement that we should
stick  to  the  fixed  exchange  rate  in  order  to  bring  inflation  down;  in  this  respect,  the  policy  was
indeed successful: inflation fell from 8-10 per cent to 2-3 per cent in less than two years. One effect
of  this,  however,  was  that  real  interest  rates  shot  up.  Structural  reforms  were  also  implemented,
particularly in the tax system but also in housing and other areas. One aim of these reforms was to
create more market-related incentives for savings and to reduce subsidies. While these changes were
long overdue, they now came at the worst possible time from a macroeconomic point of view.
In this context, it is relevant to mention the importance of the sequencing of policy
changes. In our case, some things, such as financial deregulation, were achieved during the 1980s
(although  obviously  not  enough)  and  supported  demand  when  this  was  already  strong.  Later  on,
when the economy was on its way down, tax changes were implemented that encouraged saving. To
this should be added the mistake I have already mentioned, of not liberalising outward capital flows
at the same time as the domestic credit market is deregulated.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 4 -
The crisis culminated in the fall of 1992, when for a few days repo rates were raised
to  500  per  cent  in  the  vain  hope  of  stemming  currency  outflows.  Interest  rate  hikes  and  other
contractive  measures  for  defending  the  fixed  exchange  rate  in  the  midst  of  European  currency
turmoil further exacerbated the economic downturn and added to the banks’ loan losses. All in all, in
the three years from 1991 to 1993, Sweden’s GDP fell by a total of around 6 per cent. Before the
financial crisis had even been recognised in the summer of 1992, production had probably already
fallen by 2-3 per cent.
It is my impression that the process in these respects has been quite different in Asia,
perhaps apart from Thailand. Growth did not drop much before the crisis. More important were the
direct contagion effects, particularly via financial markets. Other “triggers” were political, such as
uncertainty  caused  by  upcoming  elections,  and  perceived  balance  of  payments  problems.  In  many
respects the process - once it had started - was also more rapid in Asia. Perhaps markets have - after
all - learnt something from previous crises in Europe and Latin America. They did not see the crisis
coming but once it started, they reacted more rapidly.
4.  Crisis management
I  will  now  turn  to  the  issue  of  how  to  resolve  a  crisis,  once  it  has  erupted.  It  is
obviously necessary to tackle macro and micro problems in parallel since the two are interlinked.
As  I  stated  earlier,  I  believe  that  the  origin  of  the  Swedish  crisis  was  primarily
macroeconomic, due  to  policy  mistakes  in  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  and  triggered  by  the  policy
shift  to  a  low  inflation  regime.  (Although  there  were  also  structural  weaknesses  in  the  financial
sector).  The  solutions  were  also  primarily  macroeconomic  in  kind.  Once  the  krona  peg  had  been
abandoned, demand got a stimulus. The task confronting policy makers was to restore the credibility
of  economic  policy.  This  required  in  our  case,  given  the  weak  fiscal  position,  very  strong  fiscal
measures  (some  8  per  cent  of  GDP  1994-98).  But  it  also  called  for  a  consistent  monetary  policy.
However, and this is important to underline in the present context, if the financial problems had not
been managed properly, they could easily have been a drag on the macro economy. For example, by
taking prompt action it seems that we largely avoided a “credit crunch”, which was a possibility that
worried people a lot at the time. Credit volumes obviously fell, but this could be explained by the
reduction in demand.
Briefly, the important components of the solution for the financial sector were as follows:
1.  The Government, later confirmed by Parliament, issued an unlimited guarantee stating that
no depositors or other counterparties to Swedish credit institutions would suffer any losses.
This was a fundamental measure in order to restore confidence  in  the  Swedish  banks  both
from  domestic  and  from  foreign  depositors  and  other  counterparties.  The  results  showed
themselves  rather  quickly,  e.g.,  in  the  form  of  renewed  interbank  credit  lines  with  foreign
banks.  Also  the  Swedish  public  remained  calm  and  there  were  no  runs  on  the  banks.
However, the government (Parliament) guarantee and the other measures must also be made
known to all interested parties.
2.  The mandate to implement the support policies was given to a new agency, the Bank Support
Authority,  which  was  at  arm’s  length  from  the  political  sphere  but  accountable  to  the
Government. To avoid conflicts of interest, it was found appropriate not to have the Support
Authority in either  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Central  Bank  or  the  Financial  Supervisory
Authority.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 5 -
3.  A  common  framework  of  measures  was  constructed  for  support  of  the  banking  system.  A
strategy for deciding which banks to reconstruct and which to liquidate was developed and
explained  to  the  general  public.  The  measures  were  designed  to  minimise  costs  for  the
Government and the risk of moral hazard. Consequently, shareholders were not covered by
the government guarantee and would lose their equity investments to the same degree as the
Government had to provide support for their banks. This provided an incentive to the owners
to  avoid  applying  for  state  support  unless  it  was  absolutely  necessary,  to  minimise  the
amount  of  support  and  to  reduce  the  time-period  of  receiving  support.  We  used  a  very
simple,  but  clear  and  easy-to-explain,  method  of  identifying  banks  which  should  be  given
support  in  order  to  survive  and  those  which  should  be  liquidated  or  merged.  First  you
write-down  the  bank’s  bad  loans.  Then  you  test  the  bank  in  a  micro-  and  macroeconomic
model.  If  the  model  indicates  that  the  bank  will  be  adequately  profitable  again  in  the
medium-term future it should be given support to survive. But if the model indicates that the
bank will never be profitable again the bank will not be of economic benefit to the society
and should thus be closed or merged in an orderly manner.
4.  Strict valuation rules were used from the onset of the crisis. This was deemed necessary in
order to restore confidence but the policy was not without risks. All bank assets had to be
marked-to-market  even  if  the  market,  such  as  that  for  real  estate,  was  exceptionally  weak.
This  led  to  higher  bank  losses  and  a  weaker  financial  position  than  if  a  somewhat  more
flexible  valuation  rule  had  been  adopted.  The  Bank  Support  Authority  hired  experts  on
valuation of various types of assets to ensure that the banks did not over- or underestimate
the value of their assets with the aim to motivate requirements for more support. In addition,
the  rules  on  when  to  identify  a  loan  as  a  non-performing  loan  and  how  much  to  write-off
were made stricter and with less room for the banks’ own judgement.
5.  The  Swedish  government  did  not  take  any  specific  measures  to  rescue  or  reconstruct  the
non-financial companies, neither did it instruct the banks on how to use the support they had
received.  All  support  was  provided  via  the  banks  and  the  state-owned  asset  management
corporations, leaving them to negotiate the best terms for themselves and their non-financial
customers. There was a wave of bankruptcies and restructuring of non-financial companies,
primarily in the domestic sector due to weak domestic demand.
6.  The extensive use of Asset Management Corporations (AMCs) in Sweden has become well
known  abroad.  AMCs  had,  in  fact,  been  established  in  other  countries  before  the  Swedish
crisis, so this was nothing new. The special feature in our case is the emphasis on splitting an
ailing bank into a good bank and a “bad part” and transferring the bad assets to the AMC at
carefully assessed market values. Once in the AMC, the assets are regrouped and improved
in  order  to  become  attractive  to  potential  buyers.  As  soon  as  a  reasonable  price  can  be
obtained, the asset was sold. This was sometimes a rather time-consuming process but in the
end the results were probably better than if there had been a quick “fire-sale” of the assets. It
is  my  opinion  that  the  use  of  AMCs  is  superior  to  having  the  bad  assets  remain  in  the
problem banks. The bank staffs are no experts in the field of handling bad assets and may not
obtain the best sales values. Also, the bank management needs to tackle other problems and
to work hard on future strategic planning for the bank – they do not have time enough for the
often very large number of complex decisions to be taken on the bad assets.
5.  Conclusions
Finally,  can  we  draw  any  conclusions  for  Asia  in  general  and  Korea  in  particular
from the way the financial crisis was handled in Sweden?
BIS Review   65/1998
- 6 -
First,  I  think  it  is  important,  as  I  said  before,  to  recognise  the  importance  of
macroeconomic  developments.  Once  the  fixed  exchange  rate  had  been  abandoned,  Sweden’s
economy  experienced  an  export-driven  upturn.  But  it  did  take  a  long  time  for  confidence  in  the
Swedish economy in general to return - at least another two years. It is noteworthy that this was so
despite the fact that the recovery in growth had started in the summer of 1993. The explanation lies
primarily  in  the  fiscal  situation,  to  which  the  financial  sector  and  related  problems  had  made  a
substantial contribution - enlarging the budget deficit by perhaps as much as 6% of GDP at the time.
On top of this, the krona was depressed for a long time by the repayment of foreign loans.
The financial problems did not have a major impact on economic developments from
1993 onwards. Once the important decisions concerning the financial sector had been taken, it was
not long before the financial aspect of the crisis had disappeared from the headlines. And the banks
were  already  recovering  in  late  1993  -  just  a  year  after  the  peak  of  the  crisis.  This  in  itself  was
obviously  a  great  achievement  and  it  may  be  worth  briefly  stating  some  of  the  more  important
lessons that, in my opinion, can be drawn from this episode of financial crisis management:
1.  Confidence needs to be restored rapidly. This was achieved in Sweden as far as the financial
sector was concerned. If confidence returns fairly soon, the real effects on the economy need
not be large. But if, on the other hand, the lack of domestic and/or external confidence were
to persist, this could act as a drag on economic development for a long period. It is also my
experience  from  other  countries  that  the  longer  the  period  with  a  lack  of  confidence,  the
more  drastic  the  measures  that  will  be  needed  to  restore  credibility.  Among  other  things,
restoring confidence involves being transparent about the problems and about the measures
for  dealing  with  them.  It  also  means  that  measures  are  implemented  as  stated  by  the
responsible  authorities,  without  any  deviations  in  timing  or  application.  Just  the  suspicion
that  specific  industries  or  other  interest  groups  may  be  receiving  unjustifiably  favourable
treatment would quickly erode any confidence.
2.  Transparency is important. A severe crisis wipes confidence out - rightly so. We realised that
it was up to Sweden to regain it. To do so, all the cards had to be on the table. The extent of
the  losses  and  the  magnitude  of  the  bad  loans  had  to  be  revealed  in  their  entirety  and
valuation had to be prudent. If you hide losses initially or are overly optimistic in valuations,
you risk having to apply again to the international investment community or to taxpayers for
additional support. This, in my view, might jeopardise confidence and legitimacy. It is also
necessary to have highly transparent and fair “rules of the game” for government support to
the financial sector, not least to avoid political bickering. The responsibility for transparency
falls  primarily  on  two  parties:  the  authorities  and  the  banks.  The  authorities  must  be
transparent about the broad framework for the solution of the crisis and the banks must be
transparent about their losses and other deficiencies, financial position and need for external
support.
3.  Someone must take the losses. It is important to realise that once the crisis has occurred, the
losses  cannot  be  hidden  and  must  be  dealt  with  in  one  way  or  another.  In  this  respect
Swedish  institutions  worked  well.  Party  politics  were  clearly  separated  from  business
realities. And the politicians did a good job, realising that bygones were bygones, setting up a
fair framework to sort the crisis out. From a political perspective it was important that the
banks’  owners  were  not  rescued.  People  at  large  had  to  take  substantial  cuts  in  living
standards - at least temporarily. Letting the “big guys” go unhurt under these circumstances
would have jeopardised the whole operation.
4.  The  macroeconomic  policy  mix  for  crisis  management  can  differ.  In  our  case,  there  was
obviously not much room for fiscal stimulation of the economy. Considering the much lower
BIS Review   65/1998
- 7 -
public  debt,  there  could  be  more  room  in  some  Asian  countries  but  the  potential  budget
effects  of  the  financial  losses  also  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  Monetary  policy  has  a
difficult dual role: it has to strike a balance between stimulating the economy so as to ease
the  burden  on  the  banks  and  on  their  borrowers  and  at  the  same  time  ensuring  the  capital
inflows that are needed to rebuild the depleted foreign currency reserves.
5.  On top of this - and perhaps the most important factor - there was political consensus. The
government sought and received backing from the main opposition party. That party was
also allowed to appoint Board members of the Bank Support Authority so that it could be
continuously  informed  and  influence  decisions.  That  was  important  both  for  political
legitimacy at home and for credibility abroad - investors could be sure that the system we
had created would be upheld even if there were a change in government.
Let me end on a positive note. Economically, the crisis in Korea and in many of the
other Asian countries should be manageable although it will probably take time before the results are
clearly visible. Korea is in far better shape than many other countries, including my own in the early
1990s, given the high rates of potential growth and that the fiscal balances are in reasonable shape.
However, what actually happens will depend on how the crisis is managed.
That is now precisely the question.
BIS Review   65/1998
