The  Bank  of  Japan’s  January  report  of  recent  economic  and  financial
developments   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 6/2/98.
Summary
Japan’s economic growth remains stagnant. Sluggish domestic demand, especially
household expenditures, has been exerting negative influence upon production, employment and
With respect to final demand, net exports have continued to increase, and business
investment has been rising moderately, mainly in the manufacturing sector. Meanwhile, private
consumption  has  continued  to  stagnate,  reflecting  cautious  household  sentiment  that  has
persisted  even  after  the  rebound  of  the  front-loading  expansion  of  spending  prior  to  the
consumption  tax  hike  had  subsided.  Housing  investment  has  continued  to  be  weak  and
public-sector  investment  has  been  decreasing.  Reflecting  the  weak  final  demand,  inventory
adjustment  pressures  have  been  spreading,  and  industrial  production  has  been  on  a  slightly
declining trend. The pace of improvement in employment and income conditions has also been
slowing. Thus, the positive growth cycle of production, income, and expenditures has stalled.
As regards the outlook of the economy, external demand is expected to continue
upholding the economic growth, and the special tax-cut measures announced in December 1997
are expected to have positive effects on household spending. Overall, however, the economy is
likely to remain stagnant for a while, due to the intensifying pressures of inventory adjustment,
the  continued  decline  in  public-sector  investment,  and  the  anticipated  deceleration  in  business
fixed investment. Given the slowdown in the pace of growth, the economy is  considered  to  be
vulnerable to further negative impacts. In these circumstances, the possibility of the emergence
of  further  downside  risks  should  be  carefully  observed,  such  as  prolonged  and  intensified
adjustments  in  the  Asian  economies,  more  restrictive  lending  stance  of  financial  institutions
impeding  corporate  finance,  or  further  deterioration  of  confidence  in  the  corporate  and
household sectors.
With  regard  to  prices,  wholesale  prices  have  declined  reflecting  a  slack  in  the
supply and demand conditions of goods. Meanwhile, consumer prices have remained at a level
slightly  above  that  of  the  previous  year  when  observed  excluding  the  effects  of  institutional
changes such as the rise in the consumption tax rate. Thus, prices on the whole remained stable.
Prices are likely to be  steady  in  the  immediate  future,  since  downward  pressures  on  prices  are
not as significant as was the case in 1995, when the yen’s appreciation induced a penetration of
imports,  which  then  directly  dampened  prices  of  import-competing  domestic  final  goods,
arousing  concerns  for  a  deflationary  spiral  in  the  economy.  However,  conditions  which  may
affect  price  developments,  including  the  slack  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  Asian
economies,  should  be  carefully  examined,  since  the  output  gap  in  the  domestic  economy  is
unlikely to diminish for a while.
Financial  markets  have  shown  the  following  developments.  Yields  on  TBs  and
long-term  government  bonds  have  been  at  around  their  lowest  levels.  Interest  rates  of  term
instruments in money markets and yields on corporate bonds and bank debentures, on the other
hand,  have  risen  and  remained  high  due  to  the  more  cautious  attitude  of  market  participants
toward credit and liquidity risks following the failure of some financial institutions. Stock prices
have been low as the confidence in corporate profit growth continued to be weak and uncertainty
over the financial system mounted. In the foreign exchange markets, the yen appreciated against
the Asian currencies, while it depreciated against the US dollar.
BIS Review   11/1998
- 2 -
With respect to growth in monetary aggregates, the underlying trend of lendings
by private financial institutions has remained almost unchanged, and the year-to-year changes in
average outstanding of M2+CDs have continued to be at around 3 percent. Lending attitudes of
fnancial  institutions,  however,  are  becoming  increasingly  cautious  as  capital  adequacy
constraints  have  become  more  binding  due  to  the  fall  in  stock  prices  and  the  yen.  Moreover,
higher market interest rates are gradually pressuring lending rates to rise since December 1997.
There  is,  therefore,  a  need  to  carefully  monitor  the  developments  in  the  financial  markets  and
their influences on the real economy.
BIS Review   11/1998
