Bank  of  Japan’s  September  report  of  Recent  Economic  and  Financial
Developments   BANK OF JAPAN COMMUNICATION, 11/9/98.
The Bank’s View1
Japan’s economic conditions continue to deteriorate.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  public  investment  seems  to  have  bottomed  out.  Net
exports  (exports  minus  imports)  are  increasing  mainly  due  to  a  decline  in  imports.  However,
business  fixed  investment  has  been  decreasing  significantly,  and  housing  investment  has  declined
further. Private consumption has not yet shown a recovery despite the special income tax reduction.
Against  this  background  of  weak  final  demand,  production  has  been  reduced  substantially.  As  a
result,  some  industries  have  shown  improvements  in  inventory  adjustments,  but  the  level  of
inventories is still high as a whole. With the decline in expenditure and production, corporate profits
continue to decrease, and the decline of employee income is accelerating somewhat. In addition, the
ratio  of  job  offers  to  applications  records  a  historically  low  level,  and  the  unemployment  rate
remains  at  a  high  level.  As  a  whole,  the  employment  and  income  conditions  have  deteriorated
further.
As  the  above  indicates,  there  are  continued  negative  interactions  of  production,
income,  and  expenditure.  Given  the  current  considerably  low  level  of  economic  activities,  the
economy  is  unlikely  to  transit  immediately  to  a  self-sustained  recovery  led  by  private  demand,
although a further deterioration in the economy is expected to cease gradually from the effects of the
comprehensive  economic  stimulus  package.  Additionally,  attention  should  be  paid  to  possible
negative effects on the real economy from financial developments including the recent fall in stock
prices. In these circumstances, the cabinet approved a guideline on budget requests by ministries for
fiscal 1999. This guideline intends to stimulate the economy by allocating ¥4 trillion to the special
budgetary provision on the condition that the Fiscal Structural Reform Act is suspended. In addition,
the  bills  to  rebuild  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  are  being  deliberated  at  the  Diet,  and  the
reduction  exceeding  ¥6  trillion  in  personal  income  taxes  and  corporate  taxes  is  expected  to  be
discussed  in  detail.  The  materialization  of  these  policies  along  with  their  effects  on  corporate  and
household sentiment should be carefully monitored.
With regard to prices, wholesale prices are on a downtrend, and consumer prices are
lowering below the previous year’s level. With respect to the outlook, the downward pressure from
domestic factors is unlikely to weaken considerably reflecting the already large output gap, despite
the expected effects of the comprehensive economic stimulus package. Hence, prices are likely to be
weak for some time.
In the  financial  markets,  stock  prices  dropped  considerably  in  late  August  and  still
remain unstable, due to the heightened uncertainty over the problems with the financial system and
the  worldwide  stock  market  plunge  triggered  by  Russia’s  financial  crisis.  Meanwhile,  interest  rate
spreads,  such  as  the  rate  differential  between  Euro-yen  deposits  and  treasury  bills,  the  Japan
premium,  and  the  yield  differential  between  private  and  government  bonds,  expanded  against  the
background  of  intensified  market  concern  toward  credit  risks  of  Japanese  financial  institutions.
Nevertheless, both long- and short-term interest rates declined slightly as a whole, which seemingly
indicates that some market participants anticipated additional monetary easing.
                                                     
1 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on September 9, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   70/1998
- 2 -
With  respect  to  corporate  finance,  some  firms  are  moving  to  resume  securing
on-hand liquidity against the cautious lending stance  of  private  banks,  although  credit  demand  for
real  economic  activities  remains  sluggish.  Consequently,  the  issuance  of  corporate  bonds  and
commercial paper continues to increase, and the private bank lending, measured by annual percent
changes, has escaped further decline so far. In addition, the growth of money stock appears to hold
back its recent decelerating trend.
However,  some  firms,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  ones,  continue  to  face  a
severe environment in terms of both funds availability and fund-raising costs. This influence on the
economy continues to warrant careful monitoring.
BIS Review   70/1998
