Mr. Macfarlane discusses Australia’s position in light of recent events in Asia
Speech delivered by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, before
the Australian Stock Exchange, the Australian Institute of Company Directors and the Securities
Institute of Australia in Brisbane on 26/3/98.
It is a pleasure to be here in Brisbane addressing the Australian Stock Exchange,
the Australian Institute of Company Directors and The Securities Institute of Australia at their
combined Bull and Bear Luncheon.  I do not know whether I should nominate myself as a bull or
a bear.  Members of this audience will be able to make up their own minds after they have heard
my story today.
1. Introduction
In the period since the collapse of Asian currencies - roughly since the floating of
the Thai baht on 2 July 1997 - I have spent a fair amount of time, as have many others, trying to
understand  the  reasons  for  that  collapse.    It  has  been  a  salutary  experience,  and  it  has  caused
many of us to re-examine some cherished views.  I have already spoken twice on this subject, so
I do not intend to cover the same material today.  What I hope to do, however, is to draw some
lessons from it, and to apply them to Australia.
In a previous speech1, I tried to identify the list of economic characteristics that
would make a country vulnerable to a currency crisis or, worse, to a full-blown economic crisis.
As you probably know, there is no definitive list that enables us to forecast these events with any
precision, but there are about a dozen factors that seem to increase a country’s vulnerability.  If a
country scores a very low mark on all of these factors, or at least most of these factors, there is a
good chance that it would be subject to an international loss of confidence and ensuing economic
problems.    You  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  Australia  is  not  in  this  category;  indeed,
Australia scores a very high mark on most of these factors and thus should be in a very secure
position.  But we can never be complacent.  Like all countries, we do not achieve a perfect score,
and  therefore  it  is  worthwhile  to  go  through  a  systematic  examination  of  our  strengths  and
weaknesses in light of the recent events.
2. Criteria for vulnerability
The list of factors identified from our research2 on the Asian crisis that pointed to
the likelihood of a currency crisis or a wider economic crisis was as follows:
1.
2.  
3.  
Does  the  country  have  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  free  movement  of
international capital?
Is the exchange rate over-valued?
Has a country with similar economic characteristics recently experienced a
currency crisis?
4.  
Is there a large budget deficit and a lot of government debt outstanding?
                                                     
1  "The Asian Situation: An Australian Perspective", Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, March 1998.
2  We drew heavily on other work in this area, for example, Morris Goldstein, "Comments on Early Warning
Indicators of Financial Instability in Emerging Economies", Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (forthcoming)
and Graciela Kaminsky, Saul Lizondo and Carmen Reinhart, "Leading Indicators of Currency Crises", IMF
Working Paper, July 1997
BIS Review   32/1998
- 2 -
5.  
6.  
7.  
8.  
9.  
Is there loose monetary policy and high inflation?
Is the domestic economy in, or at risk of, a recession?
Is there a large current account deficit?
Is there a large amount of foreign debt?
Is there an asset price boom (especially credit-driven) occurring?
10.   Are there a lot of bad debts in the banking system, and a poor system of
bank supervision?
11.   Has there been a lot of unhedged foreign currency borrowing?
12.   Are  there  poor  accounting  standards,  few  disclosure  requirements,
ambiguous bankruptcy procedures, etc.?
A  brief  scan  of  this  list  should  reassure  people  that  Australia  is  in  good  shape.
That is, it would receive a very favourable mark on the vast majority of these indicators, and so
should be able to handle the current international turmoil without too much disruption.  But we
are not perfect, and there are two items on the list - the current account and external debt - where
our score is low by international standards.  In the remainder of my talk today I would like to set
out in more detail how Australia stacks up against the above list, starting with the ten factors on
which we receive a very high score, and following roughly the same order as in the list above.  I
will cover the factors where we receive a high score quite quickly in order to leave room for a
closer examination of the two weak points.
3. Australia’s strengths
Australia allows the free movement  of  international  capital,  but  we  certainly  do
not have a fixed exchange rate.  The Australian dollar was floated in December 1983, and after a
few years of turbulence in the mid 1980s, has generally behaved as a floating rate should in the
period since then.  While it was more volatile in the 1980s than the major currencies such as the
US  dollar,  yen  and  Deutschemark,  in  the  nineties  it  has  generally  been  less  volatile  than  they
have.  It has varied cyclically over the past dozen years, but around a flat trend.
There is no evidence to suggest that it is over-valued.  Opinions will always differ
on  such  a  subject,  but  at  the  moment  there  are  probably  more,  including  some  influential
offshore  institutions,  inclining  to  the  opposite  view.    Like  most  currencies,  it  has  depreciated
against the US dollar over the past 18 months, but against the Trade-Weighted Index it has been
relatively stable.  Judged by other measures of the exchange rate designed to capture competition
with imports or against export competitors, it has shown a small increase in competitiveness.3
The issue of contagion can be addressed by asking whether another country with
similar economic characteristics has recently experienced a currency crisis.  The answer is in the
negative: all the countries that have recently experienced a currency crisis have been at an earlier
                                                     
3  See "Alternative Measures of the Effects of Exchange Rate Movements on Competitiveness", Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin, January 1998.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 3 -
stage  of  economic  development  than  Australia,  particularly  in  respect  of  the  depth  of  their
financial  infrastructure  and  the  degree  of  prudence  exercised  by  borrowers  and  lenders.    The
financial markets have made a clear distinction between troubled Asian economies like Thailand,
Indonesia and Korea and countries like Australia.
On fiscal policy, little needs to be said other  than  that  Australia  has  a  very  low
underlying budget deficit by world standards and is expecting a surplus next financial year.  The
stock of  government  debt  to  GDP  (which  effectively  measures  the  extent  of  accumulated  past
deficits) is exceptionally low by international standards.  On monetary policy, seven years of low
inflation  has  finally  received  the  international  recognition  it  deserves.    The  international  bond
markets have expressed their confidence in Australia’s fiscal and monetary policies by reducing
the spread between Australian and US yields to the lowest margin in a generation.
In the aftermath of the currency crisis which resulted in the partial breakdown of
the  European  Monetary  System  in  1992,  the  view  developed  that  if  a  country  was  in  or  near
recession, it would be particularly vulnerable to a currency crisis.  This is because it would not
be able to resist the currency crisis with tighter policies.  (Whether it should, of course, would
depend upon the circumstances.) Whatever the strength of this argument - and it is strongest for
fixed exchange rate cases - it clearly does not apply to Australia, as we have a buoyant domestic
economy.    Furthermore,  Australia  is  recognised  internationally  as  having  had  one  of  the  best
growth records among OECD countries this decade.  (Only Ireland and Norway - two very small
economies - have done better.)
I will delay discussion of the current account, the balance of payments and foreign
debt until after I have completed the list of positive factors for the Australian economy.  The next
factor on my list was whether the country was in the midst of an asset price boom.  The problem
with asset price booms is that they are usually followed by asset price busts, which can give rise
to  company  insolvencies  and  banking  problems.    Clearly,  this  is  not  the  case  in  Australia  at
present, although we do have fresh in our memories the events of the late eighties and so cannot
be  too  censorious  of  recent  Asian  events.    While  the  Australian  share  market  has  risen  over
recent  years,  it  has  done  so  by  a  smaller  amount  than  the  United  States  or  most  of  Europe.
Commercial  property  prices  have  also  been  relatively  restrained,  and  while  house  prices  are
rising, the large rises have been confined mainly to inner Sydney and Melbourne.
I think we can be confident that our system of bank supervision is at world best
practice,  and  the  ratio  of  bad  debts  to  total  loans,  at  0.9  per  cent,  is  at  its  lowest  level  since
statistics have been collected (admittedly, the  collection only  dates  back  to  1991).    Of  course,
what currently seems to be a good loan can become a bad debt if circumstances change.  Even
so,  I  have  a  lot  of  confidence  that  our  figures  are  a  good  guide  to  the  health  of  our  banking
system.4
I think it is true to say that there has not been a lot of unhedged foreign currency
borrowing occurring among Australian corporates since the days of the "Swiss franc loans"  of
the mid-eighties, but I will postpone discussion of that topic until I deal with foreign debt in the
second  half  of  this  talk.    Accounting  standards,  disclosure  requirements  and  bankruptcy
procedures  are  what  might  be  termed  financial  infrastructure.    So  is  the  existence  of  a  large
group  of  equity  analysts  and  financial  journalists,  the  ASC  and  stock  market  listing
                                                     
4  In many developing countries, official statistics on bad loans are thought to greatly under-estimate the true figure.
Even so, Mexico and Thailand reported ratios of 10.5 per cent and 7.7 per cent in the year before their economic
crises.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 4 -
requirements.  We tend to take a lot of this for granted, but it is very important that they be up to
best international practice.  Again, we should not feel too superior to our Asian neighbours in
this respect; it takes decades or more to develop these, and as recently as the late eighties we still
had  some  glaring  deficiencies.    I  think  we  are  now  at  international  best  practice,  but  it  still
involves continued improvement to stay there.
4. Australia’s weaknesses
While I am satisfied that the underlying structure of our economy, particularly its
financial underpinning, is sound, there is no sensible way we can avoid a widening of our current
account deficit in the short term.  It is virtually inevitable because  a significant number of the
countries that make up our major export markets are likely to contract, or not grow as quickly,
over  the  next  18  months.    It  is  what  economists  call  an  "external  shock".    It  is  also  true,  of
course, that if exports are weaker, then GDP growth will also be lower than it would have been
without the "external shock".  These "real" effects on exports and growth are already occurring,
though their full effects will take some time to be clear.  In the case of financial prices, such as
the exchange rate, bond yields, commodity prices and  share  prices,  of  course,  the  adjustments
occur at once, as market participants can immediately adjust prices to reflect their expectations
of what is to come.
What I wish to do in the remainder of this talk is to try to address two questions.
First, how will the Australian and international financial community accept the widening of the
Australian current account? This is important because it has implications in the first instance for
financial prices.  Second, what are the prospects for our exports, and hence economic growth? I
will  not  answer  this  question  in  a  quantitative  way,  which  may  disappoint  those  who  want
numerical forecasts; in fact, I will be making a few criticisms of the simple models that are often
employed for this purpose.
4(a) Reaction in financial markets
In  the  mid-eighties,  Australian  financial  markets  -  particularly  the  foreign
exchange  and  bond  markets  -  experienced  a  major  reaction  to  the  widening  current  account
deficit.  The reason the reaction was so large was that doubts began to emerge about whether the
economic  situation  was  sustainable,  particularly  in  view  of  the  implications  for  foreign  debt.
There is always the possibility that the same or similar doubts will re-emerge over the next 18
months, but I am inclined to think that will not be the case.  The reasons for my view are set out
below.
If we look at the history of the current account since the early 1980s (Diagram 1),
it is apparent that the deficit has varied between about 3 1/2 per cent and 6 1/2 per cent of GDP,
with  an  average  of  4  3/4  per  cent.    Most  importantly,  there  has  been  no  on-going  trend
deterioration  -  the  trade  account  has  improved  at  a  rate  sufficient  to  offset  the  increase  in  net
income payable abroad.  The widening in the current account deficit that we expect in 1998/99
will be the fifth such cyclical widening in the past 20 years, and I think that people now accept
this as a part of our economic cycle.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 5 -
You  will  note  that  I  am  only  talking  about  cyclical  movements  in  the  current
account.  The broader issue of whether we should accept an average current account deficit of
4 3/4  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  long  run  would  require  another  paper  as  long  as  the  one  I  am
presenting  today.    It  would  focus  on  our  national  savings  performance,  both  in  respect  to
governments and to the incentives that are provided to the private sector.  But that is for another
day.
On previous occasions, the cyclical widening of the current account deficit usually
reflected  a  mixture  of  external  influences,  such  as  a  fall  in  the  terms  of  trade,  plus  some
significant  internal  imbalances  or  policy  deficiencies.    As  examples  of  the  latter,  domestic
demand in the earlier widenings ran at unsustainably fast rates, usually in excess of 7 per cent
per annum for a time.  Similarly, in all but one of the earlier widenings, Australia’s inflation rate
was higher than the world average, and again on two occasions, we were running a significant
budget  deficit.    On  this  occasion,  we  have  none  of  these  imbalances.    The  widening  of  the
current account deficit will be essentially the result of an external contraction of demand, with
domestic demand running only slightly faster than trend.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 6 -
The foreign debt situation is not as threatening now as the most pessimistic people
in the mid-eighties feared.  Looking at a graph of the ratio of foreign debt to GDP (Diagram 2)
shows  that  it  nearly  tripled  between  1982  and  1986  (from  12  per  cent  to  33  per  cent).    Many
people  feared  that  it  would  continue  to  rise  at  this  rate,  but  it  has  not.    In  the  nineties,  it  has
averaged a little over 40 per cent, where it currently is.  Another widely used measure of debt
sustainability - the ratio of debt servicing to exports (Diagram 3) - showed a somewhat similar
pattern.  It rose from 6 per cent to 22 per cent in the 1980s, but then reversed sharply in the early
nineties, and is currently at about 12 per cent.  The strong growth of Australian exports and the
fall in world interest rates are largely responsible for this favourable development.
In  the  1980s,  when  the  sharp  rises  in  foreign  debt  and  its  servicing  costs  were
occurring, the Australian economic debate was, not surprisingly, pre-occupied with these issues.
At  the  time,  there  were  no  official  statistics  comparing  foreign  debt  levels  in  developed
countries, and in their absence there was a tendency for people to assume the worst - that is, to
assume that Australia was the highest on the list.  Now that the IMF and OECD publish official
statistics on the subject (Table 1), we  see  that  we  should  not  have  assumed  the  worst.    While
Australia is certainly in the top quartile of countries ranked by the net foreign debt to GDP ratio,
it  is  not  the  highest  -  New  Zealand,  Sweden  and  Canada  are  higher.    Looking  at  the  gross
external debt to GDP ratio, Australia is in the bottom half of the table.5
Table 1: External Debt as per cent of GDP
Net Debt
       Gross Debt
New Zealand [1996]
Sweden [1996]
Canada [1996]
Australia [1996]
64.2
45.2
44.8
40.2
Ireland [1996]
Sweden [1996]
Switzerland [1995]
Denmark [1995]
143.1
101.7
  96.0
  89.0
                                                     
5  Depending on the purpose at hand, there can be a case for looking at either net debt or gross debt.  If the purpose
is to ask how vulnerable a country is to a currency crisis, gross debt (as has been used in the recent Asian episodes)
is the better measure.  It shows the amount of foreign lending that potentially would not be renewed if serious
doubts developed over a country’s future.  The fact that the domestic private sector also had some foreign loan assets
(as taken into account in net debt measures) would be of little assistance in such a currency crisis.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 7 -
Greece [1993]
Finland [1996]
Denmark [1995]
Ireland [1996]
United States [1996]
Austria [1996]
Italy [1996]
Spain [1995]
Norway [1993] 
Germany [1995]
France [1995]
Portugal [1993]
Netherlands [1994]
Japan [1996]
Switzerland [1995]
United Kingdom
33.3
31.6
29.9
29.8
20.2
12.3
  6.0
  3.8
  3.7
 -2.1
 -2.8
 -6.7
           -19.7
           -19.9
           -99.0
  n.a.
Netherlands [1994]
Canada [1996]
New Zealand [1996]
Finland [1996]
Austria [1996]
Greece [1993]
France [1995]
Germany [1995]
Australia [1996]
Italy [1996]
Norway [1993]
Portugal [1993]
Spain [1995]
United States [1996]
Japan [1996]
United Kingdom
  88.3
  77.7
  75.6
  74.0
  73.4
  62.4
  57.2
  57.2
  55.9
  54.0
  49.0
  48.6
  44.3
  42.6
  33.0
   n.a.
Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook 1997
The other aspect of foreign debt that has received a lot of attention in the light of
recent  Asian  developments  is  the  extent  of  unhedged  foreign  currency  borrowing.    Official
figures only tell us that 60 per cent of Australian borrowing is denominated in foreign currency.
Of  that,  a  significant  proportion  has  been  borrowed  by  banks,  and  this  is  virtually  all  hedged.
Our  assessment  is  that  major  Australian  corporates  normally  hedge  their  foreign  currency
borrowing unless they choose not to because they have a natural hedge through their exports.
As I mentioned, financial markets tend to be forward looking, and it is likely that
a  significant  deterioration  in  the  current  account  is  already  factored  into  important  financial
prices.  The reaction of financial markets to date has been more measured than was the case in
the  1980s,  no  doubt  reflecting  their  assessment  of  the  much  improved  "fundamentals"  of  the
Australian economy.  But we should not take this for granted.  We have seen in Asia over the
past year just how fast the international capital markets can react if they come to the judgment
that a country is not being managed in a sustainable way.
4(b)      Slowdown in exports
We would all like to know how large the current slowdown in exports will prove
to  be.    But,  because  we  have  not  been  through  this  type  of  situation  before,  there  is  a  lot  of
uncertainty about how to go about this.
To date, those trying to be scientific and quantitative have tended to use a model
which  I  would  term  a  "fixed  co-efficient  input-output  model".    This  approach  starts  by
forecasting  the  fall  in  import  volumes  which  each  of  our  trading  partners  will  experience  and
assumes  that  the  volume  of  our  exports  to  each  country  will  fall  by  a  similar  amount.    After
adding together the results for each country, it arrives at  a figure  for Australian exports to the
region.    This  is  a  time-honoured  approach,  but  I  am  sceptical  of  how  appropriate  it  is  for  a
country in Australia’s position.
Despite Australia’s impressive export diversification of the past decade, about 60
per cent of our exports are still essentially rural and resource commodities which are sold onto
BIS Review   32/1998
- 8 -
world markets.  Most of these are fungible - they are sold to wherever the demand is.  If Korean
demand for base metals falls, Australia will still probably sell the same amount of base metals
worldwide  as  before,  but  with  more  sales  to  countries  other  than  Korea.    Of  course,  if  world
demand  has  weakened,  the  price  will  have  to  fall  to  clear  the  market.    That  is  what  has  been
happening - commodity prices are now 9 per cent lower than at their March 1997 high in SDR
terms.  Thus, from Australia’s perspective, the Asian slowdown may have its biggest effect not
through lower export volumes, but through a fall in commodity prices, some (or, conceivably, a
lot) of which has already happened because these markets are forward looking.  There is still an
effect  on  the  economy,  of  course,  since  lower  prices,  other  things  being  equal,  mean  lower
export income, which in turn means lower demand and so on.  It is important to note, however,
that  other  things  have  not  been  equal:  the  Australian  dollar  has  depreciated  such  that  in  $A
terms, commodity prices are actually higher than a year ago.
A good example of exporters seeking other markets is shown when we consider
the recent history of our exports to Japan, by far our largest export market during the 1990s.  As
you  know,  the  Japanese  economy  has  been  extremely  weak  over  the  past  five  years,  and  our
exports  to  Japan  have  been  flat  over  most  of  that  period.6    But  this  has  not  stopped  overall
Australian export volumes growing strongly; they have risen at an average annual rate of 7 1/2
per cent in real terms over the past  five  years.    Where  has  the  growth  come  from? Just  about
everywhere but Japan, including, until  recently,  the  other  Asian  countries  that  are  currently  in
trouble.    The  most  striking  feature,  however,  has  been  the  growth  in  a  group  of  countries  we
have always called "other".  As you can see from Diagram 4, this is our fastest growing market
in recent years.  To satisfy your curiosity, "other" is what we have left after we exclude Asia, the
United States and Europe: that means it includes the Middle East, New Zealand, the Indian Sub-
Continent, the Former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, South America, etc.
Another reason why the conventional approach to estimating the effects of Asia
on Australian exports may overstate the slowdown is that a significant proportion of our exports
are inputs into Asian exports, rather than final consumer or investment goods.  This seems to be
the case particularly for the two largest Asian markets - Japan and Korea.  The situation is not as
clear  for  some  other  countries,  but  as  a  general  rule,  we  are  probably  better  off  in  current
circumstances than most suppliers because of the weight of commodities, foodstuffs and "inputs
into exports" in our mix.  After the transitional export finance problems are solved, we should
                                                     
6  Until the last nine months, when they rose apparently in line with a pick-up in Japanese exports.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 9 -
expect  to  see  strong  growth  in  Asian  exports  as  a  result  of  their  large  increase  in
competitiveness.    I  would  be  a  lot  more  worried  if  Australian  exports  consisted  of  consumer
products.  Incidentally, this is one of the reasons why tourism has been hit so hard - it is probably
our biggest export that is aimed directly at households, and is considered by them something of a
luxury.
I hope I have not gilded the lily too much in the above discussion.  There is no
doubt we will find the going tough on the export side, and we will not be able to repeat in the
short term the sort of figures we have become used to over the past five years.  But I think not
enough account in popular discussions has been taken of our particular mix of exports and our
capacity to find new markets.
5. Conclusion
The events in Asia have confronted us with a  challenge that was not foreseen  a
year  ago.    In  deciding  how  to  handle  it,  the  first  step  is  to  recognise  that  the  outlook  for  the
economy is less favourable than it would have been in the absence of these events.  The optimal
policy  response  will  be  to  accept  that  the  effects  should  be  spread  across  several  economic
variables, rather than attempting to adhere closely to earlier aspirations for any one variable, and
letting the others do all the adjustment.  It is clear that we should be prepared for a higher current
account deficit in the short run - to try to avoid it would place intolerable strains on the rest of
the economy.  Similarly, we will have to accept a somewhat lower rate of economic growth and
slightly higher inflation than seemed likely not so long ago.  Notwithstanding these changes, we
feel that over the next 12 months, Australia will continue to experience an  economic outcome
which  will  place  it  among  the  better  performers  in  the  OECD  area.    We  also  believe  that  our
economic  fundamentals  will  hold  us  in  good  stead,  and  that  we  will  retain  our  hard-won
reputation as a country with responsible economic and financial management.
BIS Review   32/1998
