Mr. Stals discusses “The many facets of interest rates”   Address by Governor
of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  Chris  Stals,  at  a  Breakfast  Meeting  of  the  Insurance
Brokers Council of South Africa, on 2/9/98.
1. Introduction
Nobody  will  deny  it  that  South  Africa  has  extremely  high  interest  rates  at  this
stage. In the context of South Africa’s own historical record and measured against a current rate
of inflation of about 6½ per cent, nominal interest rates are extremely high. In the context of the
world environment, and particularly within the group of emerging market economies, the level of
South  African  interest  rates  lies  in  the  upper  quartile,  but  is  still  beaten  by  a  number  of  other
comparable  countries.  Six  of  the  24  emerging  markets  listed  in  the  weekly  publication  of  the
Economist, for example, have higher short-term interest rates than South Africa at this stage.
Nobody  will  deny  it  that  the  high  level  of  interest  rates  is  bad  for  the  South
African economy, particularly at the current stage of the business cycle and a rather depressed
domestic  economic  situation.  It  is  only  the  few  savers  we  still  have  in  the  country,  and  the
old-aged  people  who  live  off  their  interest  income,  who  may  benefit  from  these  high  interest
rates. On the other hand, the high interest rates will most probably reduce consumption financed
with borrowed funds, and also investment in fixed capital, equipment and inventories. The future
production  capacity  of  the  economy  is  therefore  constrained  by  the  present  adverse  financial
conditions. In terms of domestic needs, South Africa now requires a stimulation of the economy,
and would prefer lower interest rates to encourage economic development.
There is also a fairly general consensus of opinion that the present  high  interest
rates were recently forced on South Africa by the international financial situation. The so-called
East Asian crisis that started to surface in Thailand more than a year ago spilled over into the
economies  of  many  other  countries.  Even  countries  with  more  stable  economies  such  as
Australia, New Zealand and Canada were adversely affected by these developments. Emerging
countries  far  away  from  the  East  Asian  epicentre  such  as  Mexico,  Colombia,  Brazil  and
Venezuela have been infected by the problem. Countries with economies in transformation such
as  the  Czech  Republic  and  Poland  also  suffered  and  the  recent  catastrophic  developments  in
Russia cannot be completely divorced from the East Asian crisis. In the end, South Africa also
could not escape from the turmoil.
There  are  major  differences  of  opinion  among  economists  inside  and  outside  of
South Africa on what the reaction of the official macroeconomic policymakers in South Africa
should  be  to  soften  the  blows  for  the  economy.  At  the  one  extreme  there  is  the  International
Monetary Fund that believes that much more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies should have
been applied in South Africa in recent months to fend off the attacks of international speculators
and short-term profiteers.
At the other extreme we find economists in South Africa with major private sector
interests who believe that the Reserve Bank should have kept interest rates artificially low with a
complete disregard of the consequences this would have had for the exchange rate of the rand
and subsequent inflation. There are those who believe that the Reserve Bank should have done
more  to  keep  the  exchange  rate  stable,  even  if  it  should  have  required  the  reintroduction  or
tightening of exchange controls.
BIS Review   68/1998
- 2 -
There are many naive critics in South Africa who believe that the Reserve Bank is
fully responsible for the high interest rates and that the Reserve Bank indeed used its mythical
powers to force interest rates to these destructively high levels. In their ignorance they believe
that  the  Reserve  Bank  can  even  at  this  stage  pull  the  rabbit  from  the  hat  and  instantaneously
bring  interest  rates  down  again.  Unfortunately,  in  the  real  world  such  miracles  are  just  not
possible.
2. What caused interest rates to go up
To  avoid  confusion  in  this  debate,  the  real  causes  for  the  recent  sharp  rise  in
interest rates should be revisited. It will be recalled that in the first quarter of this year there was
wide-spread optimism that interest rates in South Africa could decline further during the course
of 1998. The Reserve Bank had already reduced its Bank rate from 17 to 16 per cent in October
1997, and to 15 per cent on 9 March 1998. Inflation was declining, foreign portfolio investments
flowed into the country, the foreign reserves were rising and the exchange rate of the rand was
under pressure to appreciate.
However,  the  situation  changed  dramatically  in  May  1998  when  non-residents
reviewed their investment strategy and started to withdraw some of the funds they had previously
invested  in  South  African  bonds.  During  the  four  months  January  to  April  1998,  non-resident
investors  increased  their  holdings  of  South  African  bonds  by  approximately  R16  billion.  Over
the  next  four  months,  that  is  from  May  to  August  1998,  they  reduced  their  holdings  of  South
African bonds by about R19 billion.
This dramatic change of strategy had an almost immediate negative effect on the
overall  demand  and  supply  conditions  in  the  South  African  financial  markets.  The  yield  on
long-term government bonds rose from just below 13 per cent at the beginning of May to a peak
of over 21 per cent last week. Other interest rates followed the upward trend and established the
extremely high levels we now have for the Reserve Bank’s rate for repurchase transactions, the
prime overdraft rate, and the mortgage lending rate of banking institutions.
In  this  process,  triggered  by  a  decline  of  investors  confidence  in  the  emerging
markets of the world, little concern was shown for the depressed conditions in the South African
economy.  No  consideration  was  given  to  the  needs,  desires  or  expectations  of  the  people  of
South  Africa.  Neither  the  Minister  of  Finance  nor  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  was
consulted by the markets before interest rates were forced to higher levels. The  whole  process
was driven by external factors that swept across many of the smaller economies of the world like
a  huge  tidal  wave.  The  switch  from  a  R16  billion  inflow  of  capital  for  investment  in  South
African bonds in the first four months of 1998 to an outflow of an almost similar amount in the
next  four  months  dramatically  changed  the  demand  versus  supply  conditions  in  the  South
African financial markets. In the situation, it would have required a massive creation of money
by the Reserve Bank to prevent interest rates from rising to the extent they did. Such a creation of
money in turn would have added fuel to the inflationary pressures that were already stimulated by
the depreciation of the rand.
3. What can now be done to bring interest rates down?
It is amazing to read in the financial press in South Africa almost every day the
accusation that the high interest rates in South Africa at this stage are a reflection of the Reserve
BIS Review   68/1998
- 3 -
Bank’s deliberate “high-interest-rate-policy”. The present level of interest rates is often described
as  being  “artificially”  high  because  of  Reserve  Bank  intervention  in  the  market.  These  critics
overlook  the  fact  that  the  Reserve  Bank  indeed  raised  the  amount  of  accommodation  made
available  to  banking  institutions  at  the  daily  repurchase  tender  for  central  bank  funds  from
R4.1 billion early in May to R9.8 billion at this stage. This action by the Reserve Bank obviously
prevented interest rates from rising even further and, if anything, created an artificially low level
of  interest  rates  in  the  country.  Perhaps  with  some  justification,  this  policy  of  the  Bank  was
recently criticised by the International Monetary Fund.
The Reserve Bank also made a huge amount of forward cover available to South
African  residents  with  outstanding  commitments  in  foreign  currency,  and  to  non-resident
investors with open rand positions in South Africa with the objective of discouraging them from
sending more funds out of the country. This policy undoubtedly contributed towards maintaining
interest rates at a lower level as the IMF quite correctly pointed out. In South Africa, the Bank is
widely criticised for having provided this forward cover, but at the same time also blamed for the
“high” interest rates.
After four months of heavy pummelling by the markets, South Africa now finds
itself in a situation where:
 the exchange rate of the rand has depreciated by about 25 per cent;
the banking sector has lost a lot of liquidity;
interest rates have risen to a level where borrowing from the banking sector for
the financing of additional economic activity has become almost prohibitive.
There  is  therefore  an  understandable  pressure  on  the  Reserve  Bank  to  do
something that will bring interest rates down immediately and effectively for all borrowers in the
South African market. Can the Reserve bank do anything to salvage this situation?
A  simplistic  view  is  that  the  Bank  should  reduce  the  rate  for  its  repurchase
transactions and therefore provide accommodation to banking institutions at a lower cost. This
view  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  repo  rate  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  determined  on  a  daily  basis
through a tender system, and is no longer fixed by the Bank. Should the Reserve Bank therefore
want  to  reduce  the  repo  rate,  it  will  have  to  offer  more  central  bank  funds  (“high-powered”
money) to the banking institutions.
In deciding on its policy, the Reserve Bank must, however, take into account:
•  the recent large outflows of funds through the Bond Exchange. An expansion of
domestic liquidity in this situation could facilitate the outflow of funds;
•  existing  relationships  between  interest  rate  margins,  spot  exchange  rates  and
forward  rates.  A  disruption  of  these  relationships  can  easily  lead  to  new
speculative transactions against the rand;
•  the  continuing  high  rates  of  growth  in  bank  credit  extension  and  in  the  money
supply; and
•  the need to keep inflation in check in the aftermath of a depreciation of the rand of
more than 20 per cent since May this year.
BIS Review   68/1998
- 4 -
In this situation, it will be irresponsible for the Bank to create more money in an
effort to force interest rates down. Advantages, if any, to be gained from such a policy will be
very short-lived.
A solution in the short-term for the South African dilemma can only come from
the original source of the problem, that is, from the international financial markets. Confidence
must  return  to  the  many  international  fund  managers  who  have  decided  in  recent  months  to
withdraw  substantial  amounts  of  portfolio  investments  from  the  bond  markets  of  the  smaller
economies  around  the  world.  These  fund  withdrawals  not  only  forced  interest  rates  to  higher
levels,  but  also  created  turmoil  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  A  return  of  stability  to  these
markets will pave the way for lower interest rates in South Africa, and in many other affected
countries  of  the  world.  For  any  individual  country  such  as  South  Africa  to  try  to  break  out  of
these  shackles  at  this  stage  will  be  almost  impossible,  unless  impenetrable  brick  walls  will  be
constructed around the South African economy to isolate it from the rest of the world.
4. Can South Africa survive with these high interest rates?
As already mentioned, the high level of interest rates at this stage is not consistent
with the current needs of the South African economy. There is, however, very little we can do to
get ourselves out of the dilemma in the very short-term.
The present unsatisfactory situation emphasises the long identified need for South
Africans  to  save  a  greater  percentage  of  our  income  or,  to  put  it  in  more  sensible  economic
language,  to  consume  less.  We  must  remember  that,  in  terms  of  the  macro-economy,
consumption financed with borrowed funds counts as negative saving. By borrowing from banks
to finance current expenditure, we actually use up tomorrow’s income today.
The situation also emphasises once again that the South African total production
machinery  must  become  more  competitive.  We  must  make  ourselves  not  only  more
self-sufficient  in  the  provision  of  finance  for  our  own  economic  development,  but  also  in  the
production of the goods and services we need for domestic consumption and real investment. In
other  words,  we  must  reduce  our  dependence  on  the  rest  of  the  world  and  eliminate  our
vulnerability for recurrent balance of payments crises.
As long as these high interest rates are forced on us by the international situation
over  which  we  have  no  control,  a  slow-down  in  total  economic  activity  will  be  unavoidable.
Sensible adjustment to the realities of the situation will, however, avoid a major recession that is
already predicted in some quarters, and feared by many. To delay a spending decision today, does
not  mean  a  permanent  abolition  of  a  justifiable  need,  but  realistic  deference  to  the  economic
disciplines and constraints of an adverse global situation, until international conditions improve
again.
In  the  meantime,  we  should  not  lose  confidence  in  the  resilience  of  the  South
African  economy,  and  in  its  ability  to  weather  the  current  storm.  Looking  around  the  world
today, we still have, even in the present adverse climate, many reasons for remaining optimistic
about  the  medium  and  longer-term  prospects  for  the  South  African  economy.  Our  banking
system remains sound, our financial markets operate with great efficiency, and a huge pent-up
demand for goods and services needs but little encouragement to re-stimulate the economy.
BIS Review   68/1998
