Mr.  Bäckström’s  opening  remarks  at  the  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy
Rules   Opening remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Urban Bäckström, at the
Conference on Monetary Policy Rules, in Stockholm, on 12-13/6/98.
It gives me great pleasure to open this conference, which is a joint arrangement by
Sveriges  Riksbank  and  the  Institute  for  International  Economic  Studies.  First  of  all  I  want  to
extend  a  warm  welcome  both  to  the  authors  of  the  seven  interesting  papers  and  to  all  the
discussants  who  will  be  participating  in  our  proceedings.  All  those  who  are  attending  the
conference are likewise heartily welcome and we hope they will take an active part in the series
of  discussions.  For  us  at  the  Riksbank,  as  well  as    for  me  personally,  the  opportunity  of
welcoming  such  a  large  assembly  of  leading  international  experts  and  central  bank
representatives is a notable landmark in the practical task of restoring price stability in Sweden.
Monetary policy has attracted a great deal of research in recent years. Much of this
research work has concerned major practical issues that are highly relevant for those of us who
are engaged in monetary policy’s daily round. I should like to take this opportunity of thanking
all of you here who have made contributions in this field. My thoughts go, not least, to Torsten
Persson  and  Lars  Svensson,  who  also  as  advisors  have  provided  valuable  assistance  to  us
practitioners to the Riksbank.
One thing is clear: the sounder the theoretical foundation for monetary policy, the
easier is the life of a central bank governor.
Sweden on the way to establishing price stability
There has been something paradoxical about Swedish economic policy.
After the period of generally high inflation that started with OPEC 1, Sweden was
one of the last of the industrialised countries to re-focus economic policy on price stability. The
notion that a trade-off exists between inflation and unemployment lived on in Sweden for longer
than in other countries. It took rather a long time for the drawbacks of a level of inflation that
was relatively high, for an industrialised country, to be widely recognised.
At the same time, Sweden has a long tradition in the field of central banking. The
Riksbank,  founded  in  1668,  is  the  world’s  oldest,  still-functioning  central  bank.  This  gives  us
three  hundred  and  thirty  years  experience.  It  was  in  Sweden,  too,  that  the  first  banknotes—in
Europe at least—were introduced in the seventeenth century. A monetary policy focus on price
stability,  which  is  one  of  the  themes  for  our  forthcoming  discussions,  has  always  been  an
important  item  on  the  central  bank  policy  agenda.  A  well-known  Swedish  economist,  Knut
Wiksell,  was  a  clear  exponent  of  the  idea  in  the  late  nineteenth  century.  As  it  happens,  he
addressed an audience on the subject here in Stockholm a hundred years ago almost to the day,
namely on 14 April 1898. In one of his books he wrote:
“If  prices  rise,  the rate  of interest  is to  be raised; and if prices  fall,  the  rate  of
interest is to be lowered; and the rate of interest is henceforth to be maintained at its new level
until a further movement of prices calls for a further change in one direction or the other.”
Just over three decades after his address in Stockholm, Sweden had to leave the
gold standard in September 1931. The  objective  of  monetary  policy  was  declared  to  be  to  use
“every available means to maintain the Swedish krona’s domestic purchasing power”. In this way
BIS Review   58/1998
- 2 -
the Riksbank was the first central bank to declare openly that its monetary policy norm was price
stabilisation.
Notwithstanding  this  long  tradition,  after  inflation’s  rising  trend  in  the  post-war
era, Swedish economic policy’s reorientation toward price stability did not begin until  the  late
1980s and early 1990s. That was a decade or so after such realignment had been initiated in other
countries. By then, Sweden had experienced twenty years of inflation that averaged 8 per cent a
year. That was the longest inflationary period since the early nineteenth century. In contrast, in
the one hundred and forty years from 1830 to 1970, inflation in Sweden had averaged an annual
rate of 2 per cent. So one can say that in the present decade we have  been  re-establishing  our
roots.
Sweden’s policy realignment in the early 1990s was, however, more painful than
anyone  could  have  foreseen.  One  conceivable  explanation  is  that,  having  waited  longer  than
other  countries,  the  road  back  to  price  stability  was  more  difficult  for  us.  There  were  also  a
number  of  exceptional  events  along  the  way.  What  was  perhaps  the  worst  bank  crisis  of  the
century erupted in the wake of the 1980s’ bubble economy. Exchange rate turmoil was such that,
during some dramatic days, the instrumental rate was hiked to 500 per cent. In the early 1990s
the budget deficit grew to be the largest in the industrialised world. There are many similarities,
as  well  as  some  differences,  between  the  financial  crisis  in  Sweden  and  those  in  Mexico  and
Southeast Asia.
In  recent  years  the  situation  in  Sweden  has  become  more  stable  and,  with  a
resolute  economic  policy,  developments  have  taken  a  positive  turn.  The  bank  crisis  has  been
resolved, the economy is in an expansionary phase and inflation expectations are low. Step by
step, the credibility of the new regime is being established. Experience in other countries clearly
shows that the consolidation of a changeover to a low-inflation regime takes many years.
Inflation target’s historical roots and advantages
The idea of focusing monetary policy on price stability goes back, as I mentioned
earlier, at least to Wiksell’s arguments a century ago. It seems to me that Wiksell’s emphasis on
deflation  being  as  important  to  avoid  as  inflation  has  much  to  do  with  the  acceptance  of  this
policy today.
In Sweden and many other countries, the old idea, in the 1950s and 1960s, that a
trade-off  exists  between  inflation  and  unemployment  resulted  in  an  increasingly  high  level  of
trend inflation. When the drawbacks of active economic policies of this type became apparent,
people in general and their representatives also feared the other extreme - a monetary policy that
consistently aimed at keeping inflation as low as possible. Some countries, of which Sweden is
one,  are  basically  averse  to  deflation.  So  a  regime  whereby  monetary  policy  has  a  systematic,
long-term commitment to keeping inflation at a predetermined level of 2 per cent, neither more
nor less, represents what many people perceive as a balanced approach to avoiding deflation as
well as inflation. This has made it easier to establish the legitimacy of the regime in the public
mind.
Some relevant issues for a practitioner
Let me now turn to some matters which a practitioner finds important and which
will also be touched upon during the coming two days.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 3 -
One  issue  concerns  the  indicator  of  inflation  that  is  appropriate  to  use  as  an
explicit target. The practical considerations in this respect are complex and are currently being
debated  in  Sweden.  The  consumer  price  index  has  the  advantage  of  being  familiar  to  a  wide
public.  Besides  measuring  trend  inflation,  however,  it  also  gives  information  about  price
fluctuations that stem from transitory supply-side shocks, for example changes in indirect taxes
and interest costs. With the CPI as the target variable, the central bank encounters problems in
the public discussion because shocks of various kinds are liable to result in temporary deviations
from the target. If some indicator of underlying inflation is targeted instead, however, it is likely
to  be  relatively  unfamiliar  to  people  in  general.  Neither  is  it  entirely  clear  how  the  optimal
indicator of underlying inflation should be constructed.
Whichever alternative one chooses,  it  is  essential  in  my  opinion  that  the  central
bank  be  prepared  to  contribute  to  as  open  a  discussion  as  possible,  so  that  its  ambition  of
achieving and maintaining price stability is not lost sight of and the public’s ability to hold the
central bank responsible for the conduct of monetary policy is not weakened.
Another issue  is  the  choice  of  a  targeting  horizon  for  the  monetary  policy.  This
relates to the trade-off between output volatility and inflation volatility. As it stands this sentence
is correct but very difficult to understand.
A  short  horizon  for  inflation  targeting,  say  keeping  inflation  at  the  target  level
from  quarter  to  quarter,  yields  a  very  stable  inflation  rate.  In  order  to  maintain  this  target,
however, the central bank must make drastic adjustments to the instrumental rate and this causes
a  high  degree  of  variability  in  real  economic  activity.  A  long  target  horizon  may  well  imply
greater variability in the inflation rate but would allow for more gradual interest rate adjustments
and  smaller  real  economic  fluctuations.  In  our  approach  the  normal  target  horizon  is  set  at
between one and two years.
A third issue is the degree of transparency. It is widely agreed that transparency is
not merely compatible with an inflation target regime but  actually  essential  if  the  regime  is  to
function  properly.  For  one  thing,  the  central  bank  must  be  accountable  for  its  conduct  of
monetary policy. This is a question of monetary policy’s basic legitimacy, which is important not
least  when  the  central  bank  operates  independently.  For  another,  the  actual  implementation  of
monetary policy needs to be as predictable as possible.
Would maximum transparency be preferable? Is there really any point at which a
line should be drawn or would it be more reasonable to try to identify a certain minimum level of
transparency?  Should  the  minutes  of  monetary  policy  meetings  and  the  voting  be  published?
Would  it  even  be  right  to  allow  the  central  bank’s  monetary  policy  meetings  to  be  shown  on
television?
For  my  part,  it  seems  reasonable  to  publish  relatively  detailed  minutes  of
monetary  policy  meetings  without  revealing  exactly  who  said  what  at  which  stage  in  the
discussion.  It  is,  after  all,  important  that  discussion  during  the  meetings  is  open  and
unprejudiced,  so  that  the  participants  can  listen  to  their  colleagues’  arguments,  change  their
minds in the course of a meeting and accept joint responsibility for the decisions that are made.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  that  each  individual  is  responsible  for  arguing  for  his  or  her
position. I can also see a case for reporting how votes are actually cast. This is, in fact, already
the practice of the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 4 -
Monetary policy and asset prices
Finally  some  words  about  a  matter  that  is  not  directly  on  the  agenda  for  our
discussions. I am referring to how monetary policy should respond to asset prices. The reason for
bringing  it  up  today  is  threefold.  First,  it  is  a  matter  that  is  widely  discussed  today  in  many
international forums as well as in many central banks. Second, as a practitioner I would like to
encourage our leading international experts present here today to study it further in the years to
come  in  order  to  develop  more  knowledge  in  this  area.  It  could  be  the  topic  for  a  future
conference. My third reason is more personal. Before I came to Sveriges Riksbank I was state
secretary  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  involved  in  the  management  of  Sweden’s  financial
crises. The obvious question for me is why did it happen and how can we prevent it from ever
happening again.
I have already touched on the question of monetary policy’s target variable, which,
as we all know, is a very complicated matter. An additional dimension is whether asset prices
more formally should be included in the target variable for monetary policy?
The question about monetary policy and asset prices is by no means new. At the
beginning of this century economists like Irving Fisher were already emphasising the importance
of following not just consumer prices but also asset prices. Some decades later, the tradition from
Fisher was taken up by Alchian & Klein in what has became a well-known paper from 1973. CPI
can be seen as a measure of “current service flow prices”. Asset prices in turn measure “future
service flow prices”. A weighted index consisting of CPI as well as asset prices could serve as an
inter-temporal  indicator  of  living  costs.  The  underlying  idea  was  that  such  an  index  could
contribute  to  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability.  The  authors  argued  that  if  the  central
bank concentrates solely on the development of consumer prices, monetary policy may be either
too  contractive  or  too  expansionary,  the  reason  being  that  consumer  prices  usually  react  more
slowly than asset prices to a contractive or expansionary impulse from monetary policy. There is
then a risk of monetary policy having a destabilising tendency.
Alchian & Klein found, however, that the construction of such an index was rather
difficult  in  practice;  but  they  did  underscore  the  importance  of  monetary  policy’s  taking  the
development of asset prices into account. Recently, Charles Goodhart drew attention to what is
now the twenty-five year old paper by Alchian & Klein; he, too, sees difficulties involved in a
weighted index of consumer and asset prices. The conclusion is probably that asset prices should
not formally be included in the target variable for monetary policy.
Asset  prices  are,  however,  taken  into  account  in  a  regime  that  explicitly  targets
inflation  in  terms  of  the  consumer  price  index  or  a  variant  of  this.  This  occurs  via  household
wealth effects and corporate capital costs, which influence total demand, alter the output gap and
thereby  modify  inflation  prospects.  If  asset  prices  rise  so  strongly  that,  via  increased  demand,
inflation  tends  to  rise  above  the  targeted  rate,  the  central  bank  will  normally  respond  by
tightening the monetary stance. Conversely, the monetary stance will be eased if asset prices fall
so  much  that  inflation  is  liable  to  be  below  the  target.  Thus  far  the  analysis  is  fairly
straightforward. Even if asset prices do not feature explicitly in the target variable, they will be
taken into account in a monetary policy model that targets the consumer price index.
Sweden had a combination of high inflation and rising asset prices in the 1980s. It
might then be argued that policy failed to concentrate on price stability in terms of the consumer
BIS Review   58/1998
- 5 -
price  index.  It  should  be  noted  that  with  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  at  that  time,  the
overheating in the economy was primarily a matter for fiscal policy. Price bubbles developed in
asset markets, followed later by price falls for shares and real estate, for example. This in turn led
to  the  severe  bank  crisis.  But  can  the  Swedish  bank  crisis  be  explained  simply  in  terms  of  an
insufficient focus on price stability?
The example of Japan in the 1980s suggests that consumer price stability may not
be  a  sufficient  condition  for  precluding  bubbles  in  asset  prices  and  financial  instability.  With
trend inflation averaging two per cent a year, the situation in Japan in the 1980s was very close to
what we now commonly mean by price stability. Yet the Japanese economy still moved towards
a period of grave financial instability.
Thus, the question practitioners have to consider is how to deal with a situation
where asset price effects are taken into  account  with  reference  to  consumer  price  inflation  but
where  there  may  still  be  a  risk  of  asset  price  bubbles  that  may  lead  to  financial  instability,  a
destabilisation  of  the  real  economy  and  a  severe  downward  effect  on  consumer  price  inflation
later on.
One could argue that the effects of a large rise in asset prices on aggregate demand
may  be  smaller  than  the  effects  of  a  large  fall  if  such  a  fall  increases  general  uncertainty  and
leads to more cautious spending behaviour. If the collapse of a bubble in asset prices has a much
stronger effect than the preceding boom, it may be optimal to increase interest rates to raise the
probability of bursting a bubble even though such a policy action may temporarily lead to lower
consumer price inflation in the short term than otherwise would have been desired. The reason
for this conclusion is that that bursting the bubble sooner rather than later reduces the probability
of a still larger bubble later on with an even greater downward effect on consumer price inflation.
Hasn’t experience taught us that a growing risk of instability may be indicated by
a  steep  increase  in  asset  prices  at  a  time  when  the  credit  supply  have  been  expanding  at  an
unsustainable rate for some time? If such a situation happens to coincide with low prospects for
consumer  price  inflation,  might  there  then  be  grounds  for  the  central  bank  to  depart  from  its
inflation target for the time being in order to curb the increase in asset prices?
That  special  circumstances  might  prompt  a  temporary  departure  from  a  central
bank’s  inflation  target  is  not  a  novel  suggestion.  It  has  been  discussed,  for  example,  in  the
context of natural disasters, large supply shocks and so on. And what is a full-blown bank crisis
if not a serious economic disaster?
At  the  same  time,  curbing  rapidly  rising  asset  prices  when  prices  of  goods  and
services still show little sign of turning upwards is not exactly an easy task for the central bank.
One of the difficulties lies in justifying this to the general public. Another is  whether  an  asset
price bubble is actually developing; does the central bank really have better information than the
market participants? A third problem is that an interest rate hike might exacerbate the subsequent
course of events when asset prices are corrected. Fourthly, the central bank’s ambition to steer
asset prices directly could perhaps pave the way to a much larger bubble in the future. In other
words,  can  safeguards  against  financial  bubbles  and  an  absence  of  subsequent  economic
consequences lead to a moral-hazard type of phenomenon among the market participants?
Circumstances  must  evidently  be  very  special  to  warrant  central  bank  action  to
counter asset price bubbles if there is no concurrent upward pressure on consumer price inflation.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 6 -
It is also reasonable that the central bank presents a clear case for such a course of action and
does so before such a special situation arises.
The  Riksbank  has  started  a  biannual  series  of  reports  on  the  financial  system’s
stability.  The  idea  is  to  draw  lessons  from  our  recent  experience  of  a  bank  crisis  and  be  in  a
position - should the need arise in some distant future - to discuss any policy measures that might
be called for in the event of a risk of financial instability. This could also be done in our Inflation
Reports.
The situation today in Sweden is very different from the 1980s. Asset prices have
been  rising  steeply  since  1994  but  indebtedness  did  not  turn  upward  until  quite  recently.  This
suggests that the risk that the banking sector will experience significant problems in the event of
a fall in asset prices is relatively small today. However, we must continue to monitor risks in this
field in the years to come.
Conclusion
Now  when  we  are  assembled  here  for  an  important  conference,  with  interesting
contributions from a number of the world’s leading experts in the field, we would do well to be
temperate in our appraisal of what we believe we know today. To this end I shall quote Lawrence
Summers.  In  connection  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  symposium  on
“Achieving  Price  Stability”,  Summers  considered  the  major  changes  that  have  occurred  in
macroeconomic thinking in the past two decades and then rounded off by saying:
“It  would  be  a  misreading  of  history  to  think  that  we  have  now  identified  final
truth or that some of the views expressed here will not look archaic twenty years from now.”
That is a stimulating and challenging statement. Think how dull life would seem if
we  ever  arrived  at  the  final  truth.  As  luck  would  have  it,  the  increasingly  complex  reality  in
which  we  live  is  an  endless  source  of  challenges  for  researchers  as  well  as  central  bank
colleagues throughout the world.
References
Alchian, A. & Klein, B., (1973), “On A Correct Measure of Inflation”. Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, vol. 5, no. 1, February, pp. 173–191.
Goodhart, C.A.E., (1995), “Price Stability and Financial Fragility”. In The Central Bank and the
Financial System, pp. 263–302, Macmillan, London
Summers,  L.,  (1996),  “Commentary:  Why  are  Central  Banks  Pursuing  Long-Run  Price
Stability?”. In Achieving Price Stability. A Symposium Sponsored by Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29–31, pp. 35–43.
BIS Review   58/1998
