Mr. Liebscher discusses the role of a national central bank within the ESCB
as  illustrated  by  the  OeNB      Address  by  the  President  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,
the  26th  Economics  Conference  of 
Dr. Klaus Liebscher,  held  at 
the  Oesterreichische
Nationalbank on the topic “Economic Policy 2000”, in Vienna on 7-8/5/98.
Introduction
Just a few days ago, the key political decisions which will pave the way to EMU
were  taken  at  the  summit  in  Brussels.  Based  upon  the  preparatory  work  of  the  European
Monetary  Institute,  the  Commission  and  ECOFIN,  the  Council  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  of
Government agreed last weekend to start Stage Three of EMU on January 1, 1999, with eleven
countries. At the same time, the bilateral exchange rates for the participating currencies, which
are to form the basis for their euro conversion rates, were preannounced. The European Central
Bank  will  be  formally  inaugurated  in  Frankfurt  on  June  30,  and  EMU  will  commence  on
schedule  on  January  1,  1999.  These  developments  have  provided  the  financial  markets  with
reliable  points  of  reference  that  will  contribute  substantially  to  a  calculable  development  of
exchange rates and interest rates until the onset of EMU.
The  general  public  and  the  financial  markets  are  now  convinced  that  EMU  will
become  reality  in  just  a  few  months’  time.  By  comparison,  people  know  much  less  about  the
institutions that will be responsible for the single monetary policy and, in particular, about the
relationships among them. Will there still be a place left within EMU for today’s national central
banks? And if so, which tasks are they going to keep once monetary policy is made in Frankfurt?
These are questions that are frequently asked. And the answers are indeed quite complex.
The  basic  institutional  framework  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  as  defined  in  the
ESCB/ECB Statute
A superficial glance at the ESCB/ECB Statute lets things appear quite simple.
•  The establishment of the ECB in mid-1998 will coincide with the foundation of
the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). The ESCB will consist of the
ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the  EU  member  states.  From
January  1,  1999,  the  ESCB  will  have  the  sole  responsibility  for  the  single
monetary policy within the euro area. In performing its tasks, the ESCB will be
independent of any political instructions and will be committed to the primary
objective of price stability.
•  The ESCB will be governed by the ECB’s decision-making bodies, led by the
ECB  Governing  Council,  which  will  consist  of  six  members  of  the  ECB
Executive Board, including the ECB President and Vice-President, as well as
the governors of the NCBs of the euro area. Monetary policy decisions will be
BIS Review   44/1998
- 2 -
taken centrally, by a simple majority of the ECB Governing Council and based
on the principle of “one member, one vote”.
•  The ECB Executive Board will conduct monetary policy in accordance with the
guidelines and decisions adopted by the ECB Governing Council. In doing so,
it will issue the necessary instructions to national central banks.
•  The national central banks will form an integral part of  the  ESCB  and  act  in
accordance  with  the  guidelines  and  instructions  issued  by  the  ECB.  In
conducting  operations  within  the  ESCB’s  field  of  competence,  the  ECB  will
rely on the national central banks whenever possible and appropriate.
•  Finally,  a  so-called  “General  Council”  will  be  constituted  as  a  third
decision-making  body.  It  will  assume  responsibility  for  the  coordination  and
exchange  of  information  between  the  euro  area  and  EU  central  banks  which
have not yet adopted the single currency, but will not exercise any influence on
the monetary policy of the euro area.
Ample room for manoeuvre in practical implementation
This, in a nutshell, is the ESCB/ECB Statute. Its apparently quite straightforward
structure allows ample room for manoeuvre in actual practice. The European Monetary Institute
in  fact  devoted  quite  a  substantial  part  of  its  preparatory  work  on  EMU  to  the  concrete
assignment of duties and the establishment of procedures within the ESCB.
Let  me  just  quote  a  few  examples  of  questions  that  had  to  be  resolved  in
compliance  with  the  ESCB  Statute:  Who  within  the  ESCB  will  conduct  monetary  policy
operations? Who will intervene in the exchange markets? Who will manage the foreign exchange
reserves? Do we, inside the euro area, still need national balance-of-payments statistics? Where
will the commercial banks keep their central bank accounts? Which bodies within the ESCB are
to have access to the TARGET cross-border payment system? Who will issue euro banknotes?
Who will print them? Where does the monetary income from the creation of central bank money
originate:  at  the  ECB  or  at  the  national  central  banks?  And  how  is  it  going  to  be  distributed
within  the  ESCB?  Who  will  prepare  the  documents  for  the  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing
Council? Will there still be committees of experts delegated by the national central banks to at
least help prepare the decisions of the ECB Governing Council? How large should the ECB be
by comparison to the national central banks and how much staff will it need?
Each  of  these  questions  –  and  here  I  have  picked  out  just  a  few  –  has  been
discussed by the EMI at great length. Most of them have been fully resolved – even though initial
positions were sometimes diametrically opposed. In  some  cases,  transitional  rules  were  agreed
for  the  initial  phase  of  monetary  union;  they  may  then  have  to  be  adjusted  in  the  light  of
experience gained. Legal instruments have been prepared wherever necessary. When the ECB is
BIS Review   44/1998
- 3 -
established a few weeks from now, one of its first tasks will be to wind up the discussions and
endorse all of this preliminary work done by the EMI.
The philosophy underlying the organization of the ESCB
How,  in  the  light  of  the  EMI’s  preparatory  activities,  will  tasks  and  duties  be
distributed within the ESCB? What role will the national central banks play?
The  basic  philosophy  in  organizing  the  ESCB  is  to  have  all  decisions  taken
centrally by the ECB; in effect, decisions on all fundamental issues will be taken by the ECB’s
Governing Council. This is the only way in which the uniformity of the single monetary policy
can be ensured across the euro area. The implementation of decisions - that is operations, which
in practice account for most of a national central bank’s work - is effected by the national central
banks on a decentralized basis, coordinated by the ECB Executive Board. Like a red thread, these
two principles – centralized decisions and guidelines, decentralized implementation – govern all
the ESCB’s operations.
At this point,  three  concepts  must  be  explained.  The  first  relates  to  the  ESCB’s
tasks and functions. The Maastricht Treaty provides a very clear definition of those areas which
from Stage Three of EMU will fall within the Community’s field of competence. Thus the basic
tasks to be carried out by the ESCB are to define and implement the monetary policy of the euro
area, to conduct foreign exchange operations in accordance with the exchange rate policy of the
euro area, to hold and manage the official foreign reserves of the member states, and to promote
the smooth operation of payment systems. In the area of the prudential supervision of banks and
financial markets, the ESCB only contributes to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the
competent  authorities.  In  addition  to  these  basic  tasks,  the  national  central  banks  are  free  to
perform  other  tasks,  provided  they  are  not  incompatible  with  the  objectives  of  the  single
monetary policy.
The  second  item  requiring  an  explanation  is  the  legal  form  of  the  ESCB.  The
ESCB  has  no  legal  personality  of  its  own.  Only  its  components  –  the  ECB  and  the  national
central banks – have legal personality. The term ESCB therefore only refers to the fact that the
ECB and the national central banks are integral parts of a whole that is guided by a common set
of  rules,  objectives  and  duties  in  both  its  internal  and  external  relations.  This  underlines  the
federal  character  of  the  ESCB  and  the  institutional  role  of  the  national  central  banks  as  equal
partners within the ESCB.
The  third  concept  that  needs  to  be  explained  is  the  principle  of  “subsidiarity”.
Under the principle of subsidiarity, the distribution of all responsibilities and tasks must allow
for a maximum degree of freedom, while at the same time paying due regard to the body politic.
Centralized entities should not monopolize tasks that can be performed by decentralized units.
The centralized entity is to focus on the functions it has to perform in the interest of society as a
whole. The European Union incorporated the principle of subsidiarity in the Maastricht Treaty:
BIS Review   44/1998
- 4 -
In areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence, the Community shall take action only
if  and  insofar  as  the  objectives  of  a  proposed  action  cannot  be  satisfactorily  achieved  by  the
member states. How then is the principle of subsidiarity to be applied to monetary union? The
transfer  of  monetary  policy  from  the  national  to  the  higher  Community  level  is  based  on  the
conviction  that  this  is  in  the  general  economic  interest.  Only  the  actual  implementation  of
monetary policy may – and shall – remain the responsibility of the smaller entities, that is, the
national central banks “to the extent deemed possible and appropriate”. Consequently, when we
speak about subsidiarity in the context of EMU, we must distinguish carefully between monetary
policy  decisions  and  their  implementation.  In  the  former  case,  the  principle  of  subsidiarity
provides the motive for centralization, in the latter it is the incentive for decentralization.
Five areas of responsibility of National Central Banks
Against  this  background,  five  key  areas  of  responsibility  or  functions  can  be
identified for the national central banks. First, the national central bank governors will actively
contribute to all central decision-making processes within the ESCB. In this context the national
central  banks  will,  second,  serve  as  intermediaries  between  the  single  monetary  policy  and
national economic policies. Third, they will act as the ESCB’s operative entities in carrying out
monetary and foreign exchange policies as well as policies relating to payment systems and in
compiling monetary and balance-of-payments statistics. Fourth, the national central  banks  will
contribute the ECB’s capital and, as “the owners” of the ECB, also receive their share of ECB
income. Fifth, the national central banks, apart from being ESCB member banks, will continue to
exist as independent institutions outside the ESCB’s scope of responsibility and as such will be
free to perform additional functions on their own responsibility. Let me now explore these five
functions in greater detail.
1. Participation in decision-making by the ECB Governing Council
The  first  area  of  responsibility  relates  to  the  NCBs’  participation  in  decision-
making  processes.  As  already  mentioned,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  will  consist  of  the  six
members of the ECB Executive Board and, for the time being, the eleven governors of NCBs. At
the  start,  the  ratio  between  members  of  the  ECB  Executive  Board  and  national  central  bank
governors  will  therefore  be  about  one  to  two.  This  predominance  of  NCB  governors  in  ECB
decision-making will safeguard that, based on European central banking experience, the required
measure of continuity is achieved in spite of the significant changes on an institutional level.
The  ECB  Governing  Council  takes  monetary  policy  decisions  by  a  simple
majority. Each member of the ECB Governing Council has one vote. This also applies to NCB
governors,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  from  a  small  or  a  large  country.  This  reflects  the
intention  of  the  Treaty,  according  to  which  central  bank  governors  are  to  serve  on  the  ECB
Governing  Council  as  individuals,  not  as  “country  delegates”  or  representatives  of  their
BIS Review   44/1998
- 5 -
institutions.  They  are  committed  to  Community  objectives  and  the  tasks  of  the  ESCB  and  are
expected to consider the monetary policy needs of the euro area as a whole. The Treaty therefore
attaches particular importance to the independence of the members of the ECB Executive Board
and  the  national  central  bank  governors.  To  ensure  their  personal  independence,  the  ESCB
Statute  defines  certain  minimum  requirements,  including  a  minimum  term  of  office  and
protection  from  early  dismissal.  These  are  additional  safeguards  against  attempts  to  exert
pressure by way of instructions or other influence. The prohibition to issue instructions to NCB
governors  applies  in  fact  to  all  types  of  bodies,  both  external  and  internal,  including  the
decision-making  body  of  the  respective  national  central  bank.  The  Treaty  deliberately  refrains
from providing for the disclosure of the minutes of ECB Governing Council meetings and votes
cast by the individual members of the ECB Governing Council in order to assist them in acting
responsibly, to the benefit of the euro area as a whole.
The call on the members of the ECB Governing Council to think “European” has
also been underlined in economic theory as a necessary prerequisite for defining the best possible
monetary policy for the entire euro area. Let us assume, for example, that Austria and a number
of  other  small  and  medium-sized  countries  commanding  a  majority  of  votes  on  the  ECB
Governing Board together are enjoying a boom. Let us further assume that Germany and France,
which  together  account  for  well  over  half  of  the  GDP  of  the  euro  area,  are  passing  through  a
period of recession. If in such a situation the central bank governors of the small countries used
their majority of votes to raise interest rates in the euro area in order to dampen their overheated
economies, they would be opting for a measure inconsistent with the monetary policy needs of
the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This  example,  of  course,  is  mere  conjecture,  a  case  which  is  quite
unlikely to develop, particularly as we may expect the business cycles of the euro area countries
to continue to converge as they have for the past few years. The example nevertheless serves to
illustrate the principle that monetary policy decisions of the ESCB must always be to the benefit
of the euro area as a whole and must not cater to national interests.
This also shows very clearly how important it is for each national central bank to
have  its  own  macro-economic  analyses  available  for  the  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing
Council. The staff of the ECB Executive Board in Frankfurt will certainly draw up a full set of
data  and  analyses,  which  will  be  available  to  all  members  of  the  Governing  Council.  NCB
governors will, however, be well advised to have their own analyses of developments in the euro
area  and  the  global  economy,  prepared  by  their  in-house  staff  of  economists  and  statistical
experts, possibly dealing in greater detail with issues of particular interest from a governor’s own
perspective.  The  example  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  the  United  States  shows  that
well-prepared  information  is  an  indispensable  decision  aid  for  the  participants  of  meetings  at
which  monetary  policy  decisions  have  to  be  taken.  The  sounder  and  more  compelling  the
arguments that a central bank governor presents to the ECB Governing Council, the greater his or
her chance to convince the other members.
BIS Review   44/1998
- 6 -
The experience of the Federal Reserve System also demonstrates that national –
regional, in the US – central banks can find their own market niches in research and analysis. For
the  OeNB,  for  example,  I  would  see  a  comparative  advantage  in  studies  on  the  transition
countries.
2. Public relations agent and interface between the single monetary policy and national economic
policies
A second important role of national central banks resulting from the first one is to
act as public relations agents and interfaces between the single monetary policy on the one hand
and  the  public  and  economic  policy-makers  on  the  other  hand.  The  ESCB’s  –  as  indeed  any
central  bank’s  –  successful  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  will  depend
substantially  on  its  ability  to  communicate  effectively  with  the  general  public  and  economic
policy-makers.
Like any central bank today, the ESCB will have to keep citizens informed about
its strategy and the motives behind any action it takes. This is the only way to ensure that the
European  public  will  understand,  endorse  and  support  its  monetary  policy.  For  a  number  of
reasons, the national central banks will have a central role to play in this context. They are the
ones  best  acquainted  with  their  countries’  weak  spots  and  special  concerns.  They  speak  the
language of the people in the countries they represent – both literally and metaphorically. They
have enjoyed the population’s confidence for many years. They have a close network of formal
and informal communication channels. And they have the resources required for public relations
work that will reach the general public, a task which may prove time-consuming and make huge
demands  on  an  NCB’s  manpower  resources.  The  national  central  banks  are  therefore  ideally
placed for conducting the ESCB’s public relations activities in the participating countries. Care
will have to be taken, however, to ensure that such decentralized public relations efforts will still
follow a clear common line.
A  second  central  aspect  of  the  NCBs’  intermediary  function  is  their  role  as  a
communication channel to national economic policy-makers. It is in the nature of EMU that one
single monetary and exchange rate policy will apply  to  the  entire  euro  area.  Different  national
monetary policy stances to balance differences in economic developments and structures are no
longer  possible.  The  balance  must  therefore  be  achieved  by  means  of  other  economic  policy
instruments, i.e. the national fiscal, income and structural policies.
These areas of economic policy are of course beyond the central banks’ immediate
scope of competence. It is, however, part of the central banks’ responsibility to alert economic
policy-makers  at  the  national  level  as  well  as  the  public  to  any  adjustments  that  may  be
necessary. This is the only way to make sure that the euro area member states will be able to reap
full  benefit  from  EMU  and  to  minimize  potential  disadvantages.  Here,  it  will  be  of  central
importance that budgetary policies are closely coordinated at the national level, that government
BIS Review   44/1998
- 7 -
budgets are put on a sound footing in accordance with the provisions of the Growth and Stability
Pact and more flexibility is aimed at in economic structures.
Ideally,  EMU  will  be  an  incentive  for  EU  governments  to  tackle  pending
economic reforms more swiftly and with more determination. Thus, EMU could act as a catalyst
in European economic development. The significant reform efforts undertaken in the past months
and  years  in  all  of  the  EU  member  states  in  the  run-up  to  EMU  make  me  confident  that  this
positive  scenario  is  attainable.  In  fact,  to  some  extent  EMU  has  already  had  highly  beneficial
impacts  on  economic  policy  in  recent  years,  although  it  has  not  even  started  yet.  We  must  be
aware,  however,  that  the  reforms  that  have  been  initiated  must  now  be  continued  and  that
participation in EMU requires an increased readiness for permanent change and reform.
As it has been possible during the last year to convince the Austrian population of
the benefits of the euro, I trust that it will be equally possible to motivate the citizens of Europe
to take up the structural reforms that will have to accompany the euro if its full rewards are to be
reaped. Here the NCBs will have to play an important role as mediators, coordinators and public
relations agents in issues dictated by a single monetary policy within the entire euro area and the
economic  policies  of  the  member  states.  Drawing  on  their  economic  expertise,  the  national
central  banks  will  be  able  to  provide  valuable  assistance  to  economic  policy-makers  at  the
national level in formulating arguments for the reforms needed. Being independent institutions,
however,  they  should  also  stand  ready  to  act  as  the  voice  of  reason  and  alert  economic
policy-makers in due time if necessary.
3. The National Central Banks as operative entities of the ESCB
Let me now move on to the third key function of the national central banks. The
NCBs will be the operative entities of the ESCB. Preparatory work by the EMI has shown that
decentralization  of  a  very  large  portion  of  the  central  banks’  operative  activities  is  both
“possible”  and  “appropriate”.  Using  advanced  information  technology,  money  market  tender
operations, for example, can be conducted on a decentralized basis at reasonable expense.
At  the  same  time,  the  benefits  of  a  decentralized  approach  are  quite  obvious.  It
will permit the use of the NCBs’ infrastructure and the benefit of their experience in conducting
monetary  policy  and  other  operations.  Watching  their  national  financial  markets  evolve,  the
national central banks have accumulated a wealth of experience over the decades. At the early
stage  of  monetary  union,  these  markets  will  still  differ  substantially.  In  order  to  guarantee
nevertheless equal and fair access to central bank liquidity for the large number of the ESCB’s
counterparties, the national central banks will assume an indispensable function as intermediaries
between the ECB’s monetary policy decisions and the counterparties of the ESCB. The national
central banks will also be best placed to monitor, on a continuous basis, the rapid and substantial
changes in the conduct of market players triggered by monetary union itself. This will ensure that
the  ESCB’s  monetary  policy  instruments  retain  their  effectiveness  and  efficiency  even  in  a
BIS Review   44/1998
- 8 -
rapidly changing environment.
The  national  central  banks  will  therefore  conduct  open  market  transactions  and
other  monetary  policy  operations  with  the  banks  in  accordance  with  instructions  issued  by  the
ECB. Upon decision of the ECB, they will intervene on the foreign exchange markets. They will
print and issue banknotes. The commercial banks will maintain their minimum reserves with the
national central banks if such reserves are going to be an instrument of monetary policy – which I
would indeed advocate. The national central banks will supervise payment transactions, acting as
system  operators  in  large-volume  payments.  They  will  collect  statistical  data,  and  they  will
continue  to  cooperate  in  monetary  policy-making  on  an  international  level,  as  in  the  IMF  and
the BIS.
to 
just 
illustrate 
two  examples 
Let  me  mention 
the  national  central
banks’ important  function  in  operative  business:  First,  let  us  consider  their  role  in  monetary
policy  operations  within  the  ESCB.  As  a  rule,  decisions  with  regard  to  instruments  used  to
allocate or withdraw liquidity on the initiative of the ESCB will be taken centrally by the ECB.
However,  their  implementation  and  administration  -  carried  out  in  line  with  the  ECB’s
instructions  -  will  largely  be  the  responsibility  of  the  national  central  banks.  Open  market
operations will for the most part remain the exclusive task of the national central banks. These
include regular weekly tender operations with a term of two weeks, regular monthly longer-term
refinancing  operations  with  a  term  of  three  months,  structural  open-market  operations  and,
possibly,  the  issuance  of  central  bank  debt  certificates.  Only  fine-tuning  operations,  outright
transactions,  foreign  exchange  swaps  and  the  acceptance  of  time  deposits  may  in  exceptional
cases  be  executed  directly  by  the  ECB  upon  decision  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council.  As
regards standing facilities, i.e., the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility, banks will be
dealing  only  with  the  NCBs.  Minimum  reserves  will  also  be  held  exclusively  by  the  national
central banks.
The  second  example  relates  to  the  administration  of  foreign  reserves.  The  ECB
will be provided with foreign reserve assets for possible interventions in the exchange markets
and to support confidence in the euro. Initially, these foreign reserve assets will amount to a total
equivalent to up to EUR 50 billion (about ATS 700 billion). In the starting phase, the OeNB will
therefore  transfer  up  to  about  ATS  16  billion  of  its  foreign  reserves  to  the  ECB.  The  national
central banks will continue to manage the transferred foreign reserves on behalf of the ECB on a
fiduciary  basis,  in  compliance  with  the  ECB’s  investment  rules.  The  predominant  part  of
Austria’s foreign currency reserves will be retained and invested by the OeNB. Transactions by
national central banks involving such foreign currency reserves will be governed by guidelines in
order to prevent any possible undesirable impact on the monetary and foreign exchange policies
of the euro area. Very large foreign currency reserve transactions will even require the approval
of the ECB.
BIS Review   44/1998
- 9 -
As these two examples clearly illustrate, the operative framework of the ESCB as
prepared by the EMI heavily relied on the national central banks’ existing resources and merely
confers the decision-making powers on the ECB.
4. Holders of the capital of the ECB
What kind of role will the national central banks be playing as the “holders of the
capital”  of  the  ECB?  The  ECB  will  have  a  subscribed  capital  of  EUR  5  billion  (about
ATS 70 billion).  The  national  central  banks  will  be  the  sole  subscribers  to  and  holders  of  the
capital of the ECB. Only the NCBs participating in the euro area member states will pay up their
share in the capital. The capital subscription of the national central banks is based on a weighting
of 50% for the share of the respective Member State in the  population  of  the  Community  and
50% for the share of the respective Member State in the GDP of the Community. The OeNB’s
share will amount to about 2.3% or some EUR 115 million (approx. ATS 1.6 billion). Based on
eleven  countries  participating  in  monetary  union  from  the  start,  the  OeNB’s  share  in  the
subscribed capital will be 2.9%.
Capital  subscription  entitles  the  OeNB  to  a  proportionate  share  in  the  ECB’s
profit.  The  key  for  determining  the  share  of  capital  to  be  paid  up  will  also  be  instrumental  in
determining the distribution of monetary income earned by the national central banks from the
issuance  of  central  bank  money.  Under  the  ESCB’s  Statute,  the  monetary  income  of  all
participating national central  banks  will  be  paid  into  a  common  pool  and  then  redistributed  in
accordance  with  the  key  for  capital  subscription.  This  procedure  was  chosen  because  it  is
impossible  to  predict  the  regional  distribution  of  central  bank  money  creation  within  the
monetary  union.  Incidentally,  this  is  not  a  problem,  as  the  entire  euro  area  will  be  a  single
currency area with identical money market rates and uniformly applicable terms governing the
allocation of central bank money. However, to ensure an equitable distribution of income from
the  creation  of  money  within  the  ESCB,  a  profit  distribution  mechanism  will  be  installed.  At
least in the early phase of monetary union, however, there will still be substantial differences in
the central banks’ balance sheets owing to national differences in the use of cash, payments and
savings  habits.  Consequently,  transitional  arrangements  have  to  be  made  for  the  initial  period
before  the  monetary  income  distribution  mechanism  can  be  introduced.  Once  the  structures  of
national financial markets and the circulation of banknotes and coins begin to converge, it will
become  easier  to  define  an  appropriate  approach  to  the  gradual  introduction  of  the  monetary
income distribution mechanism.
5. Other activities remaining within the NCBs’ responsibility
Let me now come to the last area of central bank activities. Beside their function
as  an  “integral  part  of  the  ESCB”  the  national  central  banks  frequently  perform  a  number  of
specific duties they have grown into in the course of their history. Such public duties above all
BIS Review   44/1998
- 10 -
include tasks relating to the supervision of banks and financial markets, carried out either directly
in their function as a supervisory authority or as an expert pool supporting the authorities charged
with  banking  supervision.  Some  central  banks  prepare  analyses  of  the  financial  statements  of
companies established in their countries in connection with their use of instruments of monetary
policy and as a service to the business community. Sometimes, central banks are involved in the
government  programs  for  the  promotion  of  exports  and  research.  Beyond  that,  central  banks
frequently provide financial services to public entities. Some central banks manage accounts for
private-sector  customers,  much  like  commercial  banks.  Other  central  banks  hold  interests  in
production or service industries, which may be for commercial or strategic reasons.
The Statute of the ESCB does not envisage any forceful dismantling or unification
of the structures that each national central bank has developed in the course of time. They are
therefore  free  to  choose  their  own  legal  form  and  organization.  However,  it  must  be  clearly
pointed  out  that  any  national  central  bank  will  perform  such  additional  tasks  within  its  own
responsibility and for its own account and that such tasks  are  not  deemed  to  be  part  of  ESCB
activities.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  may  decide  by  a  two-thirds  majority  that
certain activities fail to comply with the contractual and statutory tasks and duties of the ESCB
and  may  decree  their  discontinuation.  Previous  work  by  the  EMI  on  this  issue,  particularly
studies on legal convergence, indicate that restrictions will be imposed only if such an activity
threatens to impair the single monetary policy.
Restructuring of the OeNB in the Run-Up to Monetary Union
…The  fundamental  reorganization  of  central  banking  in  Europe  associated  with
monetary union has also required restructuring of the OeNB, involving several levels:
The  first  of  these  levels  relates  to  the  transformation  from  a  central  bank  in  its
own  right  to  an  integral  part  of  the  ESCB.  The  goal  and  strategy  of  monetary  policy,  its
intermediate target as well as the monetary policy instruments must be harmonized with those of
the ESCB. The OeNB initiated this development already several years ago in order to ensure as
smooth a transition as possible for Austria’s financial system. After decades of stability-oriented
policies, the transition to the monetary policy goal laid down in the Maastricht Treaty actually
involved no change for us. The move from an intermediate exchange rate target to a new strategy
was preceded in the OeNB by preparatory studies and the development of the required know-how
through research work. Moreover, in recent years the OeNB gradually transformed its monetary
policy instruments into market-oriented instruments. The remaining adjustments to be made in
cooperation with the banks are already far advanced.
A second aspect is the review of the OeNB’s areas of operation. The OeNB will in
essence  continue  its  activities  in  all  of  its  previous  areas  of  responsibility  also  after  Austria’s
entry into Stage Three of monetary union. In many fields, however, the focus will change more
or less markedly. The OeNB’s macroeconomic analyses, for example, will cover monetary policy
BIS Review   44/1998
- 11 -
in the entire euro area in order to provide the best possible briefing to the OeNB Governor ahead
of the regular conferences of the ECB’s Governing Council. On the other hand, the impact of a
single monetary policy on the Austrian economy will have to be identified and recommendations
worked  out  for  domestic  economic  policies.  Furthermore,  the  economic  development  of  our
neighboring  countries  in  the  east  will  remain  of  key  interest  to  the  OeNB’s  analytical  work.  I
already  mentioned  the  changes  in  the  operative  aspects  of  monetary  policy.  The  OeNB  will
continue these activities within the ESCB. The OeNB will also continue to collect monetary and
balance-of-payments statistics in Austria, albeit in a form that has been harmonized for the entire
euro area. In the area of payment systems, monetary union has provided a fresh impetus to the
OeNB.  The  OeNB  has  developed  and  successfully  implemented  ARTIS  (Austrian  Real-Time
Interbank  Settlement),  a  new  payment  system  meeting  European  requirements  and  ready  for
integration into TARGET, the European payment system, from Jan. 1, 1999. The OeNB has also
made intensive and thorough preparations for the production and distribution of the future euro
banknotes.  The  design  contest  for  the  future  euro  banknotes  was  won  by  a  graphic  artist
employed with the OeNB. By setting up a new printing works for banknotes, the OeNB has the
required  technology  in  place  for  the  production  of  euro  banknotes.  In  the  field  of  banking
supervision, the current responsibilities of the OeNB are in no way affected by the establishment
of the ESCB. Monetary union will, however, intensify and speed up restructuring processes in
the European financial markets. More market transparency, increased cross-border competition,
progressive disintermediation and rising financial exposure against a background of much more
closely knit world financial markets will pose formidable challenges to the bodies responsible for
supervising  financial  markets  and  banks.  The  OeNB  responds  to  this  situation  with  a  staff  of
qualified  employees  and  active  participation  in  the  ever  tighter  international  coordination  of
supervisory authorities.
On a third level, the reorganization involves legal and organizational restructuring
of the OeNB. The Austrian central bank has a long tradition as an independent institution. The
requirement  under  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht  to  harmonize  the  central  bank  statutes  with  the
provisions of the Treaty by the time the ESCB is established therefore implied no major change
in the OeNB’s role as a central bank. Nevertheless, two areas required adjustments, spelled out in
a recently adopted amendment to the Oesterreichische Nationalbank Act. On the one hand, the
institutional framework ensuring the independence of the OeNB decision-making bodies had to
be defined in greater detail. The distribution of powers between the OeNB General Council and
the Board of Executive Directors was adapted and the functions of Governor and Vice-Governor
newly  introduced.  Furthermore,  the  article  in  the  Nationalbank  Act  which  defines  the  OeNB’s
tasks and objectives was revised to comply with the formulation of objectives as laid down in the
Maastricht  Treaty.  Secondly,  the  provisions  regulating  duties  and  instruments  were  revised  to
ensure the OeNB’s integration into the ESCB.
Outlook – the road to monetary union as an evolutionary process
BIS Review   44/1998
- 12 -
…The  establishment  of  EMU  and  the  ESCB  is  an  evolutionary  process.  During
the  past  few  years  all  of  the  EU  member  states  have  undergone  a  remarkable  process  of
economic convergence, which has not been confined to compliance with the convergence criteria
alone. More specifically, we have seen a clear approximation of economic policy goals and the
measures  considered  appropriate  for  achieving  these  goals.  There  is  no  doubt  among  the
governments of EU member states today about the necessity of a stable monetary environment
and  sound  government  budgets  as  a  basis  for  sustainable  growth.  Continuation  and
intensification of the convergence process in the national economies and economic policies over
the  next  few  years  will  be  critical  to  the  success  of  EMU.  There  must  be  further  pressure  for
structural  reforms  designed  to  make  the  economy  more  flexible.  Fiscal  policy  must  aim  at  a
conscientious  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Government  budgets  must  be
balanced  to  recover  leeway  for  fiscal  policy  that  has  largely  been  lost  in  recent  years.  These
changes  do  not  meet  us  unprepared.  They  merely  continue  reforms  initiated  in  the  past  and
present steps that would have been necessary in any case, even without EMU.
The  beginning  of  monetary  union  marks  a  change  in  paradigms  governing  the
interaction of the institutions that shape economic policies in Europe. The change has an impact
on the relations between central banks and other economic policy-makers at both the Community
and  the  national  levels.  The  role  played  by  the  national  central  banks  will  also  change
dramatically within the ESCB. However, the change will not come as an unexpected shock, but
rather as the result of many years of preparatory activities. All of the institutions involved have
taken part in these preparations, contributing their know-how and experience. Those responsible
for economic and monetary policies in the national finance ministries and central banks as well
as in the Commission and in the EMI will largely be serving in similar positions within EMU,
thereby ensuring continuity.
The  degree  of  mutual  convergence  already  achieved  is  particularly  apparent  in
monetary  policy  and  central  banking.  Coordination  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies
within the EMS over the past twenty years and preparations for monetary union since the early
1990s  have  resulted  in  an  impressive  convergence  in  the  perception  of  the  role  and  tasks  of
monetary  policy  and  of  the  overruling  target  of  price  stability.  This  was  also  highlighted  very
clearly in the convergence reports of the EMI and the Commission. The financial markets have
rewarded these efforts by a convergence of interest rates and stable exchange rates. Today, all of
the  EU  central  banks  participating  in  the  euro  area  from  January  1,  1999,  are  independent,
committed to the primary target of price stability and have already largely adapted their monetary
policy instruments to the future needs of the ESCB. The ECB will bring together what is best in
the  traditions  of  the  European  central  banks.  The  same  central  bank  governors  who  are
responsible  today  for  their  countries’  stability-oriented  monetary  policies  will  be  shaping  the
monetary policy for the euro in their function as members of the ECB Governing Council. All
these  arguments  give  me  the  confidence  that  the  ECB  will  be  able  to  enjoy,  from  the  very
BIS Review   44/1998
- 13 -
beginning, the same credibility that the most successful central banks of the ESCB have had in
the past.
The  principle  of  evolution  will  also  –  and  very  much  so  –  apply  to  the  future
distribution  of  duties  within  the  ESCB  and  thus  to  the  national  central  banks’  role  within  the
System. The histories of the few existing central bank systems organized  on  federal  principles
show  that  the  assignment  of  tasks  and  duties  within  such  a  system  may  undergo  substantial
changes  over  the  years  in  the  light  of  practical  experience.  Let  us  take  a  final  look  at  the  US
Federal Reserve System. When this system was first established, it was extremely decentralized.
As new experience was gained, decision-making on monetary policies as well as the operative
branch  of  monetary  policy  were  centralized.  By  this  I  certainly  do  not  wish  to  imply  that  the
operative activities of the ESCB will be moving towards centralization. The Fed and the ESCB
are  developing  against  vastly  different  historical  and  political  backgrounds.  The  European
Monetary Union is a union of independent states, whereas the Fed System operates in a unified
nation. Accordingly, unlike the countries within EMU, not every US state has its own Federal
Reserve  Bank.  Communications  and  information  technology  are,  moreover,  infinitely  more
advanced today so that the decentralized management of the ESCB’s operative activities will be
much  easier  to  organize  than  it  was  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  at  the  beginning  of  this
century. The history of the Fed would, however, suggest that the organization of the ESCB, too,
may be subject to an evolutionary process in the course of time, and that the exact direction of
this evolution will be influenced by experience gained in the conduct of monetary policy.
Much  will  also  depend  on  the  direction  in  which  the  European  Union  will  be
moving  as  a  whole.  To  the  extent  to  which  integration  advances,  to  which  national  borders
become  more  and  more  insignificant  and  to  which  political  union  increasingly  takes  shape,  a
parallel  development  might  take  place  within  the  ESCB.  Political  and  general  economic
integration of the Community and experience with a single monetary policy will – as I hope and
expect – influence each other in a mutually beneficial process.
BIS Review   44/1998
