Mr. George reviews the role and structure of the New Lady of Threadneedle
Street      Text  of  the  Vital  Topic  Lecture  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,
Mr. E.A.J. George, at the Manchester Business School on 24/2/98.
At  some  point  in  the  next  few  months  the  Bank  of  England  will  receive  a  new
Charter. The occasion will lack the ceremonial that accompanied the grant of our first Charter in
1694, when the Governors and Directors gathered in a solicitor’s office in Lincoln’s Inn Fields
and  swore  oaths  of  allegiance  to  the  King  and  of  fidelity  to  the  Company  of  the  Bank  of
England. The Charter itself will be a typescript bound with red ribbon - quite unlike the massive
illuminated manuscript  of  the  original  Charter  displayed  in  our  Museum:  indeed  we  may  even
have to dispense with the red ribbon if the Treasury carry out their threat to send the document
to  us  by  e-mail.  But  as  a  milestone  in  the  Bank’s  long  history,  this  new  Charter  is  almost  as
significant as the first: and taken  together  with  the  new  Bank  of  England  Bill  currently  before
Parliament, it foreshadows a rebirth of the Bank - the New Lady of Threadneedle Street.
Just  four  days  after  taking  office  last  May  the  Government  announced  its
intention of giving  the  Bank  immediate  operational  independence  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of
monetary  policy.  A  fortnight  later  the  Government  announced  a  radical  reform  of  the  entire
structure of financial services regulation in this country. This leaves the Bank with its traditional
responsibility for maintaining the stability of the financial system as a whole, but transfers  our
present specific responsibility for banking supervision to a new, single, regulator for the whole
of  the  financial  services  industry.  The  Bill  now  before  Parliament  legislates  for  these  changes
insofar  as  they  affect  the  Bank  and  it  also  changes  the  arrangements  for  the  Bank’s  internal
governance and puts our finances on a statutory footing.
The  new  legislation  does  not  fundamentally  alter  the  Bank’s  raison  d’etre  -  our
core  purposes.  The  heart  of  it  remains  the  maintenance  of  monetary  and  financial  stability,  as
well as the promotion of the effectiveness and efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  But  it  brings
new clarity to our responsibilities, and it ensures greater transparency and public accountability
in relation to  all  our  activities.  It  is  in  fact  a  radical  re-styling  of  the  Old  Lady.  And  tonight  I
should like to introduce you to the New Lady, and explain just what it is that the new-style Bank
of England is seeking to do and how we are organised to manage our affairs.
Governance of the Bank
Let  me  begin  at  the  top  with  the  changes  to  our  governing  body  -  the  Bank’s
Court  -  or  Board  -  of  Directors.  We  already  have  a  heavily  non-executive  based  board,
consisting of myself and the Deputy Governor, four full-time Executive  Directors,  and  twelve
non-Executive Directors.  The  new  Court  will  be  entirely  non-executive  apart  from  myself  and
two Deputy Governors. Court as a whole will set the Bank’s strategy, determine its budget and -
in the hallowed language of the 1946 Bank of England Act - “manage the affairs of the Bank”.
In this sense we remain a unitary board. But,  under  the  present  Bill,  the  sixteen  non-executive
members, as a group, will be given the specific duty of reviewing the performance of the Bank,
including  the  conduct  of  its  financial  affairs,  and  including  the  procedures  of  the  Monetary
Policy Committee, satisfying itself inter alia, that the Monetary Policy Committee takes proper
account  of  economic  conditions  in  the  various  regions  of  the  country.  The  prospective
non-executive  appointments  to  Court  announced  last  week 
increased
representation from the regions, with members from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The
non-executives will have their own  chairman,  appointed  by  the  Chancellor.  The  first  chairman
will  in  fact  be  Dame  Sheila  Masters  of  KPMG,  currently  Vice-President  of  the  Institute  of
Chartered  Accountants  of  England  and  Wales.  They  will  be  required  to  report  on  the  Bank’s
in  fact 
include 
BIS Review   18/1998
- 2 -
performance  to  Parliament  in  a  separate  section  of  the  Bank’s  Annual  Report.  The  Bank’s
Remuneration  and  Audit  Committees  will,  as  now,  be  made  up  entirely  of  non-executive
members  of  Court.  All  of  this  is  in  the  spirit  of  the  most  modern  principles  of  corporate
governance.
The Bank’s finances
A  second  important  change  relates  to  our  finances.  In  some  senses  the  Bank  is
like a conventional trading company: we have our own capital and balance sheet, we trade, we
make profits, and we pay both tax and a dividend to our shareholder, the Government. But there
are also parts of our public policy functions - relating to monetary and financial stability - that,
by  their  nature  cannot  be  directly  charged  out  to  individual  beneficiaries  of  our  activities  and
which  we  need  to  finance  in  other  ways.  Like  other  central  banks  we,  therefore,  take
unremunerated  deposits  from  the  banking  system  on  which  we  earn  income,  for  this  purpose.
Central banks generally levy this charge on the banking - or deposit-taking - sector specifically,
because one of the essential services we undertake is the provision, through our money market
operations, of sufficient cash day-by-day to the banking system to allow it to balance its books.
Without that the banks collectively would need to hold more cash with the central bank in place
of  interest-bearing  liquid  assets  than  they  do  at  present.  These  “cash  ratio  deposits”  in  this
country  have  hitherto  been  voluntary.  The  new  Bill  puts  them  on  a  statutory  footing,  with  the
rate of deposit to be determined by the Government.
The charge on the banks in this form has always been lower than in other major
centres. This reflects the fact that the Bank of England is among the lowest cost central banks in
the world - with a fraction of the staff of the Bundesbank, the Banque de France or the Federal
Reserve  System  even  when  adjustment  is  made  for  differences  in  function.  The  charge  will
certainly  now  be  significantly  lower  to  reflect  inter-alia  the  transfer  of  banking  supervision  to
the  FSA.  But  I  recognise  that  whatever  our  costs  we  need  to  be  accountable  for  the  resources
that we use and the burden we place on the banking system. We will now be more accountable -
to  Court,  to  the  Government  that  will  set  the  charge,  to  the  banks  themselves  and  the  wider
public through our Annual Report.
The Bank’s functions
Below the Court the new Bank will be organised administratively into three main
subdivisions,  reflecting  our  responsibilities  for  monetary  stability  and  financial  stability,  each
under  a  Deputy  Governor,  with  the  third  subdivision  responsible  for  all  forms  of  financial
market  operations,  under  a  senior  Executive  Director.  The  central  services  of  the  Bank,
including  personnel  and  finance,  will  report  to  the  Deputy  Governor,  Financial  Stability,  who
will remain responsible for the day-to-day management of the Bank.
The main changes in the Bill affect our monetary stability and financial stability
functions, which I will discuss in turn.
Monetary Stability
Let  me  start  with  monetary  stability  -  although  the  new  arrangements  may  be
familiar to you not least because they are in place already! The Chancellor decided last May that
he would no longer exercise his powers to set short-term interest rates. Anticipating the Bank of
England Bill, he set an inflation target and delegated the technical implementation of monetary
policy to achieve that target to a new Monetary Policy Committee established within the Bank.
BIS Review   18/1998
- 3 -
The Monetary Policy Committee has been operating independently in setting interest rates ever
since.
This  position  is  formalised  under  the  Bill.  With  respect  to  monetary  policy  the
Bill  defines  the  Bank’s  objective  as  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  and,  subject  to  that,  as
supporting  the  Government’s  economic  policy,  including  its  objectives  for  growth  and
employment.
The Chancellor will tell the Bank each year what precisely we are to understand
by  “price  stability”  -  he  will,  in  other  words  -  set  a  specific  inflation  target.  He  has  in  fact
initially set a target of 2½% for underlying inflation, and although the Bill provides for him to
set the target each year, the expectation is that the target is for the medium to longer term. That
is  the  political  decision.  The  task  of  achieving  that  target  -  the  technical  implementation  of
monetary  policy  -  is  then  delegated  to  the  Bank  of  England.  The  Government  will  no  longer
have  the  power  to  issue  directions  to  the  Bank  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy  (except,  in  the
terms of the Bill, in “extreme economic circumstances”). Instead, the Bill will formally establish
the Monetary Policy Committee. This  is  to  be  made  up  of  myself,  the  two  Deputy  Governors,
two Executive Directors of the Bank - responsible respectively for the Bank’s economic analysis
and  the  Bank’s  financial  market  operations,  and  four  outside  members  nominated  by  the
Chancellor  and  having  professional  knowledge  and  experience  relevant  to  the  Committee’s
functions. It also includes a Treasury observer, who may participate in our discussions, and acts
as  a  link  between  the  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities,  but  who  may  not  vote  on  our  monetary
policy decisions.
The overriding purpose of these new arrangements is to improve the credibility of
monetary  policy,  and  to  demonstrate  to  the  world  at  large  the  Government’s  commitment  to
achieving  and  maintaining  effective  price  stability.  But  it  is  important  to  understand  that  this
objective is not simply an end in itself. The ultimate objective, of course, is growth of output and
employment and rising living standards - there is no question about that. The argument is about
means,  not  about  ends.  And  effective  price  stability  as  the  immediate  objective  of  monetary
policy is a necessary condition for growth to be sustained into the medium and longer term. The
aim  of  achieving  permanently  low  inflation  is  a  deliberate  attempt  to  break  away  from  the
boom-bust  cycles  of  the  post-war  years,  which  led,  as  we  can  all  remember,  to  a  persistent
ratcheting  up  of  inflationary  expectations  and  a  steady  erosion  of  long-term  thinking  and
planning,  saving  and  productive  investment,  on  the  part  of  consumers  and  businesses.  By
pursuing  price  stability  -  by  keeping  aggregate  demand  consistently,  broadly  in  line  with  the
underlying, structural, supply-side capacity of the economy to meet that demand - we hope to be
able to moderate, rather than aggravate, the  cyclical  swings  in  output  and  prices  and  to  ensure
that growth is sustained in the medium term and hopefully then greater in the long term than it
would otherwise be.
The operation of the Monetary Policy Committee
That then  is  what  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  trying  to  do.  Let  me  say  a
word about our procedures.
On the Friday before our regular monthly decision-taking meeting, the Monetary
Policy  Committee  members  are  given  an  intensive,  all-day,  briefing  by  the  Bank  of  England
professional  staff  on  all  the  latest  relevant  data  and  on  the  staff’s  analysis.  This  includes  real
economic and financial, statistical, anecdotal and survey, information and analysis, comparison
with  the  work  of  outside  analysts  and  commentators,  and,  importantly,  input  from  our  12
BIS Review   18/1998
- 4 -
regional  Agents  who  are  in  regular  contact  with  all  sectors  of  economic  activity  across  the
country. This includes, of course, input from our Manchester Agent, Tony Strachan, who I am
sure is very well known to many of you.
The,  currently  eight,  MPC  members,  alone  with  just  a  small  Secretariat,  then
reconvene on the following Wednesday afternoon to identify and discuss the key issues and any
tactical considerations, before meeting to take and announce our decision the following morning.
This  process  of  regular  and  systematic  assessment,  based  on  the  economic  and
financial  data,  is  unimaginably  different  from  the  erratic  reaction  to  financial  market
disturbances  which  characterised  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  too  often  in  the  more  distant
past.  And  the  reflective,  interactive,  debate  within  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  very
different  too  from  the  sometimes  exaggerated  advocacy  of  a  particular  viewpoint  which
inevitably  crept  in  to  the  Ken  and  Eddie  show  during  which  the  Bank  usually  had  at  most  an
hour in which to persuade a sometimes reluctant Chancellor! The present arrangements allow us
to explore, without initially taking hard positions, alternative possible interpretations of the data
and  their  implications;  and  those  discussions  capture  far  better  than  before  the  uncertainties
inherent in the conduct of monetary policy. It is, I think, how monetary policy really should be
made.
Transparency and accountability
With  operational  independence  comes  -  quite  rightly  in  my  view  -  even  greater
transparency and public accountability.
The minutes of the two-day meeting at which that decision is taken, together with
a  summary  of  the  information  presented  by  the  staff,  are  published  in  the  week  after  the
following  meeting.  Those  minutes  also  record  the  individual  votes  of  each  member  of  the
Committee.
Beyond  this,  we  publish  a  regular  assessment  of  monetary  policy  -  including  a
forecast of inflation over the two-year period that we believe is relevant, given the lags between
policy  actions  and  inflation  outturns  -  in  the  Bank’s  Quarterly  Inflation  Report.  And  the
Treasury  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  regularly  summons  me  and  other
members of the Monetary Policy Committee to give evidence on the basis of these reports.
Finally, the Government has made it a requirement that, if we miss the target of
2.5%  by  1%  or  more  in  either  direction,  the  Committee  must  write  an  open  letter  to  the
Chancellor,  explaining  why,  how  long  we  expect  to  stay  adrift  from  the  target,  and  what  we
intend to do about it. These arrangements, taken together, provide a framework of transparency
and accountability that, as far as I am aware, goes far beyond anything which applies anywhere
else in the world.
Public understanding of what we are trying to do and why -  even  understanding
that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  not  a  precise  science  but  rather  a  matter  of  balancing
risks -  is  crucial  to  our  success.  And  transparency  and  public  understanding  should  -  by
influencing public expectations - reduce the costs of maintaining low inflation.
But,  of  course,  you  need  broad  shoulders.  As  you  know  the  minutes  of  our
January  meeting  -  published  a  fortnight  ago  -  revealed  that  the  MPC  was  for  the  first  time
divided in its policy decision. That inevitably led to an excited and over-simple categorisation of
BIS Review   18/1998
- 5 -
individual members of the Committee as either hawks or doves. In reality the division between
us  was  a  very  narrow  one,  reflecting  the  fact  -  now  acknowledged  by  most  outside
commentators -  that  the  decision,  as  to  whether  or  not  we  will  need  to  raise  interest  rates
moderately further, sooner or later, is very finely balanced. I hope this is a situation that we will
get  used  to.  I  would  expect  the  professional  experts  on  the  MPC  to  agree  quite  easily  when
monetary policy is clearly off track; but I would equally expect them to disagree as often as not
at  the  margin  when  we  are  there  or  thereabouts.  As  it  is  I  was  actually  encouraged  by  the
reaction of many of the more thoughtful commentators who - in the circumstances - recognised
that  it  was  a  reflection  of  a  grown-up  process  that  we  could  publish  a  division  within  the
Committee  and  the  reasons  for  it  without  generating  significant  market  disturbance.  In  this
sense, too, I think it likely that once the new arrangements are properly bedded down they will
be seen to be a very considerable advance on what has gone before.
Financial Stability
Let me turn now to the Bank’s second core purpose, the maintenance of financial
stability.
On the  same  day  that  the  Bank  of  England  Bill  was  introduced  into  Parliament,
the  Chancellor  launched  the  new  Financial  Services  Authority,  the  FSA,  which  will  become
responsible  for  the  authorisation  and  regulation  or  supervision  of  effectively  all  forms  of
financial services activity in the UK.
This  is  an  extraordinarily  bold  and  radical  step,  not  attempted  on  anything  like
this  scale  in  any  other  developed  financial  centre,  and  the  experiment  is  being  watched  with
great interest by other central banks and regulators from around the world.
But there are very strong reasons for moving away from the traditional model of a
separate regulator for each different type of activity - banking, securities, insurance and so on.
Financial  innovation  and  globalisation,  driven  by  an  interactive  process  of  new
information  technology,  competition  and  deregulation,  are,  unquestionably,  progressively
blurring  the  traditional  boundaries  between  different  forms  of  financial  intermediation.  So
regulation  based  on  particular  categories  of  institution  has  increasingly  become  overlaid  by
functional regulation. That has made the whole regulatory structure increasingly complex, both
for the regulated firms and for the consuming public at large.
It  has  made  it  increasingly  complex,  too,  for  the  regulators!  There  are  no  fewer
than nine separate regulators joining the FSA. The new organisation may look big and complex,
but I have to tell you that the task of co-ordinating the interests and responsibilities of all those
separate regulators, across the business of an increasing number of multi-functional groups, was
threatening  to  become  bigger  still.  Firms  with  complex  financial  services  activities  here  in  the
UK welcome the idea of a  one-stop  regulatory  shop  where  at  present  they  have  to  deal  with  a
bewildering array of different regulators for different purposes. A single, over-arching, regulator
will mean a clear line of responsibility and accountability, and it should also help to bring about
greater consistency of regulatory approach.
In  relation  to  banking  supervision  in  particular  there  seem  to  me  to  be  real
advantages  in  separating  out  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the  financial
system as a whole from the supervision of individual banking institutions. In the latter case, we
have  seen  during  the  twenty  or  so  years  that  the  Bank  has  had  statutory  responsibility  for
BIS Review   18/1998
- 6 -
banking supervision how the public policy interest in our activities has increasingly focused on
consumer protection. That is not at all a natural habitat for a central bank. It may indeed produce
a  conflict  of  interest  if  it  causes  the  central  bank  to  become  over-protective  of  individual
institutions, giving rise to moral hazard in the system as a whole.
We  were  conscious  of  these  tensions  in  the  “old”  Bank,  although  we  found
effective, informal, ways of reconciling them.
There  are  therefore  powerful  reasons  for  including  banking  supervision  among
the  responsibilities  that  are  to  be  transferred  to  the  FSA.  The  trick  will  be  to  ensure  that  the
Bank’s capacity to identify and address emerging “systemic”  financial  problems  -  that  is  those
which may have a significantly disruptive effect on the financial system as a whole rather than
just on individual  financial  institutions  -  is  not  damaged  in  the  process.  And  the  key  to  that  is
that  both  the  Bank  and  the  FSA  should  have  a  clear  understanding  of  their  respective
responsibilities, and that they should continuously work very closely together to ensure that they
keep sufficiently out of each others hair without letting things disappear between the cracks!
Our ongoing relationship was formalised during the summer in a Memorandum of
Understanding  (MOU)  agreed  between  the  Bank,  FSA  and  the  Treasury.  This  defines  very
carefully our respective responsibilities and provides for both the Bank and the FSA to exchange
information freely and to consult where our interests interact or overlap. It helpfully establishes
a  high-level  Treasury-Bank-FSA  Standing  Committee,  which  will  provide  a  forum  in  which  a
common position can be developed in relation to emerging problems. And, as a further means of
ensuring  that  we  are  aware  of  each  other’s  concerns,  the  Chairman  of  the  FSA  will  become  a
member of Court, while the Deputy  Governor  responsible  for  Financial  Stability  will  serve  on
the  FSA  Board.  In  the  end  the  success  of  these  arrangements  will  depend  upon  the  working
relationships between our respective staff at all levels, and it  is  helpful  in  this  context  that  our
own  supervisory  staff  are  moving  to  the  FSA  which  will  help  to  ensure  that  we  establish  the
right working relationships from the beginning. But we will need to work at these relationships
continuously to ensure that they are embedded into the future.
Systemic Risk
Relieved  of  our  responsibility  for  supervising  individual  banks  -  and  it  is  a
considerable relief I can tell you - the “new” Bank can concentrate its energies on detecting and
limiting  systemic  financial  risk.  That  is  a  responsibility  of  central  banks  everywhere,  and
because  it  involves  close  monitoring  of  economic  and  financial  market  developments  -
nationally  and  internationally  -  it  fits  more  naturally  and  comfortably  alongside  our
responsibilities  for  monetary  stability.  This  responsibility  will  be  overseen  by  a  new,  internal,
Financial  Stability  Committee  which  effectively  parallels  the  role  and  procedures  of  the
Monetary Policy Committee.
What we mean by “systemic risk” specifically is the danger that a failure of one
financial business may infect other, otherwise healthy, businesses. This could happen in either of
two ways: first through the direct financial exposures which tie firms together like mountaineers,
so that if one falls off the rock face others are pulled off too; and second, by contagious panic
which  sweeps  everyone  off  the  mountain  side  like  an  avalanche.  The  dangers  still  relate
particularly to commercial banking businesses, because banks are still at the centre of payments
and  settlements  systems,  and  they  are  still  relatively  heavily  engaged  in  the  maturity
transformation  of  liquid  liabilities  into  less  liquid  assets  as  an  important  part  of  their  core
activity. But it is of course clear, in today’s world of global finance, that disturbances with the
BIS Review   18/1998
- 7 -
capacity to inflict systemic, financial, damage, and associated economic disruption, can originate
outside the commercial banking system.
There are, certainly, things that we can do to reduce the risks - to try to prevent
the first climber falling off the rock face, or to avoid kicking the rock that starts the avalanche.
A key condition, obviously, is maintaining macro-economic, monetary, stability.
That  goes  without  saying.  It  gives  everyone  on  the  mountainside  much  the  best  chance  of
coming down unscathed!
We  can  also  turn  the  new  information  technology  to  our  advantage,  using  it  to
make  the  linkages  between  the  climbers  safer  -  by  reducing  the  risks  in  payments  and
settlements systems. A good deal of  our  attention  on  the  financial  stability  side  of  the  Bank  is
focused in this direction.
And  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  -  through  micro-prudential  supervision  and
regulation  of  individual  financial  businesses  -  that  the  climbers  are  properly  trained  and
equipped, and fully conscious of the risks. This now, of course, becomes the responsibility of the
FSA.
Intervention
But however much we try to prevent accidents, we need to be prepared for them
to happen. The Bank’s concern then becomes to ensure that they do not spread to other parts of
the financial system.
This  may  involve  providing  liquidity  on  penal  terms,  outside  the  central  bank’s
normal money market operations, against high quality assets to a particular institution, that does
not want to appear in the market because it is under a cloud. Or it may mean standing between
an  intermediary  and  the  market  place,  to  facilitate  payments  or  settlements  which  might  not
otherwise be completed, which could then cause gridlock. Such involvement would not normally
involve the central bank in significant financial risk.
But  in  more  difficult  -  and  mercifully  rare  -  situations,  where  the  failure  of  one
institution could bring down other - otherwise viable - institutions, the central bank may need to
consider  acting  in  the  role  of  “lender  of  last  resort”  to  the  failing  institution,  against  poorer
quality, less liquid, assets which might expose the central bank to financial loss.
The  key  phrase  here,  of  course,  is  “where  its  failure  could  bring  down  other  -
otherwise  viable  -  institutions”.  The  central  bank  safety  net  is  not  there  to  protect  individual
institutions from failure. It is there to protect the stability of the financial system as a whole. In
the  absence  of  a  serious  systemic  threat,  the  right  course  would  normally  be  to  allow  the
institution to fail. If any institution felt that  it  could  rely  on  being  bailed  out  if  it  ran  into  real
difficulty,  that,  too,  would  introduce  “moral  hazard”,  encouraging  excessive  risk-taking  and
financial fragility in the system as a whole. There can be nothing automatic about “lender of last
resort” assistance - and, when it is provided, it should always be on the most onerous terms that
the  borrower  can  bear:  it  is  not  provided  to  protect  the  shareholders  who  should  be  looked  to
first. Nor is it there to protect the management. “Lender of last resort” assistance, even when it is
extended by the central bank, involves the commitment of public money - ultimately taxpayers’
money - and it needs to  be  justified  in  terms  of  the  damage  that  would  otherwise  result  to  the
financial system and to the wider economy. For this reason the MOU, to which I referred earlier,
BIS Review   18/1998
- 8 -
provides  that  the  Bank  should  always  seek  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer’s  explicit  prior
approval  wherever  circumstances  allowed,  or  at  least  his  tacit  prior  approval  in  emergency
situations  and  where  the  risks  are  manageable  in  relation  to  the  size  of  our  capital.  These
arrangements  ensure  that  we  have  the  capacity  to  act  to  limit  systemic  damage  where  that
becomes necessary; but they rightly make such intervention subject to appropriate authorisation
and accountability, by and to, both the Chancellor and Court.
Conclusion
Mr Chairman, we have come a long way in the Bank, even since I first joined it
some  35  years  ago.  We  tended  at  that  time  to  explain  our  role  as  being  the  “Banker  to  the
Government and Banker to  the  commercial  and  other  central  banks”.  And  the  truth  is  that  our
responsibilities, and the extent of our authority, were never very clear.
Today  we  remain  a  bank,  as  we  always  have  been,  at  the  heart  of  the  financial
system, as indeed we must in order to carry out our wider functions. But the Bill, taken together
with the MOU which I  have  described,  sets  out  those  wider  functions  much  more  clearly  than
ever before, defining our responsibilities, our powers to exercise those responsibilities, and our
lines  of  accountability  to  the  Government,  to  Parliament  and  to  the  public  at  large.  This  is  a
much more precise framework for the Bank’s operations, but one which I am convinced is more
appropriate to our modern times.
I was delighted to learn last week that I am to be allowed to continue, for the next
five years, to walk out with this attractive New Lady of Threadneedle Street, and I look forward
to the challenge of carrying through the very positive changes now being made to the role and
structure of the Bank.
BIS Review   18/1998
