Mr.  Tietmeyer’s  address  at  the  International  Frankfurt  Banking  Evening
Co-speaker’s address by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Hans Tietmeyer, following
the lecture “Achieving a Credible Currency for Europe” held by Dr. Sirkka Hämäläinen, Governor of
the Bank of Finland at the International Frankfurt Banking Evening on 5/5/98.
Sirkka,
I
First of all, thank you very much for having come and for your extremely interesting
speech.
You have spoken to us this evening with dual authority:
-
on the one hand, as the Governor of a highly successful national central bank
and,
on the other, as a prospective member of the ECB Executive Board.
 In  the  face  of  such  concentrated  authority  in  your  address,  there  is  hardly  anything
pertinent that I can add.
I  can  only  emphasise  one  of  the core  sentences  of  the  speech  you  addressed  to  the
NCB governors, and which is certainly true of the Board members as well:
“The interests of the entire euro area
must always come first.”
Without  any  doubt,  this  rule  is  the  crucial  cornerstone  of  the  ECB  in  achieving
The  topic  of  our  gathering  this  evening  is  “Achieving  a  credible  currency  for
credibility.
Europe”.
Nominating  Sirkka  Hämäläinen  to  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  is,  however,
without any doubt an invaluable step on the way to a credible currency for Europe.
I  am  sure  that  you,  Sirkka,  will  be  a  jewel  in  the  crown  of  the -  hopefully -  stable
euro.
By the way, in Brussels a number of men were likewise earmarked for the Executive
Board. But they are, of course, not so important - not, at least, this evening.
Sirkka, sincerest congratulations! We are all delighted that you are going to become a
Frankfurt central banker.
I wish you, for our own sakes, every success.
  To begin with, of course, on the way to your definitive appointment.
And particularly in your office here in Frankfurt, from the summer onwards.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 2 -
II
However, not  everything  that  happened  last  weekend  in  Brussels  contributed to  the
necessary expectation that the euro will be a really supranational and depoliticised currency.
I would like to make three remarks on the decisions which were taken in Brussels last
weekend.
1.
The compromise reached in Brussels over the weekend on filling the office of
President of the European Central Bank is a decision taken by the political authorities which we
take note of and on which I do not want to make any further comments.
2.
The suggestions made with regard to the nominations for the Executive Board
of the ECB are to be viewed favourably overall. The persons involved are acknowledged experts
on  monetary  and  banking  issues,  and  for  the  most  part  have  many  years  of  experience  in  the
field  of  monetary  policy.  That  certainly  goes  for  Professor  Dr.  Otmar  Issing,  who  is  to  be
appointed for eight years. It is to be hoped that the appointment process will be completed very
soon, and the European Central Bank thus established.
3.
The  European  Central  Bank  must  endeavour  from  the  start  to  build  up  the
necessary confidence in the sustained stability orientation of its policies, and must demonstrate
its independence of political influences. As a member of the future ECB Governing Council, I
shall strongly support any such policy.
III
Sirkka,
Frankfurt will become your new place of action.
I  wish  that  you  will  feel  happy  here  in  Frankfurt.  And  I  am  sure  that  will  be  so -
provided that you are able to get to know Frankfurt a bit.
For if every one of the eleven national parliaments - like parts of the French National
Assembly - in future wanted to hold regular consultations with the members of the ECB Executive
Board, you would not get to see very much of Frankfurt, other than the airport.
I hope that will not be the case.
I  also  hope  that  you  will  like  Frankfurt.  Of  course,  I  don’t  suppose  Frankfurt  can
compete with Helsinki in every respect. But in many ways it can.
In  terms  of  culture,  too,  Frankfurt  has  a  great  deal  to  offer.  After  all,  culture  and
banking go well together. It is no accident that the great Finnish composer Jean Sibelius once said:
“It is only among bankers that I have ever come
across  an  appreciation  of  music;  it  is  very  rare
among artists, who prefer to talk about money.”
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 3 -
IV
Another reason why you may feel at home in Frankfurt is that - in my opinion - there
are a number of common features in the Finnish and German mentalities.
Both  national  mentalities  are  inclined  to  speak  their  mind  clearly  and  frankly.  It  is
possible that both the Finns and the Germans do not always express themselves with that elegance
and  fluency  that  so  distinguishes  the  representatives  of  those  civilisations  which  were  more
influenced by Rome.
But  Finns  and  Germans  alike  are  conspicuous  for  a  strong  sense  of  realism,  for
clear-cut, if sometimes somewhat harsh, powers of judgement, and for a healthy attachment to their
native land.
Finns like a clear, straightforward approach, rather than convoluted affectedness.
That goes equally for their approach to Europe. Finnish professions of faith in Europe
may not always sound so effusive and euphoric. Understandably, they also  set  great  store  by  their
independence.
On the other hand, the Finns stand by Europe
- not only when the sun is shining,
-
and not only when they are receiving money from Brussels.
Finland is on the periphery, if at all, only in geographical terms; in political terms, it
is in the heart of Europe.
V
It no doubt owed something to the sense of realism in the thinking of our two nations
that a “stability culture” evolved, and was consolidated, in both our countries.
And in both countries the respective central bank plays a major role in cementing that
stability culture. The high international reputation of Finnish anti-inflation policy owes a great deal
to your efforts and your personality, Sirkka.
So, you will likewise appreciate the “stability culture” which Frankfurt has inherited.
You once said that it is the lot of a strictly stability-oriented central banker to remain
unpopular.
I can assure you of one thing: here in Frankfurt it is possible for a central banker to be
both  stability-oriented  and  popular  at  the  same  time.  Being  a  guardian  of  stability  in  Frankfurt  is
something special, I must say.
And I am convinced that Finns have a particular gift for that.
That is because stability orientation has something to do with long-termism, and thus
with  staying-power.  And  Finns  are  proverbially  unbeatable  in  the  kinds  of  sport  that  require
staying-power.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 4 -
And another thing: once the euro has got going, it will have to pass its “Elch-Test”
(an  expression  that  was  last  year’s  “word  of  the  year”  in  Germany).  And  we  Germans  are  mighty
relieved that somebody from Finland is helping at the steering wheel. For the Finns are the experts in
all matters relating to Elks and how to deal with them.
VI
Incidentally, there are also some interesting similarities between our two currencies.
What strikes one first, of course, is the common name.
At the time when a proper name for the single European currency was being sought
instead of the three letters E-C-U, many Germans suggested calling the single currency Mark after
the  Finnish  currency.  “For  unfathomable  reasons”,  however,  that  suggestion  failed  to  meet  with
general approval.
Another  extremely  interesting  parallel  is  that  both  currencies  are  older  than  their
respective, nowadays independent, states.
As  you  will  no  doubt  know,  the  introduction  of  the  D-Mark  preceded  the
establishment of the Federal Republic of Germany, even if only by a short period.
The 50th anniversary of the introduction of the D-Mark will remind us again of that.
A ceremony to mark that occasion will take place in Frankfurt’s Paulskirche on June 20.
But  the  less  than  one  year  that  the  D-Mark  is  older  than  the  Federal  Republic  of
Germany  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  pacesetter  role  played  by  the  Finnish  markka.  The
markka was actually introduced over 50 years before independent Finland was born.
Hence we are all the happier that the Finns are prepared to let the markka be absorbed
into the euro. And that change is actually meeting with more approval in Finland than in Germany.
But  there  has  been  one  problem  in  connection  with  Finland’s  qualification  for
monetary  union.  A  few  months  of  membership  in  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  of  the  EMS  are
lacking.
When we in the Bundesbank were drafting our Convergence Report, we racked our
brains  wondering  what  we  could  do.  Strictly  speaking,  Finland  ought  to  have  joined  the  EMS  in
winter 1995-96.
But we in the Central Bank Council then recalled that, as everybody knows, the Finns
are always somewhat downcast and despondent in winter. That is because of the lack of sunshine.
We thought it would be unfair to expect the Finns to take such an important decision
as joining the ERM in the depths of winter.
But after a fine summer it was very much easier for the Finns to take that step.
And so we agreed in the Central Bank Council of the Bundesbank not to express any
criticism of Finland in this matter.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 5 -
We found that all the easier since Finland’s successes in the field of stability policy
have been of such a lasting nature. And that, of course, is what matters most.
In the other case in which a few months of ERM participation were lacking, by the
way, things were not quite so easy.
VII
Sirkka, once again, thank you very much for your address, and the very best wishes to
you in your new and important assignment.
I am sure our cooperation will be as confident as it has already been in the past few
years.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
