Mr. McDonough’s address on the occasion of the 10th International Conference
of Banking Supervisors   Keynote address by Mr. William J. McDonough, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, on the
occasion of the 10th International Conference of Banking Supervisors held in Sydney on 22/10/98.
I  am  very  honored  to  be  here  as  Chairman  of  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision  and  as  the  Chairman  of  this  year’s  International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors.
These  are  unusually  difficult  and  challenging  times  for  bank  supervisors  around  the  globe.
Turbulence in the financial markets has touched the banking system in virtually every country. To
varying  degrees  and  in  many  different  contexts,  bank  supervisors  are  dealing  with  adjustments  to
their banking systems to assure their strength and vitality.
At  times  like  these,  bank  supervisors  have  a  special  role  in  maintaining  financial
stability. That role is to facilitate a resolution of banking problems so that the depository institutions
will continue to provide the vital lifeline of credit to businesses and consumers. Past experience in
many countries suggests that even severe problems can be overcome with decisive action by banks
to  identify  problems  quickly,  recognize  losses,  strengthen  the  capital  base,  and  execute  a  sound,
forward-looking business strategy.
Today,  the  supervisory  community  has  the  same  challenge.  We  must  identify  the
lessons to be learned from the current financial turmoil and address them. Moreover, we must do so
even while there is continued rapid evolution of financial markets, products and strategies and the
constant  challenge  that  evolution  poses  to  our  existing  supervisory  policies  and  techniques.  While
the challenge of evolutionary financial markets is clear in countries with financial institutions which
are actively involved  in  the  international  marketplace,  it  is  no  less  important  for  emerging  market
countries, which increasingly feel the influence of international financial competition.
Thus, it is appropriate that we are devoting a day to questions of operational risk, an
area  of  rapid  evolution  in  risk  management  concepts  and  practice.  The  most  important  current
operational  risk  problem,  that  of  preparing  for  the  century  date  change  in  the  Year  2000,  has  a
prominent place on the program and in our national supervisory agendas. I congratulate our hosts,
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  working  in  cooperation  with  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulatory
Authority, for putting together this program and I thank them for hosting the ICBS this year.
I would like to focus on the dual role of supervisors in preventing banking problems
and  in  providing  the  necessary  support  when  there  are  systemic  problems.  When  the  Basle
Committee,  in  concert  with  banking  supervisors  from  around  the  globe,  developed  and  in  1997
finalized  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision,  it  was  with  this  dual  role  of
supervisors in mind. On the prevention side, our primary goal as supervisors should be to reduce the
risk of severe problems to the lowest possible level consistent with adequate provision of credit to
the economy and a sense of two-way risk for banking institutions. Quite correctly, most of the Core
Principles are aimed at the task of reducing the potential for systemic problems. However, it also is
vitally  important  that  when  problems  arise  for  an  individual  institution  or  a  group  of  institutions,
supervisors can provide guidance and supervisory action, as necessary, to resolve the situation. Thus,
some  Core  Principles,  especially  those  on  supervisory  enforcement  and  the  safety  net,  address  the
operational role of supervisors and the institutional context in which they carry out that role.
All of us have learned a lot about marketplace turmoil and systemic risk in the last
year  to  18  months.  First,  I  will  highlight  some  issues  reflecting  the  close  linkages  between  credit,
liquidity and capital adequacy, both at the financial firm and the market level. Next, I will turn to
lessons  from  earlier  experiences  with  banking  problems  and  show  how  prompt,  but  deliberate,
BIS Review   86/1998
- 2 -
responses  to  credit  problems  can  improve  the  health  and  liquidity  of  the  banking  system.  I  will
conclude  by  talking  about  the  work  of  the  Basle  Committee,  both  with  respect  to  the  immediate
problems and the future agenda.
II. Preventing Financial Problems
The market disturbances of the past 18 months have focused a great deal of attention
on the need for greater transparency and for increased attention to corporate governance, legal and
accounting  matters,  without  diminishing  the  traditional  supervisory  focus  on  credit,  liquidity  and
capital.
Recent events suggest that we are seeing new ways in which the links between credit
and  liquidity  are  increased  in  the  financial  system.  Wider  credit  spreads  in  virtually  all  actively
traded financial markets, accompanied by declines in liquidity in many markets, signal us that credit
concerns are rising in the financial system. We, as supervisors, must interpret and respond to those
signals, often in shorter time frames than we are comfortable with, and often in concert with a high
level of market volatility. One anomaly is that these issues arise in the face of apparently genuine
improvements  in  liquidity  in  the  high-yield  bond,  syndicated  loan,  and  emerging  markets  that  we
have seen at various times since the early 1990s.
Four questions about the current developments appear to offer well-defined avenues
which supervisors can pursue.
First,  are  current  market  conditions  signaling  a  loss  of  confidence  in  prior  credit
judgments,  perhaps  in  response  to  the  growing  awareness  of  how  capital  markets
instruments,  especially  derivatives,  can  transform  the  risk  profile  of  customers  and
counterparties?
Second, are growing capital market activities involving credit risk, such as equity and
corporate  debt  underwriting,  foreign  exchange  and  credit  derivatives,  and
securitization  creating  new  liquidity  stresses,  in  particular,  greater  liquidity  risk  for
financial institutions and their customers, when credit quality declines?
Third, to what extent are markets signaling greater uncertainty about the nature and
level  of  risks  in  the  world  economy  given  the  tremendous  structural  change  in  the
world financial system and the world economy over the last two decades?
Fourth,  what  do  recent  market  developments  tell  us  about  the  capacity  of  financial
firms to define and manage risk, or to fully understand their own risk profile?
The question of what current market conditions may be signaling about confidence in
prior credit judgments is especially important for supervisors. For example, do supervisors need to
revise  what  they  expect  banks  to  know  about  their  customers,  their  business  strategies  and  the
business purpose of their transactions? In the run-up to the recent market problems, we have seen
customers  make  use  of  innovations  in  financial  products  and  strategies  developed  since  the  mid-
1980s to a much greater extent than before. For example, banks, corporations and governments in
the emerging markets world are far more involved in foreign currency funding, derivatives markets
and use of the international capital markets for debt issuance than before. New groups of institutional
customers,  such  as  hedge  funds,  are  devoted  almost  exclusively  to  developing  and  executing
strategies based on innovative financial instruments and techniques.
BIS Review   86/1998
- 3 -
The  basic  financial  analysis  that  is  the  foundation  of  the  credit  process  may  be
affected  by  changes  in  both  customer  and  counterparty  behavior.  For  example,  a  lesson  we  have
learned  from  the  current  turmoil  is  how  complex  the  concept  of  leverage  is  in  today’s  markets,
where leverage roughly describes the ratio of risk to capital. Where leverage once could be measured
directly from the balance sheet, we’ve become aware that leverage can be achieved in a number of
ways. These include holding a high-risk portfolio of assets, engaging in extensive derivatives trading,
especially if it involves options, funding domestic currency assets with foreign currency liabilities,
investing in long-term assets with short-dated funding and pursuing a high-risk business strategy. All
of these effectively can create leverage.
A  related  lesson  learned  is  that  collateral  can  mitigate  credit  risk,  but  it  cannot
eliminate  it.  One  reason  is  that  posted  collateral  inevitably  lags  movements  in  market  prices  and
recognition of credit issues. In trading agreements, for example, gaps between the amount owed by
the customer and the amount of collateral pledged develop surprisingly quickly. One costly solution
is to hold large amounts of excess collateral, but that is most often unacceptable to the counterparty.
Similarly,  when  the  collateral  is  real  estate,  equities  or  high-yield  securities,  a  gap  can  open  up
between  the  amount  owed  and  the  value  of  the  collateral  whenever  the  price  of  the  collateral
declines. We have seen both problems in the current turmoil.
These questions of credit analysis and risk control are an integral part of the current
work of the Basle Committee on credit risk management. The starting point for that work is a paper
describing the framework for traditional credit risk management by banks. That framework can then
be used to consider how changes in the financial markets affect the credit process. In addition to the
issues  I’ve  described,  this  work  will  look  at  the  impact  of  other  developments  such  as  credit  risk
models,  credit  derivatives  and  securitization.  One  goal  of  this  work  is  to  identify  areas  of  risk
management  which  are  improving,  and  those  which  may  need  strengthening,  especially  potential
problems in the internal controls that prevent and detect breakdowns in risk control.
The  second  question,  how  the  larger  role  of  capital  markets  activities  is  affecting
liquidity  risk,  also  involves  a  reconsideration  of  the  guidance  the  Basle  Committee  developed  a
decade ago. The recent market turmoil has been especially hard on emerging market banks  which
funded  domestic  currency  assets  with  unhedged  foreign  currency  liabilities.  The  liquidity  risk  of
concentrations on the asset side of the balance sheet has a different significance when assets are sold
not  only  to  raise  cash  but  also  to  conduct  portfolio  management,  which  assumes  generally  liquid
markets. Moreover, we are seeing new liquidity needs arising from the changed funding practices of
customers. For example, we are seeing instances of customers who had funded themselves largely in
the capital markets in recent years turning to the banking system for funding in the current, stressful
environment. These observations and issues, which also have been made by others, most recently the
Willard  Group,  have  led  us  to  add  liquidity  management  to  the  near-term  agenda  of  the  Basle
Committee.
The third question involved the role that uncertainty as a result of structural change in
the financial system may be playing in recent market developments. One lesson from this turmoil is
how difficult it is to understand the linkages between markets and economies in light of the changing
patterns of financial and economic flows.
In the near term, this points to the need to incorporate more guidance on meaningful
stress testing into our supervisory policies and devote more attention to it in our supervisory practice.
For meaningful stress testing, a bank must have strong information systems that can both aggregate
BIS Review   86/1998
- 4 -
information  about  the  bank’s  positions  and  facilitate  analysis  of  the  positions  under  different
scenarios. Better management information systems is one of the primary benefits of the move toward
greater  modeling  of  market  and  credit  risk  management.  Management  information  systems,
however,  are  not  enough.  It  also  is  necessary  for  management  to  assess  the  internal  and  external
factors that create risk in relation to the bank’s positions in order to come up with revealing stress
scenarios.  And  finally,  a  bank  needs  a  process  to  ensure  that  the  results  of  stress  tests  receive  the
high-level attention necessary for the bank to respond effectively to the results.
In  the  near  term,  supervisors  also  must  re-examine  how  they  think  about
concentrations. One lesson from the recent turmoil is how correlations in market prices arise from
previously  unsuspected  linkages:  countries  with  similar  government  debt  structures  or  similar
exchange  rate  regimes,  institutional  investors  with  similar  risk  strategies,  and  instruments  traded
with  widely  different  customers,  but  with  a  common  element  of  market  risk,  such  as  a  country-
related  risk.  Stress  testing  also  can  be  useful  in  identifying  such  concentrations,  particularly  when
accompanied by thoughtful analysis from bank management.
These issues will be addressed in the ongoing work of the Committee on credit and
liquidity risk management. In two other areas, we have begun work, but the magnitude of the efforts
will involve more time.
The  first  area  is  capital.  The  added  focus  on  stress  testing  by  banks  and  by
supervisors should also influence how supervisors evaluate capital adequacy at banks. As banks are
developing risk management and stress testing approaches, some are beginning to look at how they
determine whether their capital is adequate to absorb losses, including losses under reasonable stress
scenarios. One lesson from the current environment is the enormous size of market movements that
are possible in such a stress scenario—whether in currency or equity markets or in credit spreads,
and  how  quickly  losses  from  even  small  positions  can  mount.  As  banks  develop  new  methods  of
evaluating  capital  adequacy,  we  can  consider  whether  these  approaches  provide  new  tools  for
assessing capital adequacy from a supervisory perspective.
The  second  area  is  transparency.  The  challenge  of  understanding  the  impact  of
changes in the financial system on banks and financial markets should add impetus to our efforts to
increase transparency in the financial markets. As understanding the nature of the borrower and its
risks  becomes  more  complex,  the  demand  for  better  and  more  timely  information  is  increasing.
Moreover,  we  supervisors  have  a  special  interest  in  putting  good  information  in  the  hands  of
investors, lenders and counterparties, and that is the powerful assistance that market discipline can
provide supervisors. We have seen how a bank’s equity price, its funding spreads and its access to
markets  can  provide  feedback  on  the  bank’s  prospects,  and  how  these  market  signals  can  be  a
decisive factor in motivating management to address problems. We also have seen through current
events  how  the  absence  of  sufficient  information  can  mask  critical  weakness  in  the  corporate  and
banking sectors, leading initially to an over-optimism that is followed by excessive risk aversion.
The Basle Committee has created two working groups, the Transparency Subgroup,
led  by  Susan  Krause  of  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and  the  Accounting  Task
Force, led by Nick LePan, of the Office of Supervision of Financial Institutions in Canada, to suggest
ways  in  which  banks,  bank  supervisors,  the  accounting  community  and  others  can  further
transparency.
I  have  described  several  issues  and  spoken  mainly  about  areas  for  additional
supervisory guidance. But as we consider the issues of credit, liquidity and capital raised by recent
BIS Review   86/1998
- 5 -
market developments, we should look at the full range of tools that supervisors have at their disposal
to help prevent financial problems. They include:
licensing, which ensures that banks are owned and managed by people with integrity
and  appropriate  expertise  and  that  activities  they  engage  in  are  limited  to  those
deemed appropriate for banks;
prudential regulation, which sets standards to ensure the prudent operation of banks;
best-practice  guidance,  which  allows  banks  to  benefit  from  the  supervisor’s
knowledge of superior industry practices;
on  and  off-site  supervision,  which  allows  supervisors  to  review  banks’  operations,
procedures  and  records  for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  compliance  with  laws,
prudential standards and other safe and sound banking practices, as well as to gauge
the risk inherent in banks’ entire operations;
accounting  and  disclosure  standards,  which  ensure  that  investors  have  an  accurate
picture of banks’ financial condition; and
enforcement  powers,  which  allow  supervisors  to  take  action  to  correct  violations,
address overly risky practices and resolve problem situations.
III. Resolving Financial Problems
The immediate problem for many banking supervisors is to address the problems of
credit, liquidity and capital adequacy in their national banking systems. Banking supervisors have an
important role to play in encouraging a rapid but deliberate recovery of asset quality at banks. While
it  is  still  too  early  to  look  at  lessons  learned  about  resolving  such  problems  from  this  round  of
banking difficulties, we can draw on the lessons of the past.
The 1980s and early 1990s offer examples of what can be done to  resolve  banking
problems. For example, the United States suffered oil and agriculture-related regional recessions in
the 1980s and a real-estate and leveraged buyout-led recession in the early 1990s. Severe real-estate-
related  problems  developed  around  the  same  time  in  many  European  countries,  with  serious
repercussions for some banking systems. Today, banks in most of these countries are much stronger,
and until recently, highly profitable. What happened?
I would like to suggest five steps that form a common theme in the more successful
recoveries.  First,  banks,  often  with  the  assistance  of  their  supervisors,  ascertained  the  true
dimensions of their credit problems. The result of the process was realistic assessments of:
a total of actual losses in the portfolio that needed to be charged off;
the potential additional losses, both in a “most likely” and “worst case” scenario; and
the exposures that needed to be considered in “workout” mode. The  workout  loans
were those which had sufficiently severe problems that it was time to stop viewing
them as “business as usual”, but to see them as requiring special attention.
BIS Review   86/1998
- 6 -
Second,  the  workout  loans  or  exposures  were  assigned  to  the  special  expertise  of
workout  specialists.  Banks  built  their  own  staffs  or  outsourced  the  activity  to  another  financial
institution, a consulting firm or a boutique. In the early 1990s, some banks took an even more drastic
step and sold the loans to firms that specialized in managing distressed debt. The key, however, was
to  get  these  exposures  in  the  hands  of  those  who  could  work  with  borrowers  or  the  markets  to
maximize the value from problem portfolios.
The workout process must not be allowed to interfere with the continued provision of
credit  to  the  economy,  however.  The  key  policy  concern  in  the  early  1990s  in  the  United  States
shifted quickly from worries about bad banks to a credit crunch as banks aggressively tackled their
loan  problems.  And  that  is  why  it  is  so  important  to  segregate  the  “workout”  portfolio  from  the
remaining loan portfolio. When a dedicated staff is working out bad loans, the bank’s officers can
devote their attention to the continued sound operation of the bank—the current agenda of serving
the  bank’s  customers  well  and  the  forward  agenda  of  developing  and  executing  a  sound  business
strategy.
This  is  a  key  reason  every  country  needs  a  strong  legal  framework  for  credit
relationships  and  a  robust  bankruptcy  process.  Successful  workouts  cannot  occur  if  the  roles  and
responsibilities  of  creditor  and  debtor  are  not  clear,  and  especially  if  there  are  no  established
processes that can be used as a fallback and discipline on debtors if all other means of recovery are
exhausted.
Third, the banks assessed the consequence of identified and potential losses on their
loan loss reserves. The Basle Committee has just this month published guidance on the valuation of
loans and loan loss provisioning. It urges that loan impairment be recognized promptly, that loan loss
reserves reflect the potential for loss in the credit portfolio, and that adequate disclosure about credit
quality, loan loss provisioning and loans losses be made.
Fourth,  banks,  often  with  the  help  of  supervisors,  assessed  the  adequacy  of  their
current and prospective capital levels in light of the loan losses identified and the loan loss potential
estimates reflected in the reserves. In most cases, this meant a need for additional capital, whether by
raising  capital  funds  directly  from  the  market  or  from  existing  shareholders,  or  by  considering  a
merger or sale of all or some of the bank.
This issue of raising capital when the bank is under stress is one of the most difficult
questions  for  bank  management  and  for  supervisors,  but  our  collective  experience  suggests  that
solutions  can  be  found  even  in  very  difficult  markets.  The  key  to  success  appears  to  be  a  clear
disclosure  of  the  existing  problems,  an  action  plan  to  address  the  problem,  and  a  viable  business
strategy going forward. We know from experience that when a bank takes these steps, current and
potential  investors  are  far  more  likely  to  react  positively.  Indeed,  there  is  a  well-developed
community  of  investors  seeking  bargains  among  distressed  institutions  with  decent  prospects  for
recovery.
When banks turned to shareholders or the marketplace to raise new capital, they often
were confronted with concerns about market perception, dilution of existing shareholders, potential
loss of control by the current owners, and reduction of prices of existing equity and debt. These were
and are valid issues, but again, judging from experience, they proved to be secondary to the central
issue of ultimate recovery or resolution of the bank.
BIS Review   86/1998
- 7 -
The enlightened self-interest of the management of a troubled bank usually allows it
to see what needs to be done and to take appropriate action. If not, supervisors must have the means
to  step  up  the  pressure  through  statutory  enforcement  powers.  While  the  pressure  initially  can  be
informal and private, in the form of supervisory letters or similar instruments, it must be possible to
move  to  more  formal  types  of  agreements  with  the  board  of  directors  of  a  troubled  banking
institution.
Fifth,  bank  management  and  supervisors  resolved  troubled  banking  institutions.  In
the first instance, this meant understanding and helping bank boards of directors to understand what
the options were for realizing value from the institution. Even for a bank losing substantial amounts
of  money,  there  may  be  aspects  that  represent  valuable  customer  franchises  or  the  opportunity  to
enter a new market or the ability to consolidate operations and increase operating leverage. These
are  assets  for  which  there  is  a  market—and  a  market  price.  Realizing  the  value  from  these  assets
while winding down the less viable aspects of the  business  may  be  one  way  for  the  bank  itself  to
manage its own market exit.
As a second line of approach, banking supervisors had resolution procedures and the
necessary statutory powers to take over failing banks and resolve them. This almost always involved
the  need  for  additional  capital  and  funding.  In  many  cases,  the  banking  agency  or  deposit  insurer
could  sell  off  deposits  and  other  elements  of  the  franchise  in  such  a  way  that  continuous  service
could be offered to customers. Since the banking agency or insurer often was left with the bad assets,
workout expertise was required to realize value from them.
Throughout  these  steps,  supervisors  need  to  work  with  troubled  banks  in  a
constructive manner, just as banks should deal with troubled customers. If the supervisory process is
too harsh, the supervisor will exacerbate the stresses on credit and liquidity in the financial system.
Bank  supervisors  must  have  the  tools  and  the  determination  to  make  steady  progress  in  terms  of
recovery  or  to  seek  resolution  through  merger,  sale  or  the  winddown  of  the  bank.  The  process  of
workout may be deliberate and patient, but it must move forward as quickly as practicable and not be
permitted to stall. Only then can the normal flow of credit and liquidity in the financial system be
maintained.
Finally, it is important throughout the process of restructuring a banking system that
the general public does not have to fear for the loss of their life savings. A reliably funded deposit
insurance mechanism, a central bank that can provide liquidity to solvent, viable banks and a well-
functioning payments system are essential elements of the public sector safety net. The safety net’s
true beneficiaries are not financial institutions, but the general public.
IV. The Role of the Basle Committee
What  do  I  see  as  the  near  and  medium-term  role  of  the  Basle  Committee  and  this
organization  of  banking  supervisors?  What  should  be  our  goals  to  meet  before  the  next  such
conference, to take place in New York in the Year 2000?
Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  the  Core  Principles  lay  out  the  major  highway  to
effective banking supervision, but do not provide a detailed  street  plan.  One  important  element  of
feedback  we  are  receiving  from  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group,  consisting  of  members  of  the
Basle Committee and members of the emerging markets, along with more informal feedback, is the
need to provide more detailed street plans. There are several ways to achieve that.
BIS Review   86/1998
- 8 -
The first is to continue to elaborate  on  the  Core  Principles  by  producing  papers  on
key topics to augment and update the Compendium. The Compendium is the set of relevant papers
issued  over  the  years  by  the  Basle  Committee  which  elaborate  further  on  the  Core  Principles  and
provide the next level of detail. In the past year, for example, we have published papers on internal
control systems for banks, interest rate risk management and operational risk that fill in some of the
gaps in the Compendium related to risk management and internal controls. These were prepared by
the Risk Management Subgroup, chaired by Roger Cole of the Federal Reserve Board and Christine
Cumming of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We have work underway now in that Subgroup
for future papers on supervisory issues in credit risk management, corporate governance and internal
audit.
As another example, we issued a paper on the framework for enhancing transparency
last month. The Transparency Subgroup intends to build upon that framework, with special emphasis
on  trading,  derivatives  and  credit  risk  disclosure.  In  addition,  as  noted,  we  published  last  week  a
paper on loan valuation and loss reserves.
This  probably  is  still  not  enough  detail  for  many  supervisors.  The  need  for  more
detail may be better met through increased technical assistance provided by the Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision, along with similar assistance programs of its individual members. Moreover,
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and regional development banks have stepped up
their  efforts  to  provide  technical  support  as  well.  Often,  the  detailed  street  plan  can  be  developed
only  with  very  specific  knowledge  of  the  marketplaces,  banks’  powers  and  roles  in  the  financial
system,  and  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the  country  in  question.  Local  supervisors  and  outside
technical experts can work together to fashion specific supervisory guidance and regulation that are
appropriate in the local marketplace.
Additional  resources  are  available  from  the  Institute  on  Financial  Stability,  a  joint
effort  of  the  G-10  central  bank  governors,  the  Basle  Committee,  the  International  Organization  of
Securities  Commissions  (known  as  IOSCO)  and  the  International  Association  of  Insurance
Supervisors (known as IAIS). The purpose of the Institute is to provide training to senior supervisors
and  other  supervisory  staff  in  the  application  of  basic  supervisory  principles  to  their  national
supervisory  systems.  The  job  of  senior  supervisors  in  the  emerging  markets  is  an  immensely
challenging  one,  requiring  negotiation,  management  and  leadership  skills,  in  addition  to  technical
supervisory  skills.  The  Institute,  by  bringing  together  key  policy-making  officials  in  central  banks
and supervisory agencies through high-level seminars, serves the dual purpose of sharing expertise
and developing and deepening the relationships among supervisors globally. The Institute will hold
courses not only in Basle, but on a regional basis as well. The Institute will act as a clearing house
for the coordination and provision of technical assistance by central banks and supervisory bodies.
We also must work closely with the IMF and the World Bank. These institutions put
people in virtually all of the world’s countries to evaluate candidly the macroeconomic and financial
climate and supervisory policies and practices. In an important development for the furtherance of
the Core Principles, the  IMF  and  World  Bank  are  using  the  Core  Principles  as  the  benchmark  for
evaluating supervisory regimes around the world.
This  is  an  effort  that  the  Basle  Committee  plans  to  support  not  only  through
continued  work  on  the  Core  Principles  and  the  Compendium,  but  by  providing  expertise  and
supervisory  resources  to  supplement  and  advise  IMF  and  World  Bank  staff.  The  members  of  the
Basle  Committee  in  many  cases  have  the  staff  with  the  deep  expertise  to  help  emerging  markets
supervisors  with  the  application  of  the  Principles  in  their  national  context  and  in  light  of  various
BIS Review   86/1998
- 9 -
obstacles. The IMF and World Bank have expressed their desire to bring more of that expertise to
bear in their efforts, and we have begun discussions on how to accomplish that most effectively. In
addition, we believe that first-hand observation of the practical issues in implementation will suggest
what  further  elaboration  and  precision  would  be  most  useful  to  the  Core  Principles,  and  what
additional research and papers, programs by the Institute for Financial Stability or specific technical
assistance  could  supplement  them.  Our  goal  is  to  keep  the  Core  Principles  relevant,  incisive  and
implemented by supervisors globally.
In addition, we in the broader financial supervisory community must set thoughtful
goals  for  ourselves  as  we  manage  our  individual  agendas.  The  problems  that  have  beset  many
countries  in  Asia,  Russia  and  other  regions  and  countries  are  not  confined  to  the  banking  sector,
although that may be the largest part of the financial sector. Together with IOSCO and the IAIS, we
should work to strengthen internal financial firm management, supervision and market discipline, no
matter what the nature of the financial firm or market.
As a final point, let me stress that while we continue to elaborate the roadmap of the
Core Principles, we must also press on in understanding the frontiers of financial developments. This
makes for a difficult and ambitious agenda, but we must be and we are up to the challenge.
The  most  important  example  of  this  broad  effort  is  the  work  the  Committee  has
begun on the future of capital. We know the value the Basle Accord has had in strengthening capital
standards around the world. At the same time, we have recognized that advances in risk management
and financial practices are beginning to erode the relevance of the Accord for the most technically
sophisticated banks. That means that we must identify ways to ensure that the Accord will provide
meaningful guidance for the maintenance of strong capital levels at those banks, while still providing
the fundamental protection to the financial system that is needed in all countries.
To that end, the Committee has formed a  Steering  Group  on  the  Future  of  Capital,
chaired  by  Claes  Norgren  of  the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority.  It  is  my  hope  that  the
review conducted by the Steering Group will bring together new thinking on a minimum capital rule,
a comprehensive look at the supervisory evaluation of capital adequacy, which I described earlier,
and enhancements to market discipline.
On this issue, as on all the others we have discussed this morning, we in the Basle
Committee must work and will be working closely with supervisors around the world. To that end,
we  hope  to  work  with  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group,  and  the  much  broader  Core  Principles
Consultation Group, which met earlier this week. One of our goals in 1999 is to enhance further the
utility  and  the  dialogue  in  those  Groups,  to  ensure  that  we  are  jointly  building  the  supervisory
framework for the 21st century.
BIS Review   86/1998
