Mr King explores lessons from the UK labour market
Text  of  the  Employment  Policy  Institute’s  Fourth  Annual  Lecture  delivered  by  the  Deputy
Governor of the Bank of England, Mr Mervyn King, held in London on 1/12/98.
It is both an honour and a challenge to deliver the fourth EPI lecture. It is an honour to follow in
such  distinguished  footsteps,  and  it  is  a  challenge  to  tackle  the  subject  of  the  link  between
monetary  policy  and  the  labour  market.  Few  subjects  are  as  emotive.  Wages,  jobs  and
unemployment  feature  as  frequently  in  the  popular  press  as  they  do  in  academic  articles.  The
Bank of England must learn from one in order to convey our message in the other. And we are
fortunate  in  that  labour  economics  is  a  field  in  which  British  economists  have  been  –  and
continue to be – at the forefront of research. That I can say objectively because I am not myself a
labour  economist.  So  tonight  I  shall  be  exploring  lessons  from  the  labour  market  for  the
Monetary Policy Committee. The Employment Policy Institute has played an important role in
bringing together those undertaking research on labour markets and those involved with policy
decisions.  In  particular,  its  Employment  Audit  provides  a  valuable  commentary  on  current
developments.
The  labour  market  is  unlike  any  other  market.  Indeed,  for  many  people  the  very  language  of
economists – equilibrium unemployment, market-clearing wages – seems incompatible with the
human dimension of unemployment and deprivation. Are the 16 million unemployed people in
the European Union merely an equilibrium, on the one hand, and a statistic, on the other? But for
most people the labour market is the market where – for better or worse, in sickness or in health
– they sell their time and their skills at a market price. That price determines, in large part, their
opportunities and economic welfare. Wage rates have a much greater significance in influencing
the distribution of real incomes than do the prices of almost anything else. As a result, the labour
market cannot be divorced from broader social and political considerations.
If their terminology and language are sometimes insensitive, what do economists have to offer by
way of ideas about unemployment? The prize for the most important idea and most insensitive
terminology surely goes to Milton Friedman for the concept of the natural rate of unemployment.
I shall discuss shortly the significance of this idea for monetary policy. But for a more elegant
advocacy of a similar position it is necessary to delve further back in history.
individuals  out  of  proportion 
This month sees the 75th anniversary of the publication of what Milton Friedman described as
John  Maynard  Keynes’  best  book:  A  Tract  on  Monetary  Reform.  It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the
most  persuasive  polemics  ever  written  on  the  subject  of  monetary  policy.  To  coincide  with
publication in December 1923, Keynes gave a lecture to the National Liberal Club in which he
talked about “the triple evils of modern society”. From the notes he used for that lecture – printed
in  his  Collected  Writings  –  we  can  see  that  Keynes  regarded  the  evils  as,  first,  the  “vast
the
enrichment  of 
“disappointment  of  expectations  and  difficulty  of 
third,
“unemployment”. Fat cats, short-termism and the jobless society: Keynes was ahead of his time.
All these, Keynes argued, were “mainly due to instability of the standard of value”. Over the past
20  years,  Britain  faced  the  same  three  problems.  The  income  distribution  widened  and  the
rewards  for  those  with  special  talents,  and  even  for  some  with  no  apparent  talent,  increased
significantly  more  than  earnings  for  the  unskilled.  Both  inflation  and  expectations  of  inflation
were  high  and  unstable,  making  it  more  difficult  for  firms  to  plan  for  the  long  term.  And  the
unemployment rate rose to double-digit levels.
to  any  services  rendered”;  second, 
laying  plans  ahead”;  and, 
BIS Review   103/1998
– 2 –
Keynes  argued  that  the  way  to  prevent  those  triple  evils  from  undermining  society  was  price
stability. Central bankers should be as vigilant in countering deflation as in preventing inflation.
The link between unemployment and inflation has been a central theme in macroeconomics for
the remainder of the century.
Following the publication of A Tract on Monetary Reform, Keynes received a letter from none
other than the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England. “Dear Keynes,” he wrote, “I write to
you  in  this  familiar  fashion  because  we  are  both  old  Kings’  Scholars,  though  not  of  the  same
election.” So far, so good. Regrettably, however, the then Deputy Governor’s only comment on
the book appeared to be that he was grateful to Keynes for writing in a style which an educated
man could read with pleasure, and for having the book printed in a particularly attractive style.
This Deputy Governor has learned a great deal from Keynes’ book. I refer to it in almost every
lecture I give. In this lecture I shall discuss three aspects of the significance of the labour market
for monetary policy. The first of these concerns the link between unemployment and inflation in
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
The  second  issue  is  how  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  uses  the  available  empirical
information about the UK labour market when deciding on interest rates. How do unemployment
figures and earnings data enter the MPC’s decisions?
The third issue is the way in which unemployment enters the objectives of monetary policy. With
an explicit inflation target, is it true that the MPC neither cares about unemployment nor takes it
into consideration when setting interest rates?
The labour market and the monetary transmission mechanism
The theory of unemployment has spawned more concepts, and – without doubt – more acronyms,
than  almost  any  other  field  of  economics  (apart,  perhaps,  from  measures  of  price  inflation).  I
shall return to the language of unemployment later. But I want first to discuss the two concepts
which are at the heart of any discussion of monetary policy and the labour market. They are the
natural  rate  of  unemployment  and  the  rate  of  unemployment  consistent  with  stable  inflation,
usually known as the NAIRU.
The concept of the natural rate of unemployment introduced by Milton Friedman and Edmund
Phelps  30  years  ago  is  the  level  of  unemployment  that  –  as  Friedman  famously  described  –
would be “ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilibrium equations” reflecting the
structural characteristics of the labour and product markets. Friedman was the first to recognise
that  this  natural  rate  of  unemployment  was  neither  constant  over  time  nor  immune  to  policy
influences.
The  natural  rate  hypothesis  implies  a  vertical  long-run  Phillips  curve.  In  other  words,  if  the
monetary authorities attempted to “peg” the level of unemployment below the natural rate, then
this in time would cause the inflation rate to rise indefinitely. The work of Friedman and Phelps
soon proved highly relevant. The futility of using monetary policy to choose between different
combinations of unemployment and inflation became only too apparent in the 1970s. Monetary
shocks can – and in the early 1980s  and  1990s  did  –  cause  unemployment  to  deviate  from  its
natural rate, but only for a period. As inflation expectations catch up with the consequences of
the monetary shock, unemployment returns to the natural rate.
BIS Review   103/1998
– 3 –
But the responses of unemployment and inflation expectations to monetary shocks are far from
immediate.  Indeed,  Friedman  speculated  that  the  full  adjustment  to  an  unexpected  change  in
inflation might take up to “a couple of decades”. Such long lags in the dynamics of the labour
market  mean  that  there  is  unlikely  to  be  a  simple  relationship  between  deviations  of
unemployment from its natural rate and changes in the inflation rate. Chart 1 shows that it did
indeed  take  almost  20  years  to  bring  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  (implied  by  financial
market returns on indexed and conventional gilts) down from double-digit levels to the current
target of 22%, accompanied by a large rise and subsequent fall in unemployment.
The idea of the NAIRU can be thought of as a conceptual response to inertia in the system which
means that the response of the economy to shocks will be protracted. In 1975 Franco Modigliani
and Lucas Papademos introduced the concept of the non-inflation  rate  of  unemployment  –  the
NIRU  –  defined  as  “a  rate  such  that,  as  long  as  unemployment  is  above  it,  inflation  can  be
expected  to  decline”.  Note  in  passing  that  more  appropriate  terminology  would  be  the  non-
increasing inflation rate of unemployment (NIIRU). Modigliani and Papademos recognised that
the NIRU would be affected by macroeconomic shocks. They argued that there was evidence to
suggest that “over the last two  decades  the  NIRU  [in  the  US]  was  held  down  by  a  favourable
trend in the terms of trade between the private nonfarm sectors on the one hand and imported
goods and farm products on the other. A termination or reversal of this trend would tend to raise
the NIRU, at least temporarily.”
It  is  ironic  that  two  of  the  most  prominent  economists  of  countries  synonymous  with  art  and
beauty – Italy and Greece – (one a future Nobel prize winner and the other a future central bank
governor)  should  have  given  birth  to  an  unattractive  acronym  that  has  spawned  so  many  even
more unappealing cousins. The first, and most feted, offspring – the NAIRU – was introduced by
James Tobin five years later. NIRU, NIIRU, NAIRU – tongue twisters for the Financial Times
Christmas quiz, or measures of the Inflationary Trigger Point? Take your choice. For the sake of
simplicity I shall adopt the conventional term, NAIRU, to represent the entire family.
So  what  is  the  relationship  between  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  and  the  NAIRU?  The
natural rate of unemployment and the NAIRU are quite different concepts. The former describes
a real equilibrium determined by the structural characteristics of the labour and product markets
– the grinding out of Friedman’s Walrasian general equilibrium system (modified, if necessary,
by  non-Walrasian  features  of  labour  markets  such  as  imperfect  competition,  search  behaviour
and efficiency wages). It exists independently of the inflation rate. In contrast, the latter, as well
as being affected by these structural characteristics, is also affected by the gradual adjustment of
the economy to past economic shocks that determine the path of inflation. Because it is defined
as the unemployment rate at which there is no immediate pressure for a change in the inflation
rate, it is a reduced form – not a structural – variable.
This  difference  is  reflected  in  the  methods  used  to  generate  empirical  estimates  of  the  two
concepts. The natural rate of unemployment can be estimated only by reference to a  structural
model of the labour market which has explicit microeconomic underpinnings and which can be
used to identify the characteristics determining the natural rate. Empirical estimates of the natural
rate  would  typically  be  related  to  inflation  only  in  the  long  run  when  the  effects  of  shocks
average out. In contrast, the NAIRU is estimated using a system of time-series equations relating
inflation  to  past  and  present  economic  shocks.  The  sole  criterion  for  judging  the  success  of
estimates  of  the  NAIRU  is  their  short-term  correlation  with  inflation.  Indeed,  the  NAIRU  as
defined here – and in recent work by Estrella and Mishkin (1998) – is the level of unemployment
such that the difference between it and the current rate of unemployment is all that is necessary to
describe short-run inflationary pressure.
BIS Review   103/1998
– 4 –
Although the NAIRU will tend towards the natural rate of unemployment in the long run, there is
no reason to expect there to be a close relationship between the two measures in the short run.
The natural rate is likely to move only relatively slowly over time in response to changes in its
structural determinants. In contrast, the NAIRU will vary both with changes in the natural rate
and in response to macroeconomic shocks. So those who argue that estimates of the NAIRU are
too time-varying to be plausible are, I think, in danger of missing the point.
The NAIRU can be used as an ex-post device to describe the level of unemployment at which
inflation started (or would have started) to increase. But the usefulness of these estimates as an
ex-ante  predictor  of  future  inflationary  pressure  depends  critically  upon  the  economic
environment. In particular, for estimates of the NAIRU to be a good predictor of future inflation,
the natural rate would need to be relatively stable, and the magnitude of likely shocks would need
to be small. This perhaps goes some way to explaining why estimates of the NAIRU in the recent
past have appeared to contain more ex-ante information about future inflation in the US than they
have in Europe.
More  fundamentally,  the  distinction  between  the  natural  rate  and  the  NAIRU  illustrates  the
difficulty  of  using  those  concepts  for  the  month-to-month  implementation  of  monetary  policy.
The natural rate, although clearly relevant to the dynamics of inflation, is not sufficient to explain
changes in the inflation rate. The NAIRU, which is defined to be a measure related to short-run
inflationary pressures, requires knowledge of the reduced form of the  transmission  mechanism
and the history of shocks to the economy. But that knowledge is required also for a forecast for
inflation, and so the NAIRU itself provides no additional information over that contained in the
forecast. Indeed, estimates of the NAIRU could be described as a by-product of the process of
forecasting inflation.
As an example, consider the impact of the appreciation of sterling from mid-1996 until late 1997.
Retail price inflation can be thought of as a weighted average of domestic and imported inflation.
The substantial real appreciation of sterling since mid-1996 has for a while reduced the imported
component of UK inflation and so, in turn, retail price inflation, below the level  that  it  would
otherwise have reached. In essence the NAIRU fell relative to the natural rate. That restraining
effect on inflation will gradually wear off and begin to be reversed if sterling continues to fall.
The issue of whether the domestic inflation component would fall to a level consistent with the
inflation  target  by  the  time  this  temporarily  depressing  effect  wore  off  was  central  to  the
monetary policy debate during the summer.
The example of sterling’s appreciation shows how a macroeconomic shock, entirely independent
of the labour market, can affect the relationship between the rate of unemployment and the rate
of inflation. The rise in sterling is likely to have reduced the NAIRU via two separate channels.
First, in the short run, the relationship between domestically generated inflation – of which wage
inflation  is  a  substantial  element  –  and  retail  price  inflation  shifts  because  of  lower  imported
inflation.  Second,  the  temporary  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  that  followed  the  rise  in
sterling in 1996 reduced the wedge between the real consumption wage – which is of relevance
to employees and which reflects a mix  of  both  domestic  and  imported  inflation  components  –
and the real product wage – which is of relevance to employers and which reflects the prices only
of  domestically  produced  goods.  That  reduction  in  the  wedge  is  likely  to  have  reduced  the
pressure on nominal wage growth for any given level of unemployment.
So it is quite possible to believe that the NAIRU has fallen even if the natural rate has not. But
this is likely to be temporary. As the impact of sterling’s appreciation on wages and prices wears
off,  the  NAIRU  will,  other  things  being  equal,  rise  towards  the  natural  rate.  But  other  more
BIS Review   103/1998
– 5 –
lasting  changes  may  reduce  the  natural  rate  (and  hence  the  NAIRU).  For  example,  a  range  of
government policies, including changes to the Jobseekers Allowance, the New Deal and the new
Working Families Tax Credit, have increased incentives to work. The National Minimum Wage
works in the opposite direction. Assessing the impact of these structural factors on the natural
rate is no easier than calculating the effect of macroeconomic shocks on the NAIRU. But it is
useful to distinguish the two concepts, not least because they can move quite differently in the
short run.
Enough  of  this  theory,  some  of  which  may  appear  largely  semantic.  None  of  it  is,  of  course,
either  new  or  original.  But  understanding  the  language  of  unemployment  matters.  Richard
Rogerson,  in  the  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  last  year,  posed  the  question:  “Have  the
language and concepts developed by economists in their study of unemployment served their role
of  fostering  clear  communication  of  findings  and  allowing  issues  to  be  sharply  defined?”
Professor Rogerson’s conclusion, you will perhaps not be surprised to hear, was a resounding no.
Neither  the  natural  rate  nor  the  NAIRU  are  terms  well  chosen  to  win  friends  and  influence
people. After all, there is nothing natural about the natural rate.
Whatever we call them, it is crucial to recognise that there is considerable uncertainty about the
location of both the natural rate of unemployment and the NAIRU. Even in the United States,
where there appears to be no obvious trend in the natural rate, estimates of the 95% confidence
interval for the NAIRU are typically from 5% to 7.5%. In the UK where both structural reforms
and macroeconomic shocks have had a larger impact than in the US, the range of uncertainty is
even greater. Perhaps the most honest answer to the question of what is the natural rate was that
given by Milton Friedman to the Wall Street Journal in January 1995: “I don’t know what the
natural rate is, neither do you, and neither does anyone else.”
The labour market and monetary policy in practice?
How do these concepts affect monetary policy in practice? And what role does analysis of the
labour market play in the Monetary Policy Committee’s decisions on interest rates?
Using  the  language  of  unemployment  developed  earlier,  the  MPC  has  to  assess  whether  the
current  level  of  unemployment  differs  significantly  from  the  NAIRU  and,  as  importantly,
whether it is likely to remain so in the future. It may do that explicitly by taking a view on the
level of the NAIRU, or it may do it implicitly by producing a forecast for inflation. In practice,
we focus directly on an inflation forecast.
But  the  need  for  policymakers  to  focus  on  the  level  of  unemployment  and  the  level  of  output
each time they assess the stance of monetary policy is unavoidable. Alan Greenspan has to do it.
MPC members have to do it. Knowing that the growth rate of GDP is (or is likely to be) above or
below its trend rate of increase is of little value unless one also knows where the level of output
is relative to potential. This is a basic, but fundamental, point. If, for whatever reason, the level
of unemployment is below the natural rate, a rise in unemployment is unavoidable. That may be
undesirable.  But  any  attempt  to  avoid  it  will  simply  result  in  a  longer,  or  more  pronounced,
correction  at  a  future  date.  In  order  to  hit  the  inflation  target  the  MPC  needs  to  minimise
deviations in the level of output from potential, not in the growth rate of output from its trend.
The need to focus attention on the level of economic activity is of course well understood by the
academic community. It is now standard practice in the literature on monetary policy to assume
that the authorities seek to minimise a social loss function, defined in terms of the deviation of
the level of output or unemployment from their equilibrium values, and in terms of the deviation
BIS Review   103/1998
– 6 –
of inflation from its desired value. But if this is so obvious, why, in discussions of the economic
conjuncture  and  economic  policy,  is  so  much  attention  placed  on  growth  rates  rather  than  on
levels? Why are commentators and pundits so concerned with whether economic growth is going
to be above or below its trend rate, or even whether it is likely to be above or below zero? That is
not what matters for economic policy nor, more importantly, for social welfare.
An excessive focus on growth rates of output and employment, rather than on their levels, may
reflect  a  rather  natural,  but  dangerous,  optimism  about  the  degree  of  spare  capacity  in  the
economy. After all, is not the belief that we could always achieve lower unemployment without
an  increase  in  inflation  the  mark  of  a  kinder,  gentler,  altogether  more  civilised  approach  to
economic policy? Or is it simply wishful thinking? As Greg Mankiw put it:
“Wishful  thinking  is  one  reason  that  monetary  policy  has  historically  been  excessively
inflationary… To my mind, wishful thinking is as worrisome a problem for monetary policy as
time inconsistency.”
Genuine  concern  for  the  unemployed  means  a  recognition  that  sustainable  reductions  in
unemployment  require  a  combination  of  monetary  stability  on  the  demand  side  and
microeconomic reforms such as the New Deal on the supply side. As Alan Blinder has reminded
us, we need soft hearts and hard heads, not the other way round.
Despite suggestions to the contrary, the MPC does have soft hearts and hard heads, and does not
base its assessment of the labour market – never mind its decisions on interest rates – solely on
estimates of the growth of average earnings. An assessment of the overall tightness of the labour
market requires all the available data – both quantity and prices – to be analysed. The wealth and
diversity of published labour statistics means it is rare for them all to point in the same direction.
The MPC’s analysis of the labour market is like the construction of a jigsaw puzzle. The pieces
of data are assessed alongside each other in order to build up as clear a picture as possible. No
single piece of data is interpreted in isolation. And no single piece of data is, in itself, decisive.
The growth of wages and salaries is an important indicator of domestically generated inflation.
But  this  does  not  imply  that  there  is  some  magical  threshold  defining  “acceptable”  and
“unacceptable” rates of earnings growth. In the short run, the link between earnings growth and
inflation is complicated by a whole host of factors, including exchange rate movements, cyclical
variations in productivity and profit margins, irregular bonus payments, and one-off adjustments
to tax rates and other “wedge” effects. It is true that given the UK’s historical levels of annual
productivity  growth  of  around  2%  and  the  inflation  target  of  22%,  it  would  be  a  cause  for
concern to the MPC if average earnings increased by much more – or much less – than 4.5% a
year over a prolonged period without there being a corresponding change in trend productivity
growth. That is not because the Committee has a view about the appropriate level of pay awards.
It is not our job to second-guess what businesses should or should not pay their employees. Nor
is it because we think earnings growth causes inflation – inflation is a monetary phenomenon.
Rather it is because sustained earnings growth much above or below these rates may indicate that
the  level  of  utilisation  in  the  labour  market  has  reached  a  level  inconsistent  with  the  inflation
target.
The June meeting of the MPC drew particular attention to the rise in headline earnings growth as
measured  by  the  Average  Earnings  Index.  But  that  should  be  viewed  against  a  background  of
increasing concern about the tightness of the labour market. In its meeting in April, the Monetary
Policy Committee noted that “labour market data on quantities were signalling a tighter position
than  the  price  [earnings]  data”.  At  that  time,  the  Labour  Force  Survey  and  claimant  count
BIS Review   103/1998
– 7 –
measures of unemployment had both fallen below their previous troughs recorded in the spring
of  1990,  and  were  still  declining.  This  position  was  evident  across  all  categories  of
unemployment,  as  can  be  seen  from  chart  2  which  shows  the  various  measures  of  joblessness
reported in the EPI’s Employment Audit. In addition, employment and total hours worked were
rising quite strongly; recruitment intentions were at their  highest  level  for  nine  years,  with  the
level of  vacancies  at  Jobcentres,  and  the  average  duration  of  these  vacancies,  both  well  above
their 1988/89 peaks; and survey measures of recruitment difficulties were also at high levels.
The  underlying  rise  of  the  Average  Earnings  Index  had  increased  to  42%  by  the  beginning  of
1997,  but  was  little  changed  by  the  end  of  the  year.  If  I  had  been  asked  to  deliver  the  third
Annual  EPI  lecture,  rather  than  the  fourth,  the  main  question  you  might  have  expected  me  to
grapple with would have been why earnings growth had not at that point risen by more, given the
1.0 million fall in unemployment and the 1.4 million rise in LFS employment since the end of
1992.  As  a  Committee,  we  discussed  at  some  length  during  the  spring  of  this  year  why  the
changes in the quantity measures had not fed through to higher earnings growth. We discussed
whether  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  (and  the  NAIRU)  might  have  declined  due  to  an
increase in trend productivity or improvement in the functioning of the labour market. We also
considered whether there had been independent influences on the NAIRU stemming from falls in
inflation expectations or the effects of sterling’s appreciation.
It is against this background that the MPC’s decision to raise rates in June should be seen. The
increase in headline earnings growth to 4.9% in February, from  an  upwardly  revised  4.6%  the
previous  month,  appeared  consistent  with  other  labour  market  indicators.  But  we  were  fully
aware of the evidence suggesting that the rise in earnings growth had been, and for a couple of
months  would  continue  to  be,  affected  by  unusually  large  bonus  payments.  If  this  was  true,
earnings growth might well have fallen back once the bonus effect had dropped out. Given the
uncertainties in this area, the Committee concluded that it should not place too much weight on
the  latest  numbers.  Instead,  it  stepped  back  and  examined  the  underlying  trend  in  the  labour
market over the previous two years. We noted that private sector earnings growth had been rising
throughout this period and that reported wage settlements displayed a similar profile. Given this
longer-term perspective, the Monetary Policy Committee concluded that capacity constraints in
the labour market were threatening the attainment of the Government’s inflation target.
Of course, since then, the earnings data have been successively revised, rebased and suspended –
a piece of the jigsaw has temporarily gone missing. As you can see from chart 3, the profile of
the old series showed a steady rise in earnings growth from around 33% in mid-1995 to nearly
52% or so by the spring of this year. In sharp contrast, the revised and rebased data (before they
were suspended) followed roughly the shape of a slightly squashed capital N. From a trough of
3% at the end of 1995, earnings growth was estimated to have risen to a peak of over 53% in
February and March 1997 before falling back below 4% in early 1998 and then bouncing back
above 5% again by May.
How  would  the  MPC’s  analysis  of  the  labour  market  have  changed  if  the  revised  (but  now
suspended) data had been available six months earlier? That question is not easy to answer. The
quantity  data  would  still  have  suggested  that  the  labour  market  was  both  tightening  and,  by
historical standards, tight. The MPC would therefore have had the unenviable task of trying to
understand why the steady tightening in the quantity measures had produced a  zigzag  path  for
measured earnings growth. We would also have had to try to understand why the zigzag profile
of the new Average Earnings Index was not visible in other measures – shown in chart 4 – of
nominal  earnings  growth,  such  as  wage  settlements  and  private  surveys.  As  I  have  said
BIS Review   103/1998
– 8 –
elsewhere, trying to reconcile the new earnings series with other labour market data is far from
easy.
The Chancellor wrote to Giles Radice, the Chairman of the Treasury Select Committee, on 23
October announcing that he had asked Sir Andrew Turnbull and myself to conduct a review of
the  revisions  to  the  average  earnings  figures.  The  review,  which  is  considering  both
methodological  and  managerial  issues,  is  being  carried  out  by  Martin  Weale  of  the  National
Institute, supported by Peter Sedgwick of the Treasury. Martin and Peter have made an enormous
effort  over  the  last  month  or  so  to  finish  the  review  as  quickly  as  possible.  However,  exactly
when the Report will be finished and what it will conclude are, I am afraid, still not known. As a
result, the ONS has yet to decide when to resume publication of the average earnings series. All I
can say today is watch this space.
The labour market and the objectives of monetary policy
In  the  final  part  of  my  talk,  I  want  to  turn  to  the  question  of  what  this  analysis  of  the  labour
market implies for monetary policy. One of the – perhaps the – most important  economic  and
social problems facing Europe is the high level of unemployment: 16 million unemployed people
throughout the European Union, a rate of over 10%, with young people under 25 accounting for
almost  a  quarter  of  this  total.  That  represents  a  major  failure  of  economic  policy.  But  is  it  a
failure of monetary policy? To go one step further, should the objectives of monetary policy –
whether enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty or in the Chancellor’s remit for the Monetary Policy
Committee – be altered to include an explicit reference to unemployment? Many think so. For
example,  the  new  German  Finance  Minister,  Oskar  Lafontaine,  has  said  that  his  aim  was  a
“European  monetary  policy  that  supported  growth  and  employment  as  well  as  price  stability”.
Nearer  to  home,  the  TUC  has  called  for  the  MPC  to  be  given  a  wider  remit  to  include
employment  as  well  as  inflation.  And  several  newspaper  editorials  have  argued  for  a  broader
remit for the MPC.
The  fact  that  the  proposition  appeared  in  a  newspaper  does  not  of  course  mean  that  it  is
necessarily compelling. As my newsagent told me the other day: “Don’t believe everything you
read in the newspapers – they are all in the hands of the media.”
The argument for including  employment  explicitly  in  the  formal  remit  of  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee is often bolstered by reference to the objectives of the Federal Reserve in the United
States, which is charged by statute with promoting “the goals of maximum employment, stable
prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates”.  At  first  sight,  this  appears  to  contrast  with  the
remit of the MPC which is: “(a) to maintain price stability and (b) subject to that to support the
economic  policy  of  Her  Majesty’s  Government,  including  its  objectives  for  growth  and
employment”. But what matters most is the intellectual framework underlying the behaviour of
the central bank. The Federal Reserve’s remit does not make clear if the FOMC is supposed to
try  to  exploit  some  long-term  trade-off  between  employment  and  inflation.  But  the  practice  is
clear.  Under  Alan  Greenspan’s  leadership,  the  FOMC  has  firmly  rejected  the  notion  that  by
accepting a somewhat higher rate of inflation it is possible to achieve a permanently higher level
of employment.
It is conventional to express the implications of a vertical long-term Phillips curve in terms of the
statement that unemployment can be held below the natural rate only by accepting accelerating
inflation – or, to be more precise, an inflation rate higher than anticipated by wage bargainers.
Equally,  however,  the  statement  can  be  turned  the  other  way  round.  If  the  central  bank  is
successful in pursuing, over a number of years, a constant rate of inflation, then unemployment
BIS Review   103/1998
– 9 –
cannot  remain  above  the  natural  rate  indefinitely.  Not  only  can  central  banks  not  bring
unemployment  down  below  the  natural  rate  for  long,  neither  can  they  be  accused  of  keeping
unemployment  persistently  above  the  natural  rate.  Monetary  policy  cannot  influence  levels  of
employment in the long run. There should be no surprise about this. A central bank can use its
chosen  instrument  –  interest  rates  –  to  hit  a  nominal  target  –  such  as  an  inflation  target,  or  a
target for the exchange rate or even the growth of nominal GDP – but it cannot use a nominal
instrument to target some desired level of a real variable, such as the growth rate of output or the
level of unemployment.
None of the above means that monetary policy has no impact on unemployment. To the contrary,
monetary policy does affect the movements of employment and unemployment over the business
cycle. And the remit of the MPC makes clear how we should take this consideration into account
– as I explained a year ago in a lecture at the LSE. By aiming consistently and symmetrically to
hit  the  inflation  target,  the  MPC  should  ensure  that  inflation  is,  on  average  over  a  number  of
years,  close  to  the  target  of  22%.  Shocks  of  various  kinds  will  mean  that  inflation  will  often
deviate  from  the  target  and  the  MPC  is  required  to  take  action  to  bring  inflation  back  to  the
target.  But  it  will  do  so  gradually,  if  to  do  otherwise  would  have  damaging  consequences  for
employment  or  output.  By  looking  ahead  and  aiming  to  bring  inflation  back  on  track  over  a
horizon  of  two  years  or  so,  the  MPC  should  be  able  to  avoid  undesirable  volatility  of
employment and output. That is part of our remit.
Conclusions
Let me briefly draw two conclusions from my analysis tonight. First, the concept of a natural rate
of  unemployment,  and  the  existence  of  a  vertical  long-run  Phillips  curve,  are  crucial  to  the
framework of monetary policy. They help us focus on levels of output and employment  rather
than simply their growth rates. They also mean that there may be times when, although a rise in
unemployment  is  undesirable,  it  is  unavoidable.  But  the  natural  rate  is  of  much  less  help  in
operational decisions on interest rates made month by month. This is because the natural rate is
determined by microeconomic structural factors that are not easy to observe, and which are likely
to change over time, and may not bear any close relationship to inflationary pressures in the short
run.
More easily observable in terms of its relationship to inflation and unemployment is the concept
of the NAIRU. This differs from the natural rate when macroeconomic shocks affect the rate of
inflation corresponding to any degree of excess demand in the labour market. Since the NAIRU
represents  the  current  reduced-form  relationship  between  inflation  and  unemployment,  it  is
possible to calculate the prospects for inflation without any need to refer to such a variable as the
NAIRU. It is a convenient shorthand concept for purposes of exposition, but not a necessary tool
for operational decisions on interest rates.
Second, the contribution of monetary policy to employment objectives is to promote economic
stability in its broadest sense. I referred at the outset to Keynes’ view that the “triple evils” of an
unequal distribution of income, instability of expectations and unemployment were all related to
an  unstable  and  unpredictable  monetary  standard.  The  solution,  Keynes  suggested,  was  to  set
monetary policy to hit a target for prices, or a low and stable inflation rate. He argued 75 years
ago that monetary policy should be devoted to regulating the supply of money so that “the index
number of prices will never move far from a fixed point”. Keynes went on to say that:
“The  Bank  of  England  since  the  war  has  always  done  exactly  the  opposite  of  what  the  latest
science recommends. I conclude from this that their opposition comes, not from mere obstinacy
BIS Review   103/1998
– 10 –
or conservatism, but from their not yet understanding the point. I am, therefore, optimistic about
the future.”
It took the Bank of England almost 70 years to get to that point and introduce an inflation target.
The  objective  of  stability  is  best  achieved  by  an  inflation  target  because  it  stresses  both  what
monetary policy cannot do – reduce unemployment in the long run – and what it can do – react to
shocks in order to minimise undesirable  volatility  in  output  and  employment.  To  that  end,  the
pursuit of an explicit and symmetric inflation target is the relevant objective of monetary policy.
With  an  inflation  target  and,  more  recently,  the  new  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  both
unemployment  and  inflation  have  fallen  significantly.  I  hope  and  believe  that,  with  these  new
institutional arrangements, although we shall certainly make mistakes in the setting of monetary
policy, we should be able  to  avoid  the  instabilities  of  the  past  30  years  which  did  so  much  to
damage Britain’s economic standing.
We should never forget that – as Milton Friedman pointed out in his 1968 Presidential Address
(quoting in turn John Stuart Mill) – monetary policy becomes important for society only when it
goes badly wrong. That is the basis for my proposition that a successful monetary policy should
be boring, and that successful central bankers should be seen as neither heroes nor villains, but
simply as competent referees, allowing the game to flow and staying out of the limelight. In the
end, a central bank is doing its job when no one notices that it is there. So if, over the past 40
minutes,  I  have  been  sufficiently  boring  then  I  promise  to  carry  on  in  that  vein.  If  not,  then  I
promise to mend my ways.
References
Blinder, A.S., (1987) “Hard Heads, Soft Hearts: Tough-Minded Economics for a Just Society”,
published by Addison-Wesley Publishing Company
Estrella & Mishkin (1998) “Rethinking the Role of NAIRU in Monetary Policy: Implications of
Model  Formulation  and  Uncertainty”,  paper  prepared  for  The  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research conference on Monetary Policy Rules, Islamorada, Florida, January 15–17, 1998
Friedman, M., (1968) “The Role of Monetary Policy” American Economic Review, March: 1–17
Keynes, J. M., (1923) “A Tract on Monetary Reform”, published by Macmillan, London
Keynes, J. M., (1923) “Notes for Lecture to the National Liberal Club” reprinted in “Collected
Writings of John Maynard Keynes”, Vol. XIX, Macmillan, London, 1981
King,  M.A.,  (1997)  “The  Inflation  Target  Five  Years  On”,  Lecture  given  to  mark  the  tenth
anniversary of the LSE Financial Markets Group
Mankiw,  N.G.,  (1998)  “Comment”  in  (eds.)  Solow,  R.M.  and  Taylor,  J.B.  “Inflation,
Unemployment and Monetary Policy”, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA
Modigliani,  F.  &  Papademos,  L.,  (1975)  “Targets  for  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Coming  Year”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , No. 1:141-63
Phelps, E., (1967) “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and Optimal Unemployment Over
Time”, Economica 34 August: 254-81
BIS Review   103/1998
– 11 –
Phillips, A.  W.,  (1958)  “The  Relationship  between  Unemployment  and  the  Rate  of  Change  of
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957”, Economica 25 November: 283-99
Rogerson, R., (1997) “ Theory Ahead of Language in the Economics of Unemployment”, Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. 1, 73–92
Tobin, J., (1980) “Stabilisation Policy Ten Years After” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
No. 1:19–71
 BIS Review   103/1998
