Mr.  Tietmeyer  considers  the  euro:  a  challenge  to,  and  opportunity  for,  the
financial markets   Speech by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Hans Tietmeyer,
on the occasion of the 21st Colloquium of SUERF and CFS, delivered in Frankfurt on 15/10/98.
I
“Educational institutions - explicitly including universities - are not philanthropic
islands  of  abstract  debate.”  This  maxim  of  the  German  President’s  is  borne  out  by  this
colloquium.  For  this  is  not  merely  an  “abstract  debate”.  The  subject  is  of  great  practical
relevance: “The euro: a challenge to, and opportunity for, the financial markets.” And there can
be no talk of an “island”, either. For this is a cross-border, joint meeting of SUERF and CFS.
Incidentally,  the  motive  is  the  exchange  of  knowledge  with  the  financial
community  (including  central  banks),  thus  avoiding  all  suspicion  of  insular  ivory-tower
erudition.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  financial  community  will  likewise  benefit  from  an
exchange  of  knowledge.  After  all,  the  euro  was  and  is  an  intellectual  challenge  for  all  those
concerned with it. An interesting exchange of views is therefore to be expected. And a debate
based on two fundamental perceptions may be fruitful: A consistent monetary policy, committed
primarily to the target of stability, is the best contribution a central bank - no matter whether the
Bundesbank or the European Central Bank - can make to the viability of the financial markets.
Without stable money, the financial markets cannot function properly. Conversely, it must also
be said: monetary policy needs an efficient, highly competitive and stable financial system. In the
first place, a financial sector that is susceptible to disruption poses risks to the entire monetary
system, and thus also to the safety of the currency. Secondly, in a stable environment monetary
policy impinges on economic activity more smoothly. That was and is true of the Bundesbank’s
monetary policy. It is bound to apply to the ESCB’s monetary policy as well.
II
Clarity  now  obtains  in  some  matters  of  significance  to  financial  market  players
concerning  the  euro.  The  future  framework  for  economic  policy  action  is  now  emerging  ever
more clearly.
Since  its  constitutive  meeting  in  June,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  taken  a
multitude of important decisions. There is broad clarity today about the arsenal of  instruments
with which the ESCB will operate. The primary buttress of refinancing will be repo transactions,
which  have  been  so  successful  at  the  national  level.  The  interest  rate  for  this  main  source  of
finance will lie within the corridor whose ceiling and floor are marked out by the interest rates
for  the  marginal  lending  and  deposit  facilities.  These  principal  elements  of  the  range  of
instruments have been designed with the intention of the money market developing as steadily as
possible, so that recourse to fine-tuning instruments can be relatively rare.
The  same  purpose  is  served  by  minimum  reserves,  which  are  often  criticised  in
banking circles. At a rate of 2 %, the cost burden is kept within very narrow bounds - especially
considering that, owing to the envisaged payment of interest on minimum reserves, the banks’
working balances, which will have to be held anyway, will yield interest. In the envisaged form
(a reserve to be maintained as a monthly average) they will act as a buffer in the money market.
They  can  therefore  largely  cushion  unforeseen  fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  liquid  funds
without any major central bank intervention.
BIS Review   84/1998
- 2 -
A very important step on the way to a single monetary policy is the agreement on
the  main  elements  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  which  was  reached  in  the  ECB  Governing
Council two days ago. These elements comprise: the quantitative definition of price stability as
the primary objective of the single monetary policy: “Price stability shall be defined as a year-on-
year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2 %.” And
this  price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  Money  will  be  assigned  a
prominent  role,  with  a  reference  value  for  the  growth  of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate.  This
reference value will be derived in a manner consistent with - and will serve to achieve - price
stability. Under normal circumstances, deviations of the current monetary growth rate from the
reference value signal risks to price stability. This concept of a reference value, of course, does
not imply a commitment to mechanistically correct deviations over the short term, as it was not
the  case  in  the  Bundesbank  policy.  Besides  this  prominent  reference  value  for  the  growth  of
broad money, a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability will play a major role in the ESCB’s strategy. However, a forecast figure will not
be published.
By this decision, the ECB Governing Council is following up to a large degree on
the Bundesbank’s successful strategy while at the same time taking due account of the specific
conditions  prevailing  in  the  euro  area,  especially  at  the  start  of  EMU.  By  and  large,  the
institutional and technical preparations are making substantial progress. On January 1, 1999 the
ESCB  will  certainly  be  fully  operational.  Happily,  there  is  broad  agreement  in  the  ECB
Governing Council on the basic orientation of anti-inflation policy. And, economically speaking,
Euroland has been in a de facto monetary union anyway since the eleven participating states were
determined and the bilateral entry rates defined.
Not  later  than  January  1,  1999,  central  bank  interest  rates  must  be  running  at  a
single level. But where that common level will be, cannot, of course, be said with any certainty
today  -  some  eleven  weeks  before  the  start  of  monetary  union.  However,  given  our  current
knowledge  of  monetary  trends  and  other  economic  prospects,  the  interest  rates  are  likely  to
converge towards the lower end of the current range in the euro area. In the past few weeks, a
number of central banks of the future Euroland whose interest rates are still relatively high have
undertaken significant interest-rate cuts. That process will continue in the course of the next two
months.
On  the  average,  such  convergence  will  result  in  a  further  not  inconsiderable
reduction in interest rates in Europe.
With its “steady-as-she-goes” interest-rate policy, the Bundesbank has contributed
to a stable monetary and economic situation in Germany and Euroland as a whole. That is why
the  IMF  expressly  “commended”  the  Bundesbank  a  month  ago  “for  having  led  the  way  in
establishing price stability in Germany as well as through out much of the European Union”. In
the  process,  it  had  created  favourable  conditions  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The
Bundesbank’s  monetary  policy  was  even  characterised  at 
time  as  “somewhat
accommodative”. Gratifyingly, the target of price stability has virtually been reached in Germany
and  Europe  alike.  For  the  immediate  future,  neither  particular  inflation  risks  nor  particular
deflation risks are detectable at present. That must remain so. But the Bundesbank still remains
vigilant. Vigilant as to the extent to which new constraints might arise. And, of course, vigilant
as to the extent to which new room for manoeuvre might materialise.
that 
BIS Review   84/1998
- 3 -
And monetary policy must always pay heed to the specific conditions prevailing.
For instance, the conditions for monetary policy in the future euro area differ to some extent from
those in the United States and also in the United Kingdom. Besides the different levels of central
bank rates, there are differences in the position in the business cycle and in the intensity of the
trade  relations  with  the  crisis  regions,  not  to  mention  the  specifically  European  subject  of  the
convergence of central bank rates.
III
However, there can be no doubt that the global environment has become harsher
and  more  turbulent  for  Germany  and  Europe  as  well  in  the  past  few  weeks  and  months.  A
number of East Asian countries are beset by a deep-seated, persistent financial crisis. Happily, in
some countries that have initiated far-reaching adjustments, encouraging signs of consolidation
are meanwhile to be seen. Russia is in the grip of a profound economic crisis, which naturally
has  a  very  worrying  political  dimension.  In  Latin  America,  despite  considerable  efforts  at
adjustment in some countries, there are still latent risks of contagion, and the markets have, alas,
so far not taken sufficient account of the differences in conditions. And in Japan a severe crisis of
confidence still prevails, involving substantial potential risks to the world economy. The recent
measures  to  remedy  the  weaknesses  in  the  banking  sector  might,  however,  constitute  an
important step towards overcoming the difficulties.
On  the  continent  of  Europe,  by  contrast,  conditions  have  so  far  been  distinctly
more  favourable.  The  economic  upswing  in  the  future  euro  area  is  now  more  broadly  based.
Internal expansionary forces are in the ascendant. Our trade relations with the crisis regions are
not  so  close  that  the  crises  there  are  bound  to  trigger  a  recession  in  Europe.  But  besides  the
comparatively reassuring perception that those crises are unlikely to spill over to us (at least in
the short run) through the channel of trade relations, there is increasing concern that the crises
might, instead, come right into our “front room” through the channel of financial relations, via
the global financial markets. That concern also owes something to the fiasco of the Hedge Fund
Long-Term  Capital  Management  and  to  the  response  it  triggered.  Many  people  are  wondering
whether the greater part of the problem is not still floating below the surface, as with an iceberg.
And many people fear that the present crises might result in a structural weakness
of the financial system with regard to appropriate risk transformation. The first aspect concerns
the  emerging  countries.  There  is  a  danger  that,  as  it  were,  the  financial  markets  will  now
withdraw from a whole category of countries without distinguishing sufficiently carefully to what
extent individual countries have made structural progress. A second aspect - albeit very vaguely -
might  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  banks  may  be  less  willing  to  run  risks  in  extending  credit,
especially  to  enterprises.  But  it  is  not  only  the  financial  markets  that  should  differentiate
appropriately when taking investment decisions and assuming risks. The responsible politicians
and central bankers should likewise make adequate distinctions in their analyses.
For  general  panic  is  unwarranted.  And  there  is  no  reason  for  lapsing  into  an
apocalyptic mood. A dispassionate analysis shows that there are a number of factors stabilising
the  world  economy.  They  certainly  include  the  high  degree  of  monetary  stability  world-wide.
They also include the favourable overall performance in the future euro area. And they likewise
include the still favourable course of business activity, by and large, in the English-speaking area.
What  is  more,  many  analysts  make  far  too  little  distinction  between  developments  of  crisis
proportions, on the one hand, and adjustments, which may even be desirable in the medium run,
of previous exaggerations, on the other hand. That applies, for instance, in part to some equity
BIS Review   84/1998
- 4 -
markets. And, by the way, it is also wrong to regard the recent Annual Meetings of the IMF and
the World Bank - as has widely been claimed - as a failure. It may be true that certain incautious
statements  in  the  wings  aroused  some  unrealistic  expectations.  But  the  results  achieved  in
Washington should not necessarily be judged by that. Distinct progress was definitely made in
Washington with regard to the future work of those organisations. And I hope very much that in
the near future the US Congress will clear the hurdle and remove the obstacle to a better financial
endowment of the IMF.
IV
Unwarranted  though  panic  in  the  assessment  of  the  situation  is,  blind  political
hyperactivity,  with  the  aim  of  inordinately  large  financial  programmes,  would  be  equally
undesirable. For the essential prerequisite for steering a country out of a crisis of confidence is
sound  domestic  policies.  After  all,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  some  of  the  emerging  countries
affected by the turmoil had previously made certain serious domestic mistakes. Not infrequently,
the  public  and  private  sectors  are  interlinked.  Foreign  investors,  as  well  as  domestic  financial
institutions, could therefore take it for granted that they would be bailed out by the state or by
IMF programmes in the event of a crisis. Unfortunately, moral hazards and the lack of financial
supervision  have  in  the  past  often  prompted  overly  risky  behaviour.  Asset  prices  -  especially
those of real property  and  equities  -  have  sky-rocketed  in  some  cases.  Investments  were  made
which were not duly geared to the return that could realistically be expected.
Moreover, many countries had overly rigid exchange rate links. Such links may be
dangerous. After all, they obstruct monetary policy. And, under such a system, massive current
account  deficits  may  accumulate  if  a  persistent  inflation  differential  exists  and  one’s  own
currency  therefore  appreciates  sharply  in  real  terms.  Some  countries  have  also  shown
unsustainable  budget  deficits.  All  these  weaknesses  of  domestic  policies  are  points  calling  for
action.  And  the  therapy  and  conditionality  of  the  IMF  must  likewise  make  appropriate
distinctions and take action  to  deal  with  the  actual  causes  of  the  problems.  In  some  countries,
investors’ confidence can only be regained by a sustained consolidation of the national budget. In
other cases, it will be necessary to settle a domestic banking crisis. And in some places, that may
entail,  not  least,  the  creation  of  a  stable  legal  system,  with  a  clear  dividing-line  between  the
private  and  public  sectors.  And  in  very  many,  if  not  in  all,  cases,  domestic  financial  market
supervision must be improved. It must at least meet international standards, such as have been
laid  down  by  the  G-10  in  its  Core  Principles.  Enhanced  and  efficient  surveillance  is  likewise
necessary in this context.
Not blind political hyperactivity, but action in steps, albeit target-oriented action,
is  on  the  agenda,  because  there  have  for  some  time  been  a  number  of  sound  and  promising
approaches  at  the  level  of  international  cooperation.  Those  approaches  must  be  implemented.
That builds more confidence in the markets than all new announcements of generous financial
programmes. There are likewise reasonable approaches to making what many people regard as
over-sensitive  financial  markets  more  resilient  again.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  global
financial  markets  need  greater  transparency  in  order  to  improve  their  viability.  Firstly,  more
transparency at the national level: besides macro-economic data, financial market data must be
monitored  more  carefully  than  before.  Above  all,  more,  and  more  up-to-date,  particulars  on
national  debts  in  foreign  currencies,  and  on  maturities,  are  required.  This  is  a  challenge  to
borrowers  and  lenders  alike.  Secondly,  more  transparency  at  the  level  of  market  players.  The
experience of the past few days has shown that there seems to be a particular need to take action
in the case of Hedge Funds. How this is to be done can still be discussed. An indirect solution
BIS Review   84/1998
- 5 -
has been proposed: banking supervisors monitor the lending of an individual  bank  to  a  Hedge
Fund. The data are then compiled through an international credit register. Taking Hedge Funds as
the starting point has been proposed. It may well be true that they are so flexible that they can
elude  direct  supervision  whenever  they  want  to.  But  when  it  becomes  apparent  which  Hedge
Fund  discloses  data  and  which  does  not,  then  the  market  can  discipline  itself.  Then  it  is
competition that determines the degree of transparency. Be that as it may, if Hedge Funds are so
important for the overall system as those responsible in the United States judge them to be, then
they  cannot  remain  exempt  from  supervision.  Thirdly,  more  transparency  about  the  financial
instruments posing risks. That applies, for instance, to derivatives in bank balance sheets. And
fourthly,  more  transparency  about  the  activities  of  the  international  financial  institutions
themselves can do no harm. On the one hand, it is true, the confidentiality of discussions must be
upheld.  On  the  other  hand,  the  recipients  of  public  funds  must  likewise  be  subject  to  a  strict
assessment of performance.
V
A cool head rather than a hot heart; that would, by the way, even be appropriate -
or would be particularly appropriate - if the crises in the global financial system were to spread
further (though I sincerely hope, and believe, they will not). That goes for the IMF. There must
be no more panic-stricken rescue operations in which private creditors are not involved. It also
goes for the countries concerned. Thus, debt moratoriums announced unilaterally - i. e. without
including the creditors - are highly questionable. After all, a country beset by a crisis has to try to
regain  investors’  confidence  as  soon  as  possible.  Utmost  caution  is  required  on  the  subject  of
controls on capital movements, too. Trying to control, let alone to limit, the outflow of capital ex
post in a crisis is extremely risky. Quite apart from the limited technical options, the far-reaching
effects of such controls must also be borne in mind. On this point, Rudi Dornbusch has rightly
said:  “  In  a  global  setting  ad  hoc  capital  controls  in  one  country  will  immediately  cause
contagion not only to the “usual subjects” but even beyond. Fearful that the crisis might spread,
investors will act pre-emptively everywhere. They will pull out their money without waiting for
more bad news.”
A  clear  target-oriented  stance,  rather  than  hyper-activity  -  that  motto  likewise
applies  to  monetary  policy.  A  relaxation  beyond  the  degree  that  is  consistent  with  domestic
stability is beneficial to nobody. In the medium and long run, it actually does harm, not only to
the country itself but to the global economy as a whole. That is a lesson taught by the current
problems in Japan. They are due not least to the overly expansionary monetary policy pursued in
the  late  eighties.  At  the  time,  Japan  regarded  that  policy  as  a  contribution  to  international
cooperation,  and  it  was  actually  called  for  by  the  United  States.  That  does  not  mean  that
monetary policy should bury its head in the sand. In the Communiqué of the Interim Committee,
it says: “Should there be a worsening of the crisis or a further slowdown in economic activity,
additional  action  on  both  domestic  and  international  grounds  would  be  required  by  both
emerging  market  countries  and  industrial  countries.”  However,  upheavals  in  the  financial
markets  cannot  be  tackled  by  monetary  policy  instruments  alone.  Monetary  policy  in  the
industrial countries must preserve the high level of confidence and credibility it now enjoys in
the financial markets. Otherwise, any measures could back-fire.
VI
Without any doubt, given the crises  besetting  many  parts  of  the  world,  the  euro
has passed its first acid test. That is gratifying. The markets regard the euro as a safe haven. In
BIS Review   84/1998
- 6 -
that respect, it has already become a serious rival to the dollar. And exchange rates in the EMS
between  the  future  euro  currencies  have  remained  stable.  That  demonstrates  two  things:  The
markets have accepted the transition to monetary union as being irreversible. And the euro and
the independent European Central Bank are enjoying a high degree of confidence in investors’
eyes.
The continuous and sometimes exasperating insistence on the achievement of the
necessary  stability  conditions  has  thereby  borne  its  first  fruit.  However,  maintaining  those
conditions  for  success  is  a  long-term  task.  The  role  of  the  euro  as  an  international  investment
currency,  anchor  currency  and  reserve  currency  is  inseparably  associated  with  its  internal
stability.  The  markets  will  focus  their  attention  on  that.  And  that  is  the  criterion  whereby  the
markets, and also the man in the street, will judge European monetary policy at the end of the
day. It is this anti-inflationary basic orientation by which the Governing Council of the European
Central Bank will be guided; that emerged very clearly again from the debate we held on strategy
two  days  ago.  However,  for  a  durably  stable  monetary  union,  European  monetary  policy  also
needs the support of the other areas of economic policy - not only at the start of monetary union
but also in the future.
In that case the euro has a good chance of becoming a lastingly stable currency,
respected by the markets and the population alike. And domestic stability is at the same time the
best  contribution  the  euro  can  make  to  a  sound,  viable  and  stable  global  financial  system  in
which the financial market players can act in a spirit of responsibility.
BIS Review   84/1998
