Mr  Stark  discusses  the  worldwide  currency  situation  and  international  monetary
cooperation
Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  to  ELEC  in
Kronberg on 4/12/98.
I
Anyone comparing the global economic policy debate at the end of 1998 with the debate last year
will notice not only a number of similarities but also some striking differences.
It is true that there was already a debate under way at that time on the crises of some countries in
South-East Asia. In fact, President Tietmeyer spoke in depth about them to ELEC pointing out
potential domino effects.
A  general  optimism  prevailed  in  the  public  debate,  however,  particularly  in  respect  of  future
developments in the US economy. At all events, I can well recall headlines announcing the ‘end
of the business cycle’ and predicting the arrival of the ‘new economics’, which probably referred
to the theory of continuing progress in productivity or even the end of the economic problem of
supply and demand itself.
Quite often, it is the same commentators who only a few weeks ago were forecasting a ‘global
economic  crisis’  with  a  similar  supposed  degree  of  certainty  and  evoking  the  start  of  a  world
recession. Two months ago – at the Annual Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank – talk was
still of ‘doom and gloom’. But today we can read again headlines like ‘Crisis, what crisis?’
However, a return to the Garden of Eden and the decline of the old world are events that tend not
to happen very often. At all events, we are still alive.
The fact that people fail to strike a balance between optimism and pessimism was pointed out
recently by the US economist Paul Romer, one of those talented people in his profession who are
wrongly claimed to be proponents of the ‘new economics’.
One cannot escape the feeling that one-sided and exaggerated perceptions are contributing to the
present problems of the global economy. Do they not create sentiment and expectations that tend
to strengthen rather than reduce the much lamented herd behaviour of the markets?
Anyway,  the  transparency  of  opinions  about  supposed  facts  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  the
transparency  of  the  facts  themselves.  The  media  and  the  markets  produce  and  process
information incessantly. The question is whether it is the relevant information. If that were the
case, there would scarcely be an international debate on improving transparency in the financial
markets.
Certainly,  a  ‘worst  case  scenario’  can  never  be  completely  ruled  out  in  theory,  although  a
scenario of that kind depends on the interaction of a large number of factors.
II
BIS Review   105/1998
– 2 –
Keyword ‘accumulation of slumping economic cycles’
A number of Asian economies are indeed going through a sharp recession at present. Japan, as
one of the largest economies in the world, has been suffering for quite some time from a negative
business trend and a crisis of confidence caused by structural problems in the financial sector.
In August, the developments in Russia added to the crisis in the Asian countries. The unilateral
moratorium led to a reassessment by investors of the risks in other emerging markets, such as of
Latin America.
These  factors  have  contributed  to  a  shift  in  global  expectations  of  growth,  which  vary  quite
considerably from region to region.
On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  cannot  be  ignored  that  some  countries,  in  particular  in  South-East
Asia, are showing initial successes in overcoming their internal structural problems. In a number
of  cases,  they  have  been  able  to  stabilise  their  exchange  rates  and,  in  some  instances,  have
witnessed  an  appreciation  of  their  currencies  enabling  some  countries  to  reduce  their  interest
rates again.
Of the greatest importance for the region is the situation in Japan. Initial steps have been taken to
eliminate  the  structural  problems  in  the  financial  sector  by  adopting  the  Financial  System
Revitalisation bills. Now it is most important to implement those measures in a consistent and
convincing manner.
What mainly argues against a ‘looming global economic crisis’ is the economic situation in the
United States and Europe.
Despite a slight drop in pace, the US economy seems to be in relatively good shape overall.
Admittedly, the structural problems should not be taken too lightly there either. The savings ratio
of  households  has  shown  a  continuous  fall  over  the  past  few  months.  In  September,  it  was
negative  for  the  first  time.  That  is  related  with  the  high  and  increasing  current  account  deficit
which can only be financed by extensive capital imports.
In  the  future  euro  countries,  economic  growth  up  to  now  has  been  strong,  although  some
forecasts for 1999 were revised downwards recently. A temporary slowdown is expected.
But all in all, it is scarcely adequate to speak of an accumulation of slumping economic cycles.
Keyword ‘deflation’
Despite  all  the  dire  predictions,  there  are  no  indications  worldwide  of  deflation  either.  At  any
rate, there is no evidence of a cumulative decline  in  the  general  price  level  and  an  associated,
self-intensifying contraction of economic activity either in the European or the global context.
What we are witnessing at present in Europe is a  process  of  disinflation.  In  part,  this  is  being
fostered by international developments in the prices of commodities and crude oil – incidentally,
with quite positive terms of trade effects for the oil-importing euro countries.
In Germany, for example, core inflation is about 1%.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 3 –
‘Deflation is not on the agenda,’ Stanley Fischer, the IMF’s Deputy Managing Director, recently
underlined.  The  present  price  stability  and  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  capital  market
indicate  the  absence  of  inflation  expectations.  That  provides  the  opportunity  for  longer-term
inflation-free growth.
III
If it appears rather unlikely that the crises in parts of the world economy will spread to America
and Europe through the real economy, is it not possible – given a loss in confidence – that this
could happen through the channel of the financial markets?
Keyword ‘credit crunch’
A number of observers fear, for example, that the current uncertainties in the financial markets
might  cause  financial  institutions  to  refuse  financial  resources  even  to  first  class  borrowers  in
future – with matching implications for investment and growth.
There would be various reasons for that:
•  First,  financial  institutions  change  their  risk  preferences,  especially  as  a  result  of
disappointed  confidence  or  an  expected  recession.  At  least  for  a  while,  there  may  be  a
higher risk aversion overall.
•  Second, financial institutions find themselves subjected to an erosion of their capital base.
They  then  have  to  show  restraint  in  terms  of  further  exposures  –  even  to  top-rated
borrowers – in order to restore appropriate financial ratios. A rise in the cost of equity can
even reinforce that.
•  Third, the assets deposited as collateral decline in value, say, as a result of a fall in asset
prices in the real property or equity markets.
In some cases, however, what is worrying about a credit crunch is the idea that the normal price
mechanism  balancing  supply  and  demand  is  being  paralysed  in  the  credit  market  for  specific
reasons.
In a ‘credit crunch’ scenario – so the theory goes – financial institutions do not respond to a rise
in demand for credit by raising the lending rate and extending their supply of credit.
That  is  because  they  fear  a  disproportionate  rise  in  the  share  of  demanders  of  credit  with
comparatively  risky  projects  –  the  keyword  is  ‘adverse  selection’.  Moreover,  after  receiving
credit, the debtors would have an incentive to enter greater risks – the keyword is ‘moral hazard’.
If banks have difficulty in assessing their potential borrowers’ risk and are unable to monitor the
behaviour of their debtors perfectly, they tend to refuse to grant credit, especially in a situation of
economic uncertainty.
Furthermore,  the  problem  of  ‘asymmetric  information’  cannot  be  solved  by  the  provision  of
collateral. If there is a fall in asset prices – say, with the bursting of speculative bubbles – the
value of the collateral provided will undergo a dramatic fall.
How relevant are such considerations to the present global economic situation?
BIS Review   105/1998
– 4 –
A more in-depth view is probably needed here, too – in particular as it is difficult to identify a
credit crunch in a clear-cut manner. It is not possible to identify whether a decline in lending is
due to a restraint in supply or to slack demand.
Despite these problems in the diagnosis, there are some indications in Japan of a credit crunch on
the supply side. That is suggested, at all events, by the inadequate capital position of a number of
Japanese banks. Even established corporations seem to be receiving scarcely any more loans.
We  do  not  have  a  problem  of  liquidity  supply  worldwide,  however.  What  we  do  have  is  a
confidence problem which is being manifested in a generally greater risk aversion.
In the United States, credit terms have worsened since the summer, especially as a result of the
turbulent developments in the equity markets. However, with its cuts in interest rates the Federal
Reserve Bank has – so far successfully – prevented a credit crunch.
In the countries forming the future euro area, there has so far been no evidence of a credit crunch.
There is no identifiable reduced lending, nor have the banks’ capital bases been eroded by large-
scale losses.
Even the argument that continental European banks are at risk as a result of their relatively large
exposure in the  countries  of  central  and  eastern  Europe  is  putting  things  too  simply.  First,  the
banks have entered short-term exposures only on a minor scale. The major part of their lending
has a medium- and longer-term maturity and is secured by Federal guarantee.
Second,  the  off-balance-sheet  positions  which  are  not  shown  in  the  statistics  are  of  particular
importance for assessing the degree of risk to which the financial institutions are exposed. In that
respect, I feel that European banks bear less of a burden.
Overall, the effects of the regional crises on the real economy are weaker, too, in Europe, and the
financial system is, on the whole, more stable. That is probably due to the difference in financing
arrangements.
In the United States, for example, financing is mainly taken up through the market. By contrast,
in Europe there is much more direct financing through individual (house) banks. Another factor
is that credit risks can be intercepted better in the continental universal banking system.
Given  the  slight  fluctuations  in  property  prices,  slumps  in  credit  resulting  from  dwindling
collateral are also unlikely here.
IV
The keyword ‘contagion’ undoubtedly belongs on the agenda, too.
The  worldwide  potential  for  contagion  has  certainly  increased  over  the  past  few  decades,
although  it  is  always  difficult  to  draw  a  clear  dividing  line  between  contagion  effects  and
shortcomings in policy.
The  individual  economies  are  becoming  increasingly  integrated  internationally.  Above  all,  the
rapid dismantling of restrictions in foreign exchange and financial transactions has brought the
markets closer together. And increasing securitisation and the marketability of assets make the
individual debt relationships anonymous.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 5 –
Finally  completely  new  conditions  have  been  created  by  enormous  technological  progress  and
all-pervasive computerisation in the financial markets.
Institutional  investors,  investment  funds  or  insurance  companies  can  move  large  investment
amounts from one country to another and change them from one currency into the next within a
few seconds.
Certainly,  there  has  been  an  enormous  increase  in  the  opportunities  of  investing  funds  in  a
country.  But  there  are  also  greater  opportunities  of  withdrawing  those  funds  with  all  of  the
adverse implications for the exchange rate and the domestic real economy.
In  that  way,  financial  flows  rove  around  the  globe  in  search  of  profitable  investment
opportunities.
However,  that  is  by  no  means  as  negative  as  it  is  often  presented.  Admittedly,  this  calls  for
discipline from policymakers and from the market players.
Access to the international financial markets has allowed many former developing countries and
emerging economies to develop quickly and has improved their living standards.
But these developments naturally also harbour risks.
Profit  margins  have  fallen  under  rising  competitive  pressure.  Turnover-oriented  transaction-
driven finance is displacing traditional buy-and-hold finance.
Longer-term bilateral financial relationships between banks and enterprises, which are typical of
continental  Europe,  are  being  increasingly  replaced  by  Anglo-Saxon  financing  through  the
markets. That also means a growth in short-termism. Volatility in the markets becomes greater.
Given the low level to which interest rates have fallen in the capital market during the past few
years in industrial countries, there has probably been a rise in the general willingness to take risks
in order to be able to offer domestic investors the yields on their investment that they have been
used to.
Confidence  in  the  newly  developed  hedging  opportunities  has  also  encouraged  riskier
investment. Until recently, some investors evidently regarded the hedge funds they used as a kind
of fully comprehensive cover.
The  predominance  of  institutional  investors  has,  at  the  same  time,  fostered  a  kind  of  herd
instinct.
Large-scale investors can afford to make a solid review of their investment in regions that  are
prone to risk. But many smaller investors act as ‘free riders’. They save themselves the trouble
and cost of their own research and gear their investment to that of the large-scale investors. If
large-scale  investors  withdraw  their  funds  from  a  country,  many  other  investors  follow  almost
without  any  examination.  Incidentally,  that  does  not  mean  that  the  large-scale  investors  have
adequately identified the risks in the past.
As  a  result,  however,  the  fundamental  differences  between  individual  investments  or  the
countries  concerned  are  obscured.  There  is  an  increased  risk  that  the  ‘herd’  of  investors  will
break out in a blind stampede in times of uncertainty.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 6 –
As certain as it is that the possibilities of contagion are greater, it is just as impossible to identify
and isolate a clear transmission path for crises.
Several factors seem to play a role, such as a similar macroeconomic situation, a high level of
government debt or even similar exchange rate systems.
There is no doubt that countries are susceptible to crises if political conditions there are unstable
and contribute to international investors’ uncertainty.
What is crucial, however, is that fundamentals in the countries concerned appear to play a much
greater  role  overall  than  the  international  capital  movements  and  the  volatility  in  the  financial
markets which are everywhere alleged to be the cause.
In  South-East  Asia,  for  example,  it  was  mainly  the  lack  of  operationally  efficient  banking
supervision which led to a rapid expansion of credit.
On the banks’ assets side were longer-term assets in domestic currency, such as shares and loans
for  real  estate  projects.  On  the  liabilities  side  were  what  tended  to  be  shorter-term  issues  and
liabilities denominated in foreign currency.
This meant that the banks were vulnerable in two ways: first, to asset price bubbles bursting and,
second, to depreciations of the domestic currency.
When  confidence  in  the  dollar  pegs  actually  did  diminish,  the  banks  came  under  massive
pressure. The fragile domestic financial sector collapsed like a house of cards.
How  then  is  it  possible  to  make  a  further  reduction  in  financial  market  instability  and  in  the
present risk of contagion spreading from South-East Asia to other regions?
V
What is important for that is how things develop in the expectation-biased financial markets. At
present,  they  probably  still  lack  clear  orientations,  which  is  reflected  by  a  level  of  volatility
which is still high.
In  the  present  situation,  clear  economic  policy  signals  are  therefore  of  paramount  importance.
Above all, the confidence of the markets has to be restored.
Only  underlying  economic  and  political  conditions  that  inspire  confidence  nationally  and
internationally  can  lay  the  basis  for  long-term  involvement  by  foreign  investors  and  for  stable
financial relationships.
That  is  of  structural  importance.  It  will  also  make  it  possible  to  get  away  globally  from  the
overemphasis on short-term financial flows and the associated short-termism.
First of all, it is Japan that has to act. The confidence of the general public and the markets in
Japan and, in the long term, in the region can be restored only if the reorganisation of the banking
sector is pursued in a determined manner.
The  emerging  markets  affected  by  capital  outflows  naturally  also  have  to  act.  They,  too,  must
solve their internal structural problems.  Such  solutions  should  be  geared  to  the  principles  of  a
BIS Review   105/1998
– 7 –
market economy. In the long term, sliding back into a protectionist policy does most damage to
the country which seeks to isolate itself.
Payment  moratoria  and  capital  controls  that  are  unexpectedly  introduced  ex  post  and  forbid
investors to withdraw their funds may lead to a locking-in. They are damaging for international
confidence and increase the risk of contagion.
What  deserves  main  attention  is  the  establishment  of  efficient  banking  and  financial  market
supervision in accordance with international standards. That includes setting up adequate safety
nets for private  bank  deposits  –  perhaps  in  the  form  of  a  deposit  guarantee  fund  –  in  order  to
prevent a run on the domestic banking system in a crisis.
The  international  financial  markets  also  need  certainty  about  the  role  of  the  central  banks.
Internal stability should take precedence over defending unrealistic exchange rate pegs.
Certainly, a prudent monetary policy will always leave sufficient scope for economic growth. But
the central bank must not foster lending booms and speculative bubbles by pursuing a policy of
easy money.
It  is,  above  all,  also  the  IMF  which  bears  responsibility  as  the  leading  international  financial
institution.
Possibly  the  IMF  has  dulled  private  investors’  risk  awareness  and  encouraged  ‘moral  hazard’
behaviour by granting generous financial packages in past crises.
As important as short-term financial assistance is for giving direct support to affected countries
that are prepared to reform and for preventing contagion, private investors must not simply be
bailed out. Those who enter greater risks in the expectation of higher yields ought also be ready
to bear any consequent losses.
The IMF should therefore refocus more on its role as a catalyst for preventing and overcoming
crises.
For  example,  in  the  latest  financial  package  for  Brazil,  amounting  to  US$ 41.5 billion,  only
around US$ 5 billion comes from the IMF’s own resources. By contrast, US$ 27 billion is being
raised by what is basically bilateral funding through the facilities of the BIS and the activation of
the New Arrangements to Borrow.
The activation of the NAB must not be a model for other cases, however. The NAB are, strictly
speaking, a ‘reserve tank’  for  cases  of  extreme  emergency.  Activating  them  is  acceptable  now
only as a ‘precautionary’ agreement because of Brazil’s special role for the stability of the global
financial markets.
Funding through the BIS must not become standard practice either. IMF programmes should, as
a matter of policy, be funded by the IMF.
Rather than tying up larger financial packages with the aid of other organisations, the IMF should
involve private creditors in crisis solutions to a greater extent than hitherto. The IMF should also
call for internal structural reforms in the national financial markets.
Above  all,  the  IMF  can  play  a  major  role  in  improving  the  transparency  of  the  international
financial markets and thus in dismantling the asymmetrical distribution of information.
BIS Review   105/1998
That is an aspect which should not be underrated.
– 8 –
If a lack of transparency is among the causes of processes of contagion and herd behaviour and if
a credit crunch is ultimately due to asymmetrical information, increased transparency will make a
crucial contribution to the stability of the global financial system.
The operational efficiency of the markets will be strengthened; investors will be able to make an
appropriate assessment of risks; and the risk of contagion will be significantly reduced.
I would even go one stage further. If the markets do not create optimum transparency themselves,
there is much to be said for providing transparency in some cases as a public good as well – by
the  international  community,  such  as  through  the  IMF,  through  the  G-10  and  the  supervisory
authorities in the national financial markets.
Obviously, transparency belongs on the agenda of international cooperation.
Any  approach  to  international  cooperation  extending  beyond  that  must  not  ignore  world
economic and political realities, however.
That  applies,  in  particular,  to  any  attempt  to  force  exchange  rates  into  a  more  or  less  narrow
regime.
A global exchange rate system would create major problems. In my view it is neither desirable
nor feasible.
First, the differences in the fundamentals of the participating economies are too great. Second,
the internally conducted policies are not directed towards the same aims.
Flexible  exchange  rates  are  an  important  safety  valve  which  can  take  pressure  off  economic
disequilibria.  Regulated  currency  markets,  on  the  other  hand,  create  no  more  than  an  illusory
stability. Sooner or later that situation might explode.
One of the lessons of the recent crises is: the vast majority – if not all – of the countries affected
by the crises had pegged their exchange rates too rigidly.
VI
In the future euro area, the exchange rate safety valve will be irrevocably shut from January 1,
1999.
The financial markets have already accepted the forthcoming monetary union. They regard the
announced  irrevocable  exchange  rates  of  the  participating  countries  as  credible.  And  by
yesterday’s  decision  of  10  European  national  central  banks  to  lower  interest  rates,  it  has  been
demonstrated: we are already in a de facto monetary union.
The  euro  has  undoubtedly  already  passed  its  first  severe  test  during  the  financial  market
turbulence of the past few months.
But  that  success  is  based  on  many  years’  efforts  to  achieve  convergence.  It  is  the  outcome  of
setting  priorities:  the  priority  of  internal  monetary  stability  and  the  priority  of  consolidating
government budgets in the participating countries.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 9 –
However, that stability-oriented policy mix must also be retained in future, because the real tests
for the euro are still to come.
In future, there will only be a single monetary policy, on the same terms and conditions, and at
the  same  interest  rates,  in  all  participating  countries.  Adjustments  to  differing  regional  trends
must take place regionally and in the real economy in future.
Regional competitiveness and a high degree of internal flexibility will then become crucial assets
of national economic, fiscal, wage and social policies.
This  is  the  new  reality  to  which  all  participating  countries  must  adapt.  The  sooner,  the  better.
Only  then  can  the  euro  be  a  success  and  play  its  part  in  helping  to  stabilise  the  international
financial markets.
BIS Review   105/1998
