Mr. Ciocca discusses competition and mergers in the Italian financial system
Speech by Sig. Pierluigi Ciocca, a Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at a conference
on  “La  concentrazione  nell’industria  dei  servizi  finanziari:aspetti  teorici  ed  esperienze
internazionali” held at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore in Milan on 12/11/98.
Introduction
In the last twenty years there has been considerable consolidation in the credit field. The process
began in the United States, where there have been more than 7,000 bank mergers since 1980. The
United  Kingdom  was  the  first  country  in  Europe  to  see  significant  merger  activity,  but  it  has
spread to other countries, including Italy.
The most frequently cited general cause of consolidation lies in the changes that have occurred in
the  external  environment:  advances  in  electronic  data  processing  and  telecommunications,
provisions aimed at attenuating the institutional separation of intermediaries, and the contraction
in  the  role  of  public  pension  systems.  Among  other  things,  these  developments  have  fostered
financial globalization, asset management services, the use of powerful IT systems, and a drastic
reduction  in  data  transmission  and  communication  costs.  The  repercussions  have  not  been
restricted  to  international  and  wholesale  markets  but  have  also  been  felt  in  local  and  retail
markets.  Banks  appear  to  have  seen  the  larger  scale  of  operations  as  offering  the  prospect  of
coping with these repercussions better.
In Italy’s case, however, a key additional factor has been the increase in competition. The Italian
banking  system  had  entered  the  eighties  with  the  low  level  of  competition  inherited  from  the
past.  The  subsequent  change  was  radical  and  the  consequent  narrowing  of  margins  stimulated
restructuring  and  consolidation.  From  the  eighties  onwards,  the  dictum  of  comparative  statics
“more  concentration,  less  competition”  has  been  replaced  by  the  dynamic  alternative  “more
competition, more mergers”. The premise, already tested in analyses carried out by the Bank of
Italy,  was  that  the  Italian  banking  system  —  traditionally  marked  by  a  low  degree  of
concentration  and  banks  of  limited  average  size  with  multiple  branches  —  offered  not  only
plenty  of  niches  for  small  banks  but  also  considerable  scope  for  economies  of  scale.  This
potential  is  at  last  being  realized,  in  the  international  context  I  have  just  described,  under  the
pressure of the “novelty”, at least for Italian banking, represented by the growth in competition
that the Bank of Italy has been pursuing.
In my remarks I shall touch on three aspects of these complex processes, the outcome of which is
still wide open:
a)
b)
c)
antitrust  action  can  forestall  the  adverse  effects  of  consolidation  on  competition  and
reinforce the beneficial effects;
the Bank of Italy, both before and after 1990, has pursued a policy aimed at fostering the
efficiency of the banking system through competition;
more competition, consolidation and restructuring remain objectives to be pursued, even
though  they  are  only  necessary,  and  not  sufficient,  conditions  for  increasing  the
competitiveness of the Italian banking system, which is still burdened by high operating
costs.
Mergers and the protection of competition
BIS Review   99/1998
- 2 -
A high degree of concentration and a small number of large banks that enjoy growing economies
of  scale  represent  a  situation  that  needs  to  be  watched  carefully.  It  is  necessary  to  ensure  that
mergers bring benefits for customers and not an increase in market power. The law recognizes
the threat that concentration poses for competition. Nonetheless, the traditional attitude towards
mergers has been attenuated, in view of the positive effects that they are capable of producing.
In  Italy,  Article  6  of  Law  287/1990  defines  the  scope  of  antitrust  action.  The  ban  on  mergers
applies  to  those  that  would  create  or  strengthen  a  dominant  position  that  is  detrimental  to
competition.
Antitrust  law,  in  turn,  can  supplement  the  monitoring  of  mergers  with  a  range  of  alternative
instruments.  Controlling  a  firm’s  behaviour  may  prevent  it  from  exploiting  its  position  to
discriminate  against  competitors.  Controlling  the  agreements  between  competing  firms  may
prevent such understandings from distorting the play of competition.
In addition, there is the action — which does not derive directly from antitrust law in the strict
sense  of  the  term  and  which  often  falls  within  the  scope  of  several  institutions’  authority  —
aimed at ensuring the contestability of markets, at making it possible for other firms to enter the
market and erode the dominant firm’s profits. Freedom to enter the market must be coupled with
freedom to leave the market by keeping down the sunk costs of withdrawing, allowing inefficient
firms to go to the wall, and making it effectively possible for entrepreneurs to sell all or part of
their businesses.
The  provisions  concerning  the  abuse  of  dominant  positions  and  agreements  detrimental  to
competition, together with control of the effective freedom to enter and leave the market, make it
possible to take a fairly relaxed view of most mergers and acquisitions, bearing in mind that in
particularly serious cases operations hindering competition may be prohibited at law. It should
also be noted in this respect that the parties can be required to dispose of assets or to adopt other
measures like to ensure sufficiently competitive conditions. This practice is widely followed in
the  banking  sector:  in  the  United  States  some  recent  mega-mergers  have  been  waved  through
subject  to  the  mandatory  disposal  of  assets  equivalent  to  between  5  and  13  per  cent  of  the
deposits acquired.
The  banking  industry  still  has  several  distinctive  features,  especially  as  regards  the  taking  of
deposits and the granting of loans. One important sunk cost is related to the information content
of  the  customer  relationships  on  which  lending  decisions  are  based,  an  asset  that  is  not  easily
marketable.  Credit  relationships  involve  an  information  asymmetry  between  borrowers  and
lenders that results in their not being completely fungible. Small banks that establish particularly
close relationships with their borrowers enjoy an information advantage. This explains why it is
difficult  for  banks  to  enter  directly  into  geographical  markets  in  which  they  were  previously
absent;  indirect  growth  by  acquiring  existing  banks  or  branches  is  often  the  easiest  way  to
overcome this barrier and enter a retail market characterized by information asymmetries.
At the same time this peculiarity is likely to act as an exit barrier, thereby reducing the incentive
to  enter  the  market  and  the  potential  competition.  Sometimes  the  authorities  themselves
encourage mergers in order to remove inefficient banks from the market without their having to
be  put  into  liquidation,  with  all  the  costs  the  resulting  termination  of  customer  relationships
entails. The scope for mergers is accordingly a condition for keeping down market entry and exit
barriers  and  thereby  reducing  the  probability  of  collusion.  A  market  for  the  control  and
ownership of banks that works is a necessary condition for the efficiency of banking as a whole.
Mergers  also  make  the  financial  market’s  assessment  of  banks  more  effective;  larger  credit
BIS Review   99/1998
- 3 -
institutions  are  encouraged  to  open  up  their  ownership  structure  to  third  parties  and  the  stock
market in order to increase their ability to raise equity capital.
On the liabilities side of banks’ balance sheets, the demand for deposits and accessory services is
still  linked  to  customers’  physical  closeness  to  branches.  The  evaluation  of  mergers  must
therefore  take  into  account  not  only  imperfect  contestability  but  also  the  evolution  of  local
markets and the conditions effectively applied to customers.
Lastly, credit intermediaries are multi-product enterprises and often operate in several markets.
Mergers  between  diversified  intermediaries  will  have  a  different  impact  on  the  ability  to  be
present in the various markets — for loans, deposits, payment instruments, securities business,
asset  management,  leasing,  factoring,  consumer  credit  and  corporate  finance,  etc.  When
assessing mergers, account therefore needs to be taken not merely of the increase in the degree of
concentration in one market, but also of how competitive conditions change in the other markets.
The Bank of Italy and the promotion of competition
From the end of the seventies onwards the action taken by the Bank of Italy has been aimed at
increasing  competition  in  the  banking  and  financial  system.  The  powers  of  authorization
assigned  by  law  to  the  Bank  as  the  body  responsible  for  supervision  were  exercised  from  the
twenties onwards according to the principle of competition. In the “Branch  Plan”  drawn  up  in
1978  the  Bank  explicitly  announced  the  objective  of  fostering  competition  in  the  banking
industry: the opening of branches was envisaged primarily in the areas where the concentration
of loans and deposits was highest, and not infrequently monopolistic.
Thus  the  Bank  of  Italy  placed  competition  at  the  centre  of  its  policy  aimed  at  increasing  the
efficiency  and  solidity  of  the  banking  and  financial  system  well  before  it  was  granted  formal
antitrust powers in 1990.
The  precondition  for  the  change  in  the  Bank’s  approach  was  the  abandonment  of  the  idea  —
widely held after the crisis of the thirties, not only in Italy and not only among central banks —
that  competition,  or  “excess”  competition,  caused  banking  instability  and  was  antinomic  with
respect  to  stability.  On  the  contrary,  and  especially  in  the  conditions  of  international  openness
typical of the Italian economy in normal circumstances, an inefficient banking system is bound to
be  prone  to  systemic  instability,  even  though  oligopoly  allows  it  to  be  profitable.  A  powerful
stimulus  to  achieve  profitability  and  hence  a  congruous  capital  base  through  efficiency  could
clearly be detected in the increase in competition in the domestic banking and financial markets.
Increased competition therefore became the key intermediate objective, the fulcrum of the Bank
of Italy’s monetary, exchange rate and supervisory policies. Without competition, in the long run
there  cannot  be  efficiency;  without  efficiency,  in  the  long  run  there  cannot  be  stability  in  the
banking  and  financial  industry.  A  further  consideration,  rooted  in  the  economic  theory  upon
which  antitrust  legislation  is  based,  was  that  laisser  faire  and  competition  were  not  the  same
thing,  that  the  former  could  override  the  latter  (especially  in  an  industry  with  economies  of
scale), and that deregulation was likely to be more effective if set within the framework of  an
economic  and  institutional  policy  aimed  at  protecting  and  strengthening  competition  and
ultimately imposing it on producers who might well not like it. The attribution to the Bank of
Italy of responsibility for implementing antitrust law in the banking field was thus not a break, an
anomaly to be removed later. It was the natural, institutional, recognition of a state of affairs that
had  already  existed  for  tens  of  years.  Above  all  it  sanctioned  a  principle  that  must  be
consolidated and applied more widely: not only are prudential supervision and the protection of
competition not in conflict, but they are rigorously complementary.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 4 -
The declarations of intent, the strategic decisions, the single acts with which the Bank of Italy
interpreted and applied these general criteria in practice have been many and spread over twenty
years. They cannot all be listed here, but I shall briefly indicate the most important in a series of
summary points:
• 
the first, absolutely fundamental, step was taken at the beginning of the eighties with the
reaffirmation of the notion of banks, both publicly and privately-owned, as enterprises. In
the wake of the transposition of the EEC’s First Banking Directive of 1985, the issue was
finally  settled  in  a  judgement  handed  down  by  the  Court  of  Cassation  in  1989.  The
transformation  of  publicly-owned  banks  into  companies  limited  by  shares  followed,  as
provided for in Law 218 of 1990;
     between  1985  and  1990,  while  the  amendments  to  the  law  that  would  lead  to  the  new
Banking  Law  of  1993  were  being  enacted,  administrative  measures  were  adopted
attenuating  or  eliminating  the  restrictions  in  fields  such  as  branching,  fund-raising  and
lending beyond the short term, and the creation of new banks. The growth of individual
banks was increasingly related, by way of solvency and gearing ratios, to the amount of
capital they were able to bring into play;
starting in the early eighties, the quantity, the quality and the diffusion of the information
disclosed by banks to customers and the market were enhanced;
by  the  end  of  1988  the  shift  from  direct  administrative  instruments  to  indirect  market
instruments in implementing monetary policy had been completed;
in response to the need to place growing volumes of public debt with domestic investors,
steps were taken to create efficient money and bond markets. The share of bank deposits
in households’ financial assets fell from 53 per cent in 1979 to 34 per cent in 1990 and
stands at 25 per cent today;
the removal of exchange controls was started in 1988 and completed in 1990, with the
result  that,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  Italy  had  a  fully  convertible  currency  and
complete freedom of both short and long-term capital movements.
All  the  indicators  show  that  the  degree  of  competition  in  the  Italian  banking  system  increased
significantly  in  the  eighties.  Between  1979  and  1989  the  average  number  of  banks  present  in
each  province  rose  from  20  to  27.  The  concentration  of  the  loan  market  fell  by  15  per  cent
nationwide  and  by  20  per  cent  in  the  Centre  and  South.  The  differential  between  the  average
bank lending rate and the pre-tax yield on Treasury bills narrowed from 5 percentage points in
1980 to less than 1 point in 1989 and this happened in a period which saw the riskiness of bank
credit increase slightly. The spread between lending and deposit rates also narrowed, declining
initially from more than  9  percentage  points  in  1980  to  less  than  7  points  in  1989.  Inevitably,
these developments resulted in the margins on credit business coming under pressure.
In 1990 the law establishing the Competition Authority (Law 287/1990) made the Bank of Italy
responsible for the antitrust function in the banking sector. The choice was made in view of the
specific technical nature of banking and the complementary nature of prudential supervision and
the  protection  of  competition.  In  the  United  States,  with  its  century-long  tradition  of  antitrust
legislation, the situation is similar since the Federal Reserve or the Office of the Comptroller of
the  Currency,  according  to  the  banks  involved,  are  responsible  for  evaluating  the  anti-
competitive  effects  of  mergers.  The  Department  of  Justice  cooperates  with  the  regulatory
authorities and in extreme cases may bring a legal action against an operation. In Europe, it is
BIS Review   99/1998
- 5 -
worth mentioning the case of the Netherlands, where, in establishing a Competition Authority at
the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  law  provisionally  assigned  the  protection  of  competition  in  the
banking  and  insurance  industries  to  the  respective  supervisory  authorities.  Other  antitrust
authorities are also beginning to recognize the specificity of the banking sector and, as in Canada,
have issued special instructions for the evaluation of bank mergers.
The growth in competition has continued in the decade that is drawing to a close. Following the
decision taken by the Bank of Italy in 1990 to liberalize banks’ branch networks by abandoning
the  system  of  “branch  plans”,  the  number  of  branches  increased  as  never  before,  rising  by
10,000, or more than 60 per cent, to 25,600 in June of this year. At the end of 1989 there were
1,173 banks in Italy, of which 83 were medium-term credit institutions or sections. By the end of
June the number had fallen by more than 20 per cent to 937, of which 120 belonged to banking
groups. In recent years the process of consolidation has involved large commercial banks, partly
in response to the prospect of an integrated European market with a single currency. The average
number of banks present in each province has risen further to 30.
During the nineties the differential between the average bank lending rate and the pre-tax yield
on  Treasury  bills  has  tended  to  remain  close  to  its  level  at  the  end  of  the  eighties.  But,  partly
owing to the rather weak performance of the economy, this decade has seen a sharp increase in
the  average  riskiness  of  loans  and  a  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  banks’  assets.  Hence,  the
stability of the differential between bank lending rates and the yield on government securities is
further evidence of the increasing competition within the banking industry.
The differences between the lending rates applied in the various parts of the country have also
narrowed in the last four years after peaking in the second half of 1994. The difference between
the  rates  on  short-term  lira  loans  in  the  North  and  the  South  is  currently  around  2  percentage
points  for  non-financial  companies  and  about  1.5  points  for  producer  households.  The  gap  is
entirely attributable to the greater average riskiness of lending in the South and the longer time it
takes to recover credits there. The ratio of bad debts to total loans disbursed to customers in the
South  is  22  per  cent,  as  against  7  per  cent  for  borrowers  in  the  Centre  and  North.  Analyses
carried  out  at  the  Bank  of  Italy  show  that,  after  adjusting  for  the  risks  that  materialized,  the
geographical  differential  disappeared  in  the  early  nineties.  The  spread  between  lending  and
deposit rates has narrowed further and now stands at 4.5 percentage points.
The growth in competition has contributed to a substantial redistribution of banks’ shares of the
loan market. The major changes that occurred after the ceiling on bank loans was removed were
followed by further large shifts in the two years 1989-90 and from 1995 onwards. In the last three
years the market shares that changed hands each year were equal to around 4 per cent of the total
loan portfolio on average, excluding the amounts directly affected by mergers. The increase in
competition  has  led  to  banks  adopting  more  aggressive  supply  policies  and  growth  strategies
more closely attuned to demand.
Mergers and acquisitions in the Italian banking system
Between 1990 and 1997 the Bank of Italy, pursuant to the provisions of antitrust law applying to
the banking sector, examined some 300 proposed mergers and acquisitions. The  banks  in  play
grew  steadily  larger.  In  the  last  four  years  the  banks  involved  accounted  for  7  per  cent  of  the
banking  system’s  total  assets  on  average  each  year.  The  consolidation  process  has  had  a
particularly  pronounced  impact  on  the  southern  banking  system,  partly  as  a  result  of  the
acquisition of the control of local banks in difficulty by banks situated in the Centre and North.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 6 -
In ten cases the Bank of Italy decided to examine proposed mergers in order to verify whether the
operation  was  likely  to  create  or  strengthen  a  dominant  position  and  prejudice  competition.  In
four  of  these  cases  the  go  ahead  was  made  conditional  on  measures  aimed  at  protecting
competition in the market in question.
Another ten examinations concerned agreements suspected of being detrimental to competition.
The investigation of  industry-wide  standard  terms  and  of  payment  instruments  were  especially
important in this respect. In its recently published findings on the rules governing the use of the
PagoBANCOMAT card, the Bank of Italy identified several circumstances that were potentially
anti-competitive and made its approval of the agreement conditional on a number of changes that
will help to make the market more competitive.
The Bank of Italy also investigated five alleged abuses of dominant positions. In four of these
cases the banks were accused of using their exclusive right to provide tax-collection services to
gain  undue  competitive  advantages  in  neighbouring  credit  markets.  In  the  fifth  case  the  Bank
took  action  to  prevent  the  bank  from  exploiting  its  dominant  position  to  expand  its  branch
network abnormally with the aim of obstructing the entry or growth of competitors in the market
in question.
In  addition  to  its  normal  examination  activity,  in  1996  the  Bank  of  Italy  investigated  the
possibility  that  banks  were  coordinating  their  pricing  policies,  but  found  no  evidence  of  such
practices.  In  1997,  in  agreement  with  the  Competition  Authority,  it  conducted  a  general  fact-
finding inquiry into the corporate services sector.
In the nineties the consolidation of the Italian banking system has proceeded primarily by means
of mergers and amalgamations, of which there had been 265 by the end of 1997. Acquisitions of
the  control  of  banks  that  subsequently  continued  to  operate  as  separate  entities  also  played  an
important  role,  with  a  total  of  91  such  takeovers.  Even  where  these  operations  have  not  yet
significantly reduced operating costs, they have allowed capital to be used more efficiently and
brought  tax  benefits,  increases  in  fee  income  and  improvements  in  the  quality  of  the  acquired
bank’s loan portfolio.
Mergers between banks which are not present in the same markets, or with only limited overlap,
increase competition. By contrast, the “market power” effect tends to prevail over the efficiency
effect where the merging banks both have a large presence in the same market. These findings
confirm the continued importance of the physical closeness of customers to their banks and the
need for the attention that the competition authorities pay to local markets.
Mergers  inevitably  impact  the  payment  system  and  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector.  By
diminishing the number of participants in the payment system, they tend to reduce the volume of
transactions  to  be  settled.  The  setting  of  operational  and  technological  standards  aimed  at
exploiting network economies may well be easier. On the other hand, larger banks are likely to
cause  more  serious  problems  in  the  event  of  insolvency:  the  overall  effect  of  mergers  on  the
stability of the payments system will depend on how they affect the riskiness of the individual
banks.
Competition, consolidation and costs
Competition, consolidation and reorganizations have helped to curb operating costs in relation to
the total assets of the banking system. In the three years from 1995 to 1997 this ratio averaged
2.4 per cent, compared with 3 per cent in the second half of the eighties.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 7 -
Nonetheless,  partly  as  a  result  of  the  rigidity  of  the  Italian  labour  market,  the  competitive  gap
between Italian banks and their counterparts abroad, which is attributable primarily to the greater
incidence of staff costs, has not narrowed in the nineties. In 1997 bank staff costs amounted to 43
per cent of gross income in Italy, compared with an average of 38 per cent in France, Germany
and Spain.
The agreements between employers and the trade unions to reduce the cost of labour, prompted
by the Bank of Italy and promoted by the Government, have not yet been given effect in a new
wage agreement linking earnings more closely to a bank’s performance. Significant cost savings,
as  well  as  increased  revenues,  can  be  achieved  by  modernizing  structures,  reorganizing
production  processes  and  developing  innovative  distribution  networks.  Other  banking  systems
have invested a substantial volume of resources, deriving in part from savings in staff costs, in
technological innovation, thereby acquiring competitive advantages on several fronts.
The  increase  in  competition  in  banking  markets,  further  intensified  by  foreign  intermediaries
accustomed  to  operating  on  a  larger  scale  and  with  smaller  interest  rate  spreads,  has  sharply
reduced  the  profitability  of  Italian  banks’  traditional  activities.  The  fall  in  net  interest  income,
which began several years ago and will be accentuated by the introduction of the euro, has not
been  offset  by  a  lasting  increase  in  revenues  from  innovative  activities:  corporate  advisory
services and finance, the administration and management of households’ savings, and business in
the international securities markets.
In the first half of the eighties Italian banks’ return on equity was in excess of 14 per cent, in line
with that of the other leading European banking systems. Since then it has fallen, reaching a low
of around 1 per cent last year. Apart from the level of costs, the large loan losses incurred in the
last few years have made a major contribution to the decline in profitability. The risk-asset ratio
of the Italian banking system is 13 per cent, well above the requirement of 8 per cent established
in the Basle Capital Accord. Only a very few banks are below this limit and the total shortfall is
around 500 billion lire.
The  decline  in  profitability  has  nonetheless  reduced  the  flow  of  internally-generated  resources
with which to finance growth and merger operations. The larger banks have suffered especially
in  this  respect:  at  the  end  of  last  year  they  held  less  than  one  third  of  the  free  capital  of  the
banking system, as against 80 per cent of its total assets. The lack of free capital, not tied up in
tangible  and  financial  fixed  assets  and  available  for  acquisitions,  will  curtail  the  scope  for
modernizing the system and pursuing efficiency.
The intermediate objective pursued over the last twenty years has been largely achieved; there is
more  competition,  there  have  been  numerous  mergers  and  a  start  has  been  made  on
reorganization  projects  that  promise  to  improve  efficiency.  Competition  has  produced  its  full
effects  on  the  prices  of  banking  products  and  services,  holding  them  down  and  making  them
more uniform. But other benefits have been, still are, slow in coming: lower costs, international
competitiveness, profits and fresh capital generated by efficiency and the quality of services.
The  picture  is  thus  chiaroscuro.  Disappointment  should  only  be  felt  by  those  who  fail  to
recognize  that  competition  fosters  efficiency  but  cannot  guarantee  it  where  producers  lack  the
ability to respond — à la Leibenstein — to the competitive stimulus. It is necessary to appreciate
how much inertia has to be overcome in a complex process that is more cultural than juridical or
institutional, in short the “passage” from oligopoly to competition of an industry that is based on
information asymmetries, bilateral customer relationships and the reputation of producers. This
journey  was  bound  to  be  laborious  and  slow,  especially  in  Italy’s  case.  The  Italian  banking
BIS Review   99/1998
- 8 -
system arrived at the world economic crisis of the seventies after two postwar decades in which
its  oligopolistic  nature  had  become  deeply  rooted,  while  the  economy  had  enjoyed  an
extraordinary  boom.  The  model  formulated  by  Donato  Menichella  and  Raffaele  Mattioli  had
“worked”  in  a  certain  sense;  it  had  met,  albeit  with  the  inefficiencies  that  were  the  inevitable
corollary, the demand for credit and money of the Italian economy in  that  buoyant  phase.  The
subsequent resistance to change cannot be entirely attributed to the reluctance of any industry to
face the forces of competition or to the natural tendency to continue to do things in the same way.
To  give  way  to  counterfactual  criticism  based  on  hindsight  —  such  as,  the  injection  of
competitive  enzymes  should  have  been  much  larger  and  more  intense  —  would  be  not  only
sterile  but  also  debatable  in  theory  and  risky  in  practice.  It  is  analytically  doubtful  whether  it
would have been possible, given the context. It is sufficient to mention just one aspect referred to
earlier:  the  uniform  treatment  of  banks  and  enterprises  and  of  banks  in  the  public  and  private
sectors became a part of Italian law — as a result of the judgement of 1989 — ten years after the
supervisory authority had clearly stated the principle. The risk at the practical level is that at this
point banking competition will be seen as a missed opportunity, and that this will lead to the idea
of renouncing it in the future.
The position of the Bank of Italy is to proceed, if possible with greater determination, on the road
taken twenty years ago — not only because the single market, the euro and their rules leave no
option, and not only because the law in force in Italy today mandates this course, but in the belief
that the progress that has already been made is in the right direction, even though competition on
its own, it is worth repeating, does not guarantee an optimal financial system.
The Bank of Italy will devote more resources, a revised internal administrative structure focused
on  banking  competition,  and  additional  analyses  serving  to  underpin  new  interventions  to  the
task  of  fostering  competition  in  the  markets  in  which  banks  operate  and  the  mergers  they
autonomously plan.
Two  changes  that  are  already  under  way  will  also  produce  their  effects.  Mutually  reinforcing,
they should, together with competition in the markets for banking products, stimulate efforts to
achieve the cost reductions and quality improvements that are necessary. The first change is the
privatization  of  the  banks  that  are  still  under  public  control,  the  second  concerns  the  exit
procedures aimed at preventing moral hazard and the neglect of costs.
The transfer of the ownership of banks to the private sector is the precondition for control to be
contested in the market. In the last few years the process of privatizing public banks has gathered
pace,  in  parallel  with  the  growth  in  mergers.  Including  the  operations  that  are  currently  being
organized, the share of the banking system’s assets in the hands of banks of which the state, local
authorities  or  foundations  own  the  majority  of  the  capital  will  shortly  fall  to  20  per  cent,  as
against 70 per cent ten years ago. BNL is about to be privatized. The Monte dei Paschi di Siena
foundation, the only one that still owns all the capital of a major bank, has recently decided to
place some of its capital in the market and to seek a stock exchange listing.
The  prospect  of  contestability  opened  up  by  bank  privatizations  has  been  strengthened  by  the
changes to the legal framework introduced by the Consolidated Law on Financial Markets, which
came into force in July of this year. The new rules serve to increase the disclosure of information,
enhance the efficiency of the financial markets and the contestability of control — in the case of
listed companies partly through the revision of the provisions governing takeovers. There are 25
commercial banks listed on the stock exchange; they account, directly and indirectly via listed
and unlisted subsidiaries, for 50 per cent of the banking system’s total assets. In addition, there
BIS Review   99/1998
- 9 -
are 10 cooperative banks listed on the stock exchange, accounting for 10 per cent of total assets,
and another 7 banks are listed on the ristretto market.
Although the Community authorities recognize the specific features of the banking sector, their
application of Article 92 of the Treaty to banks tends to be rigorous. The authorization of state
aid to some large European banks has been made conditional on their disposing of assets, parts of
the  business  and  equity  interests.  The  fact  that  bankers  will  be  able  to  count  less  on  public
support  means  they  will  have  to  adopt  even  more  stringent  criteria  of  autonomous,  sound  and
prudent management.
The  number  of  banks  in  distress  that  have  been  consolidated  (by  means  of  mergers,
amalgamations  and  takeovers)  or  placed  under  special  administration  or  in  liquidation  has
increased in the  nineties,  in  both  absolute  and  relative  terms.  The  ratio  of  the  number  of  such
banks to the total number rose from 1.5 per cent in 1990 to an average of 4.3 per cent in 1996
and 1997; the ratio of their assets to the total assets of the banking system rose from 0.2 per cent
to nearly 6 per cent. The increase in the number of such interventions with respect to troubled
banks  has  been  partly  due  to  the  increased  emphasis  on  the  preventive  nature  of  supervisory
action. Since the action is taken when the troubled bank still has a net value, it is possible to look
for  market-based  solutions  and  hence  to  reduce  the  burden  borne  by  the  deposit  protection
system or the public finances. The proportion of troubled banks subjected to restructuring that
were liquidated rose from 6 to 16 per cent between 1990 and 1997. In terms of their assets, the
ratio rose from just a few percentage points at the beginning of the decade to 11 per cent in 1997.
The  potential  for  the  development  of  the  financial  sector,  in  both  quantitative  and  qualitative
terms, that the Italian economy requires and that it can achieve is considerable, probably greater
than in most other European countries. The Bank of Italy remains committed to ensure, with the
instruments  the  law  provides,  that  this  further  development  takes  place  in  a  competitive
environment and in conditions of greater efficiency.
BIS Review   99/1998
