Mr.  Duisenberg’s  opening  statement  at  the  press  conference  covering  the
latest  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank      Introductory
statement  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr.  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  the  press
conference held in Frankfurt on 3/11/98.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  in  previous  months,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  here
today  to  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European
Central  Bank.  The  number  of  items  considered  by  the  Governing  Council  required  a  full-day
meeting. Most of the items on the agenda were of a rather technical nature or were related to the
legal implementation of decisions already taken at previous Governing Council meetings. Part of
the meeting was attended by Mr. Edlinger, President of the EU Council, and by Commissioners
de Silguy and Monti.
Let  me  first  turn  to  the  Governing  Council’s  in-depth  discussion  on  recent
economic, monetary and financial developments.
Starting with the global macroeconomic environment, it was felt that the spiral of
bad  news  has  not  continued  over  the  most  recent  weeks.  Also,  when  looking  at  market
developments, we have observed a strengthening of the US dollar vis-à-vis euro area currencies
since its trough in mid-October. We have seen a recovery in global stock markets and we have
also witnessed some upward correction of long-term bond yields after they had fallen sharply as
a  result  of  a  “ flight  to  quality” .  However,  markets  displayed  considerable  volatility  during
October, reflecting the uncertainty prevailing in the world economy.
Whether  or  not  we  can  now  expect  a  process  towards  more  normal  conditions
remains to be seen. Given the underlying causes of the adverse conditions in Asia, Russia and
other parts of the world, a quick resolution is in any case not very likely. Moreover, it is by now
quite clear that the world economy will suffer from these developments in 1999 and that the euro
area will also be affected to some extent.
However, the crucial and widely debated issue is the degree to which such effects
on the euro area will materialise and how long they may last.
As matters stand, there appears to be consensus that euro area economic growth
will slow down to some extent in 1999, driven largely by a weakening in net exports. In its latest
forecast, published on 21 October 1998, the Commission has revised downwards aggregate euro
area  real  GDP  growth  to  2.6%  in  1999,  compared  with  3.2%  projected  earlier  this  year.
According  to  the  same  source,  the  slowdown  is  expected  to  be  only  temporary  and  real  GDP
growth is anticipated to strengthen again in 2000, with the contribution of net trade improving.
At  the  same  time,  the  outlook  for  inflation  in  the  near  term  remains  generally  favourable,
assuming continued wage moderation and subdued developments in import prices.
In today’s discussion, the Governing Council agreed to examine further the broad
outlook for the euro area at its two meetings in December. In this context, we will thoroughly
discuss  the  downside  risks  for  output  growth  resulting  from  the  evolution  of  world  trade  and
from  international  financial  tensions  and  the  possibility  of  still  more  subdued  price
developments. However, one should also mention the fact that a relaxation of fiscal policies and
higher wage increases could lead to a reversal of current developments in consumer prices and
undermine  confidence.  Any  uncertainties  arising  in  these  two  fields  would  of  course
BIS Review   93/1998
- 2 -
considerably complicate our assessment, given the high degree of uncertainty already associated
with the developments in the global economy.
With  respect  to  today’s  review  of  the  monetary,  financial  and  macroeconomic
situation in the euro area, the following aspects were discussed.
First,  with  reference  to  monetary  growth,  let  me  recall  that  when  looking  at
various definitions of broad money, our preliminary data show broadly similar and stable annual
growth rates of between 3 and 5% in 1997 and the first half of 1998. According to our initial
analysis  these  monetary  trends  do  not  appear  to  signal  inflationary  pressures  at  this  juncture.
However,  a  further  assessment  will  be  made  in  December  on  the  basis  of  more  up-to-date
information.
Second,  with  respect  to  price  developments,  euro  area  HICP  inflation  fell  from
1.2% in August to 1.0% in September 1998. The generally low level of HICP increases mainly
reflects a decline in energy prices, which were almost 4% lower in September than a year earlier,
and in other commodity prices; in addition, price pressure as indicated by industrial output prices
and  unit  labour  costs  has  remained  modest.  With  respect  to  the  decline  in  HICP  inflation  in
September, this is closely related to a relatively strong fall in food prices (from 1.8% in August
to  1.4%  in  September  1998),  which  account  for  almost  one-quarter  of  the  total  HICP.  Such
monthly  changes  are  certainly  very  difficult  to  interpret.  However,  I  may  point  out  that  food
prices display a larger degree of volatility owing to their seasonal pattern.
Third, taking into account distorting factors such as calendar effects, underlying
developments in euro area-wide real GDP have remained fairly stable. Economic expansion was
broadly  unchanged  in  the  first  half  of  1998  from  the  solid  growth  seen  in  the  second  half  of
1997. Also, at this juncture, data partly available for the summer months point to the possibility
that  recent  rates  of  output  growth  may  be  broadly  sustained  beyond  the  first  half  of  this  year.
While the trends appear in some cases weaker, particularly when also looking at some national
data,  the  latest  euro  area-wide  survey  data  on  confidence,  order  books  and  capacity  utilisation
generally  remain  well  above  their  long-run  averages.  However,  further  developments  in  these
data will have to be monitored closely. Concerning the assessment of the monetary policy stance
in the euro area, the Governing Council - having carefully reviewed all factors and developments
- confirmed the view taken at its previous meeting. It considered further interest rate convergence
towards  the  lower  end  of  the  current  range  prevailing  in  the  euro  area  as  being  appropriate.
Measured by  key  central  bank  rates,  the  lowest  rates  in  the  euro  area  currently  stand  at  3.3%.
Market interest rates have also reached very low levels. In terms of three-month interest rates, the
euro area average rate has fallen to 3.75%, following the reduction of interest rates by a number
of euro area central banks. With the announcement today of further interest rate reductions by the
Banco de España and the Banco de Portugal, both effective tomorrow, the euro area average will
continue its downward trend. Nominal and real long-term interest rates for the euro area are at
historically low levels. It confirms the high degree of confidence that the euro has gained in the
judgement of the general public and of global investors. This confidence is a major asset in the
consolidation of a financial environment conducive to growth.
As has been proven in many instances in the past, monetary policy cannot solve
structural  problems.  Indeed,  monetary  policies  in  the  euro  area  countries  have  increasingly
converged over the past few years and resulted in low levels of interest rates. Several countries
have  followed  virtually  a  “ common  monetary  policy  stance”   over  a  longer  period,  but
performances  -  for  example  in  labour  markets  -  within  the  euro  area  differ  considerably  from
BIS Review   93/1998
- 3 -
country to country. The degree of success in this area seems to be closely related to structural
reforms implemented in earlier years.
I  am  confident  that  we  can  cope  both  with  current  problems  and  with  future
challenges.  This  requires  a  forward-looking,  medium-term-oriented  monetary  policy,  which
keeps inflationary expectations low. This is the decisive contribution of monetary policy to the
fostering  of  growth  and  employment.  Dealing  with  structural  problems  is  the  task  of  policies
other than monetary policy.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to report on various aspects of the
preparatory work for Stage Three.
(a)  Preparations for the “changeover weekend”
With less than 60 days to go before the start of Stage Three, we are obviously attaching
particular importance to the provision of a framework allowing for a smooth changeover to
the euro. We began our preparations a long time ago and I am confident that the ESCB will
be in a position to deliver its entire complex infrastructure to the markets by the morning of
4 January 1999. I expect the banking and financial community in the euro area to be fully
aware both of the logistical challenge that the changeover weekend represents and of the
need for careful preparation. Given the concentration of migration operations to the euro to
be conducted by a multitude of financial agents (i.e. payment systems, securities settlement
systems,  custodians,  individual  banks,  exchanges  and  financial  information  providers)  in
the  period  from  31  December  1998  to  4  January  1999,  the  ESCB  is  preparing  to  work
together with other public authorities to orchestrate the necessary policy responses to any
unexpected events. To this end, the Governing Council has set up an ad hoc “ Changeover
Weekend  Committee”   which  will  organise  the  monitoring  of  developments  vis-à-vis  the
final  migration  to  the  euro  within  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  and  in  the
banking and financial industry, both prior to and during the changeover weekend.
Additional details on the preparation of the changeover weekend are provided in a separate
press release which is to be issued to you this evening.
(b)  Payment systems issues
With regard to euro payment and settlement systems, I should like to draw your attention
to recent  developments  which  suggest  that  many  market  participants  consider  the  euro  a
special  currency  to  which  the  traditional  rules  applied  elsewhere  in  the  developed  world
would  not  necessarily  be  applicable.  Initiatives  were  taken,  or  allowed  to  develop,  that
have  no  precedent  in  the  arrangements  concerning  other  currencies.  This  relates  in
particular to the granting of payment finality and intraday credit in a currency other than a
country’s  own.  Therefore,  the  Governing  Council  considered  it  appropriate  to  issue  a
policy statement clearly spelling out the fact that the rules which apply to all of the other
currencies  in  the  world  will  also  apply  to  the  euro,  and  that  the  ECB  bears  the  same
responsibilities as all the other central banks in the world.
This  policy  statement  on  euro  payment  and  settlement  systems  located  outside  the  euro
area is to be issued to you this evening.
The  Governing  Council  also  agreed  on  the  main  features  of  the  legal  framework  within
which the TARGET system will operate. These main features are set out in greater detail in
BIS Review   93/1998
- 4 -
the  “ Third  progress  report  on  the  TARGET  project” ,  which  the  Governing  Council
endorsed  today.  In  common  with  previous  progress  reports,  the  current  one  will  be
published in the near future and will provide further technical details of interest to market
participants.
(c)  Exchange of national banknotes
In the absence of euro banknotes at the start of Stage Three, the Governing Council today
agreed  on  arrangements  according  to  which  the  participating  national  central  banks  will
exchange  legal  tender  banknotes  of  other  participating  Member  States  for  national
banknotes  and  coins  at  the  official  conversion  rate  as  from  1  January  1999.  To  ensure
substitutability  between  the  national  currency  units,  the  Governing  Council  decided  that
each participating national central bank will arrange for such an exchange at one location at
least. The national central banks may, however, limit the number and/or the total volume of
banknotes they are prepared to accept for any given transaction or on any one day.
Further details on that matter are provided in a separate press release which is to be issued
to you this evening.
(d)  Allocation of monetary income
As  regards  the  income  arising  from  the  issuance  of  national  banknotes  from  the
participating Member States, the Governing Council today decided that such income will
not be redistributed prior to the introduction of the euro banknotes. The Governing Council
also confirmed, with respect to the allocation of monetary income of the national central
banks  of  the  participating  Member  States  for  the  financial  years  1999  to  2001,  that  the
monetary income for the said period will be calculated by employing the so-called indirect
method, by multiplying a defined liability base by a specified reference rate of interest. The
sum  of  the  monetary  income  of  each  national  central  bank  will  be  allocated  to  the
participating  national  central  banks  in  proportion  to  their  paid-up  share  in  the  ECB’s
capital. Owing to the temporary character of the current decision, the question of monetary
income  allocation  will  need  to  be  revisited  before  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  in
2002.
(e)  Transfer of foreign reserve assets to the ECB
Today the Governing Council also adopted an ECB Guideline establishing the legal format
as well as the modalities of the initial transfer of foreign reserves from the national central
banks  to  the  ECB.  In  this  connection  and  as  a  measure  for  covering  possible  foreign
exchange risks for the ECB, the Governing Council endorsed, in line with the Statute of
the ESCB, an ECB Recommendation for a Council Regulation which would authorise the
ECB  to  increase  its  capital  from  the  current  level  of  5  billion  euros  to  up  to  twice  that
amount.
BIS Review   93/1998
(f)         Monetary and foreign exchange policy
- 5 -
Further decisions have also been taken with regard to preparing the monetary and foreign
exchange policy of the euro area. On previous occasions I have mentioned to you that legal
acts are under preparation which specify general principles to be followed by the national
central banks when carrying out operations in domestic assets and liabilities and in foreign
exchange  reserve  assets  remaining  with  the  national  central  banks.  Such  instruments,
which are based on provisions of the Statute of the ESCB, aim from a legal point of view
at  ensuring  the  singleness  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  the  consistency  of  such
transactions  with  the  Community’s  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policies.  Against  this
background,  the  Governing  Council  today  adopted  an  ECB  Guideline  which  establishes
certain  reporting  obligations  for  the  national  central  banks’  domestic  asset  and  liability
management  operations  and  subjects  such  transactions  to  the  prior  approval  of  the  ECB
whenever  they  exceed  a  certain  amount.  A  similar  ECB  Guideline  was  adopted  which
subjects all operations in foreign reserve assets – including gold – which exceed a certain
amount to the approval of the ECB. In addition, the Governing Council adopted an ECB
Guideline according to which any participating Member State’s transactions whose foreign
exchange working balances which exceed a certain amount must be notified to the ECB in
advance. A similar arrangement is envisaged between the ECB and the Commission of the
European Communities for all foreign exchange transactions carried out in the context of
implementing the Commission’s budget.
In the context of the statutory function of the ESCB to contribute to the smooth
conduct of policies of competent authorities in the field of banking supervision and financial
stability, the Governing Council discussed the main driving forces that are likely to affect the
EU  banking  systems  in  the  medium  and  long  term,  including  the  establishment  of  EMU.  The
Council  members  hold  the  view  that  the  establishment  of  EMU  is  expected  to  reinforce  the
structural  tendencies  that  are  already  under  way  in  the  EU  banking  systems.  These  tendencies
include  the  reduction  of  excess  capacity,  pressure  on  profitability,  enhanced  competition,
increased internationalisation and geographical diversification. One important aspect is the fact
that EU banks seem to have significantly increased their awareness of the strategic implications
of the introduction of the euro over the past few months. They are devising specific responses
accordingly,  which  include:  (i)  improvements  in  services  and  procedures;  (ii)  changes  in  the
range  of  products  supplied  to  customers;  and  (iii)  mergers,  strategic  alliances  and  cooperation
agreements. We intend to make the outcome of this examination public in due course.
Finally,  the  Governing  Council  adopted  an  ECB  Decision  concerning  public
access to the documentation and archives of the ECB. This Decision will be published in the
Official Journal of the European Communities.
BIS Review   93/1998
