Mr. Macfarlane comments on the future international financial architecture
Talk  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  Mr.  I.J.  Macfarlane,  to  the  East  Asia
Economic Summit in Singapore on 14/10/98.
…
In  my  ten  minutes  here  I  will  try  and  cover  what  I  see  as  the  main  changes  in
perspective  about  what  we  formerly  termed  the  Asian  crisis,  and  then  say  a  few  words  about
future international financial architecture.
•  The main change is that since August this year we no longer think of an Asian
crisis but we now think of either an emerging markets crisis or a general world
financial crisis.
•  A  second  important  change  is  that  the  western  policy  establishment  can  no
longer  believe  that  the  root  cause  of  the  problem  is  the  inadequacy  of  the
financial  infrastructure  and  governance  of  some  formerly  rapidly  growing
Asian countries. Of course, not everyone used to believe this, but there were
some very influential institutions that thought this way.
•  Everyone is now aware that contagion is a much stronger force than formerly
thought. Contagion is an essentially irrational force which tars large groups of
countries with the same brush, and causes fear to overrule reason.
•  Given the bigger role for contagion, more and more people are asking whether
the international financial system as it has operated for most of the 1990s is
basically unstable. By now, I think the majority of observers have come to the
conclusion that it is, and that some changes have to be made.
With  pretty  well  everyone  now  conceding  that  changes  have  to  be  made,  you
would think it would be a relatively simple matter to move on to the next step. But it will not be,
because there are still big differences of opinion about how serious the problem is.
•  One school of thought held that the main thing required to restore stability was
to  improve  transparency,  particularly  the  Government’s  transparency  to  the
private sector - e.g. by more frequent and accurate publication of figures for
international reserves. This school of thought also gave a fair bit of weight to
improving the quality of bank supervision in emerging market countries. This
explains the motivation behind two of the three working groups set up by the
G22 in April.
•  But  an  increasing  majority  think  something  more  is  required,  and  the  most
promising approach here goes under  the  general  title  of  burden  sharing  with
the private sector (the G22’s third working group). I would like to say a little
more  about  this  because  I  think  it  will  be  necessary  if  we  are  to  make  real
progress.
If we go back and think of the Thai, Korean or Indonesian crises, we can see the
problem if there is no formal system of burden sharing. Once the currency doubts started, short-
term  lenders  knew  that  if  they  could  get  their  money  out  fast  enough  they  would  minimise
currency losses and loan losses. So when each loan had to be rolled over it was not renewed, and
capital  flowed  out.  Each  day  this  happened  the  exchange  rate  came  under  further  downward
BIS Review   87/1998
- 2 -
pressure, which encouraged further capital flight. Everyone wanted to be out before the point was
reached where the exchange rate was so low, interest rates were so high, and insolvencies were
so rife, that those who could not get out of the door would be big losers. This process ensured the
maximum fall in the exchange rate.
Something  clearly  has  to  be  done  in  terms  of  managing  the  crisis  to  reduce  the
incentives  for  everyone  to  try  to  be  the  first  one  out  of  the  door.  Some  system  of  standfast
followed  by  an  orderly  workout  involving  rollovers,  reschedulings  and,  in  extreme  cases,  debt
equity swaps is clearly required. No country wants to be the first one to do this, and unilateral
action could cause panic in other countries à la Russia. What is needed is a system that involves
cooperation between the host country, private lenders and the IMF. We saw an example of how
effective this can be for Korean bank-to-bank debt late last year.
Ideally, this should not be on an ad hoc basis, as it was in Korea, but should be
thought  out  well  in  advance,  with  the  possibility  of  such  workouts  included  in  loan
documentation.  This,  of  course,  would  increase  the  cost  of  borrowing  by  emerging  market
economies, but that would be no bad thing. One of the problems over the last five years was that
it  became  too  cheap  and  too  much  of  it  was  done.  It  would  be  better  than  excessive  lending
followed by capital flight as we have seen over the past few years.
This  is  all  becoming  reasonably  conventional  thinking  now  and,  as  I  said,  it  is
contained in the third Working Party Report of the G22. But it was not that long ago that any
suggestions  along  these  lines  were  greeted  with  the  response  that  it  was  out  of  the  question
because it involved interfering with the free movement of capital.
I would like to conclude by mentioning two other things that have changed over
the past year.
First, hedge funds.
As recently as three months ago if you complained about the activities of hedge
funds you were regarded as paranoid and you received a sermon on the dangers of shooting the
messenger, etc.
Now, no one has got a good word to say for them, and they are likely to soon be
brought into either:
 the disclosure net, or
some form of supervision via their connections with banks.
Second, I see a clear improvement in future crisis management in the way the IMF
is talking with Brazil.
Unlike the Asian crises, I don’t see any country in future putting itself in the hands
of  the  IMF  without  knowing  pretty  clearly  beforehand  what  the  IMF  conditions  will  be.  If  it
doesn’t like the conditions, for example, because they are too wide-ranging, it will not go to the
Fund. If it is comfortable with the conditions, it will be able to sign up from day one.
BIS Review   87/1998
- 3 -
This  way,  we  should  be  able  to  avoid  the  long  periods  of  semi-public  haggling
over conditions that characterised the Asian crises and did so much to frighten the markets into
pushing exchange rates down excessively.
BIS Review   87/1998
