Bank of Japan’s September report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 13 September 1999.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy has stopped deteriorating, and there are some activities improving such as exports
and production. However, clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not yet been
observed.
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment has been on a downward trend. Recovery in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole.  Housing  investment,  which  had  been
recovering,  has  recently  peaked  out.  Meanwhile,  public  works  have  been  rising,  and  net  exports
(exports minus imports) have started growing due to an increase in exports.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,
industrial  production  is  turning  to  an  increase.  Against  this  background,  corporate  and  consumer
sentiment  has  seen  an  improvement.  The  improvement  in  corporate  sentiment,  however,  has  not
necessarily stimulated business activities, because firms strongly feel that they have excess capacity
and employees and their profits remain weak. Meanwhile, the improvement in consumer sentiment is
underpinning  household expenditure  even  under the  worsening  employment  and  income  conditions,
but is not strong enough to push up overall private consumption.
As  for  the  outlook,  improvements  in  the  overall  financial  environment  partly  due  to  the  monetary
easing by the Bank, along with a series of economic measures taken by the government, are expected
to continue underpinning the economy. Moreover, the positive impact on domestic production of the
recovery of overseas economies, especially of Asian economies, is likely to continue for some time.
By  contrast,  leading  indicators  suggest  a  high  probability  of  a  moderate  decrease  in  housing
investment from this autumn. In addition, under cautious sales plans, firms are implementing further
restructuring  to  improve  their  profitability.  Although  such  corporate  restructuring  is  expected  to
improve  productivity,  it  is  likely,  in  the  short  run,  to  reduce  fixed  investment  and  discourage
household  expenditure  through  the  resulting  deterioration  in  employment  and  income  conditions.
Moreover,  it  seems  that  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  will  have  an adverse  effect  on  corporate
profits  in  the  near  term.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  still  difficult  to  expect  an  immediate
self-sustained recovery in private demand. Overall economic developments require careful monitoring
in consideration of the above points. It is also important to promote structural reform in order to assure
the economy’s sustained growth in the medium term.
With regard to prices, import prices have recently fallen slightly due to the appreciation of the yen,
despite the rise in international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices
are leveling off due to the progress in inventory adjustment as well as an increase in prices of some
products closely related to international commodities, such as those of petroleum products. Consumer
prices continue  to be  unchanged.  Corporate  service  prices  are  still  falling,  although  the  pace  of  the
decline is slowing.  For  a  while,  movements  of  overall  prices  are  likely  to  be  flat,  as  the  decline  in
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 9 September 1999.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 9 September as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 96/1999
domestic commodity prices has come to a halt reflecting the rise in import prices to date. However,
substantial narrowing in the output gap led by a recovery in private demand is unlikely for the time
being, and wages continue to decline. Thus, downward pressure on prices is expected to remain.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero and financial institutions have
been  confident  about  the  availability  of  overnight  funds.  As  for  interest  rates  on  term  instruments,
short-term rates such as those of three months have weakened. However, longer-term rates maturing
beyond the year-end continue to be relatively high partly due to market participants’ concern over the
Year 2000 problem.
The Japan premium has continued to be nearly zero for short-term transactions.
Yields on long-term  government bonds rose to 2 percent in late  August,  but have  recently  fallen  to
1.8-1.9 percent. The yield spread between government bonds and private bonds (bank debentures and
corporate bonds) has stopped narrowing.
Stock  prices  recovered  the  18,000  yen  level  in  late  August,  but  subsequently  declined  against  the
background of the appreciation of the yen and the weak tone in US stock prices. Currently, the prices
are around 17,500-18,000 yen.
The yen has appreciated further against the US dollar since mid-August to the current level of around
110 yen.
The  amount  outstanding  of  funds in  the  call  money  market  has  remained  generally  stable  since  the
middle  of  June.  To  date,  this  has  not  led  to  any  difficulty  in  funds  settlement,  but  close  attention
should be paid to future market developments.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base  has  eased  considerably.  Under  these  circumstances,  major  banks  have  gradually  become  more
active than before in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition, some firms have recently been repaying their loans using their on-hand liquidity. As a result,
credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  be  weak,  and  thus  private  banks’  lending  has
remained sluggish. Furthermore, the pace of issuance of corporate bonds and CP has generally been
slowing.
Money stock (M2+CDs) has shown a year-to-year increase of about 4 percent partly due to an increase
in fiscal expenditure.
In this financial environment, credit conditions have eased somewhat.
The following continue to warrant careful monitoring: how actively investors will take risks; how far
private banks will ease their lending stance; and how these changes will affect economic activities.
BIS Review 96/1999
2
