Mr Yam’s statement on the listing of Exchange Fund Notes on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange
Speech by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  JP,  at  the
listing of Exchange Fund Notes on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on 19 July 1999.
Mr Lee, Mr Chan, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today’s signing ceremony paves the way for the listing of Exchange Fund Notes on the Hong Kong
Stock  Exchange  next  month.  In  addition  to  offering  retail  investors  an  attractive  and  reliable
investment  opportunity,  this  listing  will  mark  an  important  milestone  in  the  development  of  Hong
Kong’s debt market.
Hong Kong, and indeed Asia as a whole, lacks an active debt market. What should in theory serve as
an important pipeline of financial intermediation, through which the savings of the community flow
into productive investment, has, in this region, always been constricted. At times, it  has  been  quite
clogged up. By the standards of developed market economies, our reliance on the banking and equity
markets, the two other channels of financial intermediation, has been, and still is, disproportionately
heavy.  As  a  result,  we  cannot  really  say  that  financial  intermediation  in  Hong  Kong  is  entirely
efficient.  One  consequence  is  that,  in  the  event  of  a  failure  in  one  of  those  channels  of  systemic
proportions,  the  pressure  built  up  in  the  other  channels  could  become  unbearably  great,  and  even
explosive. A further consequence is disruption to the flow of money from savings to investment and
disruption to the economic activities that are so important to the well being of our community.
By contrast, we saw in the case of LTCM how, in well developed financial markets, financial flows
can be effectively redirected to the banking and equity sectors in response to the failure of the debt
market. Indeed, the banks themselves were called upon to rescue LTCM and ensure that, even with
dislocation in the debt market caused by excessive leveraging, the financial system could continue to
function.
No matter whether we are responsible for the plumbing of the financial system or for making money
work for the community, we in the financial community all have an interest in ensuring that money
flows through these three channels freely, safely and efficiently. One important task for all of us has
always been to develop a liquid debt market for Hong Kong.
As you are aware, the Exchange Fund debt programme, which started in March 1990, is part of that
effort,  although  the  development  of  the  debt  market  was  not  the  only  objective  of  the  programme.
Since then, we have brought to the market a total supply of paper amounting to about $100 billion,
with  maturities  ranging  from  three  months  to  ten  years.  We  have  also  developed  a  robust
infrastructure for the debt market that is fully integrated with the real time payment system to achieve
real  time  “Delivery  versus  payment”  in  the  trading  of  Exchange  Fund  paper.  But  interest  in  this
market  at  the  retail  level  has  been  slow  to  develop.  The  paper  is  predominantly  held  by  banks  for
liquidity purposes and a small part is held by institutional investors. There are a number of reasons
behind this lack of retailer interest.
First, at least until recently, the real  interest  rate  has  been  low  and  sometimes  negative,  and  so  the
yield of Exchange Fund paper has not been attractive.
Second, as issuer, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority does not have the capacity to market the paper
at  the  retail  level.  And,  quite  understandably,  the  banks  who  are  recognised  dealers  and  market
makers are not keen to market the product for us in view of the possible impact on their deposit base.
Third,  there  is  no  convenient  market  infrastructure,  in  terms  of  both  market  information  and
mechanisms for participation, through which retail investors can access that market.
1
BIS Review  84/1999
They may be other reasons. But to the extent that these three reasons are significant, our plan here to
list the longer term paper, what we call the Exchange Fund Notes, on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange,
and have trades settled through the established securities clearing system of CCASS, at a time when
there is a significant positive real interest rate, should effectively address them.
According to this plan, Exchange Fund Notes will be listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on 16
August 1999. On that day, all 57 outstanding issues of Exchange Fund Notes, with a total value of
more  than  $34  billion,  will  be  so  listed.  I  very  much  hope  that  this  joint  effort  by  the  Hong  Kong
Stock  Exchange,  the  Hong  Kong  Securities  Clearing  Company  and  the  HKMA  will  successfully
stimulate  retail  interest  in  our  Exchange  Fund  Notes  and,  more  importantly,  retail  interest  in  debt
instruments generally.
Let me now take this opportunity to do a bit of advertising. The Exchange Fund Notes are, of course,
issued  for  the  account  of  the  Exchange  Fund.  Furthermore,  all  issues  of  Exchange  Fund  paper  are
fully backed by foreign reserves. For every HK$780 worth of Exchange Fund Notes there is US$100
held  in  the  Exchange  Fund.  Investors  therefore  need  have  no  concerns  about  the  ability  of  the
Exchange Fund to repay this debt. At this time, the Exchange Fund Notes also attract a yield higher
than that for US dollar Treasury securities of corresponding maturity. Interest income from holding
the  Exchange  Fund  Notes  will  be  exempt  from  profits  tax  and  trading  in  the  paper  will  be  exempt
from stamp duty. The Stock Exchange has also offered to lower the brokerage commission on these
products.  For  a  community  that  has  always  had  a  keen  and  very  wide  participation  in  the  stock
market, the convenience of being able to buy and sell the Notes on these terms, through the brokers on
the Exchange, speaks for itself.
So much for the advertisement. May I conclude by extending my warmest congratulations to  all  of
those  involved  in  taking  forward  this  important  project.  I  hope  that  this  project  will  prove  to  be  a
success  and  I  look  forward  to  further  cooperation  in  the  future  with  all  who  have  an  interest  in
developing the debt market in Hong Kong and in the region as a whole.
BIS Review  84/1999
2
