Mr Heikensten discusses monetary policy
aspects of Sweden’s position “inside EU, outside EMU”
Speech given by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar
arranged by Handelsbanken Markets, Stockholm, on 10 September 1999.
 First a word of thanks to those  who  arranged  this  seminar  for inviting  me  to  take  part.  The agenda
covers many important issues that all deserve a thorough discussion. Sweden’s relationship with the
European monetary union is one of them.
Today I shall be considering four matters: the feasible timetable in the event of full participation in
EMU;  Sweden’s  performance  as  regards  the  criteria  for  joining  the  euro  area;  considerations
concerning the rate for the krona’s conversion to euro; and, finally, something about how economic
policy should be formulated in the meanwhile in the event that we do join the monetary union.
When could we join?
The  timetable  in  the  event  of  our  participation  in  the  monetary  union  is  set  both  by  decisions  in
Sweden and by negotiations with the existing euro countries.
As regards the domestic process, in December 1997 the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) decided that
Sweden would wait and see, but that the door to future participation is not to be closed. Players in the
financial markets, along with other observers, are now trying to work out whether this door will be
opened wide and, if so, when that is likely to happen.
Our  Prime  Minister  has  stated  that  the  question  will  be  discussed  at  the  Social  Democrats’  party
congress next March. If the congress were to agree that Sweden ought to join, the next step, to quote
the government bill, is for the matter to be “submitted to the people of Sweden for assessment”. This
can  be  done  in  a  referendum  or  an  election.  An  affirmative  response  would  be  followed  by  a
government bill, leading to a parliamentary decision on an application.
In the speculation about the timing of a participation, what is known as the fast track has been seen by
observers as a feasible scenario. It assumes that all the competent bodies are in favour of participation
and that the matter is referred to a referendum, in which case the domestic side of the decision-making
process could be completed some time around the turn of 2001.
However, such a short run-up to euro participation cannot be taken for granted. The Social Democrat
congress may refrain from considering the matter or arrive at a more tentative conclusion, for instance
along the lines of the British government’s declaration in favour of participation, but not for the time
being. That would alter and prolong the process. A number of forecasters and political observers have
in fact revised their assessments recently in favour of a later date for Sweden’s probable participation.
If  and  when  Sweden  does  opt  for  participation,  the  matter  will  be  negotiated  with  the  other  EU
countries.  This  will  be  done  on  the  basis  of  examinations  of  the  Swedish  economy  by  the  EU
Commission  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  Those  assessments  will  be  discussed  by  the
finance ministers of the member states, who will then hear the opinions of the EU Parliament and the
heads of state or of government before arriving at their decision.
When that decision has been made, the member states must also agree on the time that Sweden should
have  for  completing  the  necessary  preparations.  The  countries  that  participated  from  the  start  have
been given a transitional period of over three years from the euro’s introduction in January 1999 until
it  completely  replaces  the  national  currencies  not  later  than  June  2002.  That  a  similar  arrangement
would  apply  for  Sweden  is,  however,  not  certain.  If  we  consider  that  our  preparations  can  be
completed more quickly, perhaps we could ask for a shorter interval.
1
BIS Review 96/1999
Do we meet the entry criteria?
The Commission and the ECB will be examining the Swedish economy with reference to the criteria
that were included in the Maastricht Treaty. Those criteria are for inflation, long-term interest rates,
the  exchange  rate,  the  government  budget  balance  and  government  debt.  There  are  also  specific
requirements as regards central bank legislation. The principle of equal treatment will apply; that is,
the basis for the assessments is to be the same as for the initial group of euro participants. That means
that some conclusions can probably be drawn from the examinations in May 1998.
Compared with the countries that passed the entrance examination at that time, Sweden’s economy is
doing  well.  We  have  managed  to  achieve  stable  government  finances  and  combine  this  with
persistently low inflation, with the result that long-term interest rates have fallen towards the European
level.
In  the  present  situation,  Sweden  would  have  little  difficulty  with  the  criteria  for  inflation,  the
long-term interest rate and government finances. The budget surplus of around 2% of GDP is clearly
better  than  the  criterion  of  a  deficit  of  not  more  than  3%.  Government  debt  is  still  above  the
convergence criterion of 60% but should not constitute an obstacle; the debt is being rapidly reduced –
according to the Spring Bill by almost 10 percentage points from 1988 to 1999 – and countries with a
weaker position in this respect were admitted in the initial round. Moreover, economic forecasts for
Sweden  point  to  the  continuation  of  strong  government  finances,  making  more  debt  repayment
feasible and thereby a further improvement in this position.
The criteria for low inflation and interest rates are formulated in relative terms. Comparisons with the
level  of  inflation  and  interest  rates  in  the  three  euro  countries  where  inflation  is  lowest  show  that
Sweden  would  fulfil  these  criteria  today  and  current  forecasts  suggest  that  the  same  holds  for  the
coming years.
The  criterion  for  exchange  rate  stability  is  more  complicated.  The  Treaty  states  that  for  two  years
before  the  examination  the  national  currency  is  to  have  been  inside  the  normal  fluctuation  margins
provided  for  by  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM).  The  process  by  which  the  initial  group  of
participants  was  selected  suggests  that  the  criterion  could  be  interpreted  somewhat  more  freely.
Finland  and  Italy  were  both  approved  in  May  1998  even  though  their  currencies  had  then  been
participating in the ERM for only around eighteen months.
The other countries may also have reasons for not insisting too strongly on a strict interpretation of
formal participation by outsider countries. Considering the apparent strength of British opposition to a
fixed  exchange  rate  arrangement,  such  an  attitude  might  obstruct  a  British  membership  of  the  euro
area.  It  seems  to  me  that  in  this  respect  the  United  Kingdom  is  in  a  more  difficult  position  than
Sweden. Our Government and the Riksdag have stated that participation in ERM II can be seen as a
direct  preparation  for  joining  the  monetary  union;  the  Riksbank  has  noted  that  we  do  not  see  any
problems with that.  In  a  future  situation  where a  referendum  or  a  general  election  has  resulted  in a
positive attitude to the monetary union, it is difficult to envisage Sweden’s participation in ERM II as
posing any major political problems.
Regardless of the formal requirements that may apply at the time of the examination, the assessments
in May 1998 indicate that a central factor in the evaluation will be how the exchange rate has actually
developed. Exchange rate stability will probably be analysed with respect to the period before as well
as during participation in ERM II. The relationship between the krona and the euro1 has been relatively
stable since the beginning of 1996. Disregarding the exceptionally turbulent period last autumn, during
this  period  the  fluctuations  around  a  krona/euro  rate  of  8.70  have  been  largely  inside  a  margin  of
±2.25%.
1 The synthetic euro up to the turn of 1998.
BIS Review 96/1999
2
How is a reasonable exchange rate decided?
When, or if, the time approaches for a Swedish decision to join the monetary union, it will  thus  be
necessary to consider the  question  of  participating  in  ERM  II.  Since  the  beginning  of this  year, the
matter of whether and when the krona is to be included in the Exchange Rate Mechanism is something
that the government decides, albeit in consultation with the Riksbank. At the same time, the krona’s
central  rate  with  the  euro  in  ERM  II  and  the  margin  for  fluctuations  are  matters  for  which  the
Riksbank  is  accountable.  So  in  practice,  the  new  allocation  of  responsibilities  means  that  the
government and the Riksbank have to reach a consensus on the terms for the krona’s participation in
ERM II.
But  these  terms  are  not  decided  by  Sweden  alone.  The  central  rate  and  the  band  width  will  be
negotiated between Sweden, the countries in the monetary union and the non-euro countries that are
members of ERM II. The negotiators include finance ministries as well as central banks.
It is clearly important that Sweden and the other countries try to agree on an exchange rate that is as
reasonable as possible. This is because the central rate that is set for participation in ERM II will very
probably  be  the  rate  for  the  krona’s  subsequent  conversion  to  euro  on  joining  the  monetary  union.
Consequently it ought to be an exchange rate that is commensurable with real economic equilibrium;
in  other  words,  the  rate  the  krona  would  have  when  Sweden’s  economic  resources  are  being  fully
utilised without this generating inflationary pressure and external debt is sustainable in the long run.
At the same time, the problem of arriving at a reasonable rate should not be exaggerated. Any nominal
exchange rate whatever could, in principle, be said to be commensurate with real economic balance.
Via adjustments in wage and price levels relative to the rest of the world, the economy will sooner or
latter attain its real equilibrium exchange rate. But the question, of course, is how extensive and costly
the economic adjustments would be. Evidently, the goal must be to keep such costs to a minimum.
All the negotiating parties have a strong practical interest in setting the rate correctly. An unduly weak
krona would admittedly favour Swedish exports, but it would be disadvantageous for the competitive
position of the other countries and could also lead in time to higher inflationary pressure in Sweden.
An unduly strong krona, on the other hand, would benefit the other countries’ competitive position,
but  also  dampen  economic  activity  in  Sweden  to  the  detriment  of  demand  for  the  other  countries’
exports.
Assessments of the appropriate exchange rate cannot be based solely on a particular model. Besides
comparing various prices and costs, allowance must also be made for other indicators of the state of
the economy and their future paths. In earlier negotiations, the rate-setting decisions have rested on the
macroeconomic  situation  in  the  country  in  question  and  the  rest  of  the  world,  various  indexes  of
competitiveness and, not least, the exchange rate’s average level and its fluctuations in recent years.
The agreed rate has often been the prevailing market rate or a rate close to this.
How should economic policy be formulated?
The room for discretion in monetary policy will be affected if Sweden participates in  ERM  II.  One
extreme  in  that  situation  would  be  for  policy  to  focus  on  a  strict  exchange  rate  target,  so  that  the
interest  rate  is  set  exclusively  in  relation  to  the  exchange  rate  tendency.  In  practice,  the  Riksbank
would  then  fully  follow  the  ECB’s  footsteps.  The  other  extreme,  you  might  say,  would  be  for
monetary  policy  to  continue  to  target  inflation,  still  with  the  exchange  rate  as  one  of  the  set  of
indicators of inflationary pressure in the Swedish economy. The construction of ERM II, with a broad
band  for  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  would  then  make  it  possible  for  the  interest  rate  to  deviate
somewhat from the level in the euro area.
The  problems  that  may  arise in  such  a  situation  depend  on  how  economic  policy  in  general  works.
Provided Sweden is more or less in phase with the cyclical pattern in the euro area, there need not be
any serious conflicts. The monetary policy objectives are broadly the same.
There are therefore grounds for supposing that monetary policy can be much the same as at present.
The starting point here is a credible central rate that market players expect will be the rate at which the
3
BIS Review 96/1999
krona  is  ultimately  converted into  euro  – two  assumptions  that are  both  very  reasonable.  A  case  in
point is what happened in Finland. Monetary policy there continued to target inflation even after the
markka had been included in ERM II; following its entry, the markka stabilised and was close to its
central rate.
This brings me to the recent discussion in Swedish media. Briefly, it has been argued that Sweden is in
the  process  of  moving  out  of  phase  with  activity  in  the  euro  area,  mainly  because  fiscal  policy  is
unduly expansionary. At present we can handle such a situation because  Sweden  is  in  a  position  to
implement an independent monetary policy focused on price stability; the Riksbank can quite simply
raise interest rates and thereby  counter any  tendencies to  overheating.  Participation  in  the  monetary
union, however, would deprive us of that possibility and we would then run the risk of landing once
more in a situation like that in the late 1980s.
This  account  of  the  problem  has  a  kernel,  to  which  I  shall  be  returning  shortly,  that  deserves  to  be
taken seriously. But the arguments also suffer from distinct weaknesses.
For one thing, they assume that policy will be unsuccessful. The starting point is that the fiscal stance
will be unduly expansionary and that Sweden will deviate seriously from the cyclical path in the rest
of  Europe.  So  far,  however,  the  empirical  foundation  for  this  case  is  weak.  What  we  know  to  date
about fiscal policy indicates that its direction is now becoming more neutral after a series of years in
which its impact on the economy has been restrictive. Thus, as things stand at present, Swedish fiscal
policy will come to be more in line with the stance in the euro countries. It should also be noted that
many countries in the monetary union are doing relatively well there despite a level of activity that for
some  time  has  been  or  is  stronger  than  in  Sweden.  It  is  mainly  two  countries,  Italy  and  Germany,
albeit important for the euro area, that have fallen behind appreciably and even there it now looks as
though activity has turned upwards.
For  another  thing,  the  argument  presupposes  that  any  problems  with  overheating  can  be  tackled
successfully by the Riksbank. That is certainly true in the sense that we are able to raise the interest
rate and ensure that inflation comes into line with our target. But the picture as presented is too rosy. If
wage formation were to fail or budget policy became excessively expansionary, the restoration of  a
balanced economy would be costly: growth would be depressed and employment would presumably
fall when interest rates are raised, accompanied perhaps by an appreciation of the krona. In this sense,
access to a national monetary policy is not a patent remedy.
At the same time, it is clear that we – as a member of the monetary union – would lose the option of
guaranteeing  low  inflation  even  by  having  recourse  to  this  costly  cure.  For  example,  if  the  labour
market organisations were to make unduly high wage settlements or if fiscal policy were to get out of
hand, the Riksbank would no longer be in a position to secure low inflation.
To  me,  however,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the  natural  conclusion  today  is  to  begin  arguing  that
Sweden ought not to aim for euro area participation as soon as there is political support. Compared
with a couple of years ago, the economic situation is now more stable in almost every respect. It is not
only that the economy has adjusted in various ways to lower inflation; government finances have also
improved and during the past year employment has risen rapidly. To this should be added the support
from institutional changes in budget work and the legal status of the Riksbank.
The natural conclusion is completely different. In the years ahead it will be a matter of cultivating our
achievements. This means not losing  the  grip  on fiscal  policy,  even  though  in  simple  book-keeping
terms there may be some room for expansion. The target of a 2% surplus over the business cycle will
not be credible; neither will it provide any room to manoeuvre when activity slackens, if the surplus
when activity is strong is not considerably  larger.  Everything  must  be  done,  moreover,  to  make  the
labour  market  function  properly.  Now  that  activity  is  rising  and  new  jobs  are  being  created,  it  is
particularly important to make every effort to ensure that the vacancies are filled without delay. It is
also crucially important that wage formation functions satisfactorily and that wage costs stay well in
line with the growth of productivity.
It is only by conducting policy along these lines that Sweden’s options on the EMU issue will remain
open as the Riksdag has ordained. Fortunately enough, if we remain outside the monetary union it is
BIS Review 96/1999
4
also such a policy that we should implement in order to create good conditions for increased prosperity
and attain the high goals the Government and the Riksbank have set up for employment.
5
BIS Review 96/1999
