Mr Garganas gives a speech on integrating
Greece into the euro area and the challenges ahead
Speech given by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the “Athens
Summit 1999” on 18 September 1999.
 The adoption of the euro as a common currency by a first group of eleven European Union Member
States on 1 January 1999 was rightly described as an historic event since the move to the final stage of
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  indeed  marks  a  decisive  step  towards  full  economic  and  political
integration  between  the  countries  participating  in  this  endeavour.  The  vigorous  and  credible
implementation  by  Greece  of  policies  aimed  at  achieving  a  high  degree  of  sustainable  economic
convergence  and  meeting  the  terms  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  for  EMU  participation  have  yielded
concrete results, thus placing Greece directly on the road to joining the euro area by the target date of
1 January 2001.
Over the past few years, convergence towards price stability has been impressive. The annual rate of
inflation in August was 2%. Great progress has also been achieved regarding the general government
budgetary position. In 1998, the deficit stood at 2.5% of GDP, and is expected to fall further (to just
over 1.5%) this year, continuing the downward path of the debt–to–GDP ratio, which currently stands
at  105%.  The  gradual  reduction  in  budget  deficits,  together  with  the  entry  of  the  drachma  into  the
Exchange Rate Mechanism, has led to an appreciation of the drachma (first against the ECU and this
year against the euro), and lower long-term interest rates. In the first half of this month, the ten-year
government  bond  spread  versus  Germany  was  around  163  basis  points,  compared  with  196  basis
points in March 1999 and 425 basis points in September 1998.
The remarkable nominal convergence achieved by Greece indicates that its objective of meeting the
Maastricht criteria by early 2000 is now becoming a reality.
Although it is widely anticipated that Greece will be admitted into the euro area by June next year so
that it can adopt the single currency on 1 January 2001, we should not allow this achievement to dim
our view of what remains to be done. As I see it, Greece faces two broad sets of challenges. First, in
the remainder of 1999 and in 2000, macroeconomic policy has to remain firmly focused on keeping
the EMU process on track and on securing the conditions that will make for a smooth transition and
positive  performance  upon  entry.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  main  challenge  is  that  of  sustaining
price  stability.  Second,  Greece  is  faced  with  the  additional  challenges  of  completing  the  necessary
budgetary consolidation and stepping up the structural reforms required to prepare the economy for the
demanding competitive environment of monetary union. Let me discuss each of them in turn.
Maintaining price stability
First, there is the issue of establishing conditions that will secure price stability between now and the
end of 2000. On current projections, in the remainder of 1999 and early 2000, inflation (as measured
by the Harmonised Consumer Price Index) is expected to average close to – or slightly below – 2% – a
rate that is consistent with the Bank of Greece’s definition of price stability. The benign outlook for
inflation reflects a number of important policy choices, most notably the tight monetary policy stance
adopted to date, centred on high interest rates and a strong drachma. The reduction in inflation is also
supported by a moderation of wage settlements. However, the current favourable inflation prospects
reflect, in part, the impact of recent indirect tax cuts and other administrative measures.
Given  the  need  to  maintain  price  stability  throughout  the  year  2000  and  beyond,  the  present  tight
monetary  conditions  will  have  to  be  maintained  as  long  as  is  feasible  to  ensure  against  unforeseen
inflationary pressures. Should there be renewed inflationary pressures, there are evident limits to what
1
BIS Review 98/1999
monetary policy could do to maintain price stability in the run-up to EMU. I do not have the time to
discuss these constraints in detail. I can only mention the fact that the ability of interest rate policy to
curb  credit  growth  is  being  eroded  by  the  public’s  widespread  perception  that  interest  rates  will
necessarily decline by end-2000 and by firms’ recourse to foreign borrowing.
Looking further to 2001, the alignment of Greek interest rates with those in the euro area and the slide
of the drachma to its central ERM parity when  Greece  enters the euro  area  will,  of  course,  entail  a
substantial  easing  of  monetary  conditions.  This  prospect  for  a  substantial  easing  of  monetary
conditions in early 2001 could result in a reversal of the downward trend in inflation in the course of
2000  and  beyond.  Against  this  background,  the  macroeconomic  policy  mix  will  need  to  undergo  a
fundamental rebalancing, with other policy instruments – notably fiscal, wage and structural policies –
being  called  upon  to  offset  the  effect  of  monetary  easing  on  inflation  and  thereby  help  to  maintain
price stability.
Let me now turn to the matter of the challenges facing Greece with respect to the completion of the
adjustments required to prepare the economy for the exigencies of monetary union. Three interrelated
issues are important in this respect. First, the need to sustain efforts to achieve and maintain a sound
budgetary position consistent with the Stability and Growth Pact, and a speedy reduction in the still
high debt-to-GDP ratio. Second, the need to strengthen Greece’s ability to respond to “asymmetric”
shocks, i.e. negative shocks affecting the entire national economy and only that economy. Third, the
challenge of stepping up the structural reforms required to secure Greece’s smooth participation in the
euro area and to reap fully the opportunities offered by EMU.
Sound public finances
As I indicated at the outset, Greece has made enormous progress in reducing the large imbalances in
its  public  finances  over  recent  years.  However,  additional  progress  is  required  in  order  to  ensure
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact’s medium-term objective of a budgetary position close
to balance or in surplus. That will allow Greece to deal with cyclical fluctuations while keeping the
government deficit within the reference value of 3% of GDP. It will also allow a speedy reduction in
the still high public debt ratio and help prepare for the fiscal impact of population ageing.
A sound budgetary position will impart a layer of flexibility into the economy. Since, following entry
into the euro area, adjustment to adverse cyclical developments and country-specific disturbances will,
to an important extent, rest with budgetary policy, it will be of paramount importance to ensure that
the automatic stabilisers will be able to play their role.
Greece needs to step up its budgetary adjustment to put its debt ratio firmly on a declining path and to
bring it down swiftly below the reference value of 60% of GDP in the near future. A further steady
decline in public debt and an appropriate debt management strategy would reduce the vulnerability of
Greece’s public finances. Moreover, a speedy reduction in public debt is essential because Greece, like
other  EU  Member  States,  will  face  increased  pension  liabilities  in  the  second  decade  of  the  next
century as a large number of people will retire because of a marked ageing of the population.  As  a
result, public pension spending is likely to increase sharply in relation to GDP, particularly if there is
no reform of the social security system.
Reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio to 60% will not be easy. While Greece can count on comparatively
large  privatisation  proceeds,  it  is  burdened  by  a  currently  high  government  debt  ratio,  significant
contingent liabilities and a large debt accumulated by its chronically loss-making public enterprises.
BIS Review 98/1999
2
An exercise on the dynamics of the debt ratio carried out under certain assumptions and starting from
2000 onwards suggests that it would take 10-12 years for the debt-to-GDP ratio to be brought down to
60%. 1
Maintaining Greece’s primary  budget  surplus  at  its present  level  (6.7%)  for  10-12  years  –  which is
what is assumed in this exercise – would virtually remove the scope for easing the high tax burden on
Greek citizens over the next 10-12 years and would imply little room for public spending increases.
It would be more realistic for the government to speed up and expand its privatisation plans, using the
proceeds to reduce the debt stock. The government could also press ahead as fast as possible with the
reform of the social security system (for example, along the lines implied by the Spraos Committee
Report).  The  government  could  also  intensify  its  efforts  to  reduce  tax  evasion,  rationalise  public
expenditure and reform the wider public sector.
Asymmetric shocks
Let me now turn to the issue  of  country-specific disturbances. With the  date  of  Greece’s  entry  into
EMU  approaching,  attention  should  now  shift  from  issues  of  transition  to  monetary  union  to  the
challenges posed by EMU for Greece.
By definition, EMU implies the loss of national monetary autonomy. One of the criticisms often levied
against the EMU  project is  that  member  countries  will  not  be  able to  respond  to  adverse  economic
disturbances via changes in national monetary policy or the nominal exchange rate. It is then argued
that country-specific disturbances will result in a recession and a surge in unemployment.
In reality, the exchange rate is potentially appropriate for coping with adverse economic developments
and country-specific shocks only in a narrow set of circumstances. Mutatis mutandis, the same can be
said of monetary policy.
Shocks that are truly national are already relatively infrequent. And they will become even more so
once  Greece  joins  the  euro  area:  the  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  framework  will  reduce  the
likelihood of policy-induced shocks (such as disturbances originating from reckless fiscal behaviour),
which in the past have been an important source of country-specific shocks. Moreover, the increasing
openness and trade integration of EMU members will further blur the economic importance of national
boundaries, thereby reducing the national specificity of economic disturbances.
In the case of Greece, there will be the added benefit to be derived from the process of catching up. A
single  currency  will  greatly  enhance  prospects  for  bringing  in  new  industries,  as  the  elimination  of
exchange  rate  risk  will  encourage  firms  to  produce  closer  to  their  markets.  Large  infrastructure
projects  already  underway  –  and  financed  through  the  Community  Support  Programmes  –  will
improve competitiveness and provide a further inducement for firms to move to Greece. It is therefore
likely that the conditions after EMU entry will be favourable to growth and employment creation in
the Greek economy.
To argue that the incidence of country specific disturbances will diminish is not, however, to say that
such shocks will disappear altogether.
In  those  circumstances,  in  which  a  change  in  the  exchange  rate  or  national  monetary  policy  would
have  been  helpful,  alternative  adjustment  mechanisms  will  have  to  be  provided  for  responding  to
macroeconomic  disturbances  once  national  authorities  have  lost  monetary  and  exchange  rate
independence.
1 To achieve this it is assumed that Greece would need growth of 3.5% a year, a cost of public borrowing of 5%, and a
primary budget surplus of 6.7% of GDP. It is also assumed that the general government takes on contingent liabilities and
debt of public enterprises (outside the general government).
3
BIS Review 98/1999
At the macroeconomic level, it was argued earlier that, in the case of Greece, public finances will have
to  regain  the  necessary  room  for  manoeuvre  to  cope  with  adverse  economic  developments  and
country-specific  disturbances.  Where  structural  adjustment,  rather  than  mere  macroeconomic
stabilisation, is called for, an improvement in price competitiveness will be needed. This brings me to
the crucial role of structural reform.
Structural reform
On  the  structural  front,  there  has  been  much  progress  in  several  areas  over  recent  years  and  it  is
beginning to yield substantial benefits to the economy. But, given the breadth and the magnitude of the
structural problems, much still remains to be done.
I focus here only on a few selected issues where I feel that significant breakthroughs would make a
major contribution to preparing the economy for the exigencies of monetary union. In particular, more
stress needs to be placed on enhancing competition in product markets and improving labour market
flexibility.  Greater  market  flexibility  will  not  only  allow  Greece  to  cope  with  country-specific
disturbances  more  easily,  but  it  will  also,  by  reinforcing  Greece’s  competitiveness,  ensure  a
tension-free macroeconomic growth process and increase the employment-content of growth.
Although legislation was passed in 1998 aimed at addressing some key rigidities in the labour market
(the  inflexibility  of  working  time,  wages,  the  ineffectiveness  of  job  matching  mechanisms),  the
performance of the Greek labour market has not yet materially improved. This year’s National Action
Plan  for  Employment  is  a  well-articulated  approach  intended  to  provide  an  overview  of  the
government’s initiatives and plans in this area. But more stress needs to be placed on improving the
quality and job-relevance of vocational training.
The  government’s  privatisation  and  flotation  programme  has  been  steadily  implemented.  This  has
contributed  significantly  to  debt  reduction  and  enhanced  competition  in  the  banking  system.  But
privatisation needs to expand into other areas, including key economic sectors that remain dominated
by public enterprises.
Tax reform is also needed to alleviate the tax burden, particularly, although not exclusively, on wage
earners  and  to  bring  the  tax  structure  into  line  with  that  in  the  euro  area,  thereby  preventing  the
movement of capital and labour to lower-taxed areas.
In concluding, I would note that the achievements to date are impressive and have paved the way for
Greece’s  forthcoming  participation  in  the  euro  area.  By  meeting  the  challenges  of  completing  the
necessary  budgetary  consolidation  and  stepping  up  action  across  the  broad  spectrum  of  structural
reforms, Greece will not only be able to join the euro area in a strong competitive position, but will
also reap the full benefits from participation in EMU.
BIS Review 98/1999
4
