Mr  Sherwin  discusses  the  origins  of  New  Zealand’s  inflation  targeting  regime  and  its
evolution over the past decade
Speech by Mr Murray Sherwin, a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to
the New Zealand Association of Economists Conference in Rotorua, New Zealand on 1 July
1999.
A decade ago, during the course of 1989, the New Zealand Parliament devoted considerable
time and intellectual energy to the consideration of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand  Bill,
later to become the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989.
That Act completely re-wrote the RBNZ’s charter. The bulk of the Act – indeed almost half of
its 192 clauses - relates to prudential supervision. While the prudential material is interesting
in its own right, I won’t be dwelling on it in this address. Rather, I will  concentrate  on  the
origins of our inflation targeting regime, its evolution, and an assessment of our experience
with it over the past decade.
The origins of the 1989 Act lay primarily with Roger Douglas. Around the middle of 1986,
with memories of the 1984 election debacle still deeply etched in his mind, Douglas initiated a
discussion  on  means  by  which  monetary  policy  could  be  made  less  susceptible  to
manipulation for short-term political ends. Officials were asked to explore options that might
have that effect. Not too surprisingly, especially in the light of some of the academic literature
then  circulating  on  the  subject  of  the  relationship  between  central  bank  independence  and
long-run  inflation  performance,  officials  recommended  reforms  which  would  confer  some
degree of operational independence on the Reserve Bank.
THE ORIGINS OF INFLATION TARGETING
Inflation targeting as we now understand that term – with multi-year medium-term targets in
an  economy  with  liberalised  prices,  wages  and  financial  markets  –  was  pioneered  in  New
Zealand1. However, it was not an inherent part of the original conception of an independent
central bank. Rather, its genesis lay in the confluence of two sets of policy priorities in the late
1980’s.  Our  inflation  targeting  evolved  –  at  times  abruptly,  at  times  almost  as  painfully  as
having teeth pulled – rather than being delivered fully formed and fully considered from some
quasi-academic ivory tower high above The Terrace.
Even  before  Roger  Douglas  had  asked  for  specific  proposals  to  reform  the  institutional
arrangements  for  monetary  policy,  the  managerialist  approach  to  the  public  sector  and  its
activities had been coming to the fore in New Zealand. Specifically, this took the form, later
enshrined in the State Sector Act and the Public Finance Act, of giving public sector managers
the  authority  to  manage,  but  holding  them  directly  accountable  for  outputs  –  i.e.,  the
measurable products or services that each agency was mandated or contracted to deliver.
                                                     
1 
For  historical  completeness,  we  should  note  that  Italy,  Greece  and  Portugal  had  all  used  published
targets for inflation at times during the early 1980’s, and Sweden had briefly operated a form of inflation
targeting in the 1930’s. However, none of these provided a complete structure for inflation targeting of
the sort now understood by that term.
1
BIS Review   79/1999
In  the  Reserve  Bank’s  case,  it  was  difficult  to  define  meaningful  outputs.  There  were
suggestions that some form of monetary base measure might be appropriate, but this concept
failed  when  it  proved  impossible  to  identify  a  stable  relationship  between  this  particular
output and the sort of ultimate outcome – price stability – our political masters were seeking
from an independent central bank. Eventually, it was accepted that the only practical solution
was something of a hybrid. The Reserve Bank would be held accountable not for outputs, but
primarily for the judgements it reached in pursuing the desired outcome itself. This was to be
done  mainly  via  the  six-monthly  Monetary  Policy  Statements,  but  also  through  an
employment contract for the Governor which would state the inflation goal directly. Note that
at  that  stage,  it  was  not  envisaged  that  there  would  be  a  high  profile  public  role  for  the
employment  contract  –  any  more  than  most  public  sector  CEOs’  employment  contracts  are
ordinarily matters of high public profile.
The evolution of the Governor’s “employment contract” into what we now know as the Policy
Targets  Agreement  (PTA)  took  place  under  pressure  of  another  development.  After
successfully  driving  down  inflation  from  a  1985  peak  in  the  high  teens,  Roger  Douglas
became concerned that the public – including financial markets, employers and unions – were
expecting  the  Government  to  be  content  with  progress  to  that  point  and  that  inflation  and,
more importantly, inflationary expectations, were settling at around 5 to  7  percent.  Without
consulting officials, or, apparently, his parliamentary colleagues, Douglas announced in a TV
interview on 1 April, 1988 that policy was to be directed to reducing inflation to “around 0 or
0 to 1 percent” over the following couple of years. This was as much a surprise to the Reserve
Bank as it was to the community generally. Douglas was aiming, with this announcement, to
influence  inflation  expectations  and  by  that  means  to  reduce  the  inevitable  costs  of
disinflation.
With  the  input  of  advice  from  officials  over  the  subsequent  few  weeks,  that  initial
announcement  crystallised  as  the  0  to  2  percent  inflation  target  to  be  achieved  by  the  early
1990’s. It took real shape as a strictly defined target in the Bank’s 1989 Annual Report and in
the 1989 Budget as one of a series of macroeconomic goals announced by David Caygill2.
It is the case that the 1989 Act was passed without a single dissentient vote in Parliament. Don
Brash has made that point on a number of occasions while also reminding us that one certain
dissenter, Rob Muldoon, was hospitalised at the time. However, it is also the case that despite
the bipartisan support evident on the evening of the vote, both major political parties struggled
to reach positions where they could support the passage of the Bill. Significant opposition or
reservations existed within both caucuses.
Reservations about the new framework were also evident in submissions made to the Select
Committee  which  considered  the  Bill.  As  the  report  of  the  Finance  and  Expenditure
Committee  notes,  10  of  the  23  submissions  received  raised  concerns  about  the  proposal  to
assign  monetary  policy  the  single  objective  of  price  stability.  Generally,  and  without
challenging the desirability of low inflation, those submissions sought inclusion of a reference
to real sector objectives as well. In the event, the FEC’s report was quite unequivocal on that
point. “The Committee…. is firmly of the view that the primary function of monetary policy
                                                     
2 
For the purposes of those attempting to analyse the impact of inflation targeting, we date its introduction
in New Zealand from April 1988 rather than early 1990, which was when the Act came into effect and
the current monetary policy structure was formalised.
BIS Review   79/1999
2
should be that set out in clause 8(i). Members acknowledge that monetary policy should not
be  made  to  wear  the  cost  of  inappropriate  fiscal  and  micro-economic  policies.  Monetary
policy at the end of the day can only hope to achieve one objective, that is, price stability.”
Of course, this was not a new insight or perspective on the appropriate objective of monetary
policy. To indulge a small historical diversion, it’s interesting to look back at the 1931 report
of Sir Otto Niemeyer, the Bank of England official brought to New Zealand to advise on the
formation of a central bank. His report led directly to the establishment of the Reserve Bank
of  New  Zealand.  Borrowing  wording  from  the  statutes  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia,  Niemeyer
proposed “stability of the value of its notes as the primary duty of the Bank,” and required it
“to  exercise  control  over  monetary  circulation  and  credit  towards  that  end.”3  That,  argued
Niemeyer,  was  simply  the  standard  specification  for  a  central  bank  at  that  time.  As  it
transpired,  his  original  proposal  for  the  new  central  bank’s  objective  was  amended  slightly
during the drafting of the 1933 Act by the addition of the words “to the end that the economic
welfare of the Dominion may be promoted and maintained.”
That  amendment,  of  course,  parallels  the  words  added  to  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  in
December  1996.  The  PTA  now  reads  that  “…  the  Bank  shall  formulate  and  implement
monetary  policy  with  the  intention  of  maintaining  a  stable  general  level  of  prices,  so  that
monetary  policy  can  make  its  maximum  contribution  to  sustainable  economic  growth,
employment and development opportunities within the New Zealand economy”.
WHAT IS INFLATION TARGETING?
A decade on from the passage of the new Act, inflation targeting has become a very widely
practised, researched and analysed policy. But what is it?
Bernanke et al4 provide the following definition:
“Inflation  targeting  is  a  framework  for  monetary  policy  characterised  by  the  public
announcement of official quantitative targets (or target ranges) for the inflation rate over one
or more time horizons, and by explicit acknowledgement that low, stable inflation is monetary
policy’s  primary  long-run  goal.  Among  other  important  features  of  inflation  targeting  are
vigorous  efforts  to  communicate  with  the  public  about  the  plans  and  objectives  of  the
monetary  authorities,  and,  in  many  cases,  mechanisms  that  strengthen  the  central  bank’s
accountability for attaining those objectives”.
In  providing  that  definition,  the  authors  take  some  care  to  describe  inflation  targeting  as  a
framework as opposed to a rule. In other words, inflation targeting fits somewhere between
the extremes which feature in the  “rules versus discretion” debate which raged in monetary
policy circles in earlier years. Inflation targeting is not “automatic” in the sense of a Friedman-
like  rule.  But  nor  does  inflation  targeting  allow  the  central  bank  full  discretion.  Rather,
inflation targeting can be described as a form of “constrained discretion”. To quote Bernanke
et  al  again,  “By  imposing  a  conceptual  structure  and  its  inherent  discipline  on  the  central
                                                     
3 
Hawke, 1972
4 
Bernanke et al, 1999
3
BIS Review   79/1999
bank,  but  without  eliminating  all  flexibility,  inflation  targeting  combines  some  of  the
advantages traditionally ascribed to rules with those ascribed to discretion.”5
While  we  use  the  label  “inflation  targeting”,  Lars  Svensson6  uses  a  variation  on  that  term
which he regards as a more accurate description of the process – namely, “inflation forecast
targeting”.  Given  the  lags  inherent  in  the  operation  of  monetary  policy,  he  argues  that  the
essence  of  inflation  targeting  is  a  commitment  to  adjust  policy  to  ensure  that  a  credible  or
unbiased forecast of future inflation falls within the specified target.
However  we  choose  to  define  inflation  targeting,  it  has  certainly  gained  a  very  rapid
acceptance  around  the  world  in  a  diverse  range  of  countries.  Table  1  lists  the  countries
currently engaged in formal inflation targeting, with interest growing rapidly at present. There
are many variants in the approach, but the essential elements described above are common to
all.
Table 1
Inflation Targets Internationally
    Country    Date Adopted       Target            Target variable
   Australia       1993       Average of 2-3%  ‘Underlying’ PI up until
                              over the medium      October 1998; CPI
                                   term               thereafter
   Canada     February 1991     Midpoint 2%              CPI
                                 + 1% band
   Finland*   February 1993         2%          CPI excluding indirect
                                no explicit      taxes, subsidies and
                                   band          housing-related costs
   New          April 1988         0-3%         CPI excluding interest
   Zealand                        0 – 2%
                                originally
   Spain*     November 1994         2%                    CPI
   Sweden      January 1993     Midpoint 2%               CPI
                                 +1% band
   United      October 1992        2.5%           Retail price index
   Kingdom                     +1% reporting      excluding mortgage
                                   range           interest payments
* Now members of the Euro area
                                                     
5 
Bernanke et al, 1999
6 
Svensson, 1997
BIS Review   79/1999
4
NB. Czech Republic, Republic of Korea, Israel, Mexico and Chile also describe themselves as
inflation targeters, but not necessarily with explicit, public commitments to specific targets of
the sort listed above.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE MONETARY POLICY FRAMEWORK
It seems a decade is a long time in monetary policy. We have seen one full business cycle pass
and  that  has  been  extensively  reviewed,  documented  and  analysed  in  recent  Reserve  Bank
Bulletins. While the Reserve Bank Act has not changed in any significant respect, the way we
go about “doing” monetary policy has changed over that time. The formal inflation target has
been  widened,  the  way  we  describe  the  targeted  measure  of  inflation  has  shifted  and  our
approach to dealing with the impact of external shocks or “caveats” has changed.
In addition, a number of less formal innovations have occurred. Under this heading I include
the  development,  and  subsequent  demise,  of  the  housing  adjusted  price  index  (HAPI);  the
emergence  of  the  “underlying  inflation”  concept,  and  its  evolution  into,  effectively,  the
accountability measure for inflation performance before it was eased out of the limelight in
1997; the more recent extension of the policy horizon from around 4 quarters to the current 6
to  8  quarter  timeframe;  and  the  shift  in  thinking  about  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate  in  the
practice of inflation targeting, as embodied in both the dropping of the MCI from its direct
implementation role and the extension of the policy horizon. Policy implementation has also
gone through several stages before reaching the current Official Cash Rate (OCR) structure.
Some degree of change was probably inevitable and even a healthy sign. As the pioneers of
the inflation targeting process, it would have been a surprise if all aspects were “right” from
day one. Perhaps more importantly, even if the framework had been conceived immaculately,
the environment in which we operate today is not the same as that applying a decade earlier.
Some degree of adaptation was necessary simply to meet those changing circumstances.
Let  me  deal  with  just  a  couple  of  aspects  of  the  changes  over  the  decade.  Firstly,  the
movements  along  the  spectrum  between  what  Svensson  refers  to  as  “strict”  and  “flexible”
inflation  targeting,  and  secondly,  the  evolution  of  the  implementation  framework  from  a
quantity based regime to the current interest rate based (OCR) structure.
Strict or flexible inflation targeters?
inflationary  expectations 
As  already  noted,  the  initial  move  to  inflation  targets  arose  from  a  wish  to  influence
inflationary expectations by stating clearly the Government’s commitments. The hard-edged
character of the targets emerged a little later, partly as a consequence of the Bank taking up
the  role  of  shaping  general 
through  a  vigorous  external
communications  programme  that  stressed  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  the  targets  and  the
Governor’s  personal  accountability  for  achieving  them.  While  clearly  a  useful  device  for
communicating the strength of the Bank’s resolve to a wider public audience, the portrayal of
the  inflation  target  as  hard-edged  also  carried  risks  given  the  lags  and  uncertainties  in
monetary  policy  decision  making.  A  “strict”  approach  to  inflation  targeting  encouraged  a
search for precision in calculating “core” or underlying inflation measures for accountability
purposes and may have encouraged a shortening of policy horizons as the direct price effects
of the exchange rate became more important to the achievement of the target outcomes. Both
of those effects were evident in our monetary policy through the past 10 years.
5
BIS Review   79/1999
As  inflation  expectations  have  subsided,  it  has  been  possible  to  assume  a  degree  more
flexibility in the regime, and the current PTA reflects that. Rather than detailed calculations of
the impact of specific shocks, as embodied in the old underlying inflation measure, the PTA
now explicitly acknowledges that outcomes will occasionally fall outside the target range for a
variety of reasons, even when the Bank is “constantly and diligently” striving to deliver price
stability. In those circumstances, the Bank is required to provide a satisfactory rationale for its
judgements. Ultimately, the Bank’s non-executive board members must assess the quality of
those judgements and report their findings to the Treasurer.
Embodied  in  the  shift  in  emphasis  over  the  past  year  or  two  has  been  the  analytical  work
undertaken in reviewing the past business cycle. I won’t attempt to summarise that, since it
has  been  published  in  recent  Bulletins.  But  some  key  considerations  have  emerged  with
greater  clarity  than  was  previously  available  to  us.  These  relate  to  the  possible  trade-off
between volatility of inflation and output; the nature of the shocks we are likely to experience
over the course of a business cycle; the nature of the interactions between those shocks, the
inflation  targets,  and  alternative  policy  reaction  rules;  and  whether  movements  of  the
exchange rate are best considered to have their origins in “real” or “portfolio” shocks in the
first instance.
The judgements which we take from that work are:
• 
•  more  activism  implies  more  variability  in  interest  rates,  the  exchange  rate,  and  perhaps
the narrower the target range the more active monetary policy must be;
output; and (up to a point) less variability in inflation;
 lower inflation expectations  allow  for  a  longer  policy  horizon,  and  less  active  monetary
policy.7
Those judgements fit well with the wider target range introduced in December 1996 and with
the shift in thinking about the exchange rate. Based on research undertaken on the nature of
the shocks commonly experienced by the New Zealand economy, we now assume, in the first
instance and in the absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  shifts  in  the  exchange  rate  are
’real’  in  character.  As  such,  they  do  not  require  an  immediate  and  offsetting  interest  rate
adjustment  to  maintain  longer-term  price  stability.  The  direct  price  consequences  of  an
exchange rate movement shift in response to a real shock are likely to be transitory and, for
that reason, are best ignored. In this respect, we have moved in the direction of the Reserve
Bank of Australia. This shift in thinking is consistent with our dropping of the MCI from its
central role in the implementation structure. In effect, the “banded” MCI approach we were
using assumed exchange rate movements to be “portfolio” in nature. This shift in thinking on
the exchange rate is also consistent with the lengthening of the policy horizon.
In  essence,  we  are  accepting  the  prospect  of  somewhat  greater  variability  in  inflation
outcomes  around  the  mid-point  of  our  target  range,  against  the  prospect  of  a  little  less
variability  in  the  instruments  of  monetary  policy  and  perhaps  in  output.  In  doing  so,  we
recognise  the  risk  that  the  inflation  target  may  be  breached  more  frequently,  and  that  the
judgements  we  will  be  confronting  with  each  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Statement  have
                                                     
7 
Drew and Orr, 1999
BIS Review   79/1999
6
become  more  difficult.  If  we  get  those  judgements  wrong  too  often,  we  risk  undermining
public confidence in the Bank’s capacity to deliver consistent price stability and in that way
could hinder, rather than enhance, overall economic performance.
Implementation structures
One  aspect  of  the  monetary  policy  regime  that  has  given  rise  to  repeated  stresses  and
distractions is the implementation regime. The regime emerged in the late 1980s as essentially
a quantity-based structure – first centred on the Primary Liquidity (PL) measure and then the
settlement  cash  target.  We  were  probably  unique,  at  least  within  the  OECD,  in  having  no
officially  set  or  targeted  interest  rate.  The  preference  for  a  quantity-based  structure  had  its
roots in our reluctance to fix a particular interest rate in the midst of the structural reforms and
deregulation of the 1980s, probably encouraged by a degree of “frustrated monetarism” which
continued to hope that some stable and usable relationships would emerge between prices and
some form of money or credit aggregate.
Those relationships did not emerge. While the implementation structure formally rested on the
quantity of settlement cash provided to the banking system, increasingly the de facto vehicles
for effecting changes in monetary conditions were statements based variously on TWI comfort
zones,  90  day  bank  bill  rates,  and,  briefly,  MCI  comfort  zones.  At  times,  references  to  the
shape of the yield curve also served to reinforce a position.
Finally, in February of 1999, the quantity-based structure was abandoned in favour of a more
conventional arrangement which targets the overnight cash rate.
The  reasons  for  this  shift  were  fairly  straightforward  in  the  end.  The  settlement  cash  target
enabled  us  to  indicate  the  desired  direction  of  change  in  monetary  conditions,  but  not  the
extent of change. As became clear, the relationship between the quantity of settlement cash
made  available  to  the  system  and  prevailing  monetary  conditions  was  very  elastic.  For  that
reason,  the  settlement  cash  target  ceased  to  be  an  effective  policy  instrument  or  a  reliable
policy signal. The MCI-based structure was intended to improve the communication of policy
intentions,  while  explicitly  recognising  that  both  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  are
important to the monetary policy process in a small open economy. But any gains on that front
were lost in the noise of short-term interest rate volatility. To be fair to the MCI, if anyone
feels the need, we should recognise that it was put to a very stiff  test  with  the  onset  of  the
Asian  crisis  and  the  accompanying  sharp  fall  in  the  exchange  rate.  Any  implementation
structure  was  likely  to  experience  a  degree  of  stress  through  that  period.  Moreover,  the
concept of the MCI as a broad indicator of the overall stance of policy remains valid. What
was unsuccessful was its direct application in intra-quarter policy implementation.
In any event, the OCR is now in place, and appears to be working well. Certainly, short-term
interest rate volatility has declined markedly, and that has been welcomed. Also welcome has
been the much reduced frequency of Reserve Bank Open Mouth Operations intended to guide
monetary conditions in a direction compatible with the longer term policy objectives and the
renewed  capacity  to  maintain  focus  on  policy  rather  than  ’tactics’.  But  we  need  to  bear  in
mind that the OCR structure has so far operated in fairly benign circumstances, and that we
certainly haven’t escaped the prospect of periodic stresses and awkward decisions.
Finally, it is worth reminding ourselves that while day-to-day implementation structures have
attracted  a  lot  of  attention  over  the  past  decade,  the  real  action  in  monetary  policy  was
7
BIS Review   79/1999
elsewhere. What matters most in monetary policy are decisions on the policy stance over the
course  of  the  business  cycle.  In  our  case,  the  outlook  for  inflation  is  re-assessed  with  each
quarterly  forecast  round  and  the  monetary  conditions  required  to  deliver  the  required
outcomes are reset. For the effective conduct of monetary policy over the longer haul, it is the
quality  of  those  decisions  taken  each  quarter  that  is  fundamental,  not  the  particular
implementation structure employed between those resets.
ASSESSING THE NEW ZEALAND EXPERIENCE
In one sense, assessing the success or otherwise of New Zealand’s inflation targeting regime is
perfectly straightforward. Monetary policy has a single goal and whether that has been met or
not is transparently obvious. We need only refer to figure 1 to make a judgement.
The message in that figure is a positive one. Inflation fell to the target zone promptly, and has
stayed within, or close to, the target range since. The exception of the 1995/96 period, when
inflation was a little above the target range, was minor when taken in broader context.
The  critics  could  reasonably  respond  with  a  “So  what?  Much  of  the  world  has  managed  to
reduce inflation over that period, most without the need for a regime as strict as that employed
by New Zealand”. That, of course, is perfectly true. However, New Zealand had  previously
managed to produce and sustain markedly higher inflation than others in the OECD. What has
happened under inflation targeting is a drop, not just in our absolute inflation rate, but also in
our relative inflation rate. Compared to OECD averages, New Zealand’s inflation has moved
from very much at the top end of the spectrum to the mainstream.
BIS Review   79/1999
8
ANNUAL INFLATION RATES:
NEW ZEALAND AND SELECTED OECD COUNTRIES
(Sources: Statistics New Zealand and International Financial Statistics, RBNZ
calculation)
Note also that our current inflation performance is not, in any sense, extremist by international
standards. Rather, it sits at or about the OECD average.
However, an assessment that stopped at inflation performance alone would be simplistic. As
we have noted on many occasions, price stability is not an end in itself. Rather, it is a means
to an end. Price stability is targeted only because that is the best contribution that monetary
policy can make to broader  economic  welfare.  So  has  our  monetary  policy  made  a  positive
contribution to our economic welfare more broadly defined?
The  key  criticisms  one  hears  of  monetary  policy  relate  to  concerns  that  it  has  constrained
growth  to  levels  lower  than  could  otherwise  be  sustained,  that  it  has  been  correspondingly
hostile to employment or even “requires” a given level of unemployment to meet the inflation
target, and that it has damaged  export  performance  by  maintaining  an  overvalued  exchange
rate  and  excessively  high  interest  rates.  The  latter  point,  of  course,  is  relevant  to  our  weak
current account and associated high levels of external indebtedness.
Those  are  all  criticisms  that  the  Reserve  Bank  takes  seriously.  Our  recent  research
programmes  have  focused  on  reviewing  the  experience  of  the  past  business  cycle  to  both
uncover and describe the stylised facts, and to analyse the key drivers in that cycle.
Again,  without  wanting  to  review  that  work  in  detail,  it  does  show  that  the  1991  to  1997
expansion was both long and strong relative to the cycles that preceded it. That does not seem
to support a proposition that inflation targeting, or the particular version of it practised in New
Zealand,  is  inherently  hostile  to  growth.  Likewise,  the  employment  creation  which
accompanied  that  growth  cycle  was  strong,  both  relative  to  the  two  previous  decades  and
relative to the 1990s experience of  our  peer  group  in  the  OECD.  Certainly,  we  see  nothing
inherent in an inflation target that should “require” particular limits to unemployment levels or
constraints on employment creation. As the US has been demonstrating with great clarity over
recent  years,  strong  growth,  low  levels  of  unemployment  and  stable,  low,  inflation  can  co-
exist for a sustained period of time in the right circumstances. Of course, that particular story
9
BIS Review   79/1999
has  yet  to  be  concluded,  and  it  has  far  more  characters  in  it  than  just  Mr  Greenspan’s
monetary policy.
The proposition that monetary policy has been persistently too tight, with interest rates and the
exchange rate persistently too high, is difficult to reconcile with inflation outcomes that have
been  persistently  above  the  mid-point  of  the  target  range.  Our  recent  work  has  given  us  a
pretty good understanding of the “real” influences that shaped the past cycle.8 Factors such as
the surge in immigration, the associated house price cycle, the strength of the external sector
early  in  the  cycle  and  the  influence  of  fiscal  policy  later  in  the  cycle  go  a  long  way  to
explaining why interest rates and the exchange rate behaved the way they did.
Would  a  different  monetary  policy  have  led  to  less  impact  on  the  tradeables  sector,  and
possibly  to  a  better  current  account  outcome?  I  find  it  difficult  to  accept  that  case.  The
different  monetary  policy  sought  is  generally  an  easier  monetary  policy.  The  most  likely
outcome of an easier monetary policy would have been higher inflation, a stronger and more
sustained asset price cycle and, with that, the same sort of pressures on the real exchange rate
and the tradeables sector as were experienced - albeit over a more extended period of time.
A  couple  of  points  to  bear  in  mind  though.  First,  over  much  of  the  past  decade,  monetary
policy  has  been  engaged  in  a  process  of  consolidating  price  stability  –  of  ensuring  that
inflationary  expectations  are  reduced  and  that  public  confidence  in  the  durability  of  price
stability is reinforced. As such, we could probably have expected monetary policy to be, on
balance, somewhat restraining. For that reason, I don’t assume that the past decade is “as good
as it gets” or in any sense the norm for the longer-term behaviour of monetary policy. But the
key to that lies with the evolution of inflationary expectations.
Secondly, monetary policy has acquired a high degree of public prominence, in large part a
product  of  the  vigorous  campaign  to  influence  inflationary  expectations.  I  suspect  that  we
have  left  the  public  with  an  impression  that  monetary  policy  is  the  source  of  almost  every
wobble experienced in the economy, while masking the real  shocks  that  monetary  policy  is
often responding to. One consequence of that is a tendency to look to monetary policy to solve
all manner of economic difficulties. We’re not alone in that, of course. There seems to be a
widespread but equally erroneous impression in the US that Alan Greenspan is the source of
all economic good and evil. But such prominence for just one component of macro-policy is
unlikely to lead to realistic and balanced public debate, and is ultimately destructive of good
outcomes.
THE LESSONS LEARNED
In  a  recent  review  of  the  Australian  experience  with  inflation  targeting,  Glenn  Stevens,
Assistant Governor of the RBA, observed “There are maybe six things we have learned about
monetary policy in two centuries of economists and others thinking about it:
•  monetary policy affects principally, or only, prices in the medium term;
• 
it affects activity in the short term;
                                                     
8 
Brook, Collins and Smith, 1998
BIS Review   79/1999
10
•  because of lags, policy has to look forward; but
• 
•  expectations matter, so giving people some idea of what you are trying to do, and acting
the future is uncertain, as is the impact of policy changes on the economy;
consistently, is useful;
•  an  adequate  degree  of  operational  independence  for  the  central  bank  in  the  conduct  of
monetary policy is important.”9
Actually, Stevens footnoted a seventh candidate for his list that I thought worthy of inclusion
– namely, “that monetary policy – and for that matter most other policies – usually can’t do
everything that people might hope for.”
That  list  is  certainly  consistent  with  my  own  thinking.  However,  we  can  add  a  few  more
specific lessons from our experiences over the past decade.
•  Despite the effort devoted to trying to reduce the public’s inflation expectations, and with
that, the costs of disinflation, what really matters in terms of expectations is performance.
It is the constant delivery  of  price  stability  that  causes  expectations  to  adapt  to  the  new
reality.
•  Forecasting  is  difficult.  Given  the  lags  inherent  in  monetary  policy  and  the  consequent
need  to  be  forward-looking,  we  will  continue  to  work  on  enhancing  our  forecasting
capacity. But it’s a tough game, especially around the turning points of the cycle. And as
much as we try to look forward in shaping our monetary policy, our evolving policy stance
is inevitably heavily influenced by new data and views of the recent past.
•  What  is  happening  internationally  matters.  Our  financial  markets  are  increasingly
integrated  with  those  abroad.  Shocks,  surprises  and  policy  decisions  elsewhere  are
reflected  in  our  markets  instantly.  Monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand  will  inevitably  be
influenced by, and have to react to, developments abroad.
•  Even if the inflation target framework has had a fairly modest influence on the public’s
inflationary  expectations,  it  has  certainly  exerted  a  very  direct  impact  on  the  Reserve
Bank’s approach to its monetary policy task. The target is at the front of our minds with
each policy decision. I have no doubt that the framework has influenced the behaviour of
the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the  choices  made  by  the  Governor  at  key
points.
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
I have described the origins of our inflation targeting regime and its evolution over the past
decade. With inflation expectations now better anchored at a level consistent with our “price
stability”  mandate,  we  see  less  need  to  react  aggressively  to  anything  and  everything  that
might  take  inflation  towards  the  edges  or  even  outside  the  target  range  in  the  short  run.
Rather, we are focussed on policy settings which should ensure that inflation  a  year  or  two
ahead will be at about the centre of the target range. In short, we have shifted the emphasis
                                                     
9 Stevens, 1999
11
BIS Review   79/1999
from  staying  within  the  edges  of  the  range  in  the  short  run  to  having  inflation  at  about  the
mid-point in the medium term. At the margin, this should result in less short-term volatility in
monetary policy.
But  I  shouldn’t  make  too  much  of  that  evolution.  While  we  think  that  there  may  be  more
scope  for  flexibility,  we  shouldn’t  overestimate  that  scope,  nor  expect  too  much  from  it.  It
remains  as  true  today  as  a  decade  ago  that  the  most  important  contribution  that  monetary
policy can make to real economic growth is through maintaining price stability, and we are
not about to subordinate that objective in the interests of a policy approach that implies we
can  buy  a  bit  more  growth  by  tolerating  a  bit  more  inflation.  We  can’t.  Nor  has  anything
changed in terms of the real drivers of New Zealand’s growth performance. Those are found
in how productive, innovative and creative we are, and how well we market what we produce
to the rest of the world.
If long-run price stability is the most important contribution that monetary policy can make to
our  broader  economic  welfare,  is  inflation  targeting  the  best  monetary  policy  framework
available to us? You won’t be surprised to hear me answer with a clear ’yes’.
As  I  have  described,  we  found  our  way  into  inflation  targeting,  partly  as  a  process  of
elimination,  partly  by  accident,  and  partly  by  way  of  some  original  thinking  about  old
problems.  When  we  try  to  assess  its  particular  contribution  to  our  improved  inflation
performance,  we  run  into  all  the  usual  difficulties  of  isolating  the  impact  of  our  inflation
targeting regime from all of the other influences at work over this period.
In making that assessment, we could place a high weight on the shifts in political priorities
which dated from July 1984, on the sweeping reforms that have occurred  generally  in  New
Zealand’s  macro  and  micro  policies,  or  on  the  shift  in  our  trading  partners’  inflation
performance.  It  could  be  argued  that  the  shift  in  political  attitudes  towards  inflation  was,
ultimately,  the  only  change  that  really  mattered.  We  could  also  argue,  reasonably,  that  the
major changes in New Zealand’s monetary policy came with decisions to float the exchange
rate and commit to market funding of the Government’s fiscal deficits.
To  accept  those  arguments,  however,  would  miss  some  important  points.  Certainly,  the
political  will  to  adopt  a  price  stability  target  was  an  essential  pre-requisite  to  any  serious
attack on well entrenched inflation. But as my counterpart at the Bank of England, Mervyn
King, recently observed in reviewing the performance  of  their  Monetary  Policy  Committee,
“Institutions  matter.”  What  our  inflation  targeting  regime  has  done  is  to  give  the  initial
political  commitment  to  price  stability  a  degree  of  durability  that  transcends  the  particular
politicians or central bankers in place in 1989 when the RBNZ Act was passed into law. The
framework  has  shifted  the  incentives  from  an  acceptance  of  inflation  arising  from  all  the
familiar pressures towards a more robust resistance to any future re-emergence of inflationary
tendencies.
BIS Review   79/1999
12
REFERENCES
Bernanke, Ben S; Laubach, Thomas; Mishkin, Frederick S; Posen, Adam S. 1999. “Inflation
targeting. Lessons from the international experience”. Princeton University Press.
Brash, Donald. 1999. “Inflation targeting: An alternative way of achieving price stability”. A
speech delivered on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of central banking in the Philippines.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol 62 No 1.
Brook, Anne-Marie; Collins, Sean and Smith, Christie. 1998. “The 1991-97 business cycle in
review”. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol 61 No 4.
Drew, Aaron and Orr, Adrian. 1999. “The Reserve Bank’s role in the recent business cycle:
Actions and evolution”. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol 62 No 1.
Hawke,  Gary.  1993.  “Between  Governments  and  Banks.  A  History  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
New Zealand.” Government Printer.
King,  Mervyn.  1999.  “The  MPC  Two  Years  On,”  Lecture  delivered  to  Queen’s  University,
Belfast.
Sherwin, Murray. 1997. “Inflation targeting: The New Zealand experience”. Paper delivered
to a Bank of Canada conference on Price Stability, Inflation Targets and Monetary Policy.
Sherwin,  Murray,  1999.  “Strategic  Choices  in  Inflation  Targeting:  The  New  Zealand
Experience”.  Paper  delivered  to  an  IMF  and  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  Seminar  on  inflation
targeting.
Stevens,  Glenn.  1999.  “Six  Years  of  Inflation  Targeting”.  Address  to  Economic  Society  of
Australia.
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  1997.  “Inflation  forecast  targeting:  Implementing  and  monitoring
inflation targets”. European Economic Review, Vol 41.
13
BIS Review   79/1999
