Mr Yam focuses on international capital flows and free markets
Speech by the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr Joseph Yam, JP, at
the Crédit Suisse First Boston Asian Investment Conference on 26 March 1999.
Introduction
1. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak at this year’s Asian Investment Conference
organised by Crédit Suisse First Boston. It is particularly gratifying to be able to speak to such
a large and diverse gathering in Hong Kong itself. Many of you, I know, are old friends of
Hong Kong, and to those among you who might be visiting this city for the first time I extend
a warm welcome. Your presence here happily relieves me of the need to set the scene or to
explain  in  detail  how  Hong  Kong  has  been  grappling  with  regional  financial  crisis  and
economic slowdown. You will have been able to see and hear for yourselves that, despite the
difficulties of the last year or two, Hong Kong is still very much alive and well, and that it
remains one of the most open, most welcoming, and freest markets in the world. International
opinion  continues  to  echo  this  conclusion,  so  these  are  not  empty  boasts:  within  the  past
couple of weeks, for example, two reputable regional surveys have found the banking system
of Hong Kong to be the best and the soundest in Asia. We continue to develop our services
and  infrastructure  in  a  way  that  will  help  business  make  the  most  out  of  changing
opportunities  and  challenges.  Recent  initiatives  include  plans  announced  by  the  Financial
Secretary  earlier  this  month  for  a  cyberport  that  will  be  able  to  offer  the  most  advanced
information technologies to a whole range of businesses and industries. Within the HKMA,
we have, in the last few months, seen the completion of a major strategic consultancy study
that will help to guide the broad development of our banking sector into the next century.
2. I  single  out  these  initiatives  –  and  I  could  mention  many  others  –  for  two  main  reasons.
First, one of their aims is to help Hong Kong get the best advantage out of three closely linked
and irresistible trends: the globalisation of markets, the liberalisation of trade and finance, and
the  rapid  advance  of  information  technology.  Secondly,  while  we  need  to  grasp  the
opportunities  produced  by  globalisation,  liberalisation  and  technological  advance,  we  also
have  to  manage  the  risks  that  they  bring  with  them  in  ways  that  strengthen,  rather  than
undermine, our economic fundamentals. Along with many other economies in this region, we
have, over the last year or two, been grappling with this challenge in a very practical way at a
time  of  crisis  and  uncertainty.  The  Asian  financial  crisis  is  the  cumulative  result  of  many
complex  causes  coming  together  at  roughly  the  same  time.  But  if  we  were  to  find  a  single
factor that has brought the crisis to a head and magnified its damaging effects, we should be
looking, not to ‘crony capitalism’ or ‘Asian values’, but to a more specific and more universal
phenomenon: the swift flow of large amounts of heavily leveraged capital into and out of the
region through an international financial system that is globalised, liberalised, technologically
advanced, but, from an international point of view, largely unmanaged and unregulated.
3. The freedom of capital flows is, of course, essential to effective financial intermediation in
the  international  dimension,  which  has  played  a  vital  role  in  promoting  economic
development in this region. But, as the current crisis has shown, it also has the potential to
distort, disrupt or even destabilise domestic financial markets: this applies not just to ailing
economies, but also to sound ones. Being small and open, with predictable policy responses,
their  markets  are  susceptible  to  manipulation.  As  you  know,  last  summer  Hong  Kong  was
exposed to this problem in an extreme form, and we took radical and controversial measures
to address it. We remain convinced not only that what we did preserved our financial system
1
BIS Review   35/1999
from a serious threat to its stability at a time of stress and uncertainty, but also that our actions
were  entirely  consistent  with  our  responsibilities  as  a  government  mandated  by  law  to
safeguard the free operation of financial business and the free flow of capital within, into and
out of Hong Kong. I shall come to this episode later on. But first I should like to go a little
more  deeply  into  the  characteristics  of  international  capital  flows.  I  shall  then  discuss  the
implications,  practical  and  philosophical,  that  they  have  for  free  and  open  markets,  which
collectively  make  up  an  increasingly  seamless  international  financial  system,  but  which
continue to rely largely on their own limited resources when they encounter the problems that
this system throws up.
International capital flows
4.  Like  wind  currents  and  weather  patterns,  international  capital  flows  carry  with  them  a
mixture of benefits and risks. Let me try briefly to pin down what makes them so powerful
and so protean in their effects on the international financial landscape. I find it helpful, as a
mnemonic, to think of  their  main  characteristics  in  terms  of  what  I  shall  refer  to  as  the  six
‘V’s: Virtue, Volume, Variety, Velocity, Volatility, and Viciousness.
5.  By  Virtue,  I  mean  simply  that  international  capital  flows,  by  promoting  an  efficient  and
balanced use of financial resources, bring enormous benefits throughout the world. Over the
past  few  decades  they  have  been  of  crucial  importance  in  developing  new  economies  and
revitalising  old  ones.  When  they  work  smoothly,  international  capital  flows  help  to  relieve
shortages  of  capital  in  previously  segmented  markets.  They  provide  a  competitive
environment  that  encourages  innovation.  And,  by  affording  better  returns  to  investors,  they
help to put spare capital to the best possible use. We have seen the value of this in our own
region  in  the  1980s  and  early  ’90s,  and,  when  discussing  the  problems  created  by  capital
flows, we should never forget that they have specific and beneficial functions.
6. The second characteristic is the sheer Volume of capital movements around the world. In
April 1995 the global value of foreign exchange transactions taking place on an average day
was US$1.2 trillion. In April 1998 this figure increased to US$1.5 trillion, or, to put it in more
meaningful terms, to around 48 times the daily value of world trade. It is also worth stressing
that these are largely private capital flows. In 1997, for example, the amount of private capital
flowing into developing economies was estimated by the World Bank to be five times the size
of official flows.
7. Within these private flows there is considerable Variety and fluctuation in the nature and
organisation of capital. With financial liberalisation and the globalisation of financial markets,
portfolio  capital  flows  are  of  increasing  importance  compared  with  the  more  traditional
foreign  direct  investment  and  commercial  bank  lending  as  a  source  of  international  capital
flows.  An  aspect  of  this  Variety  is  the  growing  number  of  complex  investment  tools,  and
different orders of derivatives therefrom, involving different degrees of leverage, available for
moving  money  around  the  world,  or  indeed  enabling  investments  to  be  made  in  markets
without having actually to move money around.
8. The variety and volume of capital flows are made even more potent by the Velocity with
which capital moves around the world. The advance of telecommunications and information
technology  now  means  that  distance  and  national  boundaries  are  no  longer  important
restraints. Two consequences follow from this. First, huge amounts of money can be moved
into an economy in a very short space of time, and can be moved out just as quickly. In 1996,
BIS Review   35/1999
2
for  example,  capital  was  flowing  into  the  emerging  economies  of  Asia  at  the  rate  of  about
US$100 billion. By the second half of 1997 it was flowing out of the region at about half that
speed. Secondly, with the negation of distance and boundaries, events in one particular market
can  have  immediate,  dramatic,  but  often  quite  unpredicted  effects  on  other  markets  on  the
other side of the world. Last year, for example, the debt default in Russia affected mortgage-
backed securities as far away as the US and Brazil. Earlier this year, the devaluation of the
Brazilian  real  raised  expectations  –  unfounded,  as  it  turned  out  –  that  the  ripples  from  that
crisis would destabilise the renminbi.
9.  During  periods  of  instability  or  uncertainty,  the  volume,  variety  and  velocity  of
international  capital  flows  can,  in  an  increasingly  liberalised  and  globalised  financial
environment, often add up to the fifth ‘V’: Volatility. Indeed, the behaviour patterns of capital
flows can magnify minor local uncertainties into extensive, prolonged and highly destabilising
crises. While other factors were also at play, it is clear that something of this kind took place
in the spate of local troubles that snowballed into what we now call the Asian crisis. Private
capital inflows, attracted by high short-term returns, fuelled Asia’s economic boom. The Thai
baht  crisis  of  July  1997,  which  many  initially  dismissed  as  a  local  blip,  snowballed  into  a
regional  crisis  when  a  sudden  reversal  of  these  flows  took  place  following  a  rapid  and
wholesale reassessment of emerging market risk. In one way or another, the crisis has affected
nearly every emerging market and has slowed growth throughout the world. Stampedes of this
kind take little account of the economic fundamentals behind the markets: there were ongoing
problems  in  many  Asian  economies,  but  there  was  no  macroeconomic  reason  why  there
should have been such a sudden and wholesale withdrawal of funds at this particular time. To
quote the US Deputy Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers: ‘Financial crises have elements
of  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy,  like  bank  runs.  Everyone  expects  failure  or  everyone  expects
everyone  else  to  expect  failure,  leading  to  a  rush  to  be  the  first  one  out  and  thus  causing
failure.’ The Asian financial crisis, in which untold and unnecessary damage has been caused
by such behaviour, is a classic illustration of this.
10. Widespread volatility resulting from financial panic and herd behaviour is one of the more
worrying  aspects  of  international  capital  flows  because  small  fires  can  spark  off  major
conflagrations.  This  volatility  becomes  Vicious  when  market  participants  with  extensive
control or influence over capital flows line themselves up, manipulate the prevailing negative
and  disturbed  public  mood,  and  exploit  the  discrepancies  and  vulnerabilities  that  inevitably
arise  in  a  global  financial  system  that  is  held  together  by  localised  jurisdictions.  The  most
vulnerable of these jurisdictions are often those which are held up as models of free-market
economics: the small or medium open markets with few or no controls on capital movements
and with transparent financial systems that operate according to simple and precise principles.
11. In Hong Kong last summer we found ourselves in exactly this situation. We were a choice
target because our options were limited. We are prohibited by law from imposing exchange
controls, and, even if we were not, it would be an act of lunacy for Hong Kong, with its highly
externally oriented economy, even to consider them. The cornerstone of our financial system
is  the  linked  exchange  rate  between  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  and  the  US  dollar.  This  link  is
maintained by a classic currency board system so transparent and predictable in its responses
to market conditions that it was, at least at that turbulent time, vulnerable in one of its central
features.  Under  the  currency  board’s  autopilot  mechanism,  any  expansion  in  the  monetary
base causes interest rates to fall, while a contraction causes them to rise. The crucial part of
the monetary base influencing this rise and fall is the aggregate balance that banks maintain in
3
BIS Review   35/1999
their clearing accounts held with the currency board: it is extremely small, and, at the time,
made the monetary system susceptible to speculative attack.
12.  In  their  attempts  to  destabilise  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  in  late  1997  and  early  1998,
speculators found that, although breaking the link was impossible, driving up interest rates by
putting pressure on the Hong Kong dollar was not so difficult a matter. Late in the summer of
1998  they  developed  their  strategy  into  a  pre-concerted,  heavily  leveraged  cross-market
assault,  which  sought  to  play  off  the  currency  board  system  against  the  stock  and  futures
markets:  according  to  this  strategy,  extreme  conditions  created  by  a  large-scale  dumping  of
Hong Kong dollars would cause the stock market to plummet to a level that would allow them
to make large profits from the futures contracts they had taken out.
13. We prevented them from reaping these profits – and in fact caused many of them to incur
a  loss  –  by  investing  a  small  part  of  Hong  Kong’s  official  reserves  in  Hang  Seng  Index
constituent  stocks  and  futures  contracts  in  sufficient  quantities  to  ensure  that  the  strategy
failed. We followed this up with technical changes to the currency board system to make it
less  susceptible  to  manipulation.  The  results  of  our  market  operation  in  August  and  our
technical  measures  in  September  have  been  stable  interest  rates  and  financial  markets  that
have been free of the manipulation that posed such a threat to stability and confidence over the
summer. For an economy that is still working its way through its worst recession in more than
a generation this is good news. Many critics, however, were shocked by what they saw as a
gross violation of free-market principles in a city that had been held up as one of the world’s
great models of free-market economics. We did not, and do not, see it in this way. And, six
months or so after the event, now is perhaps an appropriate time to place the events of last
summer in some perspective.
Free markets
14. What, then, is a free market? It might be helpful to go back to basic economics to set out a
few simple principles. In bald terms, a free market is a market in which buyers and sellers are
free to trade on whatever terms they wish without government interference. The great writers
on  free  markets,  from  Adam  Smith  to  Milton  Friedman,  argue  that  free  markets  and  free
enterprise, rather than governments or monopolies, are the most efficient means of producing
and  distributing  wealth  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  soundest  basis  for  a  just  and  prosperous
society.  In  Adam  Smith’s  conception,  it  is  the  ‘invisible  hand’  of  the  free  market  that
organises  the  seemingly  chaotic  and  self-interested  activities  of  human  beings  into  a
beneficent and productive social order. For Milton Friedman, ‘the organisation of the bulk of
economic  activity  through  private  enterprise  operating  in  a  free  market’  is  ‘a  necessary
condition for political freedom.’
15.  In  its  daily  operation,  a  free  market  serves  three  main  purposes.  It  manages  resource
allocation  by  supplying  answers  for  buyers  and  sellers  to  the  basic  economic  questions  of
what, how, and for whom goods and services are to be produced. It provides price discovery
by channelling competition and adjusting prices to reflect changes in supply and demand for
different  commodities.  And  specifically 
it  arranges  financial
intermediation by matching the needs of ultimate lenders – or those in possession of surplus
loanable funds – with those of ultimate borrowers – or those in need of liquid funds: interest
rates,  which  are  determined  by  the  supply  and  demand  of  liquidity  in  the  loanable  fund
market, play a crucial role in this process.
terms  of  money, 
in 
BIS Review   35/1999
4
16. The philosophers are agreed that, in general, the less a government has to do with these
various  functions,  the  more  efficiently  the  market  can  do  its  job:  centralised,  directive
authorities,  or  ‘big  government’,  are  anathema  to  true  economic  freedom;  governments
should, at most, play a minimal, instrumental role in fostering the conditions in which each
individual has the freedom to make his or her own economic choices. But this does not mean
no government. In a free market, a government has a number of specific and limited functions
to  address  well-known  areas  where  the  unregulated  functioning  of  markets  can  result  in
outcomes  that  are  undesirable  from  the  perspective  of  society  as  a  whole.  In  general,  these
areas  involve  some  form  of  what  economists  call  ‘externalities’  –  spillover  effects  of  one
person’s behaviour on others that are not incorporated in the market prices that people pay and
receive. Public goods are an example, where the benefits to society as a whole of, say, police
protection  are  not  easily  captured  by  unconstrained  market  forces.  Protection  against
monopoly  practices  is  another  –  situations  in  which  individual  market  participants  can  take
prices  away  from  levels  consistent  with  free  competition.  All  countries  are  involved  in
correcting  instances  of  market  failure  in  one  form  or  another:  indeed,  from  a  philosophical
perspective,  it  would  not  be  too  strong  to  say  that  that  is  what  governments  are  all  about.
Many countries, of course, have become involved in the economy in ways that go well beyond
such cases of market failure. In general, the experience has been unsatisfactory, and there is a
worldwide trend towards limiting government involvement in the economy.
17.  Here  it  may  be  helpful  to  turn  from  theory  to  practice,  and  to  our  experience  in  Hong
Kong as an economy long acknowledged to have one of the freest markets in the world. In
Hong Kong, government is probably as small as it can get in the modern world. Government
expenditure as a percentage of GDP, although now at a historical high, is only about 20%. Yet
the  Government  is  involved  in  supporting  the  free  market  in  a  number  of  limited  but  key
areas. First, it provides infrastructure and facilitation to enable markets to thrive and progress:
these range from highly visible projects, such as the new airport and its associated facilities, to
the  HKMA’s  own  quiet  successes  over  the  last  few  years  in  developing  an  advanced  and
robust interbank payment and settlement system or in stimulating the development of a local
debt  market.  The  Hong  Kong  method  is  for  such  projects  to  be  done,  where  possible,  as
partnerships between government and private sector, with a heavy emphasis on private sector
involvement. Nevertheless, the role of government is essential in getting them off the ground
and in mobilising resources that cannot always be easily provided by the private sector.
18. Secondly, the Government provides regulation and protection. This ranges from the highly
visible, and currently much debated, rule of law, which is the ultimate guarantee of contracts
between  individuals,  to  the  day-to-day  regulation  of  the  markets  themselves.  Much  of  the
activity in this area is also left to the private sector: only a small proportion of contracts are
ever disputed in the public courts, and a large part of the regulation of the markets and the
professions  is  self-regulation.  Once  again,  however,  government  involvement  is  of  key
importance. The Government is there in the background as the last resort when conflicts arise,
and,  in  consultation  with  market  practitioners,  it  takes  the  initiative  to  reform  regulatory
systems when new conditions require it: the far-reaching reforms proposed for Hong Kong’s
securities and futures markets in the recent budget are a good example of this.
19. Finally, the Government is prepared to intervene in isolated, clearly identified cases where
markets appear to be malfunctioning. In this respect, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has
a special role to play within the financial sphere. One of its primary tasks is to promote the
stability and integrity of Hong Kong’s financial system, and one of its tools – in addition to
5
BIS Review   35/1999
the  linked  exchange  rate,  banking  regulation,  and  the  financial  infrastructure  –  is  the
Exchange Fund, our official reserves. The Exchange Fund, among other things, is available to
be drawn on to maintain the stability and the integrity of the monetary and financial systems
of Hong Kong. This is done rarely and sparingly, but it is necessary to have this provision for
reasons that should be readily apparent. In addition to being a free market, Hong Kong is also
an  open  market.  This  gives  it  one  of  its  main  strengths  as  an  economy,  for  our  links  with
overseas markets are a vital part of our success as a financial and commercial centre. But it
also renders Hong Kong exposed, and therefore vulnerable, to economic and other forces that
are entirely beyond its control. We would not have it any other way, because the advantages of
openness far outweigh the disadvantages. But the risks involved in this exposure were brought
home to us by the Asian financial crisis.
20.  For  Hong  Kong,  the  consequences  of  that  crisis  have  been  first  a  sharp  recession,  and
secondly the series of attacks on our currency which I have already described. At the height of
these  attacks,  during  the  summer  of  1998,  there  was  clear  evidence  that  the  free  market  in
Hong Kong was in danger of failing to fulfil its functions. Specifically, the currency, securities
and futures markets were being distorted to the point where efficient resource allocation had
given  way  to  manipulative  speculation;  where  prices  in  the  markets  were  no  longer  being
determined by changes in underlying supply and demand; and where interest rates, instead of
reflecting  the  supply  and  demand  of  liquidity,  were  being  hijacked  for  the  purpose  of
engineering dramatic changes in the markets. Strong evidence suggests that at the time a very
small  group  of  players  were  responsible  for  a  preponderant  proportion  of  the  short  futures
contracts open at that time. We also estimate that currency borrowings to the tune of HK$30
billion, arranged in advance to avoid the expected interest rate volatility they were hoping to
generate in Hong Kong, had been made by a similarly small group of players to be quickly
dumped  at  a  time  when  the  markets  were  most  vulnerable.  In  short,  we  were  far  from  the
model of ‘atomistic competition’ among small individual actors envisaged by thinkers such as
Adam Smith. The invisible hand of the market had been replaced by a very visible club being
wielded by a concentrated group of speculators.
21.  In  many  other  jurisdictions,  this  cornering  of  the  markets  would  have  been  subject  to
investigation under anti-trust legislation: the Salomon Brothers scandal in the US in the early
1990s, which many of you will recall,  is  a  parallel  that  springs  to  mind.  In  Hong  Kong  we
have no such laws: it is probably time that we thought out the cases for and against having
them.  We  should  also  look  at  safeguards  against  market  concentration.  As  things  stood  in
August last year, we were watching (in a loosely worked metaphor that might appeal to those
of you who will be attending the Rugby Sevens this weekend) a playing field that had become
so badly slanted that ordinary players could barely stand up, and a game that was about to be
cornered  by  a  highly  oversized  and  unsportsmanlike  team  with  steroid-enhanced  muscles
playing  by  its  own  rules.  As  a  referee  with  limited  powers,  but  with  responsibility  for
preserving  the  basic  integrity  of  the  game,  we  intervened  using  the  quickest,  most  efficient
and fairest methods that we had at our disposal. Stability on the playing field was restored,
and Hong Kong remains an open market, and, we believe, like the Rugby Sevens, attractive to
participants from all over the world who are keen to play a fair game.
22.  We  have  been  taking  another  look  at  the  rules  of  the  market  to  ensure  that  its  free
workings  receive  the  best  safeguards  possible.  The  reforms  include  the  currency  board
measures, now in place, and the proposed reorganisation of the securities and futures markets
that I have already mentioned. It has to be stressed, however, that there is a limit to what can
BIS Review   35/1999
6
be  done  locally  in  an  international  financial  system  that  still  lacks  international  forms  of
regulation. There is consensus that some international action is now needed to build a global
financial  architecture  that  can  cope  with  volatile  fund  flows  more  effectively  than  can
individual  jurisdictions  on  their  own.  Various  international  agencies  and  forums  have  been
grappling over the last six months with this issue, and Hong Kong, with its direct experience
of speculative  attacks,  has  been  pushing  as  hard  as  it  can  for  an  internationally  backed  and
non-intrusive system of disclosure and indirect regulation of cross-border fund flows. While
some  progress  has  been  made  in  working  out  what  the  problems  that  need  to  be  addressed
consist  of,  we  are  still  a  long  way  from  seeing  results,  and  with  the  absence  of  major
speculative attacks in the last few months, we are in danger of being lulled into a false sense
of security.
Conclusion
23.  To  summarise,  the  problem  to  be  tackled  is  essentially  this:  capital  flows  are  moving
through  a  financial  system  that  is  now  to  a  large  extent  global  and  borderless.  Market
liberalisation and advances in information technology mean that the system will continue to
develop in this direction. Yet the machinery that regulates this system is still largely operated
by individual governments. There is much that governments can do, and are doing, on their
own  to  help  ensure  that  markets  can  channel  the  benefits  that  capital  flows  bring  while
minimising the risks. But managing these risks – which lie mainly in volatilities exacerbated
by high volume and high velocity, and occasionally by deliberate viciousness – may ultimately
be beyond the capacities of individual jurisdictions. Crisis management and rescue packages
are expensive and disruptive methods of clearing away the damage and picking up the pieces.
The only effective long-term solution lies in prevention through collective action to reform the
international financial architecture and ensure that free markets continue to be able to function
as they should. Given what we have been through in Hong Kong and in this region in the last
twenty months, we are eager that the momentum on this issue should not be lost, and that it
should  not  require  the  disruptions  and  dislocations  of  another  major  financial  crisis  for  the
importance of preventive action to be driven home.
7
BIS Review   35/1999
