Mr Bergo looks at the impact of the euro on the economies of non-member states
Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Norway,  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  to  the  Scottish
Norwegian Business Forum, in Edinburgh, Scotland on 3/2/99.
At the beginning of this year we witnessed the implementation of the greatest monetary reform of the
century: the launch of the euro and the final stage of EMU.
Norway watches this great experiment from the outside, but we are not uninfluenced by it. On the
contrary, it constitutes an important change in the environment of our policy-making, especially with
respect to monetary policy. In addition, there are important questions concerning the use of the euro
by  Norwegian  economic  agents  and  possible  implications  for  the  Norwegian  business  sector,
particularly the banking and financial industry.
I shall try to address these issues. My basic proposition will be that in most respects the euro does
not give rise to fundamentally new challenges, but almost certainly accentuates some that are already
present.
The euro and Norwegian monetary policy
Monetary policy in Norway has been oriented towards maintaining exchange-rate stability for almost
the entire post-war period. When the Bretton Woods system collapsed in the early 1970s, Norway
joined the European “Snake”. However, when the European Monetary System  was  set  up  in  1979
Norway  chose  a  link  to  a  trade-weighted  basket  of  currencies.  In  spite  of  the  objective  of  a  fixed
exchange rate, several adjustments of the international value of kroner were made in the 1970s and
1980s to compensate for the loss of cost competitiveness due to price and wage inflation.
From  the  mid-1980s  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  was  increasingly  shifted  to  the  role  of  a  stable
exchange rate as a nominal anchor – against the backdrop of very high price and wage inflation and
relatively  high  domestic  interest  rates  following  the  devaluation  in  1986.  The  EU  countries’  low-
inflation track record was used as an argument for pegging the krone rate to the ECU in 1990.
The currency turmoil in Europe in 1992-93 prompted Norway to abandon the fixed rate against the
ECU  in  favour  of  a  sort  of  “managed  float”,  now  aiming  at  keeping  the  exchange  rate  “stable”
against European currencies, but with no fluctuation margins. This regime is still in force.
In  this  context  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  small  and  very  open  Norwegian  economy  is  highly
vulnerable  to  fluctuations  in  the  international  economy.  Furthermore,  the  petroleum  sector  is  of
substantial  importance  to  our  economy,  and  mainland  industries  are  largely  commodity-based.
Whatever the choice of exchange rate or monetary policy regime may be, there will be considerable
challenges  associated  with  stabilising  an  economy  which  is  that  heavily  exposed  to  cyclical
fluctuations.
This has been amply illustrated by recent events. Whereas two years ago we were trying to fight off
heavy appreciation pressures against the krone, we have since last summer seen quite the opposite
tendency.
Last  year,  the  krone  exchange  rate  moved  on  a  weaker  trend,  in  spite  of  continued  government
budget surpluses and our still relatively healthy current account. As downward pressure on the krone
grew, Norges Bank raised its key rates in seven steps last year, in line with its mandate to stabilise
the  krone  exchange  rate.  In  the  course  of  five  months,  key  rates  were  raised  by  a  total  of  4½
percentage points. In spite of this, the krone has been weaker than its initial range vis-à-vis European
currencies  since  last  August.  In  this  situation,  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  must  be  to  adjust
fundamental  factors  in  a  way  consistent  with  a  return  of  the  krone  to  its  target  range.  Of  course,
monetary policy can do nothing to reverse the terms-of-trade shock brought about by the steep fall in
BIS Review   16/1999
– 2 –
commodity prices. However, the aim to stabilise the krone against European currencies implies that
inflation over time cannot deviate from the inflation in these countries. If inflation is brought in line
with inflation in the euro area, a return of the krone to its initial level becomes more likely. Thus, in
the current situation Norges Bank must focus on relative inflation when setting interest rates. For the
time being inflation in Norway, although fairly moderate in absolute terms at just over 2 per cent, is
considerably higher than inflation in the euro area. Narrowing this differential is a prerequisite for
strengthening  the  krone  and  is  thus  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  offer  in  the  current
situation.  There  are,  however,  obvious  limits  to  how  tight  monetary  policy  can  be.  Interest  rates
cannot  be  set  so  high  that  it  results  in  an  unnecessary  severe  economic  recession  and  deflation,
because  that  in  itself  would  reduce  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  most  likely  weaken  the
krone.
Since August last year Norges Bank’s key rate has been 8 per cent – close to 5  percentage  points
higher  than  in  the  euro  area.  For  the  time  being  we  find  that  our  instruments  are  set  in  a  manner
consistent with bringing the krone back to its initial range over time.
This illustrates the challenges of stabilising the exchange rate of a small, open, oil and commodities-
based economy against that of larger, more diversified economies. Though a much larger economy,
the UK has also over time experienced problems with exchange rate targets, most recently the events
that led sterling to leave the ERM in 1992 and orient monetary policy towards an inflation target.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  from  1  January  1999  did  not  in  itself  require  changes  in  Norwegian
monetary policy. The euro could replace the ECU as the operational indicator of the external value
of  the  krone.  However,  last  spring  Norges  Bank  also  reviewed  the  merits  of  a  change  in  anchor
currencies.
Norges Bank found the potential benefits of changing the exchange rate target to a trade-weighted
basket to be relatively marginal and fairly uncertain, and recommended that the Government refrain
from  modifying  the  Exchange  Rate  Regulation.  In  the  Revised  National  Budget  for  1998,  the
Government affirmed this view and decided that the Exchange Rate Regulation would continue to
apply without any changes,  with  the  euro  replacing  the  ECU  as  the  indicator  of  the  krone’s  value
against  European  currencies.  Thus,  the  consequences  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  for  the
orientation  of  Norwegian  monetary  policy  might  not  appear  particularly  great  at  the  outset.  The
launching of EMU nevertheless entails changes in the environment for our monetary policy, for the
following reasons among others:
First,  the  European  Central  Bank  formulates  its  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  low
inflation for the euro area as a whole. Euroland will be a more closed economy than the individual
member  countries  used  to  be,  and  thus  exchange-rate  changes  less  important.  This  can  result  in
larger  exchange  rate  fluctuations  between  the  major  countries  than  in  the  past.  If  so,  keeping  the
krone stable against the euro might become more challenging.
Second,  the  launch  of  the  euro  will  reinforce  global  financial  integration  and  contribute  to  higher
capital  mobility,  and  the  establishment  of  an  efficient  payment  and  settlement  system  in  euros
reduces  the  cost  of  moving  capital.  Increased  mobility  of  capital,  both  in  and  out  of  countries,
including Norway, could follow.
As I indicated earlier, we, like others, have experienced increasing difficulty in maintaining a stable
exchange rate in a world of large, unrestricted capital flows. The relative calm within the euro area
during the recent turmoil linked to the financial crises in Asia and Russia and later Brazil could be
indicative of future differences between Europe’s “ins” and “outs”. Finland, despite its dependence
on raw materials and relatively large  exports  to  Russia,  was  less  adversely  affected  than  the  other
Nordic  countries.  For  Norway,  success  in  maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate  could  become  more
challenging in the new environment.
BIS Review   16/1999
– 3 –
Use of the euro in Norway. Euro and the Norwegian banking industry
Use of the euro in Norway
I  would  now  like  to  comment  on  how,  and  to  what  extent,  Norwegian  economic  agents  might  be
expected to use the euro in the future. There are many indications that the euro will be used more
extensively in trade between Norway and euro countries than the currencies of the 11 member states
combined today. Over time the euro will most likely be used on an even wider scale. Obviously, the
euro would increase in importance in the Norwegian market should Sweden, Denmark and the UK
join EMU.
The  euro  may  also  play  a  role  –  though  probably  limited  –  as  a  settlement  currency  between
residents.  This  will  primarily  be  of  relevance  for  import  and  export  enterprises  as  well  as  sub-
contractors in industries that are heavily exposed to the euro area. However, several factors point to
the  continued  use  of  Norwegian  kroner  among  enterprises  and  households.  Government  payments
such  as  pensions,  social  security  and  taxes  will  continue  to  be  in  Norwegian  kroner,  as,  most
probably,  will  wages.  Furthermore,  Norwegian  residents  are  not  permitted  to  settle  outstanding
claims in foreign currency in cash, according to Norwegian Foreign Exchange Regulations.
Regulatory issues
Norway  is  under  no  obligation  to  incorporate  EU  legislation  pertaining  to  the  introduction  of  the
euro  into  Norwegian  law.  However,  there  has  been  some  discussion  as  to  whether  it  would  be
appropriate to implement some changes in the regulatory framework.
One  issue  has  been  whether  there  is  a  need  for  statutory  amendments  to  assure  the  continuity  of
contracts  in  which  the  parties’  payment  obligations  are  expressed  in  ECUs  or  in  one  of  the
participating countries’ currencies. Norwegian law is considered to be clear on this issue, however,
and  in  the  view  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  there  was  no  need  for  legislative  changes.  In  its
deliberations on the Revised National Budget last spring, the Storting (Norwegian parliament) took
note of this.
Another issue is the possibility of keeping accounts in currencies other than the Norwegian krone.
The new Accounting Act, which entered into force on 1 January 1999, provides for the registration
of  accounting  information  in  Swedish,  Danish,  English  or  Norwegian.  Annual  company  accounts,
however, are to be recorded in Norwegian kroner and in the Norwegian language unless otherwise
provided for by regulation or separate decisions by the Ministry of Finance. The annual report must
be written in Norwegian. Under certain circumstances, consolidated accounts may be recorded in a
foreign currency. Accounts expressed in a foreign currency may also be published as a supplement to
accounts in Norwegian kroner.
A third question was whether it should be possible to quote financial instruments traded on the Oslo
Stock  Exchange  in  euros  and,  if  so,  whether  this  would  require  changes  in  stock  exchange
legislation.  A  broadly  based  committee  appointed  by  the  Oslo  Stock  Exchange  has  addressed  this
question. The committee concluded that, although this situation may change, there is little interest in
the  Norwegian  securities  market  in  quotations  and  settlements  in  euros.  The  committee  found  no
legal obstacles to quotations and settlements in euros. Consequently, the Ministry of Finance has not
found a basis for recommending changes to stock exchange rules. The Ministry of Finance has also
considered whether conversion to euros should be regarded as realisation within the interpretation of
tax  legislation.  The  Ministry  has  concluded  that  the  parties’  positions  are  not  actually  altered  by
conversion. The Ministry therefore maintains that assets and liabilities recorded in the currency of an
EMU country cannot be considered as realised after that currency was replaced by the euro.
Euro payment systems
BIS Review  16/1999
– 4 –
A common monetary policy in the euro area is contingent on cross-border payments in euros taking
place  just  as  rapidly  and  efficiently  as  payments  in  national  systems  do  today.  All  countries
participating in EMU are therefore linked to a common payment system, TARGET. In addition to
being a channel for monetary policy, TARGET is, however, designed to enhance the efficiency and
reliability of cross-border payment systems. TARGET is therefore  used  for  settling  both  monetary
policy and commercial transactions. EU countries outside the euro area are also linked to the system.
Payment  settlements  using  TARGET  take  place  on  a  real-time  gross  basis.  This  means  that
transactions are settled individually and with finality throughout the day. The system is also used to
settle net positions generated through netting of gross positions between banks.
The  TARGET  system  consists  of  the  national  settlement  systems  linked  together  into  a
communications network called Interlink. Payments are transferred from one country to another via
the settlement system of the payer country, where the central bank debits the payer bank’s account
and credits an account of the central bank of the beneficiary country. In turn, the central bank of the
beneficiary country credits the recipient bank.
There  are  several  alternative  systems  for  making  cross-border  payments  in  euros.  The  most
important  are  probably  the  Euro  Banking  Association  (EBA)  clearing  system  and  the  traditional
network of correspondent banks. In addition, some large domestic clearing systems like Euro Access
Frankfurt  (EAF)  allow  banks  from  all  EU  countries  to  participate.  The  participants  naturally  take
such factors as price, risk and time into account when considering whether to make use of TARGET
or any of the other options.
The  Norwegian  banking  industry  has  expressed  an  interest  in  having  Norges  Bank  provide
settlement services for a multilateral netting system for domestic transactions in euros. As an EEA
member, Norway participates fully in the single market (with the exception of agricultural products)
and Norwegian banks are subject to the same requirements and obligations as those applying in the
EU.  Access  to  the  common  payment  system  on  virtually  equal  terms  is  therefore  regarded  as
desirable  and  natural.  Norwegian  banks  attach  importance  to  being  able  to  offer  competitive  euro
services, and a Norwegian euro settlement system could make a contribution in this respect. Norges
Bank is pursuing this matter with the ECB. We have taken note of the solutions found with respect to
the non-euro EU members, including the UK.
Developments in the Norwegian banking industry
The industry that will probably be most affected by the euro is the banking industry. The banking
industry in Norway and other countries has undergone, and will continue to experience, substantial
changes  as  a  result  of  technological  advances,  internationalisation,  deregulation  and  changes  in
customer  behaviour.  This  has  intensified  competition  and  reduced  margins,  thereby  prompting  a
need  for  restructuring  and  reducing  overcapacity.  In  addition  to  increased  competition  between
banks,  new  participants  –  both  financial  and  non-financial  –  have  contributed  to  increasing  the
pressure on margins. Securities markets have also become more important in terms of their role in
saving, financing and risk management, adding to the pressure on  financial  intermediaries  such  as
banks.
Like banks in other countries, Norwegian banks have had problems compensating for the decline in
net  interest  income  by  increasing  other  income  or  reducing  costs.  Intensified  competition  both
between banks and from other financial market participants suggests that  banks  will  in  general  be
facing  major  challenges  in  the  years  to  come.  On  top  of  this  comes  EMU,  which  will  probably
amplify some of these trends.
The euro will have varying effects on different market segments. The most immediate consequence
of the transition to the euro is the elimination of foreign exchange and hedging transactions in the
BIS Review   16/1999
– 5 –
currencies  concerned.  As  exchange  between  euro-country  currencies  accounts  for  a  very  limited
share of total currency exchange in Norwegian banks, this will be of little consequence.
Two  other  areas  that  will  be  directly  affected  are  international  payment  transactions  and  liquidity
management. International payment transactions do not represent a substantial source of income for
Norwegian banks. However, it will be important for banks to be able to provide competitive payment
services in euros to avoid losing customers.
Foreign lenders today account for close to 30 per cent of all loans to Norwegian enterprises, a share
that  has  been  stable  for  the  past  five  years.  Thus  far,  foreign  branches  in  Norway  have  primarily
focused  on  the  largest  enterprises  and  financial  market  segments  that  demand  more  advanced
services.  As  the  euro  gradually  gains  a  foothold  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector,  the  Norwegian
market may prove to be of greater interest to foreign banks. Nor can we disregard the possibility that
mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  –  which  may  partly  be  perceived  as  a
response to consolidation in the business sector in the euro area – will lead to a situation whereby a
larger  number  of  Norwegian  enterprises  move  into  the  “division”  where  foreign  competition  is
strongest. Norwegian enterprises with close ties to the euro area will also demand a wide range of
euro services from their banks. For this reason, foreign banks will probably compete more intensely
with  Norwegian  banks  in  the  future.  Technological  advances,  including  the  development  of  new
channels of distribution, will reinforce this tendency.
Substantial  overcapacity  in  the  financial  sector  in  European  countries,  particularly  in  traditional
banking,  has  spurred  the  need  for  enhancing  efficiency  and  consolidation.  Over  the  last  couple  of
years  we  have  seen  a  considerable  increase  in  the  number  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  Europe,
with  mergers  taking  place  both  within  and  across  national  borders.  The  introduction  of  a  single
European currency has probably been an important catalyst in this process. Mergers and acquisitions
create entities with ambitions, financial strength and, not least, a range of services well designed to
compete on international markets. This points to increasing competition across national borders.
Several  large  Nordic  bank  conglomerates  define  the  Nordic  area  as  their  home  market,  and  have
established, or plan to establish, branches in most Nordic countries. The largest Swedish and Danish
banks  have  been  the  most  active  so  far.  A  few  of  them,  in  contrast  to  other  international  banks
established in Norway, have started to show an interest in the market for households and small and
medium-sized enterprises. The strengthening of the position of Nordic banks in their home market
may partly be perceived as a defensive strategy to keep out large global banks. The launching of a
single currency in Europe may have been an important driving force.
The euro is likely, at least in the short term, to be of greater consequence to the banking sector in
euro countries than in Norway and other countries outside the euro area. The loss of income in some
areas, such as currency trading, is greater for banks in the euro area, and the costs associated with
adapting  systems,  etc.  are  also  higher.  In  addition,  cross-border  competition  is  likely  to  intensify
more between countries with a single currency than between euro countries and non-euro countries,
although  this  is  not  certain.  These  factors  point  to  a  reduction  in  earnings  for  euro  area  banks.
However, increased competition may in the longer term enhance the efficiency and competitiveness
of banks.
The introduction of the euro will also have a considerable influence on the development of securities
markets  in  euro  countries.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  capital  intermediation  via  the  securities
market  will  increase  at  the  expense  of  financial  institutions.  The  elimination  of  foreign  exchange
risk, greater price transparency and harmonisation of market practices will increase liquidity in the
market, leading to conditions similar to those in the US.
Losing  the  advantage  of  operating  in  the  national  currency  will  result  in  keener  competition  in
securities markets for brokers, issuers, investors and stock exchanges. National ties will be of less
BIS Review  16/1999
– 6 –
importance as participants are drawn towards markets with the lowest costs. The integration of stock
exchanges will increase. The Oslo Stock Exchange, for example, is one of several stock exchanges
currently evaluating prospective partners.
The possibility that the euro may lay the foundation for a European market for private bonds should
be  of  interest  to  enterprises  both  within  and  outside  the  euro  area.  This  market  is  large  and  well
developed  in  the  US,  whereas  European  enterprises  have  primarily  relied  on  bank  financing.  The
introduction of the euro will also result in a broader and more differentiated selection of securities in
a single currency, while increased competition in issue and investment services will probably make
it less expensive to raise capital directly in the securities market. The elimination of currency risk in
the euro area will also enable investors to focus more on credit risk, thereby improving their ability
to evaluate this risk. This may make the market more receptive to private bonds, as investors may be
willing  to  accept  higher  credit  risk  when  seeking  a  return.  This  factor,  combined  with  lower
borrowing  costs,  may  give  medium-sized  enterprises,  which  so  far  have  had  to  rely  on  bank
financing, increased access to the bond market.
It should be emphasised that the expected increase in competition in securities markets in the euro
area  is  not  solely  due  to  the  single  currency.  Technological  advances,  deregulation  and
harmonisation of laws and regulations are important forces contributing to a freer flow of capital and
services in the single market. There is little doubt, however, that the introduction of a single currency
will make a major contribution to accelerating this process.
In sum, trends influencing developments in the banking and financial industry such as deregulation,
internationalisation,  changes  in  customer  behaviour  and  rapid  technological  advances  –  leading  to
intensified  competition  –  have  been  there  for  some  time  and  will  continue.  However,  the
establishment  of  monetary  union  will  probably  intensify  existing  trends,  creating  even  greater
challenges with regard to competition in the banking and financial industry.
This brings me back to the basic proposition made in the introduction. In many respects, the  euro
will not give rise to fundamentally  new  challenges.  It  is  highly  likely,  however,  that  the  euro  will
accentuate challenges that are already present. And that, I think, goes for the UK as well as Norway.
 BIS Review   16/1999
