Mr Heikensten speaks on the euro and European economic policy
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, the Swedish central
bank, at Merita-Nordbanken in Malmö, Sweden on 16 June 1999.
The single European currency, introduced at the beginning of this year, marks a major change for the
economic policies of countries in the euro area. The clearest example is, of course, the transition to a
single monetary policy. The proper functioning of the monetary union in the long term presupposes
that  the  new  European  Central  Bank  succeeds  in  making  its  policy  and  the  euro  understood  and
credible.  Important  factors  in  this  context  are  how  the  new  central  bank  chooses  to  work,  how
monetary  policy  is  continuously  formed  and  how  it  is  communicated  to  the  general  public  and  to
markets.
However, a well-constructed monetary policy and a central bank that acts wisely are not sufficient to
ensure that the union functions in the longer run. If growth and employment in the euro area are to be
as  high  as  possible  without  jeopardising  price  stability,  all  the  components  of  national  economic
policies will have to pull together. The fiscal, structural and labour market policies of the individual
countries  influence  both  the  conditions  under  which  the  new  central  bank  is  operating  and,  to  the
highest degree, Europe’s future prosperity.
A framework exists for this joint effort. Some common rules, for example the Stability and Growth
Pact, have been constructed to ensure that national fiscal policies do not pose problems for the union
as a whole. There is also a continuous discussion of economic policy in various fora, of which the
foremost  are  the  Ecofin  Council,  made  up  of  the  ministers  of  finance  and  economy,  and  its
subordinate committee, the Economic and Financial Committee, which also includes representatives
of the national central banks. The euro countries’ ministers of finance and economy also meet in what
is know as the Euro 11 Council.
This  framework  has  been  finalised  in  principle  but  is  being  reassessed  continuously  in  the  light  of
new challenges. Economic activity in the euro area this spring has been weaker than anticipated and
this has been accompanied by growing disparities between national growth rates, budget balances and
inflation.  As  a  result,  a  number  of  central  questions  about  how  the  monetary  union  functions  have
quickly come to the fore in the member states’ discussions.
Although  Sweden  is  not  participating  in  the  euro  area,  developments  there  will  affect  us.  This  is  a
large currency area in our immediate vicinity with which we have widespread trading relationships.
As a member of the European Union, moreover, we have to observe many of the established rules and
guidelines;  we  also  participate  in  the  European  discussion  on  the  formation  of  economic  policy.
Against this background, my talk today concerns economic policy in Europe and the new conditions
that accompany the euro.
The single monetary policy
Basic features
The European Central Bank (ECB) has been responsible since the beginning of this year for the single
monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area,  with  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  The
general formulation of this objective has been defined more precisely by the ECB as being a year-on-
year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2 per
cent. In that this definition refers to the rate of increase, it means that deflation is excluded in practice
and the annual rate of change in the HICP should accordingly be between 0 and 2 per cent.
The  single  monetary  policy  is  based  on  assessments  of  a  wide  range  of  economic  and  financial
indicators of inflationary pressure. A prominent position is likely to be accorded to the money supply.
1
BIS Review   76/1999
As a reference value for annual monetary growth, the ECB has initially set a rate of 4½ per cent. The
combined  strategy  —  focusing  on  inflation  but  with  a  reference  value  for  monetary  growth  —  is
motivated by the great uncertainty as to how the aggregate euro economy will function initially. The
ECB therefore wants to avoid having to stand on only one leg in its assessments. The ECB also states
that  the  objective  is  to  be  fulfilled  over  the  medium  term  and  thereby  underscores  that  the  single
monetary policy is not to parry every short-term shock. Deviations from the target may be acceptable
during a relatively short period.
An analysis of the economic situation is published by the ECB in a monthly bulletin, which aims to
‘explain to the public the monetary policy decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB’. The
bulletin  will  also  consider  fiscal  policies,  economic  structures  and  labour  market  tendencies  in  the
euro area. But the ECB does not publish either forward-looking assessments and forecasts of inflation
or  the  minutes  of  decision-making  meetings  and  the  positions  of  individual  members.  Press
conferences  with  the  ECB  Executive  will  be  held,  however,  in  connection  with  meetings  of  the
Governing Council. In addition, policy will be explained continuously by Executive Board members
in speeches and appearances before the European Parliament.
Inflation assessment
The ECB and the Riksbank both have price stability as the monetary policy objective but they have
given this objective different operational definitions. The ECB’s formulation mirrors a different view
of monetary policy’s ability to fulfil an explicit target. Presumably it also reflects a different view of
the  margin  a  central  bank  shall  have  for  tolerable  deviations  from  the  desired  price  stability.  The
Riksbank  has  specifically  targeted  inflation,  measured  by  the  CPI,  at  a  rate  of  2  per  cent,  with  a
declared tolerance interval of ±1 percentage point, thereby clearly identifying the preferred level of
inflation.
It is still too early to say what the differences between the formulations  will  signify  in  reality,  just
because we do not yet know how the ECB  will  act  in  practice.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in
Sweden is also being developed and specified in the light of new experiences. Moreover, the ECB’s
target is formulated in such a way that the level of ambition can be varied. It is perfectly possible, for
example, to strive for inflation around 1 per cent when inflation in the rest of the world is low and to
accept a higher rate when the external situation is less favourable. Historically, inflation in Germany
over the past two decades has averaged 2 to 2.5 per cent and the rate in the European Union in the
1990s has averaged 3.4 per cent, as against an average of 3.7 per cent in Sweden.
A  common  feature  of  the  two  monetary  policy  strategies  is  their  focus  on  the  medium  term.  The
Riksbank  has  expressed  this  in  such  statements  as  that  policy  is  to  be  assessed  in  an  annual
perspective  and  that  its  full  impact  occurs  after  twelve  to  twenty-four  months.  Moreover,  the
Riksbank  has  clarified  how  transitory  effects  on  inflation  are  to  be  treated.  A  deviation  from  the
inflation target on a single occasion will not lead either the Riksbank or the ECB to adjust interest
rates abruptly in order to achieve a rapid return to the target. Adjustments are to be gradual, which
implies smaller fluctuations in the interest rate and thereby also in production and employment.
Communication and evaluation
So far the ECB has chosen not to publish the assessment of inflation on which the single monetary
policy is founded. This has been justified by saying that it might cause more confusion than clarity
about  the  grounds  for  the  policy.  That  has  not  been  the  Riksbank’s  experience.  Our  view  of
inflationary pressure in the Swedish economy is published on a quarterly basis. The clear presentation
gives  observers  a  chance  of  understanding  and  questioning  our  assessments.  As  new  information
becomes  available,  moreover,  they  are  in  a  position  to  relate  it  to  our  earlier  assessment  and
continuously form a fairly good picture of how interest rates are likely to move in the future.
BIS Review   76/1999
2
The publication of our inflation assessments has also facilitated decisions in recent years to raise or
lower  interest  rates.  In  that  the  grounds  for  our  actions  are  clearer,  there  is  less  risk  of  our  being
accused of heeding extraneous considerations, a worry that featured in the European discussion last
autumn.  It  is  my  belief,  however,  that  the  ECB  will  become  more  open  about  its  economic
assessments as it settles more comfortably into its forecasting process and inflation assessment.
Another difference in transparency concerns access to discussions at the decision-making meetings.
The ECB has chosen not to publish any minutes. An important argument for this policy - and one that
I find understandable but debatable – is that minutes disclosing how individual members voted might
occasion a greater element of national considerations. The Riksbank has chosen to publish minutes of
Executive Board meetings after an interval of 6–8 weeks; the minutes are to reflect the discussion and
indicate how the members voted.
The clearly independent status that has now been assigned to the Riksbank has much to do with this
choice. The minutes make it easier for policy evaluators to follow the formation of monetary policy
and assess the actions of Board members. This is a democratic interest. Moreover, the fact that the
voting  will  be  published  probably  increases  the  members’  motivation  to  form  a  personal  opinion
about the difficult matters that have to be considered. I also believe that access to the minutes can help
people  to  understand  the  choices  that  have  to  be  made  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy  and
demystify  what  the  Riksbank  is  doing.  It  is  arguments  of  this  type  that  made  my  British  colleague
Mervyn  King  declare,  with  reference  to  the  work  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy
Committee, that ‘Divided we stand, united we fall’.
I want to emphasise that these matters are by no means simple. It seems to me that a clear analytical
framework,  combined  with  a  high  degree  of  transparency,  has  provided  a  good  foundation  for
Swedish  monetary  policy  in  recent  years.  But  with  an  Executive  Board  consisting  of  six  members,
each of whom is in a position to voice an opinion on monetary policy, it is probable that from time to
time the Riksbank will be criticised for being indistinct. There were signs of that last week when the
minutes  from  April  showed  that  I  had  not  voted  with  the  Board’s  majority.  But  as  observers  and
market players become more accustomed to how we operate, such differences of opinion are likely to
attract less attention.
Still, monetary policy signalling clearly cannot be arranged in quite the same way as before and in this
respect  we  will  presumably  become  more  like  the  ECB  and  the  Bundesbank,  where  individual
statements do not automatically constitute a collective signal from the central bank. For those who are
interested in following us and our assessments, however, we strive to provide a good foundation by
publishing — at intervals of approximately six weeks — either an Inflation Report or a lengthy press
notice on the majority view of inflation prospects.
Fiscal policies in the euro area
Let me now turn to the conduct of fiscal policy in the euro area. A judicious monetary policy is not
sufficient  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  union  functions  properly.  The  single  currency  will  make  the
national economies more interconnected than before. The  formation  of  fiscal  policy  in  one  country
will affect the overall picture of economic prospects and thereby monetary policy. In the Maastricht
Treaty the countries accordingly agreed on certain common rules for economic policy and these have
been fleshed out with additional legislation and political agreements.
Besides  fixed  and  binding  undertakings  for  each  country,  there  are  regular  common  processes  for
producing more general guidelines and standards for economic policy. The national convergence or
stability  programmes  each  member  state  presents  to  show  how  it  intends  to  follow  the  guidelines
supplement  the  latter,  which  can  be  likened  to  a  common  budget  statement  for  the  euro  area.  It  is
envisaged that the countries will exert peer pressure to bring about a good economic development in
3
BIS Review   76/1999
each country and thereby fulfil the common objectives of sustainable growth with high employment
and stable prices.
A  central  issue  here  is  the  formation  of  fiscal  policy,  for  which  there  are  binding  rules.  In  the
Maastricht Treaty the EU countries agreed that budget deficits and government debt relative to GDP
are to be limited to 3 and 60 per cent, respectively. In summer 1997 the EU finance ministers agreed
to  clarify  and  tighten  the  existing  fiscal  policy  goals  so  as  to  guarantee  a  sound  development  of
government finances in the Union. The background to this was that the rules of the game  once  the
monetary union had been established were less clear than the criteria for participation in the euro area.
More specifically, there were worries that once they had joined the euro area, countries with a high
debt  ratio  would  implement  a  less  vigorous  policy  because  their  incentives  for  exercising  restraint
would not be as clear. The pressure on these countries to consolidate their budgets might also ease if
their interest rates fell on account of ‘borrowed’ credibility from the German economy.
The Stability and Growth Pact was initiated by Germany. It means that all EU countries — and thus
non-euro  countries  such  as  Sweden  —  are  bound  by  the  rules  for  fiscal  policy  and  its  surveillance
after the move to Stage Three. Each country is to strive for budgetary positions close to balance or in
surplus in the medium term. This is intended to allow the automatic stabilisers free play while keeping
the government deficit inside the 3 per cent limit. In this way the Pact provides for some flexibility in
fiscal  policy,  which  may  be  particularly  important  when  there  is  no  recourse  to  exchange  rate
adjustments.
If the budget deficit exceeds the 3 per cent limit, sanctions can ultimately be imposed on the country
in question if the problems are not tackled. It is only in exceptional circumstances that this may not
apply. A surveillance procedure has been established for monitoring developments; national stability
programmes are to be presented at regular intervals, showing how the goals are to be fulfilled. This
process is perhaps as important in practice as the threat of sanctions. The establishment of clear rules
and sanctions is intended to support the forces in each country that favour a disciplined fiscal policy.
The sanctions do not apply to non-euro countries and they submit convergence programmes instead of
stability programmes.
So what has happened so far? The assessment of convergence or stability programmes from all the EU
countries this spring shows a mixed picture. It is clear, however, that the ambitions of most countries
still fall short of the requirements in the Stability and Growth Pact. This is certainly attributable in
part  to  the  economic  slowdown,  with  Italy  as  the  clearest  example.  But  it  is  also  notable  that  the
ambitions for budget consolidation are now lower than before the move to Stage Three. The relatively
good growth during 1998 ought to have left room for budget consolidation in many countries but it
was not used and in certain countries the structural deficit has actually increased. The Ecofin Council
has in fact criticised a number of countries, including Germany, France, Austria and the Netherlands,
for the low level of ambitions in their stability programmes.
In  Sweden,  the  budget  position  looks  comparatively  healthy.  Our  fiscal  policy  is  likewise  less
restrictive than before but the structural deficit has been turned into a surplus that is now growing and
the ambition is still to achieve a budget surplus of 2 per cent of GDP on average over the business
cycle.
At the same time it should be underscored that some variation in the objective across countries seems
reasonable. The degree of fiscal readiness — and thus the requisite size of the surplus — depends on
a number of factors. One is the cyclical sensitivity of government finances and another is the level of
government debt. It is then reasonable that a country like Sweden has a larger public sector financial
surplus than a country where the automatic stabilisers and government debt are smaller. But it is also
important to maintain the peer pressure that has been used to ensure that the member states observe
the  common  rules.  Arguing  the  case  for  adhering  to  these  rules  in  a  country’s  internal  debate  is
difficult if other member states lower their ambitions.
BIS Review   76/1999
4
Policy interaction
Economic  policy  in  the  euro  area  is  accordingly  formed  in  the  interaction  of  the  single  monetary
policy and what are primarily national fiscal and structural policies. If this interaction is to function
properly, much is required of the parties involved in the way of clarity and a dialogue.
The  available  structure  for  coordinating  economic  policies  in  the  European  Union  consists  of  a
network of different bodies and reports, with the ultimate purpose of arriving at a shared picture of the
framework  for  economic  policy.  The  forms  for  cooperation  are  being  developed  all  the  time  and  a
number of new instruments have been introduced in recent years.
A  schedule  has  been  established  for  the  continuous  exchange  of  information  and  views  during  the
year between the member states, the Commission and other Community bodies, including the ECB.
Reports  on  compliance  with  the  guidelines  for  fiscal  policy,  employment  and  structural  policy  are
submitted  by  each  country  for  discussion  and  examination  by  the  other  member  states,  the
Commission  and  the  ECB.  The  ministers  in  the  individual  countries  finally  adopt  the  programmes,
which then form the basis for the next discussion of the general economic policy guidelines, which
are adopted each summer by the heads of state or of government. In between, each country is analysed
by  the  Commission,  which  is  required  to  give  early  warning  if  countries  do  not  fulfil  undertakings
they have made in their national programmes.
The idea behind this structure is the principle of subsidiarity, that is, matters to be decided jointly by
the member states are to be limited to those for which a decision at this level is absolutely necessary;
everything else is a national concern.
The  ECB  is  to  guarantee  price  stability.  Monetary  policy  has  to  be  formed  in  the  light  of  fiscal
policy’s expected development. Similarly, inflation has to be assessed in the light of the existing trade
policies and the prevailing structures in labour markets, agriculture and so on. There is no question of
coordinating policy in the sense of the ECB undertaking to act in a certain way if policy in other fields
is  adjusted  or  realigned  —  what  euro  jargon  refers  to  as  ex  ante  coordination.  This  naturally
accentuates  the  need  for  clarity  in  monetary  policy.  It  is  reasonable  that  politicians  in  Europe  are
enabled to assess what an adjustment of fiscal policy, for example, would have for consequences for
the interest rate.
Against this background I now want to consider three issues to  do  with  European  economic  policy
that  in  my  opinion  have  been  illustrated  by  developments  in  the  past  six  months  and  should  be
discussed in the European economic policy debate. All these issues concern the need to develop the
institutional framework so that it covers coordination problems that may arise even though the rules
are being followed.
Firstly,  monetary  policy  is  naturally  not  fully  attuned  to  every  euro  country  at  present.  Cyclical
activity as well as other factors that affect inflation vary over the euro area and as I mentioned earlier,
these differences have become somewhat larger. By itself, this need not be a major problem for the
monetary  union  as  a  whole.  The  differences  may  reflect  entirely  natural  deviations  in  productivity
growth, for instance. In these cases the differences in inflation need not be all that important in the
longer run.
The differences in inflation are more of a problem if they derive from differences in the development
of  demand.  But  even  in  this  case  it  can  be  argued  that  they  will  mainly  lead  to  problems  for  the
particular country where inflation is higher; rising costs ultimately result in downward adjustments of
production, employment and inflation. There may be uncertainty, however, about the smoothness of
such  an  adjustment  and  its  consequences  for  the  union  as  a  whole.  Even  if  the  development  of
inflation  in  one  country  may  conceivably  disturb  the  path  for  the  union,  that  country  cannot  be
required to tighten its fiscal policy as long as it complies with the Stability and Growth Pact.
5
BIS Review   76/1999
Secondly, at present there is thus no mechanism whereby a fiscal adjustment could be spread over the
participating countries. This is also a problem because the implementation of the Pact indicates that
there  is  a  risk  of  this  contributing  to  a  procyclical  budget  policy.  To  date,  the  Pact’s  surveillance
process has focused on countries with a budget deficit close to the limit. There is nothing remarkable
about that: this is where the problems are most apparent and the risk of failure — with problems for
the credibility of the Pact as a whole — is most acute. But there is also the risk of the Pact having a
procyclical effect. Countries that are close to  the  maximum  deficit  on  account  of  weak  activity  are
obliged to follow a restrictive line, while those with good activity and a surplus do not need to tighten
their policies in this way.
This problem has arisen because the Pact was actually constructed so that it only functions properly
when all the member states have established the necessary margins. That is still not the case. For the
euro area as a whole it would presumably be best in the present situation if the countries with high
activity  were  to  tighten  their  policies  even  more.  That  might  create  room  for  a  somewhat  lower
interest rate in this area in the coming years and thereby ease the situation for the consolidation of
government finances in the countries with the greatest  problems.  At  present,  however,  there  are  no
mechanisms for bringing such a policy about.
Thirdly, even if the fiscal position in all the countries in question were now in good order, the trade-
off between fiscal and monetary policy raises issues for which there are still no ready-made solutions.
Let us take the hypothetical case of a falling stock market in the United States that pulls the dollar
down. The recent trend would then be reversed into an appreciation of the euro. That would be liable
to check the recovery of manufacturing in the euro area. What should the EU finance ministers do?
One possibility would be to go for an overall tightening of fiscal policy in order to pave the way for
lower  interest  rates  and  a  weaker  euro.  As  things  stand,  however,  it  is  not  clear  how  this  could  be
done  in  practice.  Once  again  we  face  the  question  of  the  restriction’s  distribution  among  the
participating countries.
These three interrelated issues are all important. The solutions are hardly self-evident, partly because
they  involve  the  difficult  balance  between  national  concerns  and  matters  that  should  be  decided  at
union level.
Conclusion
The euro’s introduction in eleven countries in our part of the world is the biggest economic  policy
change in Europe for decades. New conditions have been created not only for households and firms in
the euro area and adjacent countries but also for economic policy.
Sweden is by no means unaffected by this change, even though we are outside the euro area at the
start. Economic development in the euro area is crucial for Sweden’s economy. As a member of the
European Union, moreover, we are involved in many of the contexts where policy is formed. We have
also undertaken to conduct our policy in accordance with the rules that have been established for the
Union.
Against this background it is important that we are engaged in the discussion of economic policy in
Europe. My purpose today has been to highlight a number of issues of importance for the European
debate. I have tried to describe how the ECB works, the rules that have been built up for fiscal policy
and so on. I have also said something about events in the past six months and discussed some of the
problems as I see them.
One  thing  is  certain:  the  euro’s  introduction  does  not  constitute  the  final  step  in  the  integration  of
Europe. The single currency will raise new questions that will be answered by degrees through the
cooperation between the countries of Europe. It is important that Sweden takes an active part in that
debate.
BIS Review   76/1999
6
7
BIS Review   76/1999
