Mr.  George  gives  an  address  on  recent  changes  in  the  international  financial  and  economic
environment
Speech  given  by  Mr  E  A  J  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  a  Dinner  with  the  Lord
Mayor for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London on 10 June 1999.
My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies and Gentlemen.
When  we  were  last  here  for  this  splendid  occasion  I  suggested  that  we  were  living  in  a  dangerous
international financial and economic environment. These were strong words for a central banker – but
perhaps not strong enough. That environment rapidly became worse through the autumn, so that by
around the time of the IMF Annual Meetings in October there was a good deal of talk about global
financial meltdown and impending world recession – which was not simply journalistic hyperbole.
Since that low point things have certainly improved. The hectic scramble for financial asset quality
and  liquidity  following  Russia’s  default  and  the  near  collapse  of  LTCM  –  an  exceptionally  highly
geared hedge fund – failed to uncover fatal weaknesses elsewhere in the financial system, and lenders
and investors have gradually regained some of their appetite for risk. Fears of a general credit crunch
in  major  industrial  countries  quickly  receded;  and  sentiment  towards  the  emerging  markets  has
improved, with growing evidence of recovery in the original Asian crisis countries and a better than
expected outcome in Brazil. Among the industrial countries, Japan made stronger efforts to bring its
long  recession  to  an  end  –  through  macro-economic  stimulus  and  by  strengthening  its  domestic
banking system – and there are now signs that those efforts are beginning to be rewarded. Meanwhile
the  world  economy  has  been  effectively  underpinned  by  continuing  abnormally  strong  domestic
demand growth in the United States.
But  despite  these  developments  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go.  If  the  immediate  danger  of  global
financial instability has receded, we are still stuck with slow growth in the world economy, currently
at around 2½%, which is not much more than half the estimated trend growth rate. And we are stuck,
too, with  massive  international  imbalances,  both  between  the  emerging  and  industrial  countries,  on
the one hand, and among the major industrial countries, on the other.
Without a stronger resumption of capital inflows to the emerging markets, the industrial countries will
need  to  accommodate  an  export-led  recovery  in  those  markets.  That  implies  stronger  domestic
demand, and hence import, growth in the G7 countries, if the world economy as a whole is to get back
on trend in the reasonably near term. And the immediate challenge in this situation is to try to ensure
that, as domestic demand growth in the United States slows – as it probably must, by one means or
another  –  demand  picks  up  sufficiently  elsewhere,  especially  in  Europe  and  Japan,  to  take  up  the
running. That in turn will largely determine how successfully we can achieve an orderly unwinding of
the present imbalances.
This  wider  international  context  is,  inevitably,  having  a  profound  –  and  continuing  –  effect  on  the
pattern of interest rates and exchange rates, and on economic developments, both within the Eurozone
and here in the United Kingdom, to an extent that is still perhaps not fully appreciated.
A year ago, when the historic decision to go ahead with a broadly-based euro was taken in Brussels,
the  prospect  was  for  a  steady  pick-up  in  overall  demand  and  output  across  the  Eurozone.  It  was  a
helpful environment for the introduction of the new currency. And the constituent currencies of the
euro strengthened in the second half of last year on the back of that.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  was  a  technical  triumph  –  within  the
Eurozone, but also notably here in the City, which has clearly established itself from the outset as a
vital  contributor  to  the  development  of  broad  and  liquid  euro-denominated  wholesale  financial
markets.
1
BIS Review   68/1999
But the growing impact of the global economic setback last autumn was to dampen external demand
and  business  confidence  in  the  Eurozone  –  as  it  did  elsewhere  –  apparently  affecting  some  of  the
participating countries more than others. In contrast to the United States, slower growth of external
demand  was  not  sufficiently  offset  by  stronger  domestic  demand  growth  in  the  Eurozone,  so  that,
instead of the expected pick-up in overall output growth, activity in fact increased progressively more
slowly.  Largely  as  a  result,  the  euro  has  depreciated  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  economic
performance in individual participating countries has diverged more than might have been expected.
This has been a disappointment to some proponents of the euro and has been seized upon by euro-
sceptics  as  evidence  of  its  risks.  We  need  to  be  cautious,  in  my  view,  in  interpreting  this  initial
experience in the present unusually difficult global economic environment. As demand strengthens in
the Eurozone – and the latest indicators from Germany are more encouraging – the likelihood is that
the euro will recover and some of the present tensions ease. It has always been clear that there are
potential risks of economic divergence within the Euro area to be weighed against the more obvious
potential  economic  benefits  of  the  single  currency.  The  question  has  been  just  how  significant  are
those  risks  likely  to  be.  That  will,  ultimately,  always  be  a  matter  of  judgement.  But  it  would  be
premature, in my view, to reach that judgement based on today’s abnormal circumstances.
Now  we,  in  this  country,  have  of  course  been  battered  about,  like  everyone  else,  by  the  global
turbulence. There is no way that we could have avoided its impact – either through fiscal or monetary
policy. We are an integral part of the global economy.
And  we  had  particular  problems  of  our  own.  In  our  case,  in  marked  contrast  to  the  Eurozone,  and
despite the dampening effect of an already exaggeratedly strong exchange rate, we were confronted,
in the early part of last year, with the prospect of excess demand and accelerating inflation, and policy
had been tightened to head that off. But we, like others, were then hit in the autumn by the renewed
turmoil in the global economy. That caused a sharper fall in external demand, but it also caused both
business and consumer confidence to plummet – so that prospect of moderate overall slowdown we’d
been  deliberately  trying  to  engineer  quite  suddenly  threatened  to  turn  into  an  unnecessarily  sharp
downturn,  with  the  risk  that  the  rate  of  inflation  would  fall  significantly  below  the  Government’s
2½% inflation target.
So we promptly reversed gear – cutting interest rates very sharply – by 2½% to as low as they have
been since the mid-1960s. That has helped both business and consumer confidence to recover – from
very low levels – and the prospect now is that, after a pretty flat economic performance either side of
the year-end, overall demand and output growth will pick up steadily to around trend by the middle of
next year. But, despite these interest rate cuts, the pound has actually strengthened – notably against
the euro – in part, as I suggested earlier, because of weaker overall demand pressure on the Continent.
So  we  are  again  impaled  on  the  horns  of  our  earlier  dilemma,  arising  from  continuing  imbalance
between the stronger domestic and weaker externally-exposed sectors of the economy. Believe me – it
is not a comfortable place to be.
The question is what to do?
Of course, as with everything else, where you stand depends on where you sit.
The suffering sectors – most of agriculture, large parts of manufacturing industry and some services
sectors – are in no doubt. Cut interest rates again – they say – and again and again. They’re still twice
as high as interest rates in Europe – and they might just as well add, they are over 150 times as high as
interest  rates  in  Japan!  The  many  more  net  savers  –  including  pensioners  living  off  the  interest  on
their  savings  –  take  the  opposite  view,  although  they  do,  of  course,  benefit  from  the  low  inflation
environment through the protection it gives to the real value of their assets.
What  we  have  to  try  to  do  is  to  maintain  stability  in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  by  keeping  overall
demand continuously broadly in line with the supply-side capacity of the economy as a whole. The
BIS Review   68/1999
2
inflation target is not some abstract end in itself – it is the measure, or barometer if you like, of how
successfully we are managing to maintain macro-economic stability in the economy as a whole in this
much wider sense. The reason that our interest rates remain higher than those in the Eurozone is that,
despite the recent slowdown, our economy is operating closer  to  capacity  than  theirs.  That’s  partly
why our rate of unemployment is almost half theirs – though the greater structural flexibility of the
British economy is even more important in this context.
The MPC sets interest rates to achieve the inflation target. We have made it clear by our actions that
we are just as vigorous in relaxing policy when the risks to inflation are on the downside as we are in
tightening policy when the risks to inflation are on the upside. That’s the best help that we can give
through monetary policy.
It  does  not  mean  that  we  ignore  the  external  pressures.  In  assessing  the  prospects  for  the  overall
economy, and for inflation, we take full account of the impact of world demand and of the exchange
rate, just as we take full account of all the domestic factors bearing on inflation prospects. When, as
now, the external influences are having a powerful disinflationary effect, monetary policy is of course
easier, and interest rates lower, than they would otherwise be. That does not – and cannot – mean that
we are able to pursue any particular objective with regard to the exchange rate – or that we respond,
Pavlov-like, to exchange rate fluctuations. But we can, and do, aim to offset the impact of persistent
external influences on the prospect for inflation so that inflation in the economy as a whole stays on
track to meet the inflation target given to us by the Chancellor. That is what we have been doing – and
is the context of our further move today.
No-one, my Lord Mayor, is more conscious than I am of the limits to what we can hope to achieve
through monetary policy. But by operating within those limits we have been able to achieve greater
macro-economic stability, and consistently lower inflation, than we’ve seen for a generation. And that
stability, together with the improved supply-side flexibility of the economy, has delivered our highest
ever level of employment, and a rate of unemployment in the economy as a whole that is still close to
its lowest for almost 20 years.
3
BIS Review   68/1999
